The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lyman's History of old Walla Walla County,
Vol. 1 (of 2), by William Denison Lyman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Lyman's History of old Walla Walla County, Vol. 1 (of 2)
       Embracing Walla Walla, Columbia, Garfield and Asotin counties

Author: William Denison Lyman

Release Date: September 8, 2014 [EBook #46807]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LYMAN'S HISTORY OF OLD WALLA ***




Produced by Giovanni Fini, Charlene Taylor, Bryan Ness and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)






                         TRANSCRIBER'S NOTES:

--Obvious print and punctuation errors were corrected.

--Due to a fair amount of tables, it is recommended the use of a
  monospaced font.

[Illustration: W. D. LYMAN.]




                            LYMAN'S HISTORY
                                 _of_
                        Old Walla Walla County

                              _Embracing_

                    Walla Walla, Columbia, Garfield
                          and Asotin Counties


                    By W. D. LYMAN, M. A., Lit. D.


                              ILLUSTRATED


                               VOLUME I


                                CHICAGO
                  THE S. J. CLARKE PUBLISHING COMPANY
                                 1918




                               CONTENTS


    PART I

  THE COUNTY AND ITS EARLIEST STAGES

  CHAPTER I

  PHYSICAL AND GEOLOGICAL FEATURES, SOIL, CLIMATE, WATER-COURSES, AND
  MOUNTAINS                                                            1

  CHAPTER II

  THE NATIVE RACES OF OLD WALLA WALLA COUNTY                          10

  CHAPTER III

  THE FIRST EXPLORERS AND THEIR ROUTES THROUGH THE REGION             32

  CHAPTER IV

  THE FUR-TRADE AND FUR-TRADERS                                       42

  CHAPTER V

  THE MISSIONARY PERIOD                                               57

  CHAPTER VI

  INDIAN WARS AND OPENING OF COUNTRY TO SETTLEMENT                    83


    PART II

  SETTLEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT

  CHAPTER I

  THE PERMANENT ORGANIZATION OF WALLA WALLA COUNTY AND FOUNDING
  OF THE CITY                                                        109

  CHAPTER II

  TIMES OF COWBOYS, MINERS AND VIGILANTES                            124

  CHAPTER III

  POLITICAL HISTORY TO TIME OF COUNTY DIVISION                       136

  CHAPTER IV

  THE EARLY TRANSPORTATION AGE                                       155

  CHAPTER V

  THE DEVELOPMENT OF INDUSTRY IN OLD WALLA WALLA COUNTY TO THE PERIOD
  OF COUNTY DIVISION AND AFTERWARDS IN THE PRESENT WALLA WALLA       175

  CHAPTER VI

  INTELLECTUAL AND RELIGIOUS FORCES OF WALLA WALLA COUNTY; EDUCATIONAL
  INSTITUTIONS OF WALLA WALLA                                        210

  CHAPTER VII

  THE PRESS OF WALLA WALLA COUNTY                                    257

  CHAPTER VIII

  WITH THE LAWYERS, JUDGES AND DOCTORS                               265


    PART III

  PERIOD OF COUNTY DIVISIONS

  CHAPTER I

  POLITICAL HISTORY OF WALLA WALLA COUNTY SINCE COUNTY DIVISION      285

  CHAPTER II

  DISTINCTIVE FEATURES IN HISTORY OF COLUMBIA COUNTY                 319

  CHAPTER III

  GARFIELD COUNTY                                                    358

  CHAPTER IV

  ASOTIN COUNTY                                                      395

  CHAPTER V

  PIONEER REMINISCENCES                                              426

  BIOGRAPHICAL

                                                                     481




PART I

THE COUNTY AND ITS EARLIEST STAGES




Old Walla Walla County

(Embracing Walla Walla, Columbia, Garfield and Asotin Counties.)




CHAPTER I

PHYSICAL AND GEOLOGICAL FEATURES, SOIL, CLIMATE, WATER-COURSES, AND
MOUNTAINS

A land of scenic charm, of physical interest, of fertile soil and
ample resources, of climate in which living is a delight, of two
great rivers and many impetuous tributaries, of mountain chains with
rich and varied hues and contours of stately majesty,--such is the
imperial domain included in that portion of the State of Washington
lying east of the Columbia River and south of the Snake. While this
region has distinctive physical features, it yet has a sufficient
family resemblance to the other parts of Eastern Oregon and Eastern
Washington to indicate a common origin. We may therefore properly take
first a general view of this larger area. The greater part of the vast
Inland Empire of Northeastern Oregon and Eastern Washington consists
of rolling prairies, sometimes fairly hilly, with extensive "flats"
in various parts, and low-lying, level valleys bordering the numerous
streams. These valleys are usually quite narrow, the three marked
exceptions being the broad valleys of the Walla Walla, Umatilla, and
Yakima, the two latter being outside of the scope of our story. The
Inland Empire varies in elevation above sea-level from about three
hundred and fifty feet on the Columbia River to about nine thousand
at the highest summits of the Blue Mountains. The larger part of the
cultivated portions ranges from eight hundred to two thousand feet.
The variations in elevation have a remarkable effect on temperature
and rainfall, the former decreasing and the latter increasing very
rapidly from the lower to the higher levels. The atmosphere throughout
this region is ordinarily very clear, and the majestic sweep of the
Blue Mountains and the wide expanses of hills and dales and flats lie
revealed in all their imposing grandeur with vivid distinctness.

As there is a general physical similarity in the different parts of
this entire Columbia Basin, so has there been a common geological
history. Broadly speaking, the upper Columbia Basin from near Spokane
on the north to Wallowa on the south is volcanic in origin. The scope
of this work does not permit any detailed discussion of the geology of
the region, but it is of interest to refer to the fascinating little
book of Prof. Thomas Condon, formerly of the Oregon State University,
on the "Two Islands." Professor Condon was the first systematic
student of the geology of the Northwest, and during his active career,
extending from about 1855 to 1890, he accumulated a large and valuable
collection of fossil remains as data from which to infer the stages in
the geological history of the Northwest. One of his working hypotheses
was that there were two islands as the first lands in what is now
the Northwest. These were the Blue Mountain Island and the Siskiyou
Mountain Island. Later geologists have not entirely accepted all the
details of Professor Condon's hypothesis, though they regard his
general reasoning as sound. It is generally believed now that there
was a very early uplift, possibly a third island, in what is now the
Okanogan, Methow, and Chelan highlands and mountains. At any rate,
there is a general concurrence in the opinion that the oldest land in
this part of the continent was those very regions where the two or
perhaps three islands are supposed to have risen. The Chelan region
and thence a vast sweep northeast and then southeast toward Spokane is
of granite, andesite, and porphyry, the primeval crust of the earth.
Again on the south, the core of the Blue Mountains, especially in the
vicinity of Wallowa, is limestone and granite. All these formations are
very ancient. On the other hand, the volcanic regions are comparatively
recent, and those compose practically all the central parts. This
area between those two ancient formations, the part covering the four
counties of our present story being in the very heart of it, seems
to have undergone almost every possible dynamic influence, fire,
frost, and flood. Apparently it was a deep basin between the earlier
elevations and was the scene of stupendous volcanic and seismic energy.
Then it was covered with water and for ages a great lake extended over
much of what is now the Walla Walla Valley and the valleys of its
tributaries and the lower courses of the other streams, as the Touchet
and Tucanon. When the water had drained off, there succeeded an age of
ice and frost, with disintegration by cold and even some glaciation.
Probably there were several alternating eras of fire and frost and
flood. The Yakima Indians have a fantastic tale of the formation of
these lakes and from them the Columbia River, which may have some basis
of scientific fact. They say that in the times of the Watetash (animal
people, before the Indians) a monstrous beaver, Wishpoosh, inhabited
Lake Kachees, now one of the sources of the Yakima. Wishpoosh had the
evil habit of chewing up and cutting to pieces all the trees as well as
other animals in his reach. Speelyi, the chief God of the Mid-Columbia
Indians, endeavored to make way with this destructive monster, but
succeeded only in wounding him severely and making him so angry that he
laid around him with furious energy and soon burst the rocky barriers
of the lake. The water flowing out streamed over the country and formed
the Upper Yakima. The deluge was checked by the mountain ramparts of
the Kittitas Valley, as we know it, and thus was formed a great lake
over all that valley. But the raging beaver finally tore out that
barrier also and the flood passed on into the Yakima Valley, making
another lake over the whole region where Yakima now is, but it was
stayed for a time by the ridge just below the Atahnum of the present.
In like manner that barrier was torn out and the accumulation of waters
swept on to the vast level region where the Snake and Columbia, with
the lesser streams of the Yakima and Walla Walla, unite. Thus, a large
part of the region which we shall describe in this history was a lake.
But the infuriated Wishpoosh was not yet content, and by successive
burstings of barriers the Walla Walla lake was emptied through the
Umatilla highlands, then the Cascade Mountains themselves were parted,
and the chain of lakes was opened to the ocean, the Columbia River
itself being the connecting stream. Wishpoosh having reached the ocean
making havoc among the whales and all other objects of creation, when
Speelyi at last pierced him to the heart and his monstrous carcass was
cast up on Clatsop Beach. There Speelyi cut him into fragments and of
him made the various Indian tribes.

Whatever may be the facts in regard to Wishpoosh, it is quite obvious
that considerable areas of the lower level parts of the Columbia basin
and the tributary valleys are lake beds. While the soil has all the
indications of having been washed from the hills and mountains and
then settled in the lakes, it is plain also that it was originally the
product of fire. For the soil of this region is essentially volcanic.
In the parts which have the larger rainfall, the decaying vegetation
of ages upon ages has covered the volcanic ash with a deep, rich
loam. In other places the action of glaciers grinding and dumping
the triturated marls and clays of the mountains has resulted in the
deposit of heavy white and blue clays. In yet other parts erosion
of the volcanic rocks by wind and rain and frost, together with the
wash of the streams at flood stage, has left great beds of gravel.
Through successive strata of these varying materials there have burst
at intervals new volcanic eruptions. These in turn, worn away by sun
and wind and frost and stream, have been blown and washed over the
earlier strata and have formed a new blanket of the richest soil. This
process of successive stages of volcanic outflow, disintegration, wash
deposit, glacial dumping, dust drift, growth and decay of vegetation,
has gone on through the ages. The result has been that the greater part
of the Inland Empire has a soil of extraordinary depth and fertility.
Analysis has shown that it possesses the ingredients for plant food to
an unusual degree. It is said to have an almost identical composition
with the soil of Sicily. That fair and fertile island was made by the
volcanic matter blown out of Mount Etna, covered by decayed vegetation
and worked over by frost and sun and rain until it became almost an
ideal region for grain production. Two thousand years ago Sicilian
wheat-fields fed the hungry multitudes of Rome, and the same fields
still produce a generous quota of food products. Soil experts expect a
similar history in this country.

In no part of the Columbia basin have the processes of soil creation
been more active than in the parts of the Old Walla Walla County of
this history. Beginning with the Columbia River on the west we find as
soon as we have passed the margin of river sand, which in a few places
has encroached upon the customary volcanic covering, that the soil,
though dry, is susceptible of the highest cultivation and with water
is capable of producing the finest products in the greatest profusion.
Almost every mile from the river eastward towards the mountains seems
to increase the blanket of loam upon the underlying volcanic dust,
until upon the foothills of the Blue Mountains there is a soil hard to
match anywhere in the world, a mingling of volcanic dust, loam, and
clay, a strong and heavy soil, not difficult to work, and retaining
and utilizing moisture with remarkable natural economy. Throughout
this region the soil is of extraordinary depth and there seems to be
no limit to its productiveness. There is a cut forty feet deep through
a hill near Walla Walla, in which the same fertile soil goes down to
the very bottom. It is of lighter color when first opened to the light,
but with exposure turns darker and after a year or two of cultivation
possesses the same friability and productiveness as the top soil. Wells
have been bored in the Eureka Flat region where over a hundred feet of
soil have been pierced without the drills even touching rock. In such
soils the process of sub-soiling can go on almost indefinitely with
continuous preservation and renewal of productiveness.

The climate of the region covered in this work has the general
character of that of the Inland Empire as a whole. As compared with the
portions of Oregon and Washington west of the Cascade Mountains, the
climate of our section is drier and has the seasons more distinctly
marked, hotter in summer and colder in winter. The average yearly
temperature is, however, higher than that of the sea-coast, and
much higher than that of the Atlantic states of the same latitude.
The average of Walla Walla is about that of Virginia, though in the
latitude of Wisconsin and Maine. On account of lower altitude the
climate of the greater part of this section, especially the portions
on the large rivers, all the way from Asotin to Wallula, is warmer
than that of the parts of the state north of Snake River. The weather
reports of Walla Walla ordinarily run from four to eight degrees higher
than those of Spokane. The spring season opens from two to four weeks
earlier than at Spokane or Colfax and the difference is even greater
compared with Pullman.

Perhaps no part of the Inland Empire, unless it be the Horse Heaven
and Rattlesnake Mountain section of Benton County, is so peculiarly
the native home of that most dramatic atmospheric phenomenon, the
Chinook wind. Scarcely can anything more interesting be imagined than
that warm winter wind. No wonder that the native red man, with his
superstitious awe of Nature's tokens of love or wrath, idealized this
heavenly visitant, opening the gates of summer in midwinter chill and
gloom and wooing the flowers from their dark abodes even while the
heavy snows still crown the mountain peaks and pile the timbered flanks
of the hills with their frozen burdens. A long wintry period, two or
three or four weeks in January or February, may have sent the great
blocks of ice down the big rivers, there may be a foot of snow upon
the plains and much more in the mountains and the breath of the north
may wrap all Nature in chill and gloom, when suddenly some afternoon
the frozen fog will lift, a blue-black band will be visible along the
southern horizon, the white tops of the mountains will begin to be
streaked with dark lines, there seems to thrill through the atmosphere
a certain rustle of expectancy, night drops with a rising temperature,
during the night the snow begins to slip from the trees and slide off
the roofs, and with the morning, rushing and roaring, here comes the
blessed Chinook, fragrant with the bloom of the south, turning the snow
and ice into singing streams, calling the robins from their winter
retreats, and bidding the buttercups push from their heads the crust
of winter and open their golden petals to greet the sun. The Klickitat
myth is to the effect that there were originally two sets of brothers,
one of the Walla Wallas from the north, the other the Chinooks from the
south. The fathers of the two lived with their respective sons upon the
shore of the Columbia near the present Umatilla. The Walla Walla were
the cold wind brothers, coming down the river from the north, freezing
the streams and whirling the dust in vast clouds. At one time they
challenged the Chinook brothers to a wrestling match and threw them
all and killed them. The chilly brothers had it all their own way for
a long time after that, and they made the lives of the poor old father
and mother of the vanquished Chinooks a burden. No sooner would the
old man go out in his canoe to fish than the implacable Walla Walla
brothers would blow with their icy breath, crusting the water with ice
and compelling the old man to hurry half frozen to the shore. But a
deliverer was at hand, for one of the fallen Chinooks had left a son.
His mother had taken him to the lower river, and there he had grown up
with only the one thought of avenging his father and uncles. When he
had become grown and so strong that he could pull up huge fir trees and
toss them around like straws, he felt that his time had come. Going
up the river he slept one night near the stream now called the Satus,
and a curious depression in the hills can be seen there now which the
Indians say was his sleeping place. After his night's rest he went on
to the home of his grandparents. He found them in a most deplorable
state, half-starved and half-frozen. Young Chinook washed the grime
and filth from the old folks and from it came all the trout now found
in this region. Then transforming himself into a little creature he
crawled into the stern of his grandfather's boat and bade the old man
put forth for fish. At once the hateful Walla Wallas swept down from
the north to blow on the old man, but for some mysterious reason could
never reach him. Striving desperately in vain they saw the explanation
when suddenly Chinook rose to giant size and challenged them to
wrestle. The God Speelyi now appeared to judge the combat. One after
another the cold wind brothers were thrown. Chinook, more merciful than
they had been, did not kill them. But Speelyi declared that they should
henceforth lose their power and could blow only at very rare intervals
and that Chinook should be the lord of the land. However, Speelyi
decreed that he should blow on the mountain peaks first as a token that
he was coming.

The meteorologists tell us that the Chinook wind is not, properly
speaking, an ocean wind, though when there is a Chinook in the interior
there is a warm wind with rain on the coast. They say that the Chinook
is due to dynamic heating or atmospheric friction. When there is a low
barometer on the coast and a high over Nevada and Utah, as is very
common in winter, the high pressure will descend upon the low and
raise the temperature at a regular rate of about seven degrees to a
thousand feet of descent. This accounts for the fact that the Chinook
strikes the mountains sooner than the valleys. During the prevalence
of a Chinook, as shown by the weather reports, the thermometer will
usually be higher at Walla Walla than at Portland or Astoria. It has
been as high as seventy degrees in January during a big Chinook. As
can be imagined, snow will vanish like a dream under a wind of such
temperature, or even one at fifty degrees or fifty-five degrees, which
is more common.

A few general statistics as to the average records at Walla Walla may
be of interest. The average annual temperature as shown by official
records during thirty-one years is fifty-three degrees. The average
for January is thirty-three degrees; for July and August, seventy-four
degrees. The lowest ever recorded was seventeen degrees below zero, and
the highest was 113 degrees. The average rainfall is 17.4 inches. The
average date of the last killing frost of spring is March 30th, and the
first of autumn is November 7th. The average number of clear or mainly
clear days is 262, of cloudy is 103. The prevailing wind is always
from the south, and the highest velocity ever recorded was sixty-five
miles per hour. There is an average of eight thunder showers in a
year. The other parts of the four counties included in this history
have essentially the same climate as Walla Walla. There is, however, a
regular decrease of temperature and an increase of rainfall from the
west to east. Recent records of the Weather Observer at Walla Walla,
giving a comparison of various stations, show extraordinary differences
in rainfall according to elevation and proximity to the mountains.
Thus, the average precipitation, including melted snow, for some years
past, has been at Kennewick, 6.46 inches; at Lowden, 11.18; at Eureka,
14.35; at Walla Walla, 17.37; at Milton, 19.50; at Dayton, 22.14;
and at the "intake," only fourteen miles from Walla Walla, but at an
elevation of twenty-five hundred feet (Walla Walla being nine hundred
and twenty), and at the entrance to the mountains, it was, in 1916,
47.93. The natural rainfall is sufficient for all the staple grains and
fruits in all parts except the areas in the west and north bordering
the Columbia and Snake rivers. In those semi-arid tracts irrigation is
necessary, and the same means of artificial moisture is practiced for a
succession of vegetables and small fruits and alfalfa in considerable
parts of the other valley lands. One of the interesting and important
features of Walla Walla is the fine system of spouting artesian wells.
There are now over thirty of these wells in the Walla Walla Valley,
the largest having a flow of twenty-five hundred gallons per minute,
sufficient to irrigate a half section of land. Owing to the immense
snowfall on the Blue Mountains, ranging from ten to fifty or sixty
feet during the season, a large part of the slopes and valleys below
seems to be sub-irrigated and also to be underlaid by a great sheet of
water. Hence it seems reasonable to expect that artesian water will be
found in other places. In general it may be said that the climate of
the sections considered in this work is eminently conducive to health,
wealth, and comfort. It is a happy medium between the extreme dryness
of the Great Plateau and the extreme humidity of Western Washington; as
also between the rather muggy and enervating climate of the South and
the biting cold of winter and prostrating heat of summer of the belt
of northern states east of the Rocky Mountains. If we may judge by a
comparison of the native races, as well as by the "bunch-grass" horses
and cattle, the "bunch-grass" boys and girls will be on the road to
becoming superior specimens of humanity. Thus far there is too much of
a mixture of the human stock to make scientific comparisons.

Old Walla Walla County shares with other parts of Washington, Oregon,
Idaho, Montana, and British Columbia, the distinction of joint
ownership of one of the sublimest systems of waterways on the globe.
This system consists of the Columbia and its tributaries. The Columbia
itself washes the western verge of Walla Walla County for a distance
of only about sixteen miles. Yet, in this short distance the great
stream sustains its reputation as belonging in the front rank of scenic
rivers. Although the region around the junction of the blue, majestic
Columbia and the turbid and impetuous Snake is regarded as a desert in
its native condition, yet on one of the bright, still days of spring
or autumn views of such grandeur looking either up or down can be
obtained that no appreciative observer would ever say "desert." The
azure and gold and russet and purple that play upon the mountains and
islands looking up river, or upon the Wallula Gateway looking down,
with the mile-wide majesty of the river in the midst, must be seen to
be understood. No words of description can do justice to those scenes.

[Illustration: HUDSON BAY POST AT WALLULA. ERECTED IN 1818]

An inspection of the map will show that Snake River touches a much
larger rim than the greater stream. For it borders each one of the
four counties, for a total distance of about a hundred and fifty
miles. For this entire space Snake River is swift and turbid, having
an average fall of about three feet to the mile. Nevertheless, it
is navigable the whole distance during six or eight months in the
year. The immense volume of these two big rivers is not generally
understood by strangers. The Columbia is less than half as long as
the Mississippi, yet it is but slightly inferior in volume to the
"Father of Waters," and far surpasses any other river in the United
States. Its maximum flood stage at Celilo in the flood of 1894, the
greatest on record, was estimated at one million six hundred thousand
second feet, while the maximum of the Snake, just above its mouth, was
about four hundred thousand. We shall have occasion later to speak of
the steamer traffic upon these rivers and the improvements, past and
prospective, by the Federal Government. Suffice it to say here that
as that phase of early history was among the most important, so it is
plain that the future will bring on a new era of water-borne traffic,
and that with it will come a new era of production. Nearly all the
tributaries of the two big rivers flow from the snow banks and the
canons of the Blue Mountains. Though conveying in the aggregate during
the flood season an immense volume, the tributaries are too swift for
navigation. They supply abundant water for irrigation where needed,
and each is a superb trout stream. The largest, the Grande Ronde, is
in truth an Oregon river, for its main supplies come from the Grande
Ronde and Wallowa valleys, but it crosses the corner of Asotin County
and enters Snake River within that scenic country. The Grande Ronde is
a powerful stream and for varied scenes of wild grandeur and gentle
beauty, it is not easily matched. The Wallowa Basin (the "Far Wayleway"
of Longfellow's Evangeline) is sometimes called the Switzerland of
the Inland Empire. Of the historic interest of that region which thus
finds its exit through one of the counties of Old Walla Walla, we shall
speak again. The next affluent of the Snake River below the Grande
Ronde is Asotin Creek, a small stream and yet one of the busiest and
most useful for it is the source of the water supply of that fair and
productive region around Clarkston and extending thence to Asotin City.
Some distance below Clarkston is the Alpowa, also a historic stream.
Yet another stage and about half way between the Grande Ronde and the
mouth of Snake River we find one of the most charming in appearance
as well as most attractive to the fishermen of all the Blue Mountain
streams, the Tucanon. This also is invested with historic interest,
as we shall see later. Below the mouth of the Tucanon the previously
lofty, almost mountainous, shores of Snake River rapidly drop away
and the vast expanse of arid plain stretches away toward the crests
of the Blue Mountains. No more tributaries of the Snake River enter,
and with another stage that most interesting point in the history
of this turbulent and historic river is reached--its mouth, and its
individuality is lost in the mighty sweep of the Columbia. A few
miles below the junction the most historic and in some respects most
beautiful of the small tributaries of the Columbia streams in through
the verdant meadow and overhanging willows, the Walla Walla. The events
which have made the place of entrance, as well as many other places on
the course of this stream famous in the history of the Northwest, will
become manifest as our story proceeds.

In the great semicircle of one hundred and fifty miles in which Snake
River borders our four counties, there are frequent profound canons
through which the snow-crested mountains from which the streams issue
can be seen. The observer who has made that long journey and reaches
the open prairie at the mouth of the Snake will behold with wonder and
delight the distant chain, all in one splendid picture, of which he
had before seen broken glimpses through the rifted canon walls or up
the sources of the foaming creeks. But whether in broken glimpses or
in their grand unity, the Blue Mountains possess a unique charm and
individuality. While not so bold and aiguillated as the Cascades, and
while there are no peaks standing in lonely sublimity to compel the
vision of the traveller, like Mount "Takhoma" or Mount Adams or Mount
Hood, the Blue Mountains are not inferior in many of the features of
mountain charm to their greater brothers. The marvelous coloring is
perhaps the most distinctive of these features. While most mountains
are blue, these are blue blue. They are all shades of blue, according
to the hour and the month and the season--blue, indigo, ultramarine,
violet, purple, amethyst, lapis lazuli, everything that one can think
of to denote variations of blueness. "Blue Mountain" is a real name.
The French voyageurs of the fur-traders were the first to note the
characteristic blue, and according to Ross Cox, began at once to say,
"_Les Montagnes Bleues_." Another characteristic feature of these
mountains is the fact that they do not so much constitute a range or
chain, like the long, narrow, regular Cascade Range, as a huge mass
with prongs radiating from something like a central axis which might
be considered the great granite and limestone knot of peaks about
Wallowa Lake, of which Eagle Cap is the loftiest, over nine thousand
feet in elevation. On account of this ganglionic structure there are
many radiating canons from the long ridges and plateaus to the lower
levels. The views from the open ridges and rounded summits down these
canons constitute a scenic gallery of contours and colorings which may
challenge comparison with even the views of the loftier and bolder
Cascades.

The value of the Blue Mountains in condensing the moisture of the
atmosphere and dropping it upon the plains below in rain and snow
can hardly be conceived unless we reflect that without this vast
reservoir of salvation to all growing things the Inland Empire would
be a desert. Nor could it even be irrigated, for in the absence of the
Blue Mountains there would be no available streams for distribution.
Wonderful indeed is it to consider how the ardent sun of the Pacific
lifts the inconceivable masses of invisible vapor from the ocean and
the west wind carries them inland. The coast mountains constitute the
first condenser of that vapor, and almost constant rain during half the
year with a predominance of clouds and fogs at all times prevails along
the ocean margin of Oregon and Washington. The Cascade Range lifts its
stupendous domes and sentinel-like cliffs to catch the vapor that still
sweeps inland and to feed the greedy rootlets of their interminable
forests and to clothe the heights with perpetual snow and ice. But
those vast demands fail to exhaust the limitless resources of the sky,
and there are yet remaining infinite treasures of moisture floating
eastward. And so the next great suppliant for the vital nourishment
of all life stands with uplifted, appealing hands, our wide-extended
and clustered uplift of the Blues. Nor do they appeal in vain, as the
fertile prairies and benches with their millions of bushels of grain
and their far-reaching cattle ranges and their orchard valleys and
their countless springs can testify.

Whether from the standpoint of the forester or the farmer or the
stockman or the gardener or the orchardist or the fisherman or the
artist or the poet, the Blue Mountains constitute one of the great
vital working facts, the very framework of the life of Old Walla Walla
County. We shall discover that they are not simply a picture gallery,
but that the history of this region is fairly set within this stately
frame.

With these necessarily hurried and fragmentary glances at the physical
scene of the story, we shall be prepared to bring the human characters
upon the stage.




CHAPTER II

THE NATIVE RACES OF OLD WALLA WALLA COUNTY


Any history of any part of America would be incomplete without some
view of the aborigines. Such a view is due to them, as well as to the
accuracy of statement and the philosophical perspectives of history.
Such a view is required also by justice to the natives themselves. The
ever westward movement of American settlement has been marked by trails
of blood and fire. Warfare has set its red stains upon nearly every
region wrested from barbarism to civilization. This has been in many
cases due to flagrant wrong, greed, and lust by the civilized man. It
has been due also to savage cruelty by the barbarian. Perhaps more than
to wrong by either party, it has been due to that great, unexplained
and unexplainable tragedy of human history, the inability of either
party to comprehend the viewpoint of the other. And yet, most of all,
it has been due to that inevitable and remorseless evolution of all
life by which one race of plants, animals, and human beings progresses
by the extermination of others. Perhaps the philosophical mind, while
viewing with pity the sufferings and with reprobation the crimes and
irrational treatment forced upon the natives by the civilized race,
and while viewing with equal horror the atrocities by which the losers
in the inevitable struggle sought to maintain themselves--if to such
a philosophical mind comes the question who was to blame for all this
seemingly needless woe--must answer that the universe is mainly to
blame, and we have not yet reached the point to explain the universe.

We have found in the preceding chapter and shall find in succeeding
chapters frequent occasion to refer to events in connection with
Indians. Our aim in this chapter is rather to give an outline of
locations of different tribes, to sketch briefly some of their
traits as illustrated in their myths and customs, and to state the
chief published sources of our knowledge in regard to these myths
and customs. The history of Indian wars, which also includes other
incidental matter about them, will be found in the last chapter of Part
One of this volume.

The literature of Indian life is voluminous. Practically all the
early explorers from Lewis and Clark down devoted large space to the
natives. The pioneer settlers knew them individually and some of them
derived much matter of general value which has been preserved in brief
newspaper articles or handed down in story and tradition. Out of this
vast mass a few writers have formed groups of topics which serve well
for those generalizations which a bird's-eye view like this must be
content to take. Foremost among the writers dealing with the subject
in a large way is Hubert Howe Bancroft. Although his great work on the
history of the Pacific Coast has been severely and sometimes justly
censured, yet it must be granted that, as a vast compendium of matter
dealing with the subject, it is monumental and can be turned to with
confidence in the authenticity of its sources and in the general
accuracy of its statements of fact, even if not always in the breadth
of its opinions or the reliability of its judgments.

[Illustration: HUMISHUMA, OR MORNING DOVE, A WOMAN OF THE OKANOGAN TRIBE
Her deerskin robe, decorated with beads, elk teeth and grizzly-bear
claws, is worth over one thousand dollars]

In Volume One, Chapter Three, of Bancroft's "Native Races," there is
generalized grouping of the Columbian native tribes which may well
be accepted as a study of ethnology, derived from many observations
and records by those early explorers most worthy of credence. These
general outlines by the author are supported by numerous citations from
those authorities. The Colombians occupied, according to Bancroft,
all the vast region west of the Rocky Mountains lying between the
Hyperboreans on the north and the Californians on the south. They are
divided into certain families and these families into nations, and the
nations into tribes. There is naturally much inter-tribal mingling,
and yet the national and even tribal peculiarities are preserved with
remarkable distinctness. Beginning on the northern coast region around
Queen Charlotte Island are the Haidahs. South of them on the coast
comes the family of the Nootkas, centered on Vancouver Island. Then
comes the family of the Sound Indians, and still farther south that
of the Chinooks. Turning to the east side of the Cascades, which more
especially interests us, we find on the north the Shushwap family,
embracing all the inland tribes of British Columbia south of lat.
52 deg., 30'. This group includes the Okanogans, Kootenais, and others of
the border between British Columbia and Northeastern Washington and
Northern Idaho and Northwestern Montana. Then comes the Salish family,
in which we find the Spokanes, Flatheads, Pend Oreilles, Kalispels,
and others as far south as the Palouse region. There we begin with the
family of Sahaptins, the one which particularly concerns us in Old
Walla Walla County. Numerous citations in Bancroft's volume indicate
that the early explorers and ethnologists did not altogether agree on
the subdivisions of this family. It would seem that the groups have
been somewhat arbitrarily made, yet there was evidently considerable
effort to employ scientific methods by study of affiliations in
language, customs, treaty relations, range, and other peculiarities.
In general terms it may be said that the different writers pretty
nearly agree in finding some six or eight nations, each divided into
several tribes. These are the Nez Perces or Chopunnish, the Yakimas,
the Palouses, the Walla Wallas, the Cayuses, the Umatillas, the Wascos,
and the Klickitats. The tribes are variously grouped. The modern
spelling appears in the above list, but there is a bewildering variety
in the early books. This is especially true of Palouse and Walla
Walla. The former appears under the following forms: Palouse, Paloose,
Palus, Peloose, Pelouse, Pavilion, Pavion and Peluse. The word means
"Gooseberry," according to Thomas Beall of Lewiston. Our familiar Walla
Walla, meaning, according to "Old Bones," the Cayuse chief, the place
where the four creeks meet, the Walla Walla, Touchet, Mill Creek,
and Dry Creek, appears as Oualla-Oualla (French), Walla Wallapum,
Wollow Wollah, Wollaolla, Wolla-walla, Wallawaltz, Walla Walle, Wallah
Wallah, Wallahwallah, Wala-Wala, and Wollahwollah. For Umatilla we
find Umatallow, Utalla, Utilla, and Emmatilly. Cayuse has as variants,
Cailloux, Kayuse, Kayouse, Skyuse, Cajouse, Caagua, Kyoose, and Kyoots.
Doctor Whitman's station, now known as Waiilatpu, appears in sundry
forms, as Wyeilat, Willetpu, Wailatpui, and Wieletpoo. Some odd names
are found in Hunt, "Nouvelles Annales des Voyages," where it is stated
that the Sciatogas and Toustchipas live on Canoe River (apparently the
Tucanon) and the Euotalla (perhaps the Touchet), and the Akaitchis
"sur le Big-River," i. e., the Columbia. The tribe at the junction
of the Columbia and Snake was the Sokulks, apparently a branch of
the Walla Wallas. It would seem that the Cayuses occupied mainly the
middle Walla Walla region including Mill Creek, the Umatilla, the upper
Walla Walla, and across the high lands to the Umatilla River, while
the Walla Wallas were from the vicinity of the junction of Dry Creek,
the Touchet, and the Walla Walla River to its mouth. It appears that
the most of the region now composing Columbia, Garfield, and Asotin
counties was occupied by Nez Perces. All the tribes were more or less
on the move all the time, to mountains, plains, and rivers, according
to the season and variations in the food supply. The Sahaptin family
seem to have been in general of the best grade of Indians. Lewis and
Clark found the Nez Perces a noble, dignified and honest race, though
they say that they were close and reserved in bargaining. Generally
speaking, the inland Indians were far superior in physique and in
mental capacity to those of the Sound or the lower Columbia. Townsend
in his "Narrative" goes so far as to say that the Nez Perces and
Cayuses were almost universally fine-looking, robust men. He compares
one of the latter with the Apollo Belvedere. Gairdner says that the
Walla Wallas were generally powerful men, at least six feet high, and
the Cayuses were still stouter and more athletic. Others remarked that
very handsome young girls were often seen among the Walla Wallas. With
them doubtless, as with other Indians, the drudgery of their lives and
their early child-bearing made them prematurely old and they soon lost
their beauty.

There seems to have been much variation among these natives as to
personal habits and morality. The Nez Perces and Cayuses are almost
always described as clean, both of body and character. Palmer in his
"Journal," says that the Nez Perces were better clad than any others,
the Cayuses well clothed, Walla Wallas naked and half-starved. The last
statement seems not to correspond with the observations of Lewis and
Clark. Wilkes says that "at the Dalles women go nearly naked, for they
wear little else than what may be termed a breech-cloth, of buckskin,
which is black and filthy with dirt." About the same seems to have
been true of the Sokulks. But among the Tushepaws and Nez Perces and
Cayuses the men and women often wore long robes of buffalo or elk-skin
decorated with beads and sea-shells. Farnham speaks of the Cayuses as
the "Imperial tribe of Oregon, claiming jurisdiction over the whole
Columbia region."

The chief wealth of the tribes of Old Walla Walla County was in horses.
Doctor Tolmie expressed the supposition that horses had come from the
southward at no very long time prior to white discovery. It is well
known that a prehistoric horse, the hipparion, not larger than a deer,
existed in Oregon. Remains of that creature have been found in the John
Day Basin. But there is no evidence that there was a native horse among
the Indians of Oregon. Their "Cayuse horses," to all indications, came
from the horses of California, and they, in turn were the offspring of
the horses brought to Mexico and Southern California by the Spanish
conquerors. At the time of the advent of the whites, horses existed in
immense numbers all through the Columbia Valley. It was not uncommon
for a Walla Walla, Umatilla, Cayuse, or Nez Perce chief to have bands
of hundreds, even thousands. Canoes were a highly esteemed possession
of the Indians on the navigable rivers, and they had acquired marvelous
skill in handling them. The lower Columbia Indians spent so much time
curled up in canoes that they were distorted and inferior in physique
to the "bunch-grass Indians."

Like all barbarian people the Indians of the Columbia Valley were next
door to starvation a good part of the time. They gorged themselves
when food was plentiful, and thus were in distress when the bounty of
Nature failed, for there was no accumulated store as under civilized
conditions. Their food consisted of deer, elk, and other game, in which
the whole Blue Mountain country with the adjoining plains abounded,
and of salmon and sturgeon which they obtained in the Columbia and
Snake rivers by spearing and by ingenious weirs. They also obtained an
abundance of vegetable food from the camas and couse which were common,
and in fact still are in this region. Rather curiously, considering the
fertility of this Walla Walla County, there are very few wild berries,
nuts, or fruits. The huckleberry is practically the only berry in large
quantities and wild cherries the only kind of wild fruit.

Such were the physical conditions, hastily sketched, of the natives
of Old Walla Walla County. Their mental and moral characteristics may
be derived in a degree from the events narrated in the pages which
follow. In their best estate they were faithful, patient, hospitable,
and generous. In their worst estate, in which the whites more usually
found them, they seemed vindictive, suspicious, cruel, and remorseless.
Too many cases of the former type occurred to justify any sweeping
condemnation. One of the finest examples of Indian character in its
better light is shown by an event in this region narrated by Ross Cox
in his "Adventures on the Columbia River." The party of trappers of
the Northwestern Fur Company, of which Cox was one, was on its way
from Astoria to "Oakinagan," as he calls it--a company of sixty-four
in eight canoes. When at a point in the Columbia about equidistant
between the mouth of the "Wallah Wallah" and that of the Lewis (Snake),
a number of canoes filled with natives bore down upon their squadron,
apparently without hostile design. But within a few minutes the Indians
evinced the purpose of seizing the canoes of the whites and plundering
them by violence. It was soon give and take, and arrows began to fly.
Pretty soon one of the company, McDonald, seeing an Indian just at the
point of letting fly an arrow at him, fired and killed the Indian. A
struggle ensued, but the whites broke loose and defended themselves
sufficiently to reach an island, which must have been the one nearly
opposite the present Two Rivers. It was a gloomy prospect. Cox says
that they had pretty nearly given up hope of escaping, and had written
farewell notes which they hoped might reach their friends. It was a
dark, gloomy night in November, with a drizzling rain. During the night
the party saw signal fires on the shore to the northwest, followed
by others to east and west. Soon after a large band of ravens passed
over, the fluttering of whose wings they could hear. This had a most
depressing effect on the superstitious Canadians, and one of them
declared that the appearance of ravens at night was an infallible
sign of approaching death. Mr. Keith, one of the Scotchmen, seeing
the gloomy state of their minds and wishing to forestall the effect,
instantly joined the conversation, declaring that while there was
such a general fear of a night flight of ravens, yet it never worked
disaster unless the flight was accompanied by croaking. But when
ravens passed over without croaking, they were a harbinger of good
news. Much relieved, the Canadians regained their nerve and shouted
out, "you are right, you are right! Courage! There is no danger!" The
beleaguered band on their dismal retreat waited for the dawn, making
all preparations for resistance to the death. Early in the morning
the party crossed to the north bank of the river, and there waited
developments. A large force of Indians soon appeared, well armed, and
yet ready for a parley. The whites sent forward their interpreter,
Michel, to indicate their willingness to parley. A group of thirty or
forty of the relatives of the dead Indians advanced chanting a death
song, which, as they afterwards learned, was about as follows: "Rest,
brothers, rest! You will be avenged. The tears of your widows shall
cease to flow, when they behold the blood of your murderers; and your
young children shall leap and sing with joy, on seeing their scalps.
Rest, brothers, in peace; we shall have blood."

The events which followed this lugubrious song cannot be better told
than by following the vivid narrative of Cox:

"They took up their position in the center; and the whole party then
formed themselves into an extended crescent. Among them were natives
of the Chimnapum, Yackaman, Sokulk, and Wallah Wallah tribes. Their
language is nearly the same; but they are under separate chiefs, and
in time of war always unite against the Shoshone or Snake Indians, a
powerful nation, who inhabit the plains to the southward.

"From Chili to Athabasca, and from Nootka to the Labrador, there
is an indescribable coldness about an American savage that checks
familiarity. He is a stranger to our hopes, our fears, our joys, or
our sorrows; his eyes are seldom moistened by a tear, or his features
relaxed by a smile; and whether he basks beneath a vertical sun on the
burning plains of the Amazonia, or freezes in eternal winter on the
ice-bound shores of the Arctic Ocean, the same piercing black eyes, and
stern immobility of countenance, equally set at naught the skill of the
physiognomist.

"On the present occasion, their painted skin, cut hair, and naked
bodies, imparted to their appearance a degree of ferocity from which
we boded no good result. They remained stationary for some time and
preserved a profound silence.

"Messrs. Keith, Stewart, LaRocque, and the interpreter, at length
advanced about midway between both parties unarmed, and demanded to
speak with them; upon which two chiefs, accompanied by six of the
mourners, proceeded to join them. Mr. Keith offered them the calumet
of peace, which they refused to accept, in a manner at once cold and
repulsive.

"Michel was thereupon ordered to tell them that, as we had always been
on good terms with them, we regretted much that the late unfortunate
circumstance had occurred to disturb our friendly intercourse; but that
as we were anxious to restore harmony, and to forget what had passed,
we were now willing to compensate the relations of the deceased for the
loss they had sustained.

"They inquired what kind of compensation was intended; and on
being informed that it consisted of two suits of chief's clothes,
with blankets, tobacco, and ornaments for the women, etc., it was
indignantly refused; and their spokesman stated that no discussion
could be entered into until two white men (one of whom should be
the big red-headed chief) were delivered to them to be sacrificed,
according to their law, to the spirits of the departed warriors.

"Every eye turned on McDonald, who on hearing the demand, 'grinned
horribly a ghastly smile'; and who, but for our interposition,
would on the spot have chastised the insolence of the speaker. The
men were horrified, and 'fear and trembling' became visible in their
countenances, until Mr. Keith, who had observed these symptoms of
terror, promptly restored their confidence, by telling them that such
an ignominious demand should never be complied with.

"He then addressed the Indians in a calm, firm voice, and told them
that no consideration whatever should induce him to deliver a white
man to their vengeance; that they had been the original aggressors,
and in their unjustifiable attempt to seize by force our property,
the deceased had lost their lives; that he was willing to believe
the attack was unpremeditated, and under that impression he had made
the offer of compensation. He assured them that he preferred their
friendship to their enmity; but that, if unfortunately they were not
actuated by the same feelings, the white men would not, however deeply
they might lament it, shrink from the contest. At the same time he
reminded them of our superiority in arms and ammunition; and that for
every man belonging to our party who might fall, ten of their friends
at least would suffer; and concluded by requesting them calmly to
weigh and consider all these matters, and to bear in recollection that
upon the result of their deliberation would in a great measure depend
whether white men would remain in their country or quit it forever.

"The interpreter having repeated the above, a violent debate took place
among the principal natives. One party advised the demand for the two
white men to be withdrawn, and to ask in their place a greater quantity
of goods and ammunition; while the other, which was by far the most
numerous, and to which all the relatives of the deceased belonged,
opposed all compromise, unaccompanied by the delivery of the victims.

"The arguments and threats of the latter gradually thinned the ranks
of the more moderate; and Michel told Mr. Keith that he was afraid an
accommodation was impossible. Orders were thereupon issued to prepare
for action, and the men were told, when they received from Mr. Keith
the signal, to be certain that each shot should tell.

"In the meantime a number of the natives had withdrawn some distance
from the scene of deliberation, and from their fierce and threatening
looks, joined to occasional whispers, we momentarily expected they
would commence an attack.

"A few of their speakers still lingered, anxious for peace; but their
feeble efforts were unavailing when opposed to the more powerful
influence of the hostile party, who repeatedly called on them to
retire, and allow the white men to proceed on their journey as well as
they could. All but two chiefs and an elderly man, who had taken an
active part in the debate, obeyed the call, and they remained for some
time apparently undecided what course to adopt.

"From this group our eyes glanced to an extended line of the enemy who
were forming behind them; and from their motions it became evident that
their intention was to outflank us. We therefore changed our position,
and formed our men into single files, each man about three feet from
his comrade. The friendly natives began to fall back slowly towards
their companions, most of whom had already concealed themselves behind
large stones, tufts of wormwood, and furze bushes, from which they
could have taken a more deadly aim; and Messrs. Keith and Stewart, who
had now abandoned all hopes of an amicable termination, called for
their arms.

"An awful pause ensued, when our attention was arrested by the loud
tramping of horses, and immediately after twelve mounted warriors
dashed into the space between the two parties, where they halted and
dismounted. They were headed by a young chief, of fine figure, who
instantly ran up to Mr. Keith, to whom he presented his hand in the
most friendly manner, which example was followed by his companions. He
then commanded our enemies to quit their places of concealment, and to
appear before him. His orders were promptly obeyed; and having made
himself acquainted with the circumstances that led to the deaths of
the two Indians, and our efforts towards effecting a reconciliation,
he addressed them in a speech of considerable length, of which the
following is a brief sketch:

"'Friends and relations! Three snows only have passed over our heads
since we were a poor miserable people. Our enemies, the Shoshones,
during the summer stole our horses, by which we were prevented from
hunting, and drove us from the banks of the river, so that we could not
get fish. In winter they burned our lodges by night; they killed our
relations; they treated our wives and daughters like dogs, and left us
either to die from cold or starvation, or become their slaves.'

"'They were numerous and powerful; we were few, and weak. Our hearts
were as the hearts of little children; we could not fight like
warriors, and were driven like deer about the plains. When the thunders
rolled and the rains poured, we had no spot in which we could seek a
shelter; no place, save the rocks, whereon we could lay our heads. Is
such the case today? No, my relations! it is not. We have driven the
Shoshones from our hunting-grounds, on which they dare not now appear,
and have regained possession of the lands of our fathers, in which they
and their fathers' fathers lie buried. We have horses and provisions in
abundance, and can sleep unmolested with our wives and our children,
without dreading the midnight attacks of our enemies. Our hearts are
great within us, and we are now a nation!'

"'Who then, my friends, have produced this change? The white men.
In exchange for our horses and for our furs, they gave us guns and
ammunition; then we became strong; we killed many of our enemies, and
forced them to fly from our lands. And are we to treat those who have
been the cause of this happy change with ingratitude? Never! Never! The
white people have never robbed us; and, I ask, why should we attempt
to rob them? It was bad, very bad!--and they were right in killing
the robbers.' Here symptoms of impatience and dissatisfaction became
manifest among a group consisting chiefly of the relations of the
deceased; on observing which, he continued in a louder tone: 'Yes! I
say they acted right in killing the robbers; and who among you will
dare to contradict me?'

[Illustration: Hotel Dacres]

[Illustration: Grand Hotel

LEADING HOTELS OF WALLA WALLA]

"'You all know well my father was killed by the enemy, when you all
deserted him like cowards; and, while the Great Master of Life spares
me, no hostile foot shall again be set on our lands. I know you all;
and I know that those who are afraid of their bodies in battle are
thieves when they are out of it: but the warrior of the strong arm
and the great heart will never rob a friend.' After a short pause, he
resumed: 'My friends, the white men are brave and belong to a great
nation. They are many moons crossing the great lake in coming from
their own country to serve us. If you were foolish enough to attack
them, they would kill a great many of you; but suppose you should
succeed in destroying all that are now present, what would be the
consequence? A greater number would come next year to revenge the death
of their relations, and they would annihilate our tribe; or should not
that happen, their friends at home, on hearing of their deaths, would
say we were a bad and wicked people, and white men would never more
come among us. We should then be reduced to our former state of misery
and persecution; our ammunition would be quickly expended; our guns
would become useless, and we should again be driven from our lands,
and the lands of our fathers, to wander like deer and wolves in the
midst of the woods and plains. I therefore say the white men must not
be injured! They have offered you compensation for the loss of your
friends: take it; but, if you should refuse, I tell you to your faces
that I will join them with my own band of warriors; and should one
white man fall by the arrow of an Indian, that Indian, if he were my
brother, with all his family, shall become victims to my vengeance.'
Then, raising his voice, he called out, 'Let the Wallah Wallahs, and
all who love me, and are fond of the white men, come forth and smoke
the pipe of peace!' Upwards of one hundred of our late adversaries
obeyed the call, and separated themselves from their allies. The
harangue of the youthful chieftain silenced all opposition. The above
is but a faint outline of the arguments he made use of, for he spoke
upwards of two hours; and Michel confessed himself unable to translate
a great portion of his language, particularly when he soared into the
wild flights of metaphor, so common among Indians. His delivery was
generally bold, graceful, and energetic. Our admiration at the time
knew no bounds; and the orators of Greece or Rome when compared with
him, dwindled in our estimation into insignificance.

"Through this chief's mediation, the various claimants were in a
short time fully satisfied, without the flaming scalp of our Highland
hero; after which a circle was formed by our people and the Indians
indiscriminately: the white and red chiefs occupied the center, and our
return to friendship was ratified by each individual in rotation taking
an amicable whiff from the peace-cementing calumet.

"The chieftain whose timely arrival had rescued us from impending
destruction was called 'Morning Star.' His age did not exceed
twenty-five years. His father had been a chief of great bravery and
influence, and had been killed in battle by the Shoshones a few years
before. He was succeeded by Morning Star, who, notwithstanding his
youth, had performed prodigies of valor. Nineteen scalps decorated
the neck of his war horse, the owners of which had been all killed in
battle by himself to appease the spirit of his deceased father. He
wished to increase the number of his victims to twenty; but the terror
inspired by his name, joined to the superiority which his tribe derived
by the use of firearms, prevented him from making up the desired
complement by banishing the enemy from the banks of the Columbia.[1]

[1] The Indians consider the attainment of twenty scalps as
the summit of a warrior's glory.

"His handsome features, eagle glance, noble bearing, and majestic
person, stamped him one of Nature's own aristocracy; while his bravery
in the field, joined to his wisdom in their councils, commanded alike
the involuntary homage of the young, and the respect of the old.

"We gave the man who had been wounded in the shoulder a chief's coat;
and to the relations of the men who were killed we gave two coats, two
blankets, two fathoms of cloth, two spears, forty bullets and powder,
with a quantity of trinkets, and two small kettles for their widows.
We also distributed nearly half a bale of tobacco among all present,
and our youthful deliverer was presented by Mr. Keith with a handsome
fowling-piece, and some other valuable articles.

"Four men were then ordered to each canoe, and they proceeded on with
the poles; while the remainder, with the passengers, followed by land.
We were mixed pell-mell with the natives for several miles: the ground
was covered with large stones, small willows, and prickly-pears; and
had they been inclined to break the solemn compact into which they had
entered, they could have destroyed us with the utmost facility.

"At dusk we bade farewell to the friendly chieftain and his companions,
and crossed to the south side, where we encamped, a few miles above
Lewis River, and spent the night in tranquillity.

"It may be imagined by some that the part we acted in the foregoing
transaction betrayed too great an anxiety for self-preservation; but
when it is recollected that we were several hundred miles from any
assistance, with a deep and rapid river to ascend by the tedious and
laborious process of poling, and that the desultory Cossack mode of
fighting in use among the Indians, particularly the horsemen, would
have cut us off in piecemeal ere we had advanced three days, it will be
seen that, under the circumstances, we could not have acted otherwise."

And now we most turn to another phase of Indian life and character
which is most worthy of record, and one in which more than anywhere
else they show some of those "touches of nature which make the whole
world kin." This is that phase exhibited in myths and superstitions.
Here we shall find, as almost nowhere else, that Indians are, after
all, very much like other people. In this portion of this chapter the
author is incorporating portions of articles written by himself for the
_American Antiquarian_.

Like all primitive men, the Oregon Indians have an extensive
mythology. With childlike interest in the stars and moon and sun
and fire and water and forests, as well as plants and animal life
and their own natures, they have sought out and passed on a wealth
of legend and fancy which in its best features is worthy of a place
with the exquisite creations of Norse and Hellenic fancy, even with
much of the crude and grotesque. Yet it is not easy to secure these
legends just as the Indians tell them. In the first place few of the
early explorers knew how or cared to draw out the ideas of the first
uncontaminated Indians. The early settlers generally had a stupid
intolerance in dealing with Indians that made them shut right up
like clams and withhold their stock of ideas. Later the missionaries
generally inclined to give them the impression that their "heathen"
legends and ideas were obstacles to their "salvation," and should be
extirpated from their minds. Still further the few that did really get
upon a sympathetic footing with them and draw out some of their myths,
were likely to get them in fragments and piece them out with Bible
stories or other civilized conceptions, and thus the native stories
have become adulterated. It is difficult to get the Indians to talk
freely, even with those whom they like and trust. Educated Indians seem
to be ashamed of their native lore, and will generally avoid talking
about it with whites at all, unless under exceptional conditions.
Christianized Indians seem to consider the repetition of their old
myths a relapse into heathenism, and hence will parry efforts to draw
them out. In general, even when civilized, Indians are proud, reserved,
suspicious, and on their guard. And with the primal Indians few can
make much headway. The investigator must start in indirectly, not
manifesting any eagerness, and simply suggest as if by accident some
peculiar appearance or incident in sky or trees or water, and let the
Indian move on in his own way to empty his own mind, never suspecting
any effort by his listener to gather up and tell again his story. And
even under the most favoring conditions, one may think he is getting
along famously, when suddenly the Indian will pause, glance furtively
at the listener, give a moody chuckle, relapse into stony and apathetic
silence--that is the end of the tale.

Our stories have been derived mainly from the reports of those who have
lived much among the Indians, and who have been able to embrace the
rare occasions when, without self-consciousness or even much thought
of outsiders, the natives could speak out freely. There is usually no
very close way of judging of the accuracy of observation or correctness
of report of these investigators, except as their statements are
corroborated by others. These stories sometimes conflict, different
tribes having quite different versions of certain stories. Then again
the Indians have a peculiar habit of "continued stories," by which at
the teepee fire one will take up some well known tale and add to it and
so make a new story of it, or at least a new conclusion. As with the
minstrels and minnesingers of feudal Europe at the tournaments, the
best fellow is the one who tells the most thrilling tale.

One confusing condition that often arises with Indian names and
stories is that some Indians use a word generically and others use
the same word specifically. For instance the native name for Mount
Adams, commonly given as "Pahtou," and Mount Rainier or Tacoma, better
spelled "Takhoma," as sounded by the Indians, really means any high
mountain. A Wasco Indian once told the author that his tribe called
Mount Hood, "Pahtou," meaning the big mountain, but that the Indians on
the other side of the Columbia River applied the same name to Adams.
A very intelligent Puyallup Indian says that the name of the "Great
White Mountain" was "Takhoma," with accent and prolonged sound on the
second syllable, but that any snow peak was the same, with the second
syllable not so prolonged according to height or distance of the
peak. Mount St. Helens was also "Takhoma," but with the "ho" not so
prolonged. But among some other Indians we find Mount St. Helens known
as "Lawailaclough," and with some Mount Hood is known as "Yetsl." Still
other names are "Loowit" for St. Helens and "Wiyeast" for Hood. Adams
seems to be known to some as "Klickitat." "Koolshan" for Baker, meaning
the "Great White Watcher," is one of the most attractive of Indian
names and should be preserved. There is "Shuksan" or "The place of the
Storm Wind," the only one of the northwestern peaks which has preserved
its Indian name. In reference to "Takhoma," a Puyallup woman told the
writer that among her people the name meant the "Breast that Feeds,"
or "The Breast of the Milk White Waters," referring to the glaciers or
the white streams that issue from them. On the other hand, Winthrop in
"Canoe and Saddle," states that the Indians applied the name "Takhoma"
to any high snow peak. Mr. Edwin Eells of Tacoma has written that he
derived from Rev. Father Hylebos of the same city the statement that
the name "Takhoma" was compounded of "Tah" and "Koma," and that among
certain Indians the word "Koma" meant any snow peak, while "Tah" is a
superlative. Hence, "Tahkoma" means simply the great peak.

We find something of the same inconsistencies in regard to the Indian
names of rivers. Our maps abound with supposed Indian names of rivers
and yet an educated Nez Perce Indian named Luke, living at Kamiah,
Idaho, says that the Indians, at least of that region, had no names of
rivers, but only of localities. He told the author that "Kooskooskie,"
which Lewis and Clark understood to be the name of what we now call
the Clearwater, was in reality a repetition of "Koos," their word
for water, and they meant merely to say that it was a strong water.
On the other hand we find many students of Indian languages who have
understood that there were names for the large rivers, even for the
Columbia. In the beautiful little book by B. H. Barrows, published and
distributed by the Union Pacific Railroad Company, we find the name
"Shocatilicum" or "Friendly Water" given as the Chinook name for the
Columbia. It is interesting to notice that this same word for "friendly
water" appears in Vol. II, of the Lewis and Clark Journal, but with
different spelling, in one place being "Shocatilcum" and in another
place "Chockalilum." Reverend Father Blanchet is authority for the
statement in "_Historical Magazine_," II, 335, that the Chinook Indians
used the name "Yakaitl Wimakl" for the Lower Columbia. A Yakima Indian
called William Charley gives "Chewanna" as still another Indian name
for the Columbia.

We have many supposed Indian names for God, as "Nekahni," or "Sahale,"
but Miss Kate McBeth, long a missionary among the Nez Perces, records
in her book about them that those Indians had no native name for
the deity. Of these Indian myths many deal with the chief God, as
"Nekahni," "Sahale," "Dokidatl," "Snoqualm," or "Skomalt," while others
have to do with the lesser grade of the supernatural beings, as the
Coyote god, variously named "Tallapus," "Speelyi," or "Sinchaleep."
Others may treat of "Skallalatoots" (Fairies), "Toomuck," (Devils),
or the various forms of "Tomanowas" (magic). A large number of these
myths describe the supposed origin of strange features of the natural
world, rocks, lakes, whirlpools, winds and waterfalls. Some describe
the "animal people," "Watetash," as the Klickitats call them. Some of
the best are fire-myths. These myths seem to have been common among all
Indians of the Columbia Valley.

In the preceding chapter we have given two of the best Indian myths,
that of Wishpoosh and that of the Chinook Wind. We insert here two
stories of a very different nature, derived from the same investigator
as the two preceding, Dr. G. B. Kuykendall of Pomeroy, Washington.

There is a legend among the Yakima Indians which seems to have the
same root in human nature as the beautiful Greek myth of Orpheus and
Eurydice, showing the instinctive desire of people on earth to bring
back the spirits of the dead, and the impossibility of doing so. This
myth sets forth how Speelyi and Whyama the eagle became at one time
so grieved at the loss of their loved ones that they determined to go
to the land of the spirits and bring them back. The two adventurers
journeyed for a long distance over an unbroken plain, and came at last
to a great lake, on the farther side of which they saw many houses.
They called long and vainly for someone to come with a boat and ferry
them over. But there was no sign of life and at last Whyama said
that there could be no one there. Speelyi insisted, however, that
the people were simply sleeping the sleep of the day and would come
forth at night. Accordingly, when the sun went down and darkness began
to come on, Speelyi started to sing. In a few minutes they saw four
spirit men come to the bank, enter a boat and cross the lake to meet
them. It seemed not necessary for them to row the boat, for apparently
it skimmed over the water of its own accord. The spirit men, having
landed, took Whyama and Speelyi with them in the boat and began their
return to the island of the dead. The island seemed to be a very sacred
place. There was a house of mats upon the shore, where music and
dancing were in progress. Speelyi and Whyama begged leave to enter,
and feeling hungry, they asked for food. The spirit land was so much
less gross than the earth that they were satisfied by what was dipped
with a feather out of a bottle. The spirit people now came to meet them
dressed in most beautiful costumes, and so filled with joy that Speelyi
and Whyama felt a great desire to share their happiness. By the time of
the morning light, however, the festivities ceased and all the spirit
people became wrapped in slumber for the day. Speelyi, observing that
the moon was hung up inside the great banquet hall and seemed to be
essential to the ongoings of the evening, stationed himself in such a
place that he could seize it during the next night's meeting. As soon
as night came on the spirits gathered again for the music and dance.
While their festivities were in progress as usual, Speelyi suddenly
swallowed the moon, leaving the entire place in darkness. Then he
and Whyama brought in a box, which they had previously provided, and
Whyama, flying swiftly about the room caught a number of the spirits
and enclosed them in the box. Then the two proceeded to start for the
earth, Speelyi carrying the box upon his back.

As the two adventurers went upon their long journey toward the earth
with the precious box, the spirits, which at first were entirely
imponderable, began to be transformed into men and to have weight. Soon
they began to cry out on account of their crowded and uncomfortable
position. Then they became so heavy that Speelyi could no longer carry
them. In spite of the remonstrances of Whyama, he opened the box.
They were astonished and overwhelmed with grief to see the partially
transformed spirits flit away like autumn leaves and disappear in the
direction from which they had come. Whyama thought that perhaps even
as the buds grow in the spring, so the dead would come back with the
blooming of the next flowers. But Speelyi deemed it best after this
that the dead should remain in the land of the dead. Had it not been
for this, as the Indians think, the dead would indeed return every
spring with the opening of the leaves.

The Klickitat Indians, living along the Dalles of the Columbia, have
another legend of the land of spirits. There was a young chief and
a girl who were devoted to each other and seemed to be the happiest
people in the tribe, but suddenly he sickened and died. The girl
mourned for him almost to the point of death, and he, having reached
the land of spirits, could find no happiness there on account of
thinking of her.

And so it came to pass that a vision began to appear to the girl by
night, telling her that she must herself go into the land of the
spirits in order to console her lover. Now there is near that place one
of the most weird and funereal of all the various "memaloose" islands,
or death islands, of the Columbia. The writer himself has been upon
this island and its spectral and volcanic desolation makes it a fitting
location for ghostly tales. It lies just below the "great chute," and
even yet has many skeletons upon it. In accordance with the directions
of the vision, the girl's father made ready a canoe, placed her in it,
and rowed out into the great river by night to the memaloose island. As
the father and his child rowed across the dark and forbidding waters,
they began to hear the sound of singing and dancing and great joy. Upon
the shore of the island they were met by four spirit people, who took
the girl but bade the father return, as it was not for him to see into
the spirit country. Accordingly the girl was conducted to the great
dance house of the spirits, and there she met her lover, far stronger
and more beautiful than when upon earth. That night they spent in
unspeakable bliss, but when the light began to break in the east and
the song of the robins began to be heard from the willows on the shore,
the singers and the dancers began to fall asleep.

The girl, too, had gone to sleep, but not soundly like the spirits.
When the sun had reached the meridian, she woke, and now, to her
horror, she saw that instead of being in the midst of beautiful
spirits, she was surrounded by hideous skeletons and loathsome,
decaying bodies. Around her waist were the bony arms and skeleton
fingers of her lover, and his grinning teeth and gaping eye-sockets
seemed to be turned in mockery upon her. Screaming with horror she
leaped up and ran to the edge of the island, where, after hunting
a long time, she found a boat, in which she paddled across to the
Indian village. Having presented herself to her astonished parents,
they became fearful that some great calamity would visit the tribe on
account of her return, and accordingly her father took her the next
night back to the memaloose island as before. There she met again the
happy spirits of the blessed and there again her lover and she spent
another night in ecstatic bliss.

In the course of time a child was born to the girl, beautiful beyond
description, being half spirit and half human. The spirit bridegroom,
being anxious that his mother should see the child, sent a spirit
messenger to the village, desiring his mother to come by night to the
memaloose island to visit them. She was told, however, that she must
not look at the child until ten days had passed. But after the old
woman had reached the island her desire to see the wonderful child was
so intense that she took advantage of a moment's inattention on the
part of the guard, and, lifting the cloth from the baby board, she
stole a look at the sleeping infant. And then, dreadful to relate, the
baby died in consequence of this premature human look. Grieved and
displeased by this foolish act, the spirit people decreed that the dead
should never again return nor hold any communication with the living.

As showing still another phase of Indian imagination, the stories of
the "Tomanowas Bridge" of the Cascades may well find a place here.

This myth not only treats of fire, but it also endeavors to account for
the peculiar formation of the river and for the great snow peaks in
the near vicinity. This myth has various forms, and in order that it
may be the better understood, we shall say a word with respect to the
peculiar physical features in that part of the Columbia. This mighty
river, after having traversed over a thousand miles from its source
in the heart of the Rocky Mountains of Canada, has cleft the Cascade
range asunder with the canon 3,000 feet in depth. While generally very
swift, that portion of the river between The Dalles and the Cascades,
of about fifty miles, is very deep and sluggish. There are moreover
sunken forests on both sides of the river, visible at low water, which
seem plainly to indicate that at that point the river was dammed up
by some great rock slide or volcanic convulsion. Some of the Indians
affirm that their grandfathers have told them there was a time when the
river at that point passed under an immense natural bridge and that
there were no obstructions to the passage of boats under the bridge.
At the present time there is a cascade of forty feet at that point.
This is now overcome by Government locks. Among other evidences of
some such actual occurrence as the Indians relate is the fact that the
banks of the river at that point are gradually sliding into the river.
The prodigious volume of the Columbia which here rises from fifty
to seventy-five feet during the summer flood and which, as shown by
Government engineers, carries as much water as the Mississippi at New
Orleans, is here continually eating into the banks. The railroad has
slid several inches a year at this point toward the river and requires
frequent readjustment. It is obvious at a slight inspection that this
weird and sublime point in the course of this majestic river has been
the scene of terrific volcanic and probably seismic action. One Indian
legend, probably the best known of all their stories, is to the effect
that the downfall of the great bridge and consequent damming of the
river was due to a great battle between Mount Hood and Mount Adams, in
which Mount Hood hurled a great rock at his antagonist, but falling
short of the mark the rock demolished the bridge instead. This event
has been made use of by Frederick Balch in his beautiful story, "The
Bridge of the Gods," the finest story yet produced in Oregon.

But the finer, though less known legend, which unites both the physical
conformation of the Cascades and the three great snow mountains of
Hood, Adams, and St. Helens, with the origin of fire, is to this
effect. This story was secured by Mr. Fred Saylor of Portland.

According to the Klickitats there was once a father and two sons who
came from the east down the Columbia to the vicinity of where Dalles
City is now located, and there the two sons quarreled as to who should
possess the land. The father, to settle the dispute, shot two arrows,
one to the north and one to the west. He told one son to find the arrow
to the north and the other the one at the west and there to settle and
bring up their families. The first son, going northward, over what
was then a beautiful plain, became the progenitor of the Klickitat
tribe, while the other son was the founder of the great Multnomah
nation of the Willamette Valley. To separate the two tribes more
effectively Sahale reared the chain of the Cascades, though without
any great peaks, and for a long time all things went in harmony. But
for convenience' sake Sahale had created the great tomanowas bridge
under which the waters of the Columbia flowed, and on this bridge he
had stationed a witch woman called Loowit, who was to take charge of
the fire. This was the only fire in the world. As time passed on Loowit
observed the deplorable condition of the Indians, destitute of fire and
the conveniences which it might bring. She therefore besought Sahale
to allow her to bestow fire upon the Indians. Sahale, having been
greatly pleased by the faithfulness and benevolence of Loowit, finally
granted her request. The lot of the Indians was wonderfully improved
by the acquisition of fire. They now began to make better lodges and
clothes and had a variety of food and implements and, in short, were
marvellously benefited by the bounteous gift.

But Sahale, in order to show his appreciation of the care with which
Loowit had guarded the sacred fire, now determined to offer her any
gift she might desire as a reward. Accordingly, in response to his
offer, Loowit asked that she be transformed into a young and beautiful
girl. This was effected and now, as might have been expected, all the
Indian chiefs fell deeply in love with the beautiful guardian of the
tomanowas bridge. Loowit paid little heed to any of them, until finally
there came two magnificent chiefs, one from the north called Klickitat,
and one from the south called Wiyeast. Loowit was uncertain which of
these two she most desired, and as a result a bitter strife arose
between the two, and this waxed hotter and hotter, until finally, with
their respective warriors, they entered upon a desperate war. The land
was ravaged, all the beautiful things which they had made were marred,
and misery and wretchedness ensued. Sahale repented that he had allowed
Loowit to bestow fire upon the Indians, and determined to undo all his
work in so far as he could. Accordingly he broke down the tomanowas
bridge, which dammed up the river with an impassable reef and put to
death Loowit, Klickitat and Wiyeast. But, he said, inasmuch as they
had been so grand and beautiful in life, he would give them a fitting
commemoration after death. Therefore he reared over them as monuments
the great snow peaks; over Loowit what we now call Mount St. Helens,
over Wiyeast the modern Mount Hood, and above Klickitat the stupendous
dome of what we now call Mount Adams.

And now it is a matter of much interest to learn something of the
chief original sources and the most reliable investigators of these
myths. This survey is necessarily incomplete. The endeavor is to name
the students and writers of myths as far as possible. This search goes
beyond Old Walla Walla and covers Old Oregon.

First in the natural order of the investigators and records of Indian
myths come the early explorers and writers of Old Oregon. Most of these
give us little on the special subject of myths, though they give much
on the habits, customs, occupations, and implements of the natives.
The earliest explorer in Oregon, so far as known to the author, to
give any native legend, is Gabriel Franchere, who came to Astoria with
the Astor Fur Company in 1811. In his narrative, upon which Irving's
"Astoria" is largely based, we find a fine story of the creation of men
by Etalapass, and their subsequent improvement by Ecannum. Franchere
says that this legend was related to him by Ellewa, one of the sons
of Concomly, the one-eyed Chinook chief, who figures conspicuously
in Franchere's narrative. Of valuable books of the same period of
Franchere, are Ross Cox's "Adventures on the Columbia River," and
Alexander Ross' "Adventures on the Columbia," both of which contain
valuable references to the customs and superstitious ideas of the
natives, though not much in the way of myths. Ross gives an interesting
myth of the Oakinackens (Okanogans as we now say) about the origin of
the Indians or Skyloo on the white man's island, Samahtumawhoolah.
The Indians were then very white and ruled by a female spirit, or
Great Mother, named Skomalt, but their island got loose and drifted
on the ocean for many suns, and as a result they became darkened to
their present hue. Ross gives also an account of the belief of the
Oakinackens in a good spirit, one of whose names is Skyappe, and a bad
spirit, one of whose names was Chacha. The chief deity of those Indians
seems to have been the great mother of life, Skomalt, whose name also
has the addition of "Squisses." Ross says that those Indians change
their names constantly and doubtless their deities did the same.

[Illustration: POSTOFFICE, WALLA WALLA]

Of valuable books a few years later than those just named, one
especially deserving of mention is Dr. Samuel Parker's "Exploring Tour
Beyond the Rocky Mountains," the result of observations made in 1835
and 1836. This, however, contains little in the way of mythology.
Capt. Charles Wilkes, the American explorer of the early '40s, gives
a very interesting account of a Palouse myth of a beaver which was
cut up to make the tribes. This is evidently another version of the
Klickitat story of the great beaver, Wishpoosh, of Lake Cleelum. One
of the most important of the early histories of Oregon is Dunn's, the
materials for which were gathered in the decade of the '40s. With other
valuable matter it contains accounts of the religious conceptions
of the Indians, and here we find the legend of the Thunder Bird of
the Tinneh, a northern tribe. In this same general period, though
a little later, we find the most brilliant of all writers dealing
with Oregon; that is, the gifted scholar, poet and soldier, Theodore
Winthrop. His book, "Canoe and Saddle," has no rival for literary
excellence and graphic power, among all the books which have dealt with
the Northwest. The book was first published in 1862, and republished
fifty years later in beautiful form by John H. Williams of Tacoma.
"Canoe and Saddle" commemorates a journey from Puget Sound across the
mountains and through the Yakima and Klickitat countries in 1854. It
contains several fine Indian stories, notably that of the Miser of
Mount Tacoma, and that of the Devil of the Dalles. Winthrop does not
state from whom directly he secured the second of these myths, but no
doubt from the Indians themselves, though the peculiar rich imagination
and picturesque language of Winthrop are in evidence throughout the
narration. The tale of the Miser of Mount Tacoma is attributed by
Winthrop to Hamitchou, an Indian of the Squallygamish tribe.

At about the some time as Winthrop's, occurred the visit and
investigations of James G. Swan, whose book, "The Northwest Coast," was
published in 1857. In this is found the creation myth of the Ogress
of Saddle Mountain, relating the issuing forth of Indians from eggs
cast down the mountain-side by the Ogress. Many years ago Rev. Myron
Eells told the writer a variation of that story, which has appeared
in sundry forms and publications, being the story of Toulux, the
South Wind, Quootshoi the witch, and Skamson the Thunder Bird. In
addition to the legend of the Thunder Bird, Swan gives many items of
peculiar interest. Among these we find his idea that certain customs
of the Indians ally them with the Ten Lost Tribes of Israel. His final
impression seems to be, however, that they are autocthonous in America.
He refers to the observation of General George Gibbs of the similarity
of Klickitat myths to those in Longfellow's Hiawatha. He also refers
to the beeswax ship of the Nehalem. In connection with the thought
of Indian resemblance to the Ten Lost Tribes, it is worth noticing
that this has come forth from various directions. Miss Kate McBeth
has expressed the same in connection with the Nez Perces. It was also
a favorite idea with B. B. Bishop, one of the earliest builders of
steamboats on the Columbia, who lived many years at Pendleton, Oregon.
He told the writer that the Indians at the Cascades had a spring
festival with the first run of salmon. They would boil whole the first
large salmon caught, and have a ceremony in which the whole tribe would
pass in procession around the fish, each taking a bit. They exercised
the utmost care to leave the skeleton intact, so that at the end it had
been picked clean but with not a bone broken. Mr. Bishop thought that
this was a survival of the Jewish idea of the Paschal Lamb.

Among the great collectors of all kinds of historical data in what
might be called the middle period of Northwest history and not exactly
belonging to any one of the specific groups, is H. H. Bancroft, already
referred to in the first part of this chapter. In his "Native Races,"
are found many myths, with references given, but these mainly deal
with Mexican, Central American, and Californian Indians. He refers to
Holmburg's ethnological studies in German as containing valuable matter
in regard to our Northwestern Indians. _Harmon's Journal_, with its
reference to the Tacullies of British Columbia and their legend of the
Musk Rat, is also named. In the same connection we find reference to
Yehl the Raven, an especial favorite of the Indians of British Columbia
and the upper part of Puget Sound.

From what may be termed the first group of narrators of native tales,
we may turn to those that may be called the scientific ethnologists.
We are indebted to Dr. Franz Boas, himself the foremost of the group,
for the list of these professional students of the subject. These men
took up the matter in a more scientific and methodical way than the
travellers and pioneers and have presented the results of their work in
form that appeals to the scholar, the work of trained investigators,
seeking the facts and giving them as exactly as possible, not affected
by the distortions and exaggerations common to unscientific observers.
They were all connected with the Smithsonian Institute, and their work
was mainly under the Government.

The Bibliography as given by Doctor Boas, is as follows:

 Edward Sapir, Wishram Texts (publications of the American
 Ethnological Society, Vol. II).

 Leo J. Frachtenberg, Coos Texts (Columbia University contributions to
 Anthropology, Vol. I).

 Leo J. Frachtenberg, Lower Umpqua Texts (Ibid., Vol. IV).

 James Teit, Traditions of the Thompson Indians (Memoirs of the
 American Folk-Lore Society, Vol. VI). (This is not Washington, but
 practically identical with material from the interior of Washington.)

 James Teit, Mythology of the Thompson Indians (Jesup North Pacific
 Expedition Publications, Vol. VIII).

 James Teit, The Shuswap (Ibid., Vol. II).

 Franz Boas, Indianische Sagen von der Nord-Pacifischen Kueste Amerikas.

 Franz Boas, Mythology of the Indians of Washington and Oregon
 (Globus, Vol. LXIII, pp. 154-157, 172-175, 190-193).

 H. J. Spinden, Myths of the Nez Perce (Journal of American Folk Lore,
 Vol. XXI).

 Louisa McDermott, Myths of the Flathead Indians (Ibid., Vol. XIV).

 Franz Boas, Sagen der Kootenay (Berlin Society for Anthropology,
 Ethnology, etc., Vol. XXIII, pp. 161-172).

 Livingston Farrand, Traditions of the Quinault Indians (Publications
 of the Jesup North Pacific Expedition, Vol. II).

 Franz Boas, Chinook Texts (Bureau of Ethnology, Government Printing
 Office, 1894).

 Franz Boas, Cathlamet Texts (Ibid.).

 James Teit, Traditions of the Lilloost Indians (Journal of American
 Folk-Lore, Vol. XXV).

 Jeremiah Curtin, Myths of the Modocs (Little, Brown & Co.).

To these may be added, as of special value, the studies of Prof.
Albert S. Gatchett among the Modocs, found under the title, "Oregonian
Folk-Lore" in the _Journal of American Folk-Lore_, Vol. IV, 1891,
Houghton, Mifflin & Co. The other volumes of the _Journal of American
Folk-Lore_ from 1888 to 1913 contain valuable matter.

Doctor Boas found a treasury of information in an old Indian named
Charlie Cultee, at Bay Center in Willapa Harbor, Wash., and from that
source derived the material for the most scientific and uncolored study
of Indian lore yet given to the public. These appear in the Chinook
Texts of Doctor Boas. In this is a fine story of the first ship seen by
the Clatsops. This is found also in H. S. Lyman's History of Oregon. In
Professor Gatchett's book are found some of the finest fire myths and
fish myths of the Northwest.

Following the groups of the explorers and the professional
ethnologists, may come the larger body of miscellaneous collectors and
writers, who, through local papers and magazines and published books,
as well as personal narration, have rescued many quaint and curious
gems of Indian mythology from oblivion and through various channels
have imparted them to the slowly accumulating stock.

Those no longer living may properly appear first. Of comparatively
recent students no longer living, Silas Smith of Astoria was of the
best. His father was Solomon Smith of the Wyeth Expedition, while his
mother was Celiast, daughter of the Clatsop chief Cobaiway. Through his
Indian mother Mr. Smith obtained much interesting matter, much of which
was preserved by H. S. Lyman in his history of Oregon, and in articles
in the _Oregonian_, _Historical Quarterly_, and other publications. H.
S. Lyman was also an original investigator, deriving his data mainly
from Silas Smith and from a group of Indians who formerly lived at the
mouth of the Nekanicum. These stories appear in his history of Oregon
and in a group contained in the "Tallapus Stories," published in the
_Oregonian_. Another intelligent and patient investigator was Rev.
Myron Eells, who lived for many years on Hood's Canal. Many years ago
the author heard from him legends from the Indians which he derived
directly from the natives, such as the Thunder Bird, the Flood around
Mount Tacoma (which he thought colored by the story of Noah in the
Bible), and others. In the book by Mr. Eells, entitled "Ten Years'
Missionary Work in Skokomish," he gives a valuable description of the
"Tomanowas." In various numbers of the _American Antiquarian_ Mr. Eells
has valuable articles as follows: "The Religion of the Twana Indians,"
July, 1879; "Dokidatl, or the God of the Puget Sound Indians,"
November, 1884; "The Indians of Puget Sound," May, 1888, and March,
1890.

Prominent among the scholars and lecturers of Oregon is the great name
of Thomas Condon, for a long time in the State University, and the
earliest student in a large way of the geology of the Northwest. He
was interested in Indian myths as in almost everything that had to do
with man and nature. The legend of the "Bridge of the Gods," already
given in this chapter, particularly appealed to him. One of the notable
students of both the geology and anthropology of the Northwest was
George Gibbs, who came to Oregon as a Government geologist in 1853.
In his report on the Pacific Railroad in House of Representatives
Documents of 1853-4, he gives the first published version, so far as
we can discover, of the "Bridge of the Gods." He tells the story thus:
"The Indians tell a characteristic tale of Mount Hood and Mount St.
Helens to the effect that they were man and wife; that they finally
quarreled and threw fire at one another, and that St. Helens was
victor; since when Mount Hood has been afraid, while St. Helens, having
a stout heart, still burned. In some versions this story is connected
with the slide which formed the Cascades of the Columbia." Mr. Gibbs
also gives some Yakima legends.

One of the most distinguished of all the literary pioneers of Old
Oregon was Samuel A. Clark. In his "Pioneer Days in Oregon" are several
interesting legends well told. In this we find the legend of the
Nahalem, with Ona and Sandy and all their tribulations. We find here
told also the story of the Bridge of the Gods, in which Hood and Adams
are represented as the contending forces, having been originally the
abutments of the Bridge of the Gods. But the most noted contribution
of Mr. Clark to this legend was his poem called, "The Legend of the
Mountains," referring to the fabled bridge, which appeared in _Harper's
Magazine_ of February, 1874. This represents Mount St. Helens as a
goddess for whom Hood and Adams contended, hurling huge stones at each
other and finally breaking down the bridge. The story of the bridge
became the most noted of all native myths, being related to practically
every traveller that made the steamboat trip down the Columbia.

Let us now turn to those discoverers and writers of Indian myths who
are still living. The majority of these are from the nature of the case
adaptors and transcribers, rather than original students. But some
among them are entitled to the place of genuine investigators. Among
these a foremost place must be accorded to Fred A. Saylor of Portland.
He was for several years editor of the _Oregon Native Son_, and for
it he wrote a number of stories which he derived directly from the
Indians. A student of these stories from boyhood, he has accumulated
the largest collection of matter both published and unpublished of
anyone in the Northwest. This collection is preserved by him in
fourteen large scrap books, and constitutes a treasury of valuable
data which it is to be hoped may soon appear in a published form for
the delight and profit of many readers. Among the legends of which
Mr. Saylor is entitled to be regarded as the discoverer are these:
"The Legend of Tahoma"; "Why the Indian Fears Golden Hair," or, "The
Origin of Castle Rock;" "Speelyi, or the Origin of Latourelle Falls,
and the Pillars of Hercules;" "Thorns on Rosebushes;" "The Noah of the
Indians;" "The Strange Story of a Double Shadow;" "The Legend of Snake
River Valley;" "A Wappato Account of the Flood;" "The Last Signal Fire
of the Multnomah;" "The Legend of the Willamette;" "The Love of an
Indian Maid;" "Enumpthla;" "Coyote's Tomb;" "Multnomah." The last named
has been presented by students on the campus of the State University
and also at the Agricultural College of Oregon.

Of investigators known to the author, none seems more worthy of
extended and favorable mention than Dr. G. B. Kuykendall of Pomeroy,
Wash. He was for a number of years the physician for the Yakima
Reservation at Fort Simcoe. He began his work of collecting in 1875,
deriving his knowledge directly from the Indians. His authorities
were almost entirely old Indians, for from such only could he secure
narrations of unadulterated character. His first published writings
were in the "West Shore," of Portland, in 1887. His most mature
contribution, which may indeed be considered the best yet given to the
public, is found in Vol. II, of the "History of the Pacific Northwest,"
published by the North Pacific History Co., of Portland, in 1889. This
is an admirable piece of work, and students of the subject will find
here a treasure of native lore. The following is the list of stories
given by Dr. Kuykendall in that work: "Wishpoosh, the Beaver God, and
the Origin of the Tribes;" "Speelyi Fights Enumtla;" "Speelyi Outwits
the Beaver Women;" "Rock Myths;" "Legend of the Tick;" "Mountain Lake
Myths;" "The Origin of Fire;" "Water Nymphs;" "Wawa, the Mosquito God;"
"Origin of the Loon;" "Castiltah, the Crayfish;" "Wakapoosh, the Rattle
Snake;" "The Tumwater Luminous Stone God;" "The Wooden Fireman of the
Cascades;" "Contest Between the Chinooks and Cold Wind Brothers;"
"Speelyi's Ascent to Heaven;" "Coyote and Eagle Attempt to Bring the
Dead Back from Spirit Land;" "The Isle of the Dead."

Another original investigator and the author of an unique and
picturesque book devoted exclusively to Indian myths, is W. S. Phillips
of Seattle, well known by his non-de-plume of "El Comancho." The book
by Mr. Phillips is "Totem Tales." Mr. Phillips says that he gathered
the matter for "Totem Tales" from the Puget Sound Indians and from
Haida Indians who had come south. This work was mainly done about
twenty-five years ago. He verified much of his matter by comparing
with Judge Swan, and by the stories acquired by Doctor Shaw, who was
at one time Indian agent at Port Madison, and whose wife was one of
the daughters of old Chief Sealth (Seattle). He derived matter for
comparison also from Rev. Myron Eells. The chief Indian authority of
Mr. Phillips was old Chisiahka (Indian John to the Whites), and it
was a big tree on the shore of Lake Union that suggested the idea of
the "Talking Pine," which the author wove so picturesquely into the
narrative. Mr. Phillips has also published the "Chinook Book," the most
extensive study of the jargon language yet made. To the others he has
added a most attractive book entitled, "Indian Tales for Little Folks."

Another present day investigator, whose work is especially worthy of
mention is Rev. J. Neilson Barry, an enthusiastic and intelligent
student of every phase of the history of the Northwest. In Chapter III
of Volume I of Gaston's "Centennial History of Oregon," Mr. Barry gives
a valuable contribution to Indian legends.

Yet another original student is Miss Kate McBeth of Lapwai, Idaho,
who with her sister lived for years among the Nez Perces, performing
a most beneficent missionary work for them. In her book, "The Nez
Perces Since Lewis and Clark," may be found the Kamiah myth, and a few
others derived directly from those Indians. Mention may well be made
here also of a Nez Perce Indian named Luke, previously referred to,
living at Kamiah, who has a very intelligent knowledge of all kinds of
Indian matters. Miss McBeth says that the Nez Perces do not like to
discuss generally their "heathen" stories and customs. In connection
with the Nez Perces it may be stated that Yellow Wolf of Nespilem is an
authority on the myth of the Kamiah Monster.

Still another enthusiastic student of Indian legends is Lucullus V.
McWhorter of North Yakima. He is an adopted member of the Yakima tribe,
and has been of incalculable benefit to the Indians in instructing them
as to their rights, in presenting their cause to the Government, and in
making known their needs as well as some of their wrongs to the general
public through voice and pen. He has made a specialty in recent years
of organizing the Indians and taking them to "Round-Ups" and "Frontier
Days." A recent pamphlet by him on the treatment of the Yakimas in
connection with their water rights is an "eye-opener," on some phases
of Indian service and Indian problems. Mr. McWhorter has gathered a
large amount of matter from the Indians, in which is material for three
books: "Traditions of the Yakimas;" "Hero Stories of the Yakimas;" "Nez
Perce Warriors in the War of 1877." Among the proteges of Mr. McWhorter
from whom he tells me much of interest could be derived, are Chief
Yellow Wolf of the Joseph Band of Nez Perces, and Mrs. Crystal McLeod,
known to her people as Humishuma, or Morning Dove, an Okanogan woman
of unusual beauty and intelligence and well instructed in the English
language. Her picture appears in this work from photographs taken by
Mr. John Langdon of Walla Walla.

Any reference to any phase of Oregon would be incomplete without
mention of John Minto, one of the most honored of pioneers, one of
the noblest of men, and one of the best examples of those ambitious,
industrious, and high minded state builders who gave the Northwest its
loftiest ideals. Mr. Minto was a student of the Indians and discovered
and gave to the world various Clatsop and Nehalem legends. Hon. E. L.
Smith of Hood River, Ore., well known as an official and legislator
of both Oregon and Washington, and a man of such character that all
who ever knew him have the highest honor for him in every relation
of life, has made a lifelong study of the natives and has a great
collection of myths both in mind and on paper. He is one of the most
sympathetic, tolerant, and appreciative of investigators, one whom the
Indians of the Mid-Columbia trust implicitly. He has written little for
publication in comparison with what he knows, and it is to be hoped
that his stores of material may be brought within reach before long.
Worthy of mention as a general student of the geography and language
of the Indians is Mr. John Gill of Portland. While he has not made a
specialty of myths, he has studied the habits and language with special
attention, and his dictionary of the Chinook jargon is one of the most
valuable collections of the kind.

It is proper to mention here several who are well versed in native
lore, yet who have not given their knowledge of legends or myths to the
public in book or magazine form. The most conspicuous, indeed, of this
group is no longer living. This was Dr. William C. McKay, a grandson of
the McKay of the Astor Fur Company, who lost his life on the Tonquin.
The mother of Doctor McKay was a Chinook "princess." He was a man of
great ability and acquired a fine education. He lived for years, in
Pendleton, Ore., where he died some time ago. In the possession of his
children and grandchildren there is undoubtedly valuable material and
if it could be reduced to written form it would furnish matter of great
interest. Certain others of Indian blood may be properly added here who
could give material for interesting narrations. Among these are Henry
Sicade and William Wilton, living on the Puyallup Reservation near
Tacoma, Samuel McCaw of Yakima, Wash., and Charlie Pitt of the Warm
Springs Agency in Oregon.

This summary of Indian stories and their investigators is necessarily
incomplete. One of the hopes in including it in this work is that it
may lead to added contributions. As we contemplate the beauty and
grandeur of Old Oregon, which includes Washington and Idaho and a part
of Montana, and the pathos, heroism and nobility of its history, and
as we see the pitiful remnant of the Indians, we cannot fail to be
touched with the quaint, the pathetic, and the suggestive myths and
legends that are passing with them into the twilight. In our proud days
of possession and of progress we do well to pause and drop the tear of
sympathy and place the chaplet of commemoration upon the resting place
of the former lords of the land, and to recognize their contributions
to the common stock of human thought.




CHAPTER III

THE FIRST EXPLORERS AND THEIR ROUTES THROUGH THE REGION


Of all events in early American history influential in their bearing
upon the territorial development of the United States, the Louisiana
Purchase in 1803 must be accorded the foremost place. Until that
event the United States, in spite of the fact that it had gained
independence, was essentially European in its habit of thought
and colonial in its aspirations and outlook. A few seers indeed
recognized the possibilities of continental expansion. The doctrine of
"manifest destiny" had held the glowing vision of the place in history
which might be wrought by a continent, or at least the dominating
parts of it, under the control of the same race of men who had
redeemed the Atlantic seaboard from the wilderness and successfully
maintained against the greatest empire of the world the proposition
that "Governments derive their just powers from the consent of the
governed." The author of those words had seen more clearly perhaps than
any other the world vision of a great American democracy, independent
of Europe and yet by reason of geographical position as well as
political ideals and social aspirations, the natural mediator among
peoples and the ultimate teacher and enlightener of mankind.

When, therefore, as a result of the political revolution of 1800
and the permanent establishment of the democratic conception in the
leadership of American politics, Thomas Jefferson found himself
invested with the enormous responsibility of framing policies and
measures for the new era, one of his foremost aims was to turn the face
of the nation westward. Having long entertained the idea that the true
policy was to secure such posts of vantage beyond the Alleghenies as
would lead by natural stages to the acquisition of the country beyond
the Mississippi, even to the Pacific, he was alert to seize any opening
for pursuing that truly American policy. He did not have long to wait.
At the time of his inauguration the stupendous energies of the French
Revolution had become concentrated in that overpowering personality,
Napoleon Bonaparte. Holding then the position of first consul, but
as truly the imperial master as when he placed the iron crown of the
Lombards upon his own head, "the man on horseback" perceived that a
renewal of the great war was inevitable and that Austria on land and
England at sea were going to put metes to his empire if human power
could do it. Nothing was more hateful to Napoleon than to let French
America, or Louisiana, slip from his grasp. But he had not the maritime
equipment to defend it. England was sure to take it and that soon.
Monroe, the American envoy, was in Paris fully instructed by President
Jefferson what to do. All things were ready. The man and the occasion
met. The Louisiana Purchase was consummated. For less than three cents
an acre, a region now comprising thirteen states or parts of states,
estimated at over five hundred and sixty-five million acres, equal in
extent to all Europe outside of Russia and Scandinavia, became part of
the United States.

[Illustration: HIGH SCHOOL, WAITSBURG]

When that great event was consummated and one of the milestones in the
world's progress upon the highway of universal democracy had been set
for good, the next step in the mind of Jefferson was to provide for
the exploration of the vast new land. The westward limits of Louisiana
were not indeed defined by the treaty of purchase otherwise than as the
boundaries by which the territory had been ceded by Spain to France,
and those boundaries in turn were defined only as those by which France
had in 1763 ceded to Spain. Hence the western boundary of Louisiana
was uncertain. Although subsequent agreements and usages determined
the boundary to be the crest of the Rocky Mountains as far south as
Texas, Jefferson seems to have thought that the entire continent to
the Pacific ought to be included in the exploration, for he saw also
that the destiny of his country required the ultimate union of Atlantic
and Pacific coasts, as well as the great central valley. From these
conceptions and aims of Jefferson sprang that most interesting and
influential of all exploring expeditions in our history, the Lewis and
Clark exploration from St. Louis up the Missouri, across the Rocky
Mountains, and down the Snake and Columbia rivers to the Pacific Ocean.
Jefferson had contemplated such an expedition a long time. Even as far
back as December 4, 1783, in a letter to George Rogers Clark, he raised
the question of an exploration from the Mississippi to California.
In 1792 he took it up with the American Philosophical Society, and
even then Meriwether Lewis was eager to head such an expedition.
In a message to Congress of January 18, 1803, before the Louisiana
Purchase, Jefferson developed the importance of a thorough exploration
of the continent even to the Western Ocean. With his characteristic
secrecy, Jefferson was disposed to mask the great design of ultimate
acquisition of the continent under the appearance of scientific
research. In a letter to Lewis of April 27, 1803, he says: "The idea
that you are going to explore the Mississippi has been generally given
out; it satisfies public curiosity and masks sufficiently the real
destination." That real destination was, of course, the Pacific Ocean,
and the fundamental aim was the continental expansion of the then crude
and straggling Republic of the West. Considering the momentous nature
of the undertaking and the possibilities of the unknown wilderness
which it was to cover, it is curious and suggestive that Lewis had
estimated the expenses at $2,500, and Jefferson called upon Congress
for that amount of appropriation. An explorer of the present would
hardly expect to go out doors on that scale of expense. Jeffersonian
simplicity with a vengeance!

The scope of our book does not permit any detailed account of the
preparations or of the personnel of the party. Suffice it to say that
the leader, Meriwether Lewis, and his lieutenant, William Clark, were
men of energy, discretion, courage, and the other necessary qualities
for such an undertaking. While not men of education or general culture
(Clark could not even spell or compose English correctly) they both
had an abundance of common sense and in preparation for their mission
gained a hurried preparation in the essentials of botany, zoology, and
astronomy such as might enable them to observe and report intelligently
upon the various objects of discovery and the distances and directions
traversed.

Jefferson's instructions to Captain Lewis give one an added respect for
the intelligence and broad humanity of the great democrat. Particularly
did he enjoin upon the leader of the party the wisdom of amicable
relations with the natives. The benevolent spirit of the President
appears in his direction that kine-pox matter be taken and that its use
for preventing smallpox be explained to the Indians. All readers of
American history should read these instructions, both for an estimate
of Jefferson personally, and for light they throw on the conditions and
viewpoints of the times.

The number in the party leaving St. Louis was forty-five. But one death
occurred upon the whole journey, which lasted from May 14, 1804, to
September 23, 1806. Never perhaps did so extended and difficult an
expedition suffer no little. And this was the more remarkable from the
fact that there was no physician nor scientific man with the party
and that whatever was needed in the way of treating the occasional
sicknesses or accidents must be done by the captains. While to their
natural force and intelligence the party owed a large share of its
immunity from disaster, good fortune surely attended them. This seems
the more noticeable when we reflect that this was the first journey
across a wilderness afterwards accentuated with every species of
suffering and calamity.

The members of the party were encouraged to preserve journals and
records to the fullest degree, and from this resulted a fullness
of detail by a number of the men as well as the leaders which has
delighted generations of readers ever since. And in spite of the fact
that none of the writers had any literary genius, these journals are
fascinating on account of the nature of the undertaking and a certain
glow of enthusiasm which invested with a charm even the plain and
homely details of the long journey.

The first stage of the expedition was from St. Louis, May 14, 1804,
to a point 1,600 miles up the Missouri, reached November 2. There
the party wintered in a structure which they called Fort Mandan. The
location was on the west bank of the Missouri, opposite the present
City of Pierre. The journey had been made by boats at an average
advance of ten miles a day. The river, though swift and with frequent
shoals, offered no serious impediments, even for a long distance above
Fort Mandan.

After a long, cold winter in the country of the Mandans, the expedition
resumed their journey up the Missouri on April 7, 1805. Of the
interesting details of this part of their course we cannot speak.
Reaching the headwaters of the Missouri on August 12, they crossed that
most significant spot, the Great Divide. A quotation from the journal
of Captain Lewis indicates the lively sentiments with which they passed
from the Missouri waters to those of the Columbia: "As they proceeded,
their hope of seeing the waters of the Columbia rose to almost painful
anxiety; when at the distance of four miles from the last abrupt turn
of the stream, they reached a small gap formed by the high mountains
which recede on either side, leaving room for the Indian road. From
the foot of one of the lowest of these mountains, which rises with a
gentle ascent for about half a mile, issued the remotest water of the
Missouri. They had now reached the hidden sources of that river which
had never before been seen by civilized man; and as they quenched their
thirst at the chaste and icy fountain--as they sat down by the brink
of the little rivulet which yielded its distant and modest tribute to
the parent ocean--they felt themselves rewarded for all their labors
and difficulties. * * * They found the descent much steeper than on the
eastern side, and at the distance of three-quarters of a mile, reached
a handsome, bold creek of cold, clear water running to the westward.
They stopped to taste for the first time the waters of the Columbia."

After some very harassing and toilsome movements in that vast cordon
of peaks in which lie the cradles of the Missouri, Yellowstone, Snake,
Clearwater, and Bitterroot rivers--more early reaching starvation point
than at any time on the trip--the party emerged upon a lofty height
from which their vision swept over a vast expanse of open prairie,
in which it became evident that there were many natives and, as they
judged, the near vicinity of the great river, which, as they thought,
would carry them in short order to the Western Ocean of their quest.
They little realized that they were yet more than six hundred miles
from the edge of the continent. Descending upon the plain, they made
their way to the Kooskooskie, now known as the Clearwater River. As
judged by Olin D. Wheeler in his invaluable book, "On The Trail of
Lewis and Clark," the explorers crossed from what is now Montana into
the present Idaho at the Lolo Pass, and proceeded thence down the
broken country between the north and middle forks of the Kooskooskie,
reaching the junction on September 26. The camp at that spot was called
Canoe Camp. There they remained nearly two weeks, most of them sick
through overeating after they had sustained so severe a fast in the
savage defiles of the Bitter Roots, and from the effects of the very
great change in temperature from the snowy heights to the hot valley
below. At Canoe Camp they constructed boats for the further prosecution
of their journey. They left their thirty-eight horses with three
Indians of the Chopunnish or Pierced-Nose tribe, or Nez Perce as we now
know them.

With their canoes they entered upon a new stage of their journey,
one easy and pleasant after the hardships of the mountains. Down the
beautiful Kooskooskie, then low in its autumn stage, they swept gaily,
finding frequent rapids, though none serious. The pleasant-sounding
name Kooskooskie, which ought to be preserved (though Clearwater is
appropriate and sonorous), was supposed by the explorers to be the
name of the river. This it appears was a misapprehension. The author
has been told by a very intelligent Indian named Luke, living at
Kamiah, that the Indians doubtless meant to tell the white men that the
stream was _Koos_, _koos_, or _water_, _water_. _Koos_ was and still
is the Nez Perce word for water. Luke stated that the Indians did not
regularly have names for streams, but only for localities, and referred
to rivers as the water or _koos_ belonging to some certain locality.

After a prosperous descent of the beautiful and impetuous stream
for a distance estimated by them at fifty-nine miles (considerably
overestimated) the party entered a much larger stream coming from the
south. This they understood the Indians to call the Kimooenim. They
named it the Lewis in honor of Captain Lewis. It was the great Snake
River of our present maps. The writer has been told by Mr. Thomas
Beall of Lewiston that the true Indian name is Twelka. Still another
native name is Shahaptin. The party was now at the present location
of Lewiston and Clarkston, one of the most notable regions in the
Northwest for beauty, fertility, and all the essentials of capacity
for sustaining a high type of civilized existence. The land adjoining
Snake River on the west is Asotin County, one of the components of our
history. The party camped on the right bank just below the junction,
and that first camp of white men was nearly opposite both Lewiston
and Clarkston of today. They say that the Indians flocked from all
directions to see them. The scantiness of their fare had brought them
to the stage of eating dog-meat, which they say excited the ridicule
of the natives. The Indians gave them to understand that the southern
branch was navigable up about sixty miles; that not far from its mouth
it received a branch from the south, and at two days' march up a larger
branch called Pawnashte, on which a chief resided who had more horses
than he could count.

The first of these must be the Asotin Creek, unless indeed they
referred to the Grande Ronde, which is the first large stream, but
is considerable distance from the junction. The Pawnashte must have
been the Salmon, the largest tributary of the Snake. The Snake at the
point of the camp of the explorers was discovered to be about three
hundred yards wide. The party noticed the greenish blue color of the
Snake, while the Kooskooskie was as clear as crystal. The Indians at
this point are described as of the Chopunnish or Pierced-Nose nations,
the latter of those names translated by the French voyageurs into the
present Nez Perce. According to the observations of the party, the men
were in person stout, portly, well-looking men; the women small, with
good features and generally handsome. The chief article of dress of the
men was a "buffalo or elk-skin robe decorated with beads, sea-shells,
chiefly mother-of-pearl, attached to an otter-skin collar and hung
in the hair, which falls in front in two queues; feathers, paints of
different kinds, principally white, green, and light blue, all of
which they find in their own country. The dress of the women is more
simple, consisting of a long skirt of argalia or ibex-skin, reaching
down to the ankles without a girdle; to this are tied little pieces
of brass and shells and other small articles." Further on the journal
states again: "The Chopunnish have few amusements, for their life is
painful and laborious; and all their exertions are necessary to earn
even their precarious subsistence. During the summer and autumn they
are busily occupied in fishing for salmon and collecting their winter
store of roots. In the winter they hunt the deer on snow-shoes over
the plains, and towards spring cross the mountains to the Missouri for
the purpose of trafficking for buffalo robes." It may be remarked here
parenthetically that there is every indication that buffalo formerly
inhabited the Snake and Columbia plains. In fact, buffalo bones have
been found in recent years in street excavations at Spokane. What
cataclysm may have led to their extermination is hidden in obscurity.
But at the first coming of the whites it was discovered that one of the
regular occupations of the natives was crossing the Rocky Mountains to
hunt or trade for buffalo.

Soon after resuming the journey on October 11, the explorers noted with
curiosity one of the vapor baths common among those Indians, which they
say differed from those on the frontiers of the United States or in the
Rocky Mountains. The bath-house was a hollow square six or eight feet
deep, formed in the river bank by damming up with mud the other three
sides and covering the whole completely except an aperture about two
feet wide at the top. The bathers descended through that hole, taking
with them a jug of water and a number of hot rocks. They would throw
the water on the rocks until it steamed and in that steam they would
sit until they had perspired sufficiently, and then they would plunge
into cold water. This species of entertainment seems to have been
very sociable, for one seldom bathed alone. It was considered a great
affront to decline an invitation to join a bathing party.

The explorers seem to have had a very calm and uneventful descent
of Snake River. They describe the general lay of the country
accurately, noting that beyond the steep ascent of 200 feet (it is in
reality a great deal more in all the upper part of this portion of
Snake River) the country becomes an open, level, and fertile plain,
entirely destitute of timber. They note all the rapids with sufficient
particularity to enable anyone thoroughly familiar with the river to
identify most of them. They make special observation of the long series
of rapids commonly known now as the Riparia and Texas Rapids, and
below these observe a large creek on the left which they denominate as
Kimooenim Creek. This is rather odd, for that had already been noted
as the native name of the main river. A few miles further down they
pass through a bad rapid but twenty-five yards wide. Of course, it
must be remembered that the time was October and the river was about
at its lowest. This was the narrow crack of the Palouse Rapids, which,
however, is not so narrow as they estimated, even at low water. At the
end of this rapid they discovered a large river on the right, to which
they gave the name of Drewyer, one of their party, their mighty hunter
in fact. This was a many-named stream, for it was later the Pavion,
the Pavillion, and at the last the present Palouse, the equivalent, we
are told again by Thomas Beall, for gooseberry. The principal rapids
below the entrance of the Palouse are known at present as Fishhook,
Long's Crossing, Pine Tree, the Potato Patch, and Five Mile. Five
Mile looked so bad to them that they unloaded the canoes and made a
portage of three-quarters of a mile. At a distance below this, which
they estimated as seven miles, they reached that interesting place
where the great northern and southern branches of the Big River unite.
They were then at the location of the present Village of Burbank.
Many interesting events and observations are chronicled of their stay
at that point. Soon after their arrival a regular procession of 200
Indians from a camp a short distance up the Columbia came to visit
them, timing their approach with the music of drums, accompanied with
the voice. There seems to have followed a regular love-feast, both
parties taking whiffs of the friendly pipe and expressing as best they
could their common joy at the meeting. Then came a distribution of
presents and a mutual pledging of good will.

The captains measured the rivers, finding the Columbia 960 yards wide
and the Snake 575. From their point of observation across the continued
plain they noted how it rose into the heights on the farther side
of the river. They had already taken into account the far distant
mountains to the south, our own Blue Mountains, which they thought
about sixty miles distant, just about the right estimate. It is to be
hoped that it was one of the perfect days not infrequent in October
and that the azure hues of those mountains which we love today were
before them in all their rich, soft splendor. They noted in the clear
water of the river the incredible number of salmon. The Indians gave
them to understand that frequently in the absence of other fuel they
burned the fish that, having been thrown upon the bank, became so dry
as to make excellent fuel. These Indians were of a tribe known as
Sokulks. According to the description they were hardly so good-looking
a people as the Chopunnish, but were of mild and peaceable disposition
and seemed to live in a state of comparative happiness. The men, like
those on the Kimooenim, were said to content themselves with a single
wife. The explorers noted that the men shared with their mates the
labor of procuring subsistence more than is usual among savages. They
were also very kind to the aged and infirm. Nor were they inclined to
beggary. All things considered, these Sokulks at the junction of the
big rivers were worthy of much esteem. Captain Clark made a journey
up the Columbia, in the course of which he made sundry interesting
observations on the Indian manner of preparing salmon for preservation,
as well as for present use. At one point he entered one of the mat
houses. He was immediately provided with a mat on which to sit and his
hosts proceeded at once to cook a salmon for his repast. This they did
by heating stones, and then, bringing in the fish in a bucket of water,
they dropped in the hot stones in succession till the water boiled.
After sufficiently boiling the salmon, they placed it before the
captain. He found it excellent. He noticed that many of these Indians
were blind in one or both eyes and had lost part of their teeth. The
first of these unfortunate conditions he attributed to the glare of the
water on their unshaded eyes, and the second to their habit of eating
roots without cleansing them from the sandy soil in which they grew. It
would appear from the topography of the journal that Captain Clark went
a short distance above the present site of Kennewick, for he was near
the mouth of a large stream flowing from the west, which the Indians
called the Tapteal, but which later became known as the Yakima, also a
native name. While on land during this trip, the party got grouse (or
what we now call prairie chickens) and ducks, and also a "prairie cock,
about the size of a small turkey." This was evidently a sage hen. It is
recorded that they saw none of that bird except on the Columbia. While
camped at the junction of the rivers, the men were busily engaged in
mending their clothes and travelling outfits and arms, and otherwise
preparing for the next stage of the journey. One very interesting
feature of the stay here was the fact that one of the chiefs with one
of the Chimnapum, a tribe further west, provided the party with a map
of the Columbia and the nations on its banks. This was drawn on a robe
with a piece of coal and afterwards transferred by some one of the
explorers to a piece of paper. They preserved it as a valuable specimen
of Indian delineation.

On October 18, the party packed up and pushing off into the majestic
river, proceeded downward toward the highlands, evidently what we
call the Wallula Gateway. In the general journal, called the Edition
of 1814., in which the contributions of all the party are merged,
there seems to be some confusion as to the mouth of the Walla Walla
River. The record mentions an island near the right shore fourteen and
one-half miles from the mouth of Lewis' River and a mile and a half
beyond that of small brook under a high hill on the left, "seeming to
run its whole course through the high country." This evidently must
be the Walla Walla River, though it can hardly be called a "small
brook," even in the low season, and it flows quite distinctly in a
valley, though the highlands begin immediately below. They also say:
"At this place, too, we observed a mountain to the southwest, the
form of which is conical, and its top covered with snow." This is
obviously incorrect, for Mount Hood, which is the only snow mountain
to the southwest visible anywhere near that place, cannot be seen from
near the mouth of the Walla Walla, except by climbing the highlands.
On the next day, October 19, the party was visited by a chief of whom
they saw more and tell more on their return. This was Yelleppit. They
describe him as a "handsome, well-proportioned man, about five feet,
eight inches high and about thirty-five years old, with a bold and
dignified countenance." His name is preserved in a station on the S.
P. & S. Railroad, located just about at the place where the party met
the chieftain.

After the meeting with Yelleppit, the party once more committed
themselves to the downward rushing current of the Columbia, and passed
beyond the range of our story. Of the interesting details of their
continued journey down the river and the final vision of the ocean,
"that ocean, the object of all our labors, the reward of all our
anxieties," we cannot speak.

Having spent the winter at Fort Clatsop, about ten miles from the
present Astoria and nearly the same distance from the present Seaside,
they left Fort Clatsop for their long return journey, on March 23,
1806. They saw many interesting and important features of the country
on the return, which they failed to note in going down. Among these,
strange to say, was the entrance of the Willamette, the largest river
below the Snake. The return was made as far as the "Long Narrows" (The
Dalles) with the canoes, but at that point they procured horses and
proceeded thence by land. They passed the "Youmalolam" (Umatilla) and
then entering the highlands, were again within the area of "Old Walla
Walla County." Reaching the country of the "Wallawollahs," they again
came in contact with their old friend, whose name appears in that
portion of the journal as Yellept. They found him more of a gentleman
than ever. He insisted on his people making generous provision for the
needs of the party, and gave them the valuable information that by
going up the Wallawollah River and directly east to the junction of the
Snake and Kooskooskie they might have a route full of grass and water
and game, and much shorter than to follow the banks of Snake River.
Accordingly crossing from the north bank of the Columbia, which they
had been following, they found themselves on the Wallawollah. They do
not now describe it as before as a "small brook," but as a "handsome
stream, about fifty yards wide and four and a half feet in depth." They
got one curious misapprehension here which was held later by explorers
in general in regard to the Multnomah or Willamette. They understood
from the Indians that the Willamette ran south of the Blue Mountains
and was as large as the Columbia at the mouth of the Wallawollah, which
they say was about a mile wide. They infer from the whole appearance,
as the Indians seem to explain it, that the sources of the Willamette
must approach those of the Missouri and Del Norte. One quaint and
curious circumstance is mentioned at this stage of the story, as it has
been, in fact, at various times. And that is the extravagant delight
which the Indians derived from the violin. They were so fascinated with
the sound of the instrument and the dancing which accompanied it that
they would come in throngs and sometimes remain up all night. In this
particular instance, however, they were so considerate of the white
men's need of sleep that they retired at ten o'clock.

On the last day of April, 1806, the party turned their horses' heads
eastward up the Wallawollah River across sandy expanses, which,
however, they soon discovered to improve in verdure and in groves of
trees. Having followed the main stream fourteen miles, they reached
"a bold, deep stream, about ten yards wide, which seems navigable for
canoes." They found a profusion of trees along the course of this creek
and were delighted to see all the evidences of increasing timber. This
stream, which they now followed for a number of miles, was evidently
the Touchet, and the point where they turned to follow it was at the
present Town of Touchet. Their course was up the creek for about
twelve miles to a point where the creek bottom widened into a pleasant
country two or three miles in width. This presumably was the fertile
region beginning a mile or so east of the present Lamar, and extending
thence onward to Prescott and beyond. The party made a day's march of
twenty-six miles and camped at a point, which according to the figures
of the next day, would have been near the present Bolles Junction.
One rather quaint incident appears at this point in the narration, to
the effect that when encamped for the night, three young men of the
Wollawollahs came up with a steel trap which had inadvertently been
left behind. The Indians had come a whole day's journey to restore
this. This exhibition of honesty was so gratifying that the narration
affirms that: "Of all the Indians whom we have met since leaving the
United States, the Wollawollahs were the most hospitable, honest, and
sincere."

Resuming the march the next day the explorers noted at a distance of
three miles a branch entering the creek from the "southeast mountains,
which, though covered with snow, are about twenty-five miles distant,
and do not appear high." That branch must have been our Coppei, which
joins the main creek at our pleasant little City of Waitsburg. Having
proceeded a total distance of fourteen miles from the previous night's
camp, the travellers found themselves at a point where the main creek
bore to the south toward the mountains from which it came, and where a
branch entered it from the northeast. This spot was evidently the site
of Dayton, and the branch from the northeast which they now followed
was the Patit. The next day they crossed the Kimooenim, which is the
same that they had designated the Kimooenim Creek on their descent of
Snake River in the fall, being, curiously enough, as already noted, the
same name that they had already understood to be the Indian name of
Snake River. The stream was evidently the Tucannon. From the Tucannon
the course led our adventurers over the high, fertile plains near
to the "southwest mountains" to a ravine "where was the source of a
small creek, down the hilly and rocky sides of which we proceeded for
eight miles to its entrance into Lewis' River, about seven miles and
a half above the mouth of the Kooskooskie." This creek was the Asotin
and therefore the point where they again reached Snake River was that
grand and picturesque place where the attractive town of Asotin is now
located.

The explorers having crossed the river were beyond the jurisdiction of
this volume, and even of the State of Washington, being within that of
Idaho, and hence we cannot follow them further on their return journey.
We must content ourselves, in this farewell glance at this first, and
in many respects, the most interesting and important of all the early
transcontinental expeditions, with saying that the effects were of
momentous, even transcendent value to the development of our country.
Without the incorporation of Old Oregon into the United States, we
would in all probability not have got California, and without our
Pacific Coast frontage, think what a crippled and curtailed Union this
would be! We would surely have missed our destiny without the Pacific
Coast. The Lewis and Clark expedition was one of the essential links in
the chain of acquisition. The summary of distances by the party is a
total of 3,555 miles on the most direct route from the Mississippi at
the mouth of the Missouri, to the Pacific Ocean, and the total distance
descending the Columbia waters is placed at 640 miles.

[Illustration: Y. M. C. A. BUILDING, WALLA WALLA]

President Jefferson did not exaggerate the character of this expedition
in the tribute which he paid to Captain Lewis in 1813, when he
expressed himself thus: "Never did a similar event excite more joy
throughout the United States; the humblest of its citizens have taken
a lively interest in this journey, and looked with impatience for the
information which it would furnish. Nothing short of the official
journals of this extraordinary and interesting journey will exhibit
the importance of the service, the courage, the devotion, zeal, and
perseverance, under circumstances calculated to discourage, which
animated this little band of heroes, throughout the long, dangerous,
and tedious travel."

Though many additional valuable discoveries of this land where we live
were made by later explorers, Lewis and Clark and their assistants may
justly be regarded as the true first explorers. They were, moreover,
the only party that came purely for exploration. Later parties, though
making valuable explorations, did such work as incidental to fur trade.
With the completion of this great expedition, therefore, we may regard
the era of the explorers completed and that of the fur-hunters begun.




CHAPTER IV

THE FUR-TRADE AND FUR-TRADERS


With the great new land between the Mississippi and the Pacific Ocean
opened to the world by the Lewis and Clark expedition, the question
came at once to the active, pushing, ambitious spirits of America and
England, what shall we do with it, and what can we make of it? The
rights of the natives have usually had little concern to civilized
man. His thought has been to secure as rapidly and easily as possible
the available resources, to skim the cream from the wilderness ahead
of all rivals. Two great quests have commonly followed discovery of a
new land; that for the precious metals, and that for furs. Gold and
silver and precious stones have always had a strange fascination, and
the search for them and the wars of conflicting nations for possession
of their sources of supply have constituted the avenues of approach to
some of the greatest changes of history. The search for furs, while not
making so brilliant and showy a chapter in history as that for gold and
jewels, has had even profounder effects upon the march of exploration
and conquest and the formation of states.

Now, it must be remembered that though the Lewis and Clark expedition
was the first to cross our part of the continent and to give the world
any conception of the interior and its resources within the area
composing the western half of the United States, yet the coast line had
been known for many years, and the region around Hudson Bay and thence
northward to the Arctic Ocean and westward to the Pacific had also
been traversed some years earlier. Oregon had long been a lure to the
explorers and fur-hunters of all nations. There had taken shape before
the discoverers of the age of Columbus the conception of a Northwest
passage through the new continent to Asia. Strange to say, they did not
realize at first the surpassing importance of a new world, but thought
of it mainly as an impediment to the journey to the land of the "Great
Cham" and other supposed magnates of the Orient. Hence the vital thing
was to find a way through the intercepting land. Only eight years after
Columbus landed on San Salvador, the Portuguese, Gaspar Cortereal, had
announced that sailing westward from Labrador he had discovered the
connecting strait between the Atlantic and the waters that bordered
eastern Asia. Out of that supposed discovery the idea of the Strait of
Anian grew and for two centuries persisted in the minds of mariners. It
was while searching for Anian that Juan de Fuca, just a century after
the first landing of Columbus, entered that strait which now bears
his name. Along the western edge of California and Oregon during that
same century, the English flag was borne by the Golden Hind of Francis
Drake. Later Spanish explorers, Cabrillo and Ferrelo, and Vizcaino
and Aguilar, had made their way up the Oregon coast and there is some
reason to believe that the last-named had looked upon the mouth of the
Columbia. Following that earlier era of discovery, there was a long
interval. Spain, England, France, Holland, Austria, Germany, and Italy
were absorbed in the gigantic wars growing out of the Reformation, and
their ships almost entirely disappeared from the Pacific. But during
the latter part of the seventeenth century there was initiated that
vast movement in eastern Europe and northern Asia which shaped and
will yet more shape the policies and destinies of the world. Peter
the Great, one of the world figures, started to lead Russia out of
barbarism. Then was began that glacier-like movement of the "Colossus
of the North" toward the open waters of two continents which will no
doubt never end until the political world comes to a condition of
stable equilibrium. The successors of Peter pursued the same march for
warm water and open ports. A series of explorers made their way across
Siberia. In 1728 and 1741 Vitus Bering, one of the true "Vikings of
the Pacific," made his daring and significant voyages with the aim of
realizing Peter's great conception of the Russian acquisition of the
shores of the Pacific by sailing eastward from Asia to America. In
his last voyage, after having gone as far south as Oregon, and then
turned north along the Alaskan coast, the heroic Bering was cast upon
the desolate island which bears his name, and there in the cold and
darkness of the Arctic winter he died. His men found during that winter
that the sea-otters of the island had most beautiful furs, and they
clothed themselves with the skins of those animals. Returning in the
spring in rude boats constructed from the fragments of their wrecked
ship to Avatscha Bay, these survivors of Bering's voyage made known
to the world the possibilities of the use of these treasures of the
animal world. That was the beginning of the Russian fur-trade. A new
era in history was inaugurated. Within a few years an enterprising
Pole, Maurice de Benyowski, conveyed a cargo of furs from Kamchatka to
China. That country was then the great market for furs, and the success
of Benyowski's venture suggested to others the enormous possibilities
of the business. The great girdle of volcanic islands beginning a
little east of Kamtschatka and extending northeast and then southeast,
known now as the Aleutian Islands, and the Alaskan coast and thence
southward to Oregon and California, were found by Russians, Spaniards,
and English to abound in fur-bearing animals, of which the sea-otter
was most available immediately upon the coast, though it was soon known
that the beaver, the fox, and many others existed in great numbers
further inland.

In connection with the eager search along the coast some of the most
famous of all explorers steered their course. Among them was James
Cook, one of the most manly and intrepid of all that long line of
navigators who bore the Union Jack around the "Seven Seas." Cook's
great series of voyages, beginning in 1776 and lasting several years,
and extending through all parts of the Pacific, were designed primarily
as voyages of discovery. But while in Alaskan waters his men secured
many sea-otter furs. They did not fully realize their value until they
reached China some time later and saw the huge profit on furs in that
market. Now there was in Cook's service a certain very interesting
American sailor, John Ledyard. Ledyard was a genuine Yankee, keen,
inquisitive, and observing. He noted the possibilities of the fur-trade
in Oregon and Aleutian waters, and determined that as soon as he could
reach his own home country he would interest his countrymen in sending
their own ships upon the quest. That was just when the Revolutionary
war was in progress and several years elapsed before Ledyard was in
America. When there he lost no time in getting into communication
with leading Americans. Among others he greatly interested Thomas
Jefferson. Here then we have a most important chain of sequences. Cook,
Ledyard, Jefferson, English and American rivalries and counter aims
and claims on the Pacific coast of America--a whole nexus of related
events out of which the fabric of great history became woven. Within
a few years the race for possession of Oregon by sea was on. Earlier
than Cook, Heceta, the Spaniard, had sailed along the Oregon coast
and looked into the mouth of the Columbia. But after Cook came a long
line of Spanish explorers whose names appear upon our present day
maps, Bodega, Camano, Fidalgo, Galiano, Valdez, and many more. Then
came another group of Englishmen, Portlock, Dixon, Meares, Barclay,
Douglas, Colnett, and, most prominent of all, Vancouver. But to us,
more important than any other of the nations whose banners were carried
along the western coast, was the new republic, the United States of
America. The Stars and Stripes were flying on the Pacific. Robert Gray
in the Lady Washington, and John Kendrick in the Columbia Rediviva
had been placed in command of an expedition by certain enterprising
merchants of Boston in the very same year of the construction of the
American constitution. In 1788 they reached the coast of Oregon. That
was the initiation of the American fur-trade. Those were the great days
of that business. A ship would be fitted out with a cargo of trinkets
and tobacco and tools and blankets, and sail from Boston or New Bedford
or Marblehead or New York for its three years' round-up of the seas.
The Indians had not yet learned the value of furs. On one occasion
Gray secured for a chisel a quantity of furs worth $8,000. The cargo
of trinkets and tools and blankets out and the cargo of furs in, the
next stage of the voyage was from Oregon to Canton, in China, where
the cargo of furs was displaced by one of tea and nankeen and silk,
and then the ship would square away for her home port, a three-years'
round-up. The glory, the fascination, and also the danger of the sea
was in it. Fortunes were sometimes made in a single voyage--and also
sometimes lost. For ships and crews were sometimes lost by wreck
or savages or scurvy. Yet in spite of disasters the game was so
fascinating that during the period from 1790 to 1818 there were 108
American vessels, twenty-two English and several French and Portuguese
vessels regularly engaged in the business on the Oregon coast. Profits
were sometimes immense. Dixon, an English trader, says that during
the years 1786 and 1787 5,800 sea-otter skins were sold for $160,700.
Sturgis states that he knew a capital of $50,000 to yield a return of
$284,000.

The fur-trade on the coast was naturally first in the order of growth.
But exploration of the interior would naturally follow when the great
results of the sea-trade were known. Moreover, it most be remembered
that the fur-trade had been pursued with great assiduity and success
in Canada and even Louisiana long years before Gray and Vancouver
were contesting for the discovery of the "River of the West," or the
solution of the mystery of Juan de Fuca. As the Spaniards were the
first to try to grasp the treasure of precious stones and metals
in the New World, so the French were the pioneers in the attempted
exploitation of the treasure of the furs. Monopoly by kingly favor was
the chief method of driving out rivals and monopolizing advantages in
those days. An American railway or iron master has a feeble grip on the
bounty of a state or nation compared with the grip of a Seventeenth
Century royal favorite. Way back in the early part of that century,
Louis XIII and his minister, Richelieu, granted concessions to De
Monts, Pontgrave, Champlain, Radisson, Crozat, and others. Later, La
Salle, Joliet, Hennepin, D'Iberville, and still later the Verendryes
and many more had similar monopolies from Louis XIV and Louis XV.
The regions of the Great Lakes, the St. Lawrence and the Mississippi
were the fields of these great concessionaires. But England was not
inactive all that time. In the desperate rivalry of Gaul and Briton for
supremacy in America, the Fleur-de-lis was lowered before the Cross
of St. George and North America became British instead of French.
The fur-trade, one of the chief prizes of contest, fell to English
monopolists. Long before the final decision on the Plains of Abraham
when Montcalm fell before Wolf, Charles II had granted to Prince Rupert
a charter to the Hudson's Bay Company. That gigantic organization,
which later had so intimate a relation to Oregon, was established in
1670 with a capital of 10,500 pounds. Besides the vast enterprises
connected directly with the fur-trade, this company carried on many
great geographical expeditions. But this great monopoly could not, even
with all its privileges, entirely prevent rivalry. In 1783, the French
and Indian wars and the American Revolution now being past, a new
organization arose, destined to bear a vital part in northwest history.
This was the Northwestern Fur Company. One of its leading partners,
Alexander Mackenzie, discovered in 1789 the river which flows to the
Polar Sea and which fittingly bears his name. Four years later he made
even a more notable journey from the upper Athabasca waters across the
mountains and down the Pacific slope to a point on what was later known
as Cascade Inlet. There he proclaimed his journey by painting upon a
rock the inscription: "Alexander Mackenzie, from Canada by land, the
twenty-second of July, one thousand seven hundred and ninety-three."
That was only a year after Gray discovered the Columbia River and
Vancouver circumnavigated the island which bears his name.

Thus we see that from both sea and land the fur-traders were converging
upon Oregon. It was emerging from the mists of myth and romance into
the light of modern conditions. The rivalry between the Hudson's Bay
Company and the audacious Northwesters who had ventured to break into
their monopoly became keen and indeed sanguinary. Pitched battles were
fought and lives lost. The bold and aggressive Northwesters pushed to
the western side of the Rockies and in 1807 David Thompson, one of the
most admirable of all the early explorers of any of the rival nations
or companies, began to establish posts at various strategic points upon
Columbia waters. During several years beginning with 1807 he located
trading stations on Lake Windermere near the head of the river, on the
Spokane at the Junction with it of the Little Spokane, and on the Pend
d'Oreille and Coeur d'Alene lakes.

While the Northwesters were thus posting themselves at some of the
vantage points of Oregon, the Americans were not idle. The reader who
desires an extended view of the fascinating theme of the American
fur-trade should consult that foremost book on the subject by Gen. H.
M. Chittenden of Seattle, to which we here make our acknowledgments.
What was to become the American trade began indeed with Frenchmen and
Spaniards before the independence of the United States. In 1764 Pierre
Liguest and Auguste Chouteau founded St. Louis, which became the center
of all trading operations for many years. The Treaty of Paris of 1763
had as a matter of fact already delivered all the country west of the
Mississippi to Spain, but the Frenchmen did not yet know it. In 1800
the Louisiana Territory again became French, and three years later,
by a happy juxtaposition of statesmanship and good fortune, it passed
from French to American control. Then immediately followed, as already
narrated, the Lewis and Clark expedition with its momentous results.
After St. Louis became an American town the fur-trade was still largely
in the hands of French and Spanish traders established there during the
possession by their respective governments. Of these the most prominent
were Pierre Chouteau, Jr., a Frenchman, and Manuel Lisa, a Spaniard.
The first expedition to the Far West was that of Lisa in partnership
with William Morrison, an American of Illinois, and Pierre Menard, a
Frenchman, also living in Illinois. One interesting feature of this
expedition is that it occurred in the same year with the first of David
Thompson. Another is that on the way the party met John Colter who had
been one of the Lewis and Clark party, but on the return had decided
to stop in the wilderness to trap and explore. He was on his way to
the settlements, but was induced to return to the Rocky Mountains with
the party. In connection with Colter we may very properly digress a
little, for he was one of the typical adventurers of that period and
some of the events of his career in the wilderness cast a vivid light
upon the conditions of those times. Lisa proceeded with his party to
the mouth of the Bighorn River and there established a fort. Desiring
to notify the Indians of the arrival of the party, Lisa sent Colter
all alone on a journey of several hundred miles to the Crows on Wind
River and to the Blackfeet at the Three Forks of the Missouri. On this
journey Colter became an unwilling participant in a battle between
those two contending tribes. He was on the side of the Crows, and after
rendering efficient aid to his side in winning a victory, was severely
wounded in the leg. Nevertheless, nothing daunted, he set forth across
the ranges of towering, snowy peaks to reach Lisa's fort. He succeeded
in the solitary and desperate undertaking, and in the course of it
discovered Yellowstone Lake and the geyser region which now makes the
Yellowstone Park one of the wonders of the world. Returning to the
mountains, Colter was captured by the savage and cruel Blackfeet.
Wishing to have a little sport with their hapless victim, the Indians
stripped him and asked him if he was a fast runner. From his knowledge
of their customs he understood that he was to be put up in a race for
life against several hundred Indians. He gave them to understand that
he was a poor runner, though as a matter of fact he was very fast.
Accordingly they gave him several hundred yards start on the open
prairie with the Jefferson fork of the Missouri six miles distant. Away
he sped with the whole pack behind him like a band of wolves, with the
war-whoop ringing over the plain. With his naked feet torn and bleeding
from the cactus Colter soon outdistanced most of the pursuers, but half
way across the plain, glancing over his shoulder, he saw that one swift
Indian armed with a spear was gaining on him. With the violence of
Colter's exertions the blood was streaming from his nostrils down the
front of his body, and just as the Indian was almost within striking
distance Colter suddenly stopped and turned, a ghastly spectacle, with
extended arms. The Indian was so disconcerted with the unexpected
move that in endeavoring to wield his spear he lost his footing and
fell. Instantly picking up the spear Colter pinned his assailant to
the ground and on he went again toward the river. The foremost of the
pursuing Indians, finding their expiring comrade, paused long enough to
set up a hideous howl and then rushed on. But Colter, though almost
at the limit of his strength, drove himself on to the river ahead of
the band, and breaking through the copse of cottonwoods which skirted
the stream he plunged in. Just below was a small island against which
drift had lodged. Diving beneath the drift Colter managed to find a
crack between the trees where he might get his head in the air. There
he remained undiscovered all night while the savages were shrieking
around like so many devils. In the early morning he let loose from the
drift and floated and swam a long ways down the stream, and when day
fairly broke had got beyond the immediate vicinity of his enemies. But
in what a horrid plight! Stark naked, with no food and no weapons for
game, the soles of his feet pierced thick with the cruel spikes of the
cactus! Yet such is the endurance of some men that in seven days during
which his only subsistence was roots dug with his fingers, Colter made
his way to Lisa's fort. "Such was life in the Far-West." The story was
told by Colter to Bradbury, who narrated it in his book, "Travels in
North America." Irving used it in his "Astoria," and it also appears in
Chittenden's "American Fur-trade."

One of the partners of Lisa in the Missouri Fur Company, Andrew Henry,
in 1810 built a fort on the west side of the Great Divide on a stream
afterwards known as Henry's Fork, a branch of Snake River. It was near
the present Egin, Idaho, and was the first structure built by white men
upon Snake River or any of its tributaries.

We have given the extended narration thus far of fur-traders prior to
any actual entrance by any of them into the region treated in this
work, in order that the nature of the business and the manner in
which all parts of Oregon were involved might become clear. We now
bring upon the scene still another enterprise which came yet closer
to our own region. This was the Pacific Fur Company of John Jacob
Astor. This first of the great business promoters of our country
was born in Germany, and coming to New York in 1784 began his great
career as a fur merchant. Having made a fortune in the business almost
entirely by operations in Canada, Astor conceived the project of a
vast emporium upon the Columbia to which should converge the trade
in furs from all the region west of the Rocky Mountains and south of
the region definitely occupied by the Northwestern Fur Company. He
contemplated also a lucrative business with the Russians centered
around Sitka and Kodiak on the north, and the Spaniards on the south.
It was a noble enterprise and worthy of all success. It would have
had a most important bearing upon the progress of American enterprise
and settlement in Oregon and might have materially changed certain
chapters in history. That it failed of full accomplishment was due to
various untoward circumstances, of which the chief were: first, Astor's
own error of judgment in selecting the majority of his partners and
employees from Canadians and also selecting captains for his first two
ships who were not qualified for their important task; and second, the
War of 1812. It will be remembered that the Northwesters of Canada were
thoroughly located upon the Athabasca and had crossed the Divide and
as early as 1807 had built posts on the upper Columbia and Spokane and
on the lakes in what is now Northern Idaho. Astor no doubt anticipated
a strenuous contest with those bold, ambitious Canadians, but his own
highly successful enterprises thus far had been with Canadians and he
knew them well qualified. He reasoned that he could make it well worth
their while to be loyal to him and to the company to which he admitted
them. It is probable that all would have worked as he calculated had
not the war with Great Britain defeated all his well-laid plans.

The part of the great Astoria enterprise which more especially comes
within the scope of our story is that of the journey of the land party
across the Rocky Mountains and down the Snake and Columbia rivers,
and the subsequent establishment of forts and trading posts. The land
division was under Wilson Price Hunt of New Jersey, the partner second
in command to Astor himself. He was one of the comparatively few
Americans in the company and seems to have been a man of the highest
type, brave, humane, enterprising, and wholesouled, worthy of a place
at the head of those Jasons of the Nineteenth Century who sought
the golden fleeces of the Far-West. Both divisions got under way in
1810, the land division from Montreal in July, and the sea division
in September. The latter, however, reached the promised land of the
Columbia first, for after a tragic entrance of the mouth of the river,
the Tonquin with the party on board brought to in Baker's Bay on the
north side of the river on March 25th. Astoria was founded on April
12, 1811. A few months later, owing to the criminal obstinacy and bad
judgment of Captain Thorn, the Tonquin with all her crew but one (from
whom the story is derived) was captured by Indians and then blown up
at a place presumably Nootka Sound or near there on the west side of
Vancouver Island.

Hunt, with three other partners, McKenzie, Crooks, and Miller, after
having collected and fitted out a party of such miscellaneous material
as they could find at various places between Montreal and St. Louis,
left the latter place on October 21, 1810, and reaching a stream called
the Nadowa, near the present site of St. Joseph, Mo., stopped for the
winter. Resuming the long journey on April 21st of the next year, the
party reached the abandoned Fort Henry on October 8th. They were now on
the headwaters of Snake River. Down that wild stream they ran a losing
race with oncoming winter. For before they reached the present vicinity
of Huntington, Ore., the December snows fell thick upon them. McKenzie
and McLellan with seven of the strongest men went ahead of the main
party, and reaching the vicinity of the present Seven Devils country
made their way after twenty-one days of struggle and peril through
the great canyon of Snake River to its junction with the Clearwater,
the site of the present Lewiston and Clarkston. They had a clear idea
then of their location by a knowledge of the experiences of Lewis and
Clark. They were then within the area of our four counties of this
history and had no trouble in making their way, though in midwinter,
down the Snake, then at its lowest stage and not difficult to navigate,
to that most interesting spot, the junction of the Snake and Columbia.
Thus the advance party on this historic journey, the first of the
fur-traders, though later than the Lewis and Clark expedition, reached
the Columbia. With their canoes floating upon its broad waters they had
an easy and pleasant journey, after their former desperate straits, to
the rude stockade of Astoria, which they reached on January 18, 1812.
The main party had a more distressing time. After nearly starving and
freezing they turned toward the mountains from the present Huntington
and must have very nearly followed the course of the present railroad
from that point to the Grande Ronde. They were at just about the limit
of endurance when on December 30th, looking down from their snowy
elevation they saw far below them a sunny valley, looking to the
winter-wasted refugees like a vision of paradise. Thither hastening
they found several lodges of Indians who took pity on their forlorn
and destitute state and provided them with food and fuel. Irving gives
with his graphic pen a brilliant narration of the celebration of New
Year's day in this valley of salvation for this party. Rested and
recuperated by these few days in the Grande Ronde, they essayed their
last tussle with the mountains by scaling the snowy heights between
their resting place and the Umatilla. Reaching that warm and beautiful
valley they found that their deliverance was at hand, for there they
took a two-weeks' rest. On January 21st, having started again, they
beheld before them a blue flood nearly a mile wide hastening toward the
sunset, evidently the "Great River." Their journey afoot down the river
to the Cascades and thence in canoes to Astoria was a soft and gentle
exercise after the arduous struggles though the mountains.

[Illustration: PUBLIC SCHOOL BUILDING, DIXIE]

Such was the inauguration of the Pacific Fur Company in this country.
While amid such suffering the Americans were endeavoring to launch
their great enterprise, the Northwesters were employing great energy
and skill in planting themselves upon the upper river. They, too,
looked for new fields to conquer. In July, 1811, the redoubtable David
Thompson appeared at Astoria expecting to file a claim on the lower
river for his company. He was too late by three months, for Astoria had
been founded in April. The Scotchmen of the Astoria Company fraternized
with their countryman, but to David Stuart, one of the American
partners, this was not pleasing. Hastening his preparations he hurried
on his journey up the river. At the mouth of Snake River he found a
British flag upon a pole and on it a paper claiming the country in the
name of Great Britain. It was obvious to Stuart that there would be a
contest between his company and the Northwesters. He wished to secure
certain strategic points as far inland as possible and accordingly he
pressed on up the Columbia to the mouth of the Okanogan, estimated
to be five hundred and forty miles above Astoria. There on September
2nd, Stuart planted the American flag and started the construction
of a post, the first American structure within the present State of
Washington.

Of the interesting and varied events in the Okanogan and Spokane
countries Alexander Ross and Ross Cox, clerks in the Astor Company,
have given the most complete data. These events, important as they
were, are outside the scope of our story. We will simply say that the
rivalry between the Astorians and the Northwesters came to a sudden
climax by the War of 1812. Misfortune dogged the course of the Astor
Company. Hunt had gone from Astoria to Sitka in the second ship from
New York, the Beaver, and had started a profitable business with the
Russians, but on the return to the Columbia, the captain of the Beaver,
finding his ship damaged by a storm, insisted on going to Honolulu,
though Hunt's presence was sorely needed at Astoria. At Honolulu Hunt
received the evil tidings of the wreck of the third ship, the Lark.
With the cargo of the Beaver conveyed to Canton, while Hunt was wasting
his vitally important time at Honolulu, the same timid captain, Sowles,
lost all the best chances of the market, both for selling his furs
and buying Canton goods. Thus the whole voyage was a failure. After
an intolerable delay, Hunt chartered a vessel with which he left the
Sandwich Islands and reached Astoria August 20, 1813. more than a year
from the time of his departure. But his return was too late. The Scotch
partners had sold the company out to the Northwesters.

Such was the untoward end of the vast undertaking of John Jacob Astor.
The Americans were down and out. The Britishers were in possession of
the fur territory of Oregon. By the Joint Occupation Treaty of 1818,
both English and Americans were privileged to carry on business in
Oregon, but the effect of the downfall of the Astor Company was to
place the country in the hands of the Northwesters. That company had
two great aims: first, to get rid of American rivalry; second, to
prevent the entrance of the Hudson's Bay Company. Having accomplished
the first purpose, they set about the second. The upshot of that was
the final coalescence of the two companies in 1821 with the name of
the Hudson's Bay Company, but with the members of the younger company
on equal terms, and as far as Oregon was concerned, with the advantage
of profit in the hands of the partners of that company. And now for
twenty-five years the Hudson's Bay Company, thus reorganized, lorded it
over Oregon.

During all the years from the time of the entrance of the Pacific Fur
Company through the struggle between it and the Northwesters and then
the united fortunes of the Northwesters and the Hudson's Bay Company
down to American ownership in 1846, Walla Walla and the rest of the
region which now composes the scene of our history were prominent in
the affairs of the fur-traders. Perhaps the most valuable narrative
by any of the Astor Company of entrance into the Walla Walla County,
is that by Alexander Ross, one of the clerks, in a book of which the
full title is, "Adventures of the First Settlers on the Oregon or
Columbia River." In this narrative Ross tells of their first journey
into the interior, beginning July 22, 1811. Describing the passage
of the Cascades and the "Long Narrows" (The Dalles) and the Falls
(Celilo) he mentions a river which he calls the Lowhum (Des Chutes),
then the Day (John Day), then the Umatallow (Umatilla). He describes
here a "large mound or hill of considerable height," which from its
peculiar form they called Dumbarton Castle. This was doubtless the
curious rock just east of Umatilla, noticeable to all travellers by
steamer. Passing through the "colonnade rocks," the party soon found
themselves at a bluff where there "issues the meandering Walla Walla,
a beautiful little river, lined with weeping willows." Here they
found a great concourse of Indians, "Walla-Wallas, Shaw Haptens, and
Cajouses, altogether 1,500 souls." Some were armed with guns and some
with bows and arrows. Their chiefs rejoiced in the names of Tummatapam,
Quill-Quills-Tuck-a-Pesten, and Allowcatt. The plains were literally
covered with horses, of which there could not have been less than four
thousand in sight of the camp. Passing beyond the Walla Walla, the
party reached the junction of the two big rivers, noting the difference
in color of the two. Noting also the fine salmon fishing, where,
however, Ross observed that not so many salmon can be captured in a
day as on the Copper Mine River or in Kamtschatka. They soon reach the
Eyakema (Yakima), and here they note that the landscape at the mouth
of that river surpassed in picturesque beauty anything that they had
yet seen. They are surprised at being overtaken at that point by three
Walla Walla Indians on horseback who brought to them a bag of shot
which they had accidentally left at the preceding camp,--an evidence
of honesty similar to that experienced by Lewis and Clark among the
Walla Wallas. From the "Eyakema" this party proceeded up the river to
Okanogan, where, as already related, they built the first structure
erected by white men in the present State of Washington.

It gives some conception of the hardihood of the traders of that time
to note that Ross remained entirely alone at "Oakanacken," while the
rest of the party went northward 350 miles to find a new fur region.
During their absence of 188 days Ross secured from the Indians 1,550
beaver skins for 35 pounds, worth in Canton (China) market 2,250 pounds!

One of the most characteristic incidents of the life of that time
is found in an account given in the narratives of Cox, Ross, and
Franchere, about the Indian wife of Pierre Dorion, a hunter in one of
the parties which had been located in the Blue Mountains south of Walla
Walla. Following Franchere's account of this, it appears that while a
party of Northwesters of which he was one were on their way in 1814 up
the Columbia to cross the mountains into Canada, while they were in the
river near the mouth of the Walla Walla, they heard a child's voice
from a canoe call out: "Arretez donc, Arretez donc!" (Stop! Stop!) The
woman with her two boys were in an canoe trying to overtake the party.
Halting, they discovered that this pitiful little group were all that
remained of the trappers that had been located among the Snake Indians.
According to Madame Dorion's story, while they were engaged in trapping
in January, the trappers had been attacked one by one by the Indians
and all murdered. Securing two horses the brave woman mounted her boys
upon them and started for the Walla Walla. In the bitter cold they
could not proceed and having no other food, the woman killed the horses
and after spending the rest of the winter in the mountains made her way
with the children to the Walla Walla, where the Indians treated them
with kindness and placed them where they might find the boats of the
white men. Think of the endurance and faithfulness of the woman who
could win such a fight for life for her children.

Ross Cox gives an interesting account of his journey from Astoria to
Spokane in 1812. He too commends the "Wallah Wallah" Indians for their
honesty and humanity. He describes the immense numbers of rattlesnakes
around the mouth of the Wallah Wallah, and--a more pleasing theme the
appearance of the mountains which he says the Canadians called from
their color, "Les Montagnes Bleues." From what Cox says in this same
connection, it appears that the name Nez Perces was a translation into
French from the name Pierced-Nose, which had already been applied to
the Indians up Snake River by Lewis and Clark.

The most important event in this stage of the history was the founding
of Fort Walla Walla, at first called Fort Nez Perces. This was founded
in 1818 by Donald McKenzie. This efficient and ambitious man will be
remembered as one of Astor's partners, one who accompanied Hunt on his
great journey and had been one of the most active and influential in
the sale of Astoria to the Northwestern Company. Having been for ten
years prior to his connection with Astor a member of the Northwestern
Company, he felt more at home with it, and upon its establishment
in practical possession of the fur trade of Oregon. McKenzie became
one of its most faithful and useful managers. McKenzie seems to have
been opposed by his associates in his desire to establish a post on
the Walla Walla. But with a keen eye for strategic places and with
a sagacity and pertinacity unequalled by any of them, he forced all
to his views. Orders came from headquarters that he be allowed the
needful men and equipment, and in July, 1818, with ninety-five men
and our old friend Ross as his second in command, he set to work in
the construction of the fort at the point half a mile above the mouth
of the Walla Walla, long known in the annals of the Columbia during
both British and American possession. At that spot the foundation of
the fort may still be seen, and just abreast of it is the present
landing of the Wallula ferry. The structure consisted of a palisade of
timbers 30 inches wide, 6 inches thick, and 20 feet high. At the top
were loop-holes and slip-doors. Two bastions and water tanks holding
200 gallons still further guarded against both attack from Indians and
danger of fire. The enclosure was 100 feet square, and within it were
houses built of drift logs, though there was one of stone. Subsequently
adobe buildings were added, and some of those remained in some degree
of preservation till the great flood of 1894.

From Fort Walla Walla, as it came to be known within a few years,
McKenzie carried on a great and profitable trade to the Snake country
and the Blue Mountains. At one of his encampments while having a force
of only three men, and with a very valuable stock of furs and goods, a
crowd of piratical Indians tried to rush the ramp and plunder the whole
establishment. McKenzie with his usual nerve seized a match and holding
it over a keg of powder declared that if they did not immediately
clear out, he would blow them all up. They cleared out and left him
in possession. It is said that Archibald McKinley performed a similar
exploit at Walla Walla.

Many interesting things could be told of this historic fort. Gardens
were started, cattle brought to feed on the meadow land of the Walla
Walla, and by the time that the missionaries and immigrants began to
come in the '30s and '40s the lower Walla Walla bore a homelike and
civilized appearance. Other pasture and garden regions were added,
one of the most extensive being that now known as Hudson's Bay, the
location of the "Goodman Ranch," about fifteen miles southwest of the
present City of Walla Walla.

Our limits forbid space for all the other fur enterprises and companies
aside from the two important companies already described. There were,
however, three Americans who come within the range of our story
whose careers were so interesting and important that we cannot omit
mention of them. These were Jedadiah Smith, Nathaniel Wyeth and B.
L. E. Bonneville. The first named was a member of the Rocky Mountain
Fur Company, of which W. H. Ashley was founder. The main operations
of the company were on the Upper Missouri, Green River, and around
Great Salt Lake. Smith, however, made several remarkable journeys far
beyond the earlier range. He was a very unique character, a devout
Christian and yet one of the boldest of traders and discoverers. He
might be said to have carried the Bible in one hand and his rifle in
the other. He usually began the day with devotions and expected his
men to be present. Yet he pushed his business and discoveries to the
limit. His first great trip was in 1826. He proceeded from Great Salt
Lake to the Colorado, thence across Arizona and Southern California,
to San Diego, a route unknown to whites before. After going up and
down California hundreds of miles he crossed the mountains and deserts
eastward the next summer, following a more northern route abounding in
perils and hardships. In 1827 the journey to California was repeated
almost immediately upon his return from the first. In the spring and
summer of 1828, he struck out on an entirely new course. This was up
the Sacramento and northwesterly across the lofty ranges of Southern
Oregon to the Umpqua on the Oregon Coast. There, with his nineteen
men he did successful trapping, but a difficulty with the Indians
resulted in the massacre of the whole party except himself and three
others. Those three being separated from the leader, he made his way
in utter destitution and with great suffering to the Hudson's Bay Fort
at Vancouver. Dr. John McLoughlin, the chief factor, with his usual
generosity supplied the survivors of this disaster with their vital
necessities and sent a well-armed party to secure the valuable furs
of which the Umpquas had robbed them. Most of the furs were brought
to Vancouver and McLoughlin paid Smith $20,000 for them. Remaining in
Vancouver till March, 1829, Smith made his way up the Columbia to the
Flathead country and thence along the Rocky Mountains to the Teton
range on the Upper Snake River. This vast series of routes by Jedadiah
Smith through Utah, New Mexico, Nevada, Arizona, California, Oregon,
Washington, Idaho, Wyoming, and Colorado, was the most extensive that
had yet been taken and did more than any other to give a comprehensive
view of what became the west third of the United States. In 1831,
lamentable to relate, this truly heroic and enterprising master trapper
was killed by Comanche Indians on the Cimarron desert.

Nathaniel Jarvis Wyeth and Benjamin Louis Eulalie de Bonneville were
practically contemporary, and in their adventurous careers crossed
each other's trails. Wyeth was born at Cambridge, Mass., and from
the traditions of the family should have been a graduate of Harvard
College. He was, however, so eager to enter some active career that
he did not complete a college course. He became quite fascinated with
the utopian ideas about Oregon given to the world by Hall J. Kelley,
and in 1832 he started upon a grand enterprise toward the setting
sun. He had conceived a general plan of a vast emporium of American
business in furs and salmon, similar to that of Astor. With an ardent
imagination and yet great practical good sense, Wyeth had the material
for an empire builder. That he failed to fulfil his grand design was
due partly to sheer bad luck, but mainly to the invincible monopoly of
the Hudson's Bay Company. The work of Wyeth was, however, an essential
link in the great chain which finally led to American ownership of
Oregon. The first trip of Wyeth was in 1832. He crossed the mountains
in company with Sublette, a noted trapper of the Rocky Mountain
Company, and after some disasters with the Indians, he traversed the
Blue Mountains and reached Fort Walla Walla (the present Wallula) in
October. Pierre Pambrun was the Hudson's Bay Company's agent at Walla
Walla and he received the destitute and nearly famished Americans with
lavish hospitality. After recuperating a few days at Walla Walla,
Wyeth descended the Columbia, with unabated enthusiasm, expecting to
find the ship which had left Boston in the spring, well laden with
stores already waiting his arrival. But alas for human hopes! When he
reached Fort Vancouver he learned that his vessel had been wrecked.
His men had already suffered much and lost faith in the lucky star
of their employer and asked to be relieved from further service. He
was compelled perforce to grant their request, for he had no money.
Spending the winter in and around Vancouver, treated by McLoughlin with
utmost kindness, and acquiring much knowledge and experience, but no
money, the indomitable Yankee determined to return and raise another
fund and challenge fate and his rivals again. February, 1833, found him
again at Walla Walla. Thence he pursued a devious course to Spokane
and Colville, across the Divide, down the mountains to the Tetons on
the Upper Snake, where he fell in with Bonneville. First planning to
go with Bonneville to California, Wyeth suddenly decided to return to
Boston and make ready for an immediate new expedition to Oregon. He
made an extraordinary voyage down the Bighorn and finally down the
Missouri to St. Louis in a "bull-boat." Safely reaching Boston in
November, he brought all his contagious enthusiasm to bear on certain
moneyed men with the result that he organized a new company known as
the Columbia River Fishing and Trading Company. A new vessel, the May
Dacre, was outfitted for the voyage around Cape Horn to Oregon.

Again with new men and equipment and with such experience from his
former journey as made success seem sure, Wyeth started on his new
expedition from St. Louis on April 3, 1834. One interesting feature of
this journey was that two conspicuous scientists, Thomas Nuttall and J.
K. Townsend, and the advance guard of the missionaries, Jason Lee and
party of the Methodist Church, accompanied the party. But even though
better equipped than before and though seemingly having the sanction of
both Science and the Church to bless his aims, the same old ill-fortune
seemed to travel with him. He had brought, under a contract made on his
return the year before, a valuable stock of goods for the Sublettes
of the Rocky Mountain Fur Company, and now when on reaching their
rendezvous he made ready to deliver the goods brought with on much toil
and expense, the Sublettes refused to receive them. Their company was,
in fact, at the point of dissolution. Though Wyeth had the forfeit
money that they had put up with the contract, that was small recompense
for his labor of transportation. But nothing daunted, the stout-hearted
promoter declared to the Sublettes, "I will roll a stone into your
garden which you will never be able to get out." In fulfillment of his
threat he prepared to invade their territory by building a fort in
which to store the rejected goods and from which to send his trappers
to all parts of the upper Snake. The fort thus established was the
famous Fort Hall, the most notable fort on the whole route, in the near
vicinity of the present Pocatello. In spite of delays, the party seems
to have travelled with unparalleled celerity, for leaving Fort Hall
they reached the Grande Ronde on August 31st, a date at which previous
parties had hardly reached the head of Snake River. In the Grande Ronde
the party again encountered Bonneville. Three days more saw them at
Walla Walla, and on September 2d, Wyeth was once more at Vancouver.
Here came misfortune number two. He had expected to find the May Dacre
already in the river with a good haul of salmon which they planned to
salt and take east on the return trip. But the vessel reached Vancouver
the next day after Wyeth's own arrival, too late for any effective
fishing that year. She had been struck by lightning and had lost three
months' time in repairs. With indefatigable energy, Wyeth inaugurated
his plans. He sent a detail of men to Fort Hall with supplies. He
conducted an extensive trapping expedition to Central Oregon up the
Des Chutes River. He built Fort William on Sauvie's Island. If anyone
ever deserved success, Wyeth did. But Doctor McLoughlin, though the
kindest of men and though personally wishing every success to Wyeth,
could not forget that he was responsible to the Hudson's Bay Company.
He underbid Wyeth for the Indian trade and headed him off at every turn
in opening new regions. Nothing but a purse as long as that of the
Hudson's Bay Company's could have stood the pressure. Worst of all, a
pestilence broke out among the Indians from which they died like flies
and from which some of Wyeth's own men perished. The Indians attributed
the scourge to the evil "Tomanowas" of the "Bostons" and absolutely
boycotted them. The brave fight was lost. Bad luck and the Hudson's Bay
Company were too much for this all-deserving Yankee. Wyeth threw up his
hands, sold out to the Hudson's Bay Company for what they would give,
yielding to them possession of his cherished Fort Hall, which became
one of their most advantageous posts, and made his way, baffled but by
no means disheartened, to his New England home. With his downfall it
became clear that no ordinary force could dispossess the great British
Company from its vantage ground in Oregon.

[Illustration: RESIDENCE OF MRS. AUGUSTA WARD REES, ON BIRCH STREET,
WALLA WALLA]

But meanwhile Bonneville was upholding the Stars and Stripes as
valorously, but not more successfully than Wyeth. Bonneville was
a Frenchman who came to New York in his youth, and who had most
influential friends, and had also the extreme good fortune of
attracting the favorable notice of Washington Irving and becoming the
hero of one of the most fascinating books of that leading American
writer, "Bonneville's Adventures." Through this introduction to the
reading public, greedy in those days for tales of the romance and
adventure of the Far-West, Bonneville acquired a fame and vogue and
became invested with a certain glamour beyond that of any of the
fur-traders of Old Oregon. By the favor and influence of Thomas Paine,
Bonneville became a West Point appointee and graduated in 1819. When La
Fayette came to America in 1825 Bonneville was detailed to accompany
the "Hero of Two Continents" on his tour of the States. Greatly pleased
with his young compatriot, La Fayette took him back to France on his
return, and for several years the young French-American was a member
of the household of that great man. Returning to the land of his
adoption and resuming his army connections, Bonneville became absorbed
with the idea that he might gratify both his love of adventure and of
money by entering the fur trade in the Far West. Securing from the
War Department an appointment as a special explorer of new lands,
and investigator of the Indian tribes, he was also allowed to make a
personal venture in the fur trade.

H. H. Bancroft in his "Pacific Coast History" viciously attacks
Bonneville as well as Irving who immortalized him. General Chittenden
in his "History of the American Fur Trade in the Far-West" defends both
in a very spirited and successful manner.

The series of expeditions undertaken by Bonneville extended over the
years 1832-5. Those years were replete with adventure, hardship,
romance of a sort, but very little success in the quest of furs. In
the course of those years the adventurous army officer traversed and
retraversed the country covered by the water-sheds of the Snake River
and its tributaries, Green River and the Colorado, the Great Salt Lake
Basin, and down the Columbia. One of the most valuable journeys of
his party was through the Humboldt Basin, across the Sierras and into
California, a new route somewhat similar to the earlier one of Jedadiah
Smith. That, however, was commanded not by Bonneville himself, but by
I. R. Walker, Bonneville's most valued assistant. The most interesting
part of Bonneville's expedition to the inhabitants of Old Walla Walla
County was his winter trip from the Grande Ronde to the "Wayleway"
(Wallowa), down the Snake to the present vicinity of Asotin, thence
across the prairies of what is now Garfield and Columbia counties,
to Walla Walla. He describes that region as one of rare beauty and
apparent fertility and predicts that it will sometime be the scene
of high cultivation and settlement. Reaching Fort Walla Walla, he
was received by Pierre Pambrun with the same courtesy which that
commandant had bestowed on Wyeth, but when he tried to secure supplies
for his depleted equipment, Pambrun assured him that he would have to
draw the line at anything which would foster the American fur-trade.
Like Wyeth, Bonneville discovered to his sorrow and cost that he was
"up against" an immovable wall of monopoly of the hugest and most
inflexible aggregation of capital in the western hemisphere. He could
not compete at Walla Walla. Descending the Columbia River he found the
same iron barrier of monopoly. He too threw up his hands. The American
fur-traders were at the end of their string. They retired and left the
great monopoly in undisputed possession.

Thus ends, in American defeat, this first combat for possession of
Oregon. Another combat and another champion for the Americans was due.
Exit the trapper. Enter the missionary. Another chapter--and we shall
see what the new actor could do and did do on the grand stage of Oregon
history.




CHAPTER V

THE MISSIONARY PERIOD


In the preceding chapter we learned that the various attempts of
American trappers and fur companies to control the fur trade of
Oregon failed. The Hudson's Bay Company was too firmly entrenched in
its vast domain to be loosened by any business of its own kind. Nor
would there have been any special advantage to the United States or
the world in dislodging the great British company and substituting an
American enterprise of the same sort. The aims and policy of all fur
companies were the same: i. e., to keep the country a wilderness, to
trade with the natives and derive a fortune from the lavish bounty
of wild animal life. The Hudson's Bay Company was as good as any
enterprise of its type could be. The unfortunate fact was not so much
that it was the British who were skimming the cream of the wilderness,
as that the regime of any fur company was necessarily antagonistic to
that incoming tide of settlers who would bring with them the home,
the shop, the road, the church, the school, in short, civilization.
Hence the necessary policy of the great fur company was to discourage
immigration, or, in fact, any form of enterprise which would utilize
the latent agricultural, pastoral, and manufacturing resources of
Oregon. This policy existed, in spite of the fact (of which we shall
see many illustrations later) that individual managers and officers
of the company were often of broad and benevolent character and
predisposed to extending a cordial welcome to the advance guard of
American immigration. A few stray Americans had drifted to Oregon and
California with the hope of inaugurating enterprises that would lead to
American occupation. In general, however, the land beyond the Rockies
was as dark a continent as Africa.

But in 1832 a strange and interesting event occurred which unlocked
the gates of the western wilderness and led in a train of conditions
which made American settlement and ownership a logical result. In
1832 a party of four Indians from the Far West appeared at St. Louis
on a strange quest--seeking the "White Man's Book of Life." Efforts
have been made by certain recent writers to belittle or discredit
this event, for no very apparent reason unless it be that general
disposition of some of the so-called critical school of investigators
to spoil anything that appeals to the gentler or nobler emotions, and
especially to appose the idea that men are susceptible to any motives
of religion or human sympathy or any other spirit than the mercenary
and materialistic. But there can be no question about the journey of
these four Indians, nor can there be any reasonable doubt that their
aim was to secure religious instruction for their people. The details
of the journey and the nature of the expectations of the tribe and of
the envoys might of course be variously understood and stated, but the
general statements given by reliable contemporary authorities are not
open to doubt.

To what tribe the Indians belonged seems uncertain. It has been stated
by some that they were Flatheads and that tribe, though quite widely
dispersed, had their principal habitat in what is now Northern Idaho
and Northwestern Montana. Miss Kate McBeth, for many years a missionary
to the Nez Perce Indians, and located at Kamiah and then at Lapwai,
near Lewiston, thought that three of the Indians were Nez Perces and
one a Flathead. Nor is it known how those Indians got the notion of a
"Book of Life." Bonneville states in his journal that Pierre Pambrun,
the agent at Fort Walla Walla, taught the Indians the rudiments of
Catholic worship. Some have conjectured that the American trapper,
Jedadiah Smith, a devout Christian, may have imparted religious
instruction. Miss McBeth formed the impression that their chief hope
was that they might find Lewis and Clark, whose journey in 1805-6 had
produced a profound effect on the Nez Perces. It is interesting to
note that Clark was at the very time of this visit of the Indians the
superintendent of Indian affairs at St. Louis. He has left no statement
as to the location of these Indians, though he referred to the fact
of their visit to several passers who have recorded his statements.
The first published account of this visit appeared in the _New York
Christian Advocate_, of March 1, 1833. This was in the form of a letter
from G. P. Disoway, who had charge of the removal of certain Indians
to a reservation west of St. Louis. In his letter Disoway enclosed one
from William Walker, an interpreter for the Wyandotte Indians. Walker
had met the four Indians in General Clark's office in St. Louis. He was
impressed with their appearance, and learned that General Clark had
given them some account of the origin and history of man, of the coming
of the Savior, and of his work for the salvation of men. According to
Walker, two of the Indians died in St. Louis. As to whether the others
reached their home he did not know.

Walker's account was confirmed in a most valuable way by George Catlin,
the noted painter and student of Indian life. He was making a journey
up the Missouri River on one of the first steamers to ascend that
stream to Fort Benton. In the Smithsonian Report for 1885 can be found
Catlin's account, as follows: "These two men, when I painted them, were
in beautiful Sioux dresses which had been presented to them in a talk
with the Sioux, who treated them very kindly, while passing through the
Sioux country. These two men were part of a delegation that came across
the mountains to St. Louis a few years since, to inquire for the truth
of the representations which they said some white men had made among
them, that our religion was better than theirs, and that they would all
be lost if they did not embrace it. Two old and venerable men of this
party died in St. Louis, and I travelled 2,000 miles, companion with
these two fellows, toward their own country, and became much pleased
with their manners and dispositions. When I first heard the objects
of their extraordinary mission across the mountains, I could scarcely
believe it; but on conversing with General Clark on a future occasion,
I was fully convinced of the fact." Rather curiously Catlin speaks
of these Indians as being Flatheads or Nez Perces, as though the two
tribes were identical.

[Illustration: DR. MARCUS WHITMAN
From a statue on the Witherspoon Building, Philadelphia]

The letter of Disoway in the _Christian Advocate_ was discussed in
the _Illinois Patriot_ of October, 1833, together with the statement
that the subject had excited so much interest that a committee of
the Illinois Synod had been appointed to report on the duty of the
churches. The committee went to St. Louis and conferred with General
Clark, receiving from him a confirmation of the report. When this
pathetic story, together with the stirring appeal of the committee, had
reached the Christian people of the country, it produced a profound
impression, although, quite curiously, the little book by Lee and Frost
of the first Methodist Mission, which passed through St. Louis in 1834,
and whose members conferred with Gen. Clark, refers rather slightingly
to the event. The decades of the '20s and '30s were a time of deep
religious sentiment. It was the beginning of the Missionary movements
of the century. To the sensitive souls of the time this unheralded call
from the Far West seemed a veritable Macedonian cry. From it sprang the
Christian Missions of Oregon. And the missionaries were the advance
guard of immigration. And the immigration decided that the American
home-builder and farmer should own Oregon, rather than that the
British fur-trader and the Indians should keep it as a game preserve
and fur depot. It would indeed be too much to say that American
ownership of Oregon would not have resulted, if it had not been for
the missionaries. But it may safely be said that the acquisition would
have been delayed and that there would have been many more chances of
failure, if the missionaries had not fitted into the evolution of the
drama just as and just when they did. The missionary period was an
essential one, coming between that of the fur-traders and that of the
immigrants.

While the scope of our undertaking requires us to confine our narration
mainly to the area covered in this history, yet in order to preserve
the historical continuity and to exhibit the forces which led to
subsequent developments, we must enlarge the picture enough to include
glimpses of the mission locations outside of Walla Walla.

The first of the Christian Crusaders to respond to the Macedonian
call from Oregon was a party under Jason Lee of the Methodist Church.
This party came to Oregon in 1834 in company with Nathaniel Wyeth,
the American trader, of whose bold and worthy, and yet unsuccessful
undertakings we have spoken in Chapter Four. Reaching Vancouver, the
missionaries presented themselves to Doctor McLoughlin, the chief
factor. He met them with every expression of generous goodwill and
advised them to locate in the Willamette Valley rather than among the
tribes from whom had proceeded the Macedonian call. As a result, Lee
with his assistants, located at Chemawa, near the present Salem, Ore.
From that mission sprang the first permanent American settlement, the
native name of which was Chemeketa, place of Council, or peace-ground.
The missionaries gave it the Bible equivalent, Salem, a proceeding
of more piety than good judgment. The Willamette University of the
present is the offspring of the school started by the missionaries for
the Indian children, and within a few years modified so as to meet the
needs of the white children. For that earliest mission, like the later,
discovered that this great work, after all, must be for the white race,
not for the Indians.

The next year after the coming of the Lee party, another movement was
initiated which was destined to have a most intimate connection with
Walla Walla. For in 1835, the man who became the first white man, aside
from the fur trappers and traders, in the Walla Walla Valley, left his
home in New York for Oregon. This was Dr. Marcus Whitman, who, more
than any other one man, put Walla Walla on the map of the world. In
1835, Doctor Whitman, in company with Dr. Samuel Parker, set forth on
a reconnaissance to determine the advisability of locating a mission
among the Indians from whom had gone the Macedonian call. Reaching
Green River, the outlook seemed so encouraging that it was decided to
part company; Doctor Parker continuing westward with Indians who had
met them at Green River, while Doctor Whitman, the younger and more
active of the two, returned to his home in Rushville, N. Y., and there
organized a missionary band.

As a result of Doctor Whitman's return, a party consisting of himself
and his bride, Narcissa Prentiss, and Rev. H. H. Spalding and his newly
wedded bride, Eliza Hart, set forth in 1836 for Oregon. With them was
William H. Gray as secular agent and general manager. With the party
also were two Indian boys who had accompanied Doctor Whitman the year
before on his return from Green River. Of this bridal journey of 4,000
miles, most of it on horseback, our space permits only a few hurried
views. Aside from the momentous results in the history of Oregon and
the United States, the story is one of heroism and devotion which has
few parallels, and the record closes with a martyr's crown for Marcus
and Narcissa Whitman.

Among the precious relics in Whitman College, is Mrs. Whitman's diary
of the journey, and also that of Mrs. Spalding. That of Mrs. Whitman
was made by herself from notes on the way and was sent from Vancouver
to her parents upon the completion of the journey. Its heading is as
follows:

"Narcissa Whitman's Diary of a Missionary Tour West of the Rocky
Mountains performed 1836. Being the first white female ever beyond the
mountains on the continent. The journey was performed on horseback--a
distance of 4,000 miles. She, in company with her husband, Marcus
Whitman, M. D., and H. H. Spalding and wife, left the state of New
York for this tour in February of 1836--travelled through a part of
Pennsylvania, Ohio--and finally arrived at St. Louis in Missouri. Here
they joined the Fur Company that crosses the mountains every year--and
were also joined by Messrs. Suturly [Saturlee in Mrs. Spalding's diary]
and Gray--missionaries to the West. Matters thus arranged they all left
St. Louis in March--for the 'far West.' The further particulars of the
journey may be learned from the following extracts from her journal
taken on the way."

Following this heading is a letter addressed to her parents, dated
Vancouver, October 20, 1836, in which she says that the journal covers
the journey from the "Rendezvous," and that while at Vancouver she
had been so situated that she could copy her notes taken on the way.
The party had crossed the Great Divide on July 4th, and on that day
celebrated the natal day of the country, and as they looked down the
long vista westward, seem to have felt that they would claim possession
of that western land in the name of the American Union and the Church
of Jesus Christ. They had reached the "Rendezvous" on Green River July
6th. After several days there, refitting and resting and conferring
with Indians, they resumed the next great stage of the march with a
detachment of the Hudson's Bay Company, under Mr. McLeod, bound for
Walla Walla.

It was July 18, 1836, when they set forth under these new auspices. A
company of Flathead and Nez Perce Indians also travelled with them.
It appears from the diary of Mrs. Spalding that the Nez Perces were
very anxious that the party accompany them, but as they apparently
wished to hunt on the way it was manifestly necessary that the party go
with the traders. One chieftain, Mrs. Spalding says, concluded to go
with them, though it would deprive him of the privilege of securing a
supply of meat for the winter. Mrs. Whitman tells of the tedious time
which Doctor Whitman had with his wagon. This was one of the notable
features of his journey. Some have asserted that he was the first to
drive a wagon from the Missouri to the Columbia. This is only partly
true. Ashley, Smith, Sublette, Bonneville, and other trappers, had
driven wagons to the Black Hills, and to other points, but none of them
had gone so far west as Whitman, with a wagon. But when he reached
"Snake Fort," near Boise, generally known as Fort Boise, he left his
wagon. In 1840 Robert Newell went clear through the Blue Mountains and
reached Walla Walla. However, Doctor Whitman deserves all praise for
his energy and persistence in pushing his "Chick-chick-shaile-kikash,"
as the Indians called his wagon, even to Fort Boise, and he may be very
justly called one of the first wheel-track-makers. It is interesting
and pathetic to see how Mrs. Whitman craved some of her mother's bread.
During part of their journey they had an exclusive diet of buffalo
meat. Occasionally they would have berries and fish. They had several
cows with them and from them had some milk, which was a great help.
They had to shoe their cattle (presumably with hide, though it is not
so stated) on account of sore feet. With the cows were two sucking
calves, which, Mrs. Whitman says, seemed to be in excellent spirits,
and made the journey with no suffering, except sore feet. Soon after
passing a point on Snake River, where the Indians were taking salmon,
Mrs. Whitman bade good-by to her little trunk which they had been
able to carry thus far, but were now compelled to leave. It is truly
pathetic to read the words in her journal.

"Dear H. (This was her sister Harriet, to whom she is especially
addressing the words): The little trunk you gave me has come thus with
me so far and now I must leave it here alone. Poor little trunk! I am
sorry to leave thee. Thou must abide here alone and no more by thy
presence remind me of my dear Harriet. Twenty miles below the falls on
Snake River, this shall be thy place of rest. Farewell, little trunk.
I thank thee for thy faithful services, and that I have been cheered
by thy presence so long. Thus we scatter as we go along." A little
later it appears that Mr. McKay rescued the trunk. Mrs. Whitman shows
that she had quite a sense of humor by recording that when she found
what Mr. McKay had done her "soliloquizing about it last night was for
naught."

The journal contains quite a glowing account of the beauties of Grande
Ronde Valley, then of the toilsome, zigzag trail out of it into the
Blue Mountains westward. On August 29th, the party stood upon the
open summit, from which they saw the Valley of the Columbia. "It was
beautiful. Just as we gained the highest elevation and began to descend
the sun was dipping his disk behind the western horizon. Beyond the
valley we could see two distant mountains, Mount Hood, and Mount St.
Helens." The latter of those mountains was Adams, not St. Helens. Our
missionary band were now in sight of their goal. It was not, however,
till September 1st, that they actually rode into Walla Walla. In fact,
part of the company, including the Spaldings, did not reach the fort
till September 3d. It was a thrilling moment to that devoted little
band. It seemed to them almost equal to what it would to one of us
moderns to enter Washington or Paris or London. Think of the journey
of those two women, those brides, three thousand miles from St. Louis
to Walla Walla, five months and mainly on horseback. As they drew
near the fort, both horses and riders became so eager to reach the
end of the journey that they broke into a gallop. They saw the first
appearance of civilization in a garden about two miles from the fort.
That garden must have been nearly upon the present location of Wallula.
As they rode up to the fort, Mr. McLeod (who had gone ahead to prepare
for their coming), Mr. Pambrun, the commandant, and others, came forth
to meet so new and remarkable an addition to the population of Walla
Walla. Mrs. Whitman has the enthusiasm of a child in describing the
chickens, turkeys, pigeons, hogs, goats, and cattle, which latter were
the fattest that she ever saw and then she goes into ecstasies over
the breakfast of salmon, potatoes, tea, bread, and butter, and then
the room in the fort with its comfort after all their hardships. The
officers of the fur company treated them with the utmost courtesy and
consideration. Such was that momentous entrance of the missionaries and
of the first white women into Fort Walla Walla, September 1, 1836.

The next chapter in the story of the Whitman party was their journey
to Vancouver, the emporium of the Hudson's Bay Company. Leaving Walla
Walla by boat on the 7th of September, they reached the "New York of
the Pacific," as Mrs. Whitman says they had been told to consider it,
on the 14th. Mrs. Whitman in her journal the admiration of the party
for the beauty of the river, more beautiful, she says, than the Ohio,
though the rugged cliffs and shores of drifting sand below Walla Walla
looked dismal and forbidding. They found much to delight them at
Vancouver,--the courtesy and hospitality of Doctor McLoughlin and his
assistants, the bounteous table, with feasts of salmon, roast duck,
venison, grouse and quail, rich cream and delicious butter, a picture
of toothsomeness which it makes one hungry to read; the ships from
England moored to the river brink, and the well-kept farm with grain
and vegetables, fruits of every sort, grapes and berries, a thousand
head of cattle, and many sheep, hogs, and horses--a perfect oasis of
civilized delights to the little company of missionaries, worn and
homesick during their months on horseback across the barren plains and
through wild mountains.

Doctor Whitman and Mr. Spalding, leaving their wives in the excellent
keeping of the Hudson's Bay people at Vancouver, returned, in company
with Mr. Gray, to the Walla Walla country to decide upon locations.
They had expected, so Mrs. Whitman says, to locate in the Grande Ronde,
the beauty and fertility of which had been portrayed in glowing colors
by returning adventurers and fur-traders. But discovering as they
passed through that it was so buried in the mountains and so difficult
of access from the rivers and the regular routes of travel, they fixed
upon Waiilatpu (Wielitpoo, Mrs. Whitman spells it) for one post and
Lapwai for another. The Whitmans became established at Waiilatpu,
"the place of rye grass," six miles west of the present Walla Walla;
and the Spaldings at Lapwai, two miles up the Lapwai Creek, and about
twelve from the mouth of the Clearwater, the present site of Lewiston.
A few months after the location at Waiilatpu, on March 4, 1837, a
beam of sunshine lighted in the home of the Whitmans, in the form of
a daughter, Alice Clarissa, the first white child born west of the
Rockies and north of California. The Indians were extraordinarily
pleased with the "little white papoose," or "Cayuse temi" (Cayuse
girl), and if she had lived, the tragedy of a little later might not
have occurred. In a letter preserved at Whitman College, from Mrs.
Whitman to her sister and husband, Rev. Lyman P. Judson of Angelica, N.
Y., dated March 15, 1838, the mother says: "Our little daughter comes
to her mother every now and then to be cheered with a smile and a kiss
and to be taken up to rest for a few moments and then way she goes
running about the room or out of doors, diverting herself with objects
that attract her attention. A refreshing comfort she is to her parents
in their solitary situation." With her parents so needing that child,
fairly idolizing her and their very lives wrought up with hers, it is
too sad to relate that on June 23, 1839, the bright, active little
creature wandered out of the house while the mother was engaged in
some household task, and took her way to the fatal river that then ran
close to the mission house, though it now has a new channel a quarter
mile away. Missing little Alice Clarissa, Mrs. Whitman hastened to the
river, with a sinking dread, and there she saw the little cup where
the child had dropped it. This mutely told the heart-breaking tale.
An Indian, diving in the stream, found the body, but the gentle and
lovable life, the life of the whole mission, was gone. The faithful
and devoted father and mother had one less tie to life. The patient
resignation with which the anguished parents endured this infinite
sorrow shows vividly what strength may be imparted by the real
Christian spirit.

Both Doctor Whitman and Mr. Spalding were indefatigable workers and
quickly created civilized conditions upon the beautiful places where
they had planted their missions. That of Mr. Spalding was outside of
the territory covered by this history, and we therefore devote our
larger attention to the mission at Waiilatpu. It should, however,
be said that from the standpoint of results among the Indians, Mr.
Spalding accomplished more than any of the missionaries. This may be
accounted for in some part by the superior characters and minds of the
Nez Perces, among whom he was so fortunate as to have cast his lot.
They seem to have been of the best Indian type, while the Cayuses in
the vicinity of Waiilatpu were turbulent, treacherous, and unreliable.

Doctor Whitman was of powerful physique and familiar from boyhood with
the practical duties of farm and mill. He could turn his hand to almost
anything in the way of construction. The same was true of Mr. Gray,
who spent part of his time at Waiilatpu and part at Lapwai, though he
returned in 1837 to the east in search of new helpers. But within a
few months the Whitmans were comfortably housed, and every year saw
some improvement about the buildings and land. Seed for grain, and
fruit trees were secured at Vancouver, and stock was provided also.
The Waiilatpu farm consisted of a fertile belt of bottom land of about
three hundred acres between the Walla Walla River and Mill Creek, with
an unlimited range of low hill and bench land covered with bunch-grass,
which furnished the finest of stock feed almost the whole year round.
Doctor Whitman was himself a practical millwright and soon had a small
sawmill equipped about twenty miles up Mill Creek, while adjoining the
mission house he laid out a mill dam, the lines of which can still
be seen. The water for the mill pond was supplied from Mill Creek by
a ditch which followed nearly the course of the ditch of the present
time. The mill was a grist mill and located at the western side of the
pond, and within a few steps of the mission house and the "mansion,"
as they called the large log building erected a few years after their
arrival for the accommodation of the frequent visitors, especially
after American immigrants began to come. Toiling incessantly, the
missionary doctor and hero was rewarded by seeing his mission brought
in a surprisingly brief time to a condition of profitable cultivation.
T. J. Farnham who came with the so-called "Peoria party" in 1839, says
of Whitman's place: "I found 250 acres enclosed and 200 acres in good
cultivation. I found forty or fifty Indian children between the ages of
seven and eighteen years in school, and Mrs. Whitman an indefatigable
instructor. It appeared to me quite remarkable that the doctor could
have made so many improvements since the year 1836; but the industry
which crowded every hour of the day, his untiring energy of character,
and the very efficient aid of his wife in relieving him in a great
degree from the labors of the school, enabled him, without funds for
such purposes, and without other aid than that of a fellow-missionary
for short intervals, to fence, plow, build, plant an orchard, and do
all the other laborious acts of opening a plantation on the face of
that distant wilderness, learn an Indian language, and do the duties,
meanwhile, of a physician to the associate stations on the Clearwater
and Spokane." Joseph Drayton of the Wilkes Exploring Expedition of the
United States Navy, visited Waiilatpu in 1841. He says of the mission:
"All the premises looked comfortable, the garden especially fine,
vegetables and melons in great variety. The wheat in the fields was
seven feet high and nearly ripe, and the corn nine feet in the tassel."
Had not Doctor Whitman possessed great physical strength, as well as
determination and energy, he could not have endured the excessive toil
which was the price of his rapid progress. Senator Nesmith, who came to
Oregon in the immigration of 1843, said in the hearing of the author
of this work: "Whitman had a constitution like a sawmill." Another
old timer said of him that he had the energy of a Napoleon. Some old
timer has said that Whitman used to ride in a day to the present site
of Lewiston, from Waiilatpu, about ninety miles. He would do it by
changing horses several times. He was hard on horses, and when someone
remonstrated on the ground of cruelty, the doctor replied: "My time is
worth more than the horse's comfort."

As has been stated, Mr. W. H. Gray went east in 1857 for
reinforcements. The next year he came again to Oregon with a valuable
addition. Besides the addition to his own life of a bride, Mary Dix
(who was one of the choice spirits of Old Oregon, and during many
years a center of life and light in the new country) there were three
missionaries, each also with a newly-wed wife. These were Revs.
Elkanah Walker, Cushing Eells, and A. B. Smith. Mr. Cornelius Rogers
accompanied the party. Reaching Walla Walla, the new arrivals were
assigned to new stations, Messrs. Eells and Walker to Tschimakain, near
the present City of Spokane, while Mr. Smith went to Kamiah, about
sixty miles east of the present site of Lewiston. Mr. Rogers and the
Grays went to Lapwai. There seem never to have been more faithful and
devoted missionaries than were these of the four missions of Waiilatpu,
Lapwai, Tschimakain, and Kamiah. Yet, it could not be said that they
were successful in turning any considerable number of natives to
Christianity. The Nez Perces at Lapwai and other stations established
by Mr. Spalding, notably the one at Alpowa, were most amenable to
Christian influences, while the Cayuses in the Walla Walla Valley
were least so. In contemplation of the apparently scanty progress,
the Missionary Board at Boston decided to discontinue the missions at
Waiilatpu and Lapwai, to discharge Messrs. Spalding, Gray, Smith, and
Rogers, and to send Doctor Whitman to the Spokane country.

[Illustration: WHITMAN PARTY ON CREST OF ROCKY MOUNTAINS, JULY 4,
1836]

While these difficulties were harassing the missionaries, very
important events were taking place in national life. The slavery and
the tariff questions had become firebrands in domestic politics. The
questions of annexation of Texas, of the occupation of Oregon, of
possible trouble with Mexico over the former, and with England over
the latter, were threatening corresponding chaos in foreign affairs.
Doctor Whitman, reticent and sagacious, saw clearly that his chosen aim
of leading the natives to civilization and Christianity was rapidly
sinking in importance in comparison with the question of the white race
in the new land, and of the ownership of this great region. In 1842 the
Ashburton treaty with England settled the Northeastern boundary and the
supposition was that it would also settle the Oregon question. But when
the treaty was signed on August 9th, it appeared that the question of
Oregon was left unsettled. In a message of August 11th, President Tyler
explained to the Senate that so little probability of agreement existed
that it was thought not expedient to make that subject a matter of
negotiation.

While the Ashburton treaty was pending, the first real immigration,
though a small one of 112 persons, came to Oregon. In it, among
several of the most notable of the old Oregonians, was A. L. Lovejoy,
a young New England lawyer, a man of energy and ambition, destined
to play a conspicuous part in Oregon history. When the party reached
Whitman's Station on the Walla Walla, they delivered to him letters
from the United States and discussed with him the pending treaty and
the danger that it might draw the line so as to leave Oregon to Great
Britain, or at least to make the Columbia River the boundary, placing
the entire Puget Sound Basin and the mountains and plains eastward to
the river in possession of Great Britain. Seeing the imminence of the
danger, Whitman determined upon a supreme effort. He decided to make
a mid-winter journey East with three aims in view: to present to the
Government the situation and the vital need of preserving Oregon for
the United States; to try to aid in forming and guiding an immigration
to Oregon; and to settle affairs of the mission with the Board at
Boston. He asked Lovejoy to go with him. It looked like a desperate
undertaking, but Lovejoy, an athletic, ambitious young man, agreed to
go.

At this point comes in the bitterly disputed "Whitman Controversy."
It is not within the scope of this work to undertake an argumentative
treatment of this question. The question at issue, if rationally
considered, is rather the extent of the services of Doctor Whitman
in "saving Oregon to the United States." Mrs. F. V. Victor, Elwood
Evans, Prof. E. G. Bourne, and Principal W. I. Marshall have, more than
others, presented arguments in favor of the contention that Doctor
Whitman had no important part to play in the great political drama of
Oregon, while the claim that he had large political aims and bore a
conspicuous part in influencing the final result has been supported in
books written by Dr. O. W. Nixon, Rev. William Barrows, Prof. William
Mowry, and Rev. Myron Eells. The final book by the last named, the
"Life of Marcus Whitman," is, in the judgment of the writer, the final
and unanswered and indeed unanswerable word on the subject. The author
of this history has given in the _Washington Historical Quarterly_ of
April, 1917, his reasons for thinking the statements of Professors
Bourne and Marshall inaccurate and their arguments inconclusive. The
fact acknowledged by all is that Whitman made a ride during the fall
and winter of 1842 and succeeding months of 1843, which for daring,
heroism, and fortitude has few parallels in history. The question of
controversy is, what did he make such a journey for? His critics say
that it was in consequence of the decision of the Missionary Board to
discontinue his mission on the Walla Walla. Mrs. Victor and Principal
Marshall are the only ones among these critics who have achieved
the distinction of attributing base or selfish motives to Whitman.
They have held forth the idea that he, foreseeing the incoming of
immigrants, wanted to maintain the station at Waiilatpu in order to
raise vegetables and other supplies to sell at a high price. Whether
a motive of that sort would lead a man of Whitman's type to take that
desperate ride in mid-winter through the Rocky Mountains, at peril of
life a dozen times over from Indians, freezing, and starvation, is a
question which different people would view differently, according to
their way of estimating the motives which determine men's actions.
Perhaps people whose estimate of human nature, based possibly on their
own inner consciousness of motives, is that selfish gain is the leading
motive, would agree that the hope of cornering the vegetable market
at Waiilatpu was an adequate cause of Whitman's ride. To some people
it would seem likely that the mainspring of his action was some great
national and patriotic aim and that while he wished to maintain the
mission, his great aim was to convince the Government of the value
of Oregon and to help organize an immigration which would settle the
ownership of Oregon in favor of his country. At any rate, he went. That
much is undisputed.

Practically the only account of that memorable mid-winter ride from
Waiilatpu to St. Louis is from A. L. Lovejoy, the sole white companion
of Whitman. Whitman himself was, like most heroes, a man of few words.
He told various friends something of his experiences in Washington and
Boston, and told to associates and wrote a few letters to friends about
the immigration of 1843, but he seems to have been very reticent about
the "Ride." Mr. Lovejoy wrote two letters about that journey, one dated
November 6, 1869, which is found in W. H. Gray's History of Oregon,
and one addressed to Dr. G. H. Atkinson and used by him in an address
on February 22, 1876. This letter so vividly portrays the character
of this undertaking as it comes from the only witness besides Whitman
himself, that we deem it suitable to incorporate it here.

"We left Waiilatpu October 3, 1842, traveled rapidly, reached Fort Hall
in eleven days, remained two days to recruit and make a few purchases.
The doctor engaged a guide, and we left the Fort Uinte. We changed
from a direct route to more southern, through the Spanish country,
via Salt Lake, Taos and Santa Fe. On our way from Fort Hall to Fort
Uinte we had terribly severe weather. The snows retarded our progress
and blinded the trail, so we lost much time. After arriving at Fort
Uinte, and making some purchases for our trip, we took a new guide and
started for Fort Uncumpagra, situated on the waters of Grand River,
in the Spanish country. Here our stay was very short. We took a new
guide and started for Taos. After being out some four or five days we
encountered a terrific snowstorm, which forced us to seek shelter in a
deep ravine, where we remained snowed in for four days, at which time
the storm had somewhat abated, and we attempted to make our way out
upon the highlands, but the snow was so deep and the winds so piercing
and cold, we were compelled to return to camp and wait a few days for
a change of weather. Our next effort to reach the highlands was more
successful; but, after spending several days wandering around in the
snow without making much headway, our guide told us that the deep snow
had so changed the face of the country that he was completely lost and
could take us no further. This was a terrible blow to the doctor, but
he was determined not to give it up without another effort.

"We at once agreed that the doctor should take the guide and return
to Fort Uncumpagra and get a new guide, and I remain in camp with the
animals until he could return, which he did in seven days with our
new guide, and we were now on our route again. Nothing of much import
occurred but hard and slow traveling through deep snow until we reached
Grand River, which was frozen on either side about one-third across.
Although so intensely cold, the current was so very rapid that about
one-third of the river in the center was not frozen. Our guide thought
it would be dangerous to attempt to cross the river in its present
condition, but the doctor, nothing daunted, was the first to take the
water. He mounted his horse; the guide and myself shoved the doctor and
his horse off the ice into the foaming stream. Away he went, completely
under water, horse and all, but directly came up, and after buffeting
the rapid foaming current, he reached the ice on the opposite shore a
long way down the stream. He leaped from his horse upon the ice and
soon had his noble animal by his side. The guide and myself forced in
the pack animals, and followed the doctor's example, and soon were on
the opposite shore, drying our frozen clothes by a comfortable fire.
We reached Taos in about thirty days, having suffered greatly from
cold and scarcity of provisions. We were compelled to use mule meat,
dogs and such other animals as came in our reach. We remained at Taos
a few days only, and started for Bent's and Savery's Fort, on the head
waters of the Arkansas River. When we had been out some fifteen or
twenty days we met George Bent, a brother of Governor Bent, on his way
to Taos. He told us that a party of mountain men would leave Bent's
Fort in a few days for St. Louis, but said we would not reach the fort
with our pack animals in time to join the party. The doctor, being very
anxious to join the party so he could push on as rapidly as possible
to Washington, concluded to leave myself and guide with the animals,
and he himself, taking the best animal, with some bedding and a small
allowance of provision, started alone, hoping by rapid travel to reach
the fort in time to join the St. Louis party, but to do so he would
have to travel on the Sabbath, something we had not done before. Myself
and guide traveled on slowly and reached the fort in four days, but
imagine our astonishment when on making inquiry about the doctor we
were told that he had not arrived nor had he been heard of. I learned
that the party for St. Louis was camped at the Big Cottonwood, forty
miles from the fort, and at my request Mr. Savery sent an express,
telling the party not to proceed any farther until we learned something
of Doctor Whitman's whereabouts, as he wished to accompany them to St
Louis. Being furnished by the gentleman of the fort with a suitable
guide, I started in search of the doctor, and traveled up the river
about one hundred miles. I learned from the Indians that a man had been
there who was lost and was trying to find Bent's Fort. They said they
had directed him to go down the river and how to find the fort. I knew
from their description it was the doctor. I returned to the fort as
rapidly as possible, but the doctor had not arrived. We had all become
very anxious about him.

"Late in the afternoon he came in very much fatigued and desponding;
said that he knew that God had bewildered him to punish him for
traveling on the Sabbath. During the whole trip he was very regular in
his morning and evening devotions, and that was the only time I ever
knew him to travel on the Sabbath.

"The doctor remained all night at the fort, starting only on the
following morning to join the St. Louis party. Here we parted. The
doctor proceeded to Washington. I remained at Bent's Fort until spring,
and joined the doctor the following July near Fort Laramie, on his way
to Oregon, in company with a train of emigrants."

In the life of Whitman by Myron Eells, there is a summary of the
events which immediately followed, so well adapted to our purpose that
we quote it here as resting upon the authority of Mr. Eells, whom we
regard as a writer of undoubted candor and accuracy.

"When Doctor Whitman arrived at St. Louis he made his home at the
house of Doctor Edward Hale, a dentist. In the same house was William
Barrows, then a young school teacher, afterward a clergyman and author
of Barrows' 'Oregon.'

"Reaching Cincinnati, he went to the house of Doctor Weed. Here,
according to Professor Weed, he obtained a new suit of clothes, but
whether he wore them all the time until he left the East or not is
a question. Some writers speak of him as appearing in buckskins, or
something akin to them, afterwards both at Washington and Boston. Some,
as Dr. S. J. Parker, say he was not so dressed. It is just barely
possible that both may be true--that he kept his buckskins and buffalo
coat and occasionally wore them. It is quite certain that he did not
throw them away, as according to accounts he wore his buckskins in
returning to Oregon the next summer.

"The next visit on record was at Ithaca, New York, at the home of his
old missionary friend and fellow traveler, Rev. Samuel Parker. Here,
after the surprise of his arrival was over, he said to Mr. Parker:
'I have come on a very important errand. We must both go at once to
Washington, or Oregon is lost, ceded to the English.' Mr. Parker,
however, did not think the danger to be so great, and not for lack of
interest in the subject, but because of other reasons, did not go.
Doctor Whitman went alone, and reached Washington.

"The doctor, or his brother, had been a classmate of the Secretary of
War, James M. Porter. Through him the doctor obtained an introduction
to Daniel Webster, then Secretary of State, with whom he talked about
Oregon and the saving of it to the United States, but Mr. Webster
received him very coolly, and told him it was too late, as far as he
was concerned, for he had considered it, decided it, and turned it
over to the President, who could sign Oregon away or refuse to do so.
Accordingly Doctor Whitman went to President Tyler, and for some time
they talked about Oregon. Even the Cabinet were called together, it
is said, and an evening was spent on the subject. The objection was
made that wagons could never be taken to Oregon and that consequently
the country could never be peopled overland by emigrants, while the
distance around Cape Horn was altogether too great to think of taking
settlers to the country that way. In reply to this, Doctor Whitman
told of the great value of the country and of his plans to lead an
emigration through with their wagons the next summer. He stated that
he had taken a wagon into Oregon six years before to Fort Boise, that
others had taken one from Fort Hall to Walla Walla, and that with his
present knowledge, having been over the route twice, he was sure he
could take the emigrant wagons through to the Columbia. The President
then said that he would wait, before carrying the negotiations any
further, until he could hear whether Doctor Whitman should succeed, and
if he should there would be no more thought of trading off Oregon. This
satisfied the doctor.

[Illustration: DR. WHITMAN LOST IN A SNOW STORM, 1842]

"He then went to New York to see Mr. Horace Greeley, who was known to
be a friend of Oregon. He went there dressed in his rough clothes,
much the same that he wore across the continent. When he knocked at
the door a lady came, Mrs. Greeley or a daughter, who, on seeing such
a rough-looking person, said to his inquiries for Mr. Greeley, 'Not
at home.' Doctor Whitman started away. She went and told Mr. Greeley
about him and Mr. Greeley, who was of much the same style and cared but
little for appearances, looked out of the window, and seeing him going
away, said to call him in. It was done, and they had a long talk about
this Northwest Coast and its political relations.

"From New York Doctor Whitman went to Boston, where the officers of
the American Board at first received him coldly, because he had left
his station for the East without permission from them, on business
so foreign to that which he had been sent to Oregon to accomplish.
Afterwards, however, they treated him more cordially.

"From Boston he went to New York State and visited relatives. Then
taking with him his nephew, Perrin B. Whitman, bade them good-by and
left for Missouri. While there he did all he could to induce people
to join the emigration for Oregon, then went with the emigration,
assisting the guide, Captain Gantt, until they reached Fort Hall, and
aiding the emigrants very materially. Fort Hall was as far as Captain
Gantt had agreed to guide them, and from that place Doctor Whitman
guided them or furnished an Indian guide, so that the emigrants reached
the Columbia River safely with their wagons."

The incoming of the immigration of 1843 was a determining factor in the
settlement of the Oregon question. There can be no question that Doctor
Whitman performed a conspicuous service in organizing and leading that
immigration. It is true, however, that many influences combined to draw
that company of frontiersmen to the border of civilization and to give
them the common purpose of the great march across the wilderness. The
leading motives perhaps were the desire first to acquire land in what
they thought would prove a paradise and second to carry the American
flag across the continent and secure ownership of the Pacific Coast
for their country. Perhaps no one ever so well expressed the mingled
motives of that advance guard of American possession as did James W.
Nesmith, father of Mrs. Levi Ankeny of Walla Walla, who was himself
a member of the immigration and later became one of the conspicuous
builders of Oregon and of the nation. Senator Nesmith's account is
as follows, given in an address at a meeting of the Oregon Pioneer
Association:

"Without orders from any quarter, and without preconcert, promptly
as the grass began to start, the emigrants began to assemble near
Independence, at a place called Fitzhugh's Mill. On the 17th day of
May, 1843, notices were circulated through the different encampments
that on the succeeding day, those who contemplated emigrating to
Oregon would meet at a designated point to organize. Promptly at the
appointed hour the motley groups assembled. They consisted of people
from all the States and Territories, and nearly all nationalities;
the most, however, from Arkansas, Illinois, Missouri and Iowa, and
all strangers to one another, but impressed with some crude idea that
there existed an imperative necessity for some kind of an organization
for mutual protection against the hostile Indians inhabiting the great
unknown wilderness stretching away to the shores of the Pacific, and
which they were about to traverse with their wives and children,
household goods, and all their earthly possessions.

"Many of the emigrants were from the western tier of counties of
Missouri, known as the Platte Purchase, and among them was Peter
H. Burnett, a former merchant, who had abandoned the yardstick and
become a lawyer of some celebrity for his ability as a smooth-tongued
advocate. He subsequently emigrated to California, and was elected the
first Governor of the Golden State, was afterward Chief Justice, and
still an honored resident of that state. Mr. Burnett, or, as he was
familiarly designated, 'Pete,' was called upon for a speech. Mounting
a log, the glib-tongued orator delivered a glowing, florid address. He
commenced by showing his audience that the then western tier of states
and territories was overcrowded with a redundant population, who had
not sufficient elbow room for the expansion of their enterprise and
genius, and it was a duty they owed to themselves and posterity to
strike out in search of a more expanded field and more genial climate,
where the soil yielded the richest returns for the slightest amount
of cultivation, where the trees were loaded with perennial fruit,
and where a good substitute for bread, called 'La Camash.' grew in
the ground, salmon and other fish crowded the streams, and where the
principal labor of the settler would be confined to keeping their
gardens free from the inroads of buffalo, elk, deer and wild turkeys.
He appealed to our patriotism by picturing forth the glorious empire
we would establish on the shores of the Pacific. How, with our trusty
rifles, we would drive out the British usurpers who claimed the soil,
and defend the country from the avarice and pretensions of the British
lion, and how posterity would honor us for placing the fairest portion
of our land under the dominion of the Stars and Stripes. He concluded
with a slight allusion to the trials and hardships incident to the
trip, and dangers to be encountered from hostile Indians on the route,
and those inhabiting the country whither we were bound. He furthermore
intimated a desire to look upon the tribe of noble 'red men' that the
valiant and well-armed crowd around him could not vanquish in a single
encounter.

"Other speeches were made, full of glowing descriptions of the fair
land of promise, the far-away Oregon, which no one in the assemblage
had ever seen, and of which not more than half a dozen had ever read
any account. After the election of Mr. Burnett as captain, and other
necessary officers, the meeting, as motley and primitive a one as ever
assembled, adjourned, with 'three cheers' for Captain Burnett and
Oregon. On the 20th of May, 1843, after a pretty thorough military
organization, we took up our line of march, with Captain John Gantt,
an old army officer, who combined the character of trapper and
mountaineer, as our guide. Gantt had in his wanderings been as far
as Green River, and assured us of the practicability of a wagon road
thus far. Green River, the extent of our guide's knowledge in that
direction, was not half-way to the Willamette Valley, then the only
inhabited portion of Oregon. Beyond that we had not the slightest
conjecture of the condition of the country. We went forth trusting to
the future, and would doubtless have encountered more difficulties
than we experienced had not Doctor Whitman overtaken us before we
reached the terminus of our guide's knowledge. He was familiar with
the whole route and was confident that wagons could pass through the
canons and gorges of Snake River and over the Blue Mountains, which the
mountaineers in the vicinity of Fort Hall declared to be a physical
impossibility.

"Captain Grant, then in charge of the Hudson's Bay Company at Fort
Hall, endeavored to dissuade us from proceeding farther with our
wagons, and showed us the wagons that the emigrants of the preceding
year had abandoned, as an evidence of the impracticability of our
determination. Doctor Whitman was persistent in his assertions that
wagons could proceed as far as the Grand Dalles of the Columbia River,
from which point he asserted they could be taken down by rafts or
batteaux to the Willamette Valley, while our stock could be driven by
an Indian trail over the Cascade Mountains, near Mount Hood. Happily
Whitman's advice prevailed, and a large number of the wagons with a
portion of the stock did reach Walla Walla and The Dalles, from which
points they were taken to the Willamette the following year. Had we
followed Grant's advice and abandoned the cattle and wagons at Fort
Hall, much suffering must have ensued, as a sufficient number of horses
to carry the women and children of the party could not have been
obtained, besides wagons and cattle were indispensable to men expecting
to live by farming in a country destitute of such articles.

"At Fort Hall we fell in with some Cayuse and Nez Perce Indians
returning from the buffalo country, and as it was necessary for Doctor
Whitman to precede us to Walla Walla, he recommended to us a guide in
the person of an old Cayuse Indian called 'Sticcus.' He was a faithful
old fellow, perfectly familiar with all the trails and topography of
the country from Fort Hall to The Dalles, and, although not speaking a
word of English, and no one in our party a word of Cayuse, he succeeded
by pantomime in taking us over the roughest wagon route I ever saw."

In that immigration were nearly a thousand persons, among them several
families whose members and descendants have borne honorable parts in
building the region of Old Walla Walla County and the part of Umatilla
County adjoining, in Oregon. In the belief that among the readers
of this work may be many now living in the counties covered by this
story, who can trace their ancestry to the blood royal of that great
immigration and that a list of its names would have a permanent value
in such a record as this, we incorporate here a list of the names of
all the male members of the train over sixteen years of age, as secured
by J. W. Nesmith at the time of the organization of the train. His list
included some who turned back or went to California, or died on the
way. We quote from the "History of the Willamette Valley," by H. B.
Lang:

"The following list contains the names of every male member of that
great train over the age of sixteen years. It was prepared by J. W.
Nesmith when the train was organized, and was preserved among his
papers for a third of a century before given for publication. All
reached the Willamette Valley, except a few, the exceptions being
designated by marks and foot-notes:

  Applegate, Jesse
  Applegate, Charles
  Applegate, Lindsay
  Athey, James
  Athey, William
  Atkinson, John[2]
  Arthur, Wm.
  Arthur, Robert
  Arthur, David
  Butler, Amon
  Brooke, George
  Burnett, Peter H.
  Bird, David
  Brown, Thomas A.
  Blevins, Alexander
  Brooks, John P.
  Brown, Martin
  Brown, Oris
  Black, J. P.
  Bane, Layton
  Baker, Andrew
  Baker, John G.
  Beagle, William
  Boyd, Levy
  Baker, William
  Biddle, Nicholas[4]
  Beale, George
  Braidy, James
  Beadle, George
  Boardman, ----[2]
  Baldridge, Wm.
  Cason, F. C.
  Cason, James
  Chapman, Wm.
  Cox, John
  Champ, Jacob
  Cooper, L. C.
  Cone, James
  Childers, Moses
  Carey, Miles
  Cochran, Thomas
  Clymour, L.
  Copenhaver, John
  Caton, J. H.
  Chappel, Alfred
  Cronin, Daniel
  Cozine, Samuel
  Costable, Benedict
  Childs, Joseph[2]
  Clark, Ransom
  Campbell, John G.
  Chapman, ----
  Chase, James
  Dodd, Solomon
  Dement, Wm. C.
  Dougherty, W. P.
  Day, William[3]
  Duncan, James
  Dorin, Jacob
  Davis, Thomas
  Delany, Daniel
  Delany, Daniel, Jr.
  Delany, William
  Doke, William
  Davis, J. H.
  Davis, Burrell
  Dailey, George
  Doherty, John
  Dawson, ----[2]
  Eaton, Charles
  Eaton, Nathan
  Etchell, James
  Emerick, Solomon
  Eaker, John W.
  Edson, E. G.
  Eyres, Miles[3]
  East, John W.
  Everman, Niniwon
  Ford, Nineveh
  Ford, Ephriam
  Ford, Nimrod
  Ford, John
  Francis, Alexander
  Frazer, Abner
  Fowler, Wm.
  Fowler, Wm. J.
  Fowler, Henry
  Fairly, Stephen
  Fendell, Charles
  Gantt, John[2]
  Gray, Chiley B.
  Garrison, Enoch
  Garrison, J. W.
  Garrison, W. J.
  Gardner, Samuel
  Gardner, Wm.
  Gilmore, Mat
  Goodman, Richard
  Gilpin, Major
  Gray, ----
  Haggard, B.
  Hide, H. H.
  Holmes, Wm.
  Holmes, Riley, A.
  Hobson, John
  Hobson, Wm.
  Hembree, Andrew
  Hembree, J. J.
  Hembree, James
  Hembree, A. J.
  Hall, Samuel B.
  Houk, James
  Hughes, Wm. P.
  Hendrick, Abijah
  Hays, James
  Hensley, Thomas J.[2]
  Holley, B.
  Hunt, Henry
  Holderness, S. M.
  Hutchins, Isaac
  Husted, A.
  Hess, Joseph
  Haun, Jacob
  Howell, John
  Howell, Wm.
  Howell, Wesley
  Howell, G. W.
  Howell, Thomas E.
  Hill, Henry
  Hill, William
  Hill, Almoran
  Hewett, Henry
  Hargrove, Wm.
  Hoyt, A.
  Holman, John
  Holman, Daniel
  Harrigas, B.
  James, Calvin
  Jackson, John B.
  Jones, John
  Johnson, Overton
  Keyser, Thomas
  Keyser, J. B.
  Keyser, Plasant
  Kelley, ----
  Kelsey, ----
  Lovejoy, A. L.
  Lenox, Edward
  Lenox, E.
  Layson, Aaron
  Looney, Jesse
  Long, John E.
  Lee, H. A. G.
  Lugur, F.[4]
  Linebarger, Lew
  Linebarger, John
  Laswell, Isaac
  Loughborough, J.[4]
  Little, Milton[2]
  Luther, ----
  Lauderdale; John
  McGee, ----[2]
  Martin, Wm. J.[2]
  Martin, James
  Martin, Julius[3]
  McClelland, ----[2]
  McClelland, F.[2]
  Mills, John B.
  Mills, Isaac
  Mills, Wm. A.
  Mills, Owen
  McGarey, G. W.
  Mondon, Gilbert
  Matheny, Daniel
  Matheny, Adam
  Matheny, Josiah
  Matheny, Henry
  Matheny, J. N.
  Mastire, A. J.
  McHaley, John
  Myers, Jacob
  Manning, John
  Manning, James
  McCarver, M. M.
  McCorcle, George
  Mays, William
  Millican, Elijah
  McDaniel, William
  McKissic, D.
  Malone, Madison
  McClane, John B.
  Mauzee, William
  McIntire, John[2]
  Moore, Jackson[4]
  Matney, W. J.
  Nesmith, J. W.
  Newby, W. T.
  Newman, Noah
  Naylor, Thomas
  Osborn, Neil
  O'Brien, Hugh D.
  O'Brien, Humphrey
  Owen, Thomas A.
  Owen, Thomas
  Otie, E. W.
  Otie, M. B.
  O'Neil, Bennett
  Olinger, A.
  Parker, Jesse
  Parker, William
  Pennington, J. B.
  Poe, R. H.
  Paynter, Samuel
  Patterson, J. R.
  Pickett, Charles E.
  Prigg, Frederick
  Paine, Clayborn[3]
  Reading, P. B.[2]
  Rodgers. S. P.
  Rodgers, G. W.
  Russell, William
  Roberts, James
  Rice, G. W.
  Richardson, John
  Richardson, Daniel[3]
  Ruby, Philip
  Ricord, John
  Reid, Jacob
  Roe, John
  Roberts, Solomon
  Roberts, Emseley
  Rossin, Joseph
  Rivers, Thomas
  Smith, Thomas H.
  Smith, Thomas
  Smith, Isaac W.
  Smith, Anderson
  Smith, Ahi
  Smith, Robert
  Smith, Eli
  Sheldon, William
  Stewart, P. G.
  Sutton, Dr. Nathan'l
  Stimmerman, C.
  Sharp, C.
  Summers, W. C.
  Sewell, Henry
  Stout, Henry
  Sterling, George
  Stout, ----
  Stevenson, ----
  Story, James
  Swift, ----
  Shively, John M.
  Shirly, Samuel
  Stoughton, Alex
  Spencer, Chancey
  Strait, Hiram
  Summers, George
  Stringer, Cornelius
  Stringer, C. W.[3]
  Tharp, Lindsey
  Thompson, John
  Trainor, D.
  Teller, Jeremiah
  Tarbox, Stephen
  Umnicker, John
  Vance, Samuel
  Vaughn, William
  Vernon, George
  Wilmont, James
  Wilson, Wm. H.
  Wair, J. W.
  Winkle, Archibald
  Williams, Edward
  Wheeler, H.
  Wagoner, John
  Williams, Benjamin
  Williams, David
  Wilson, Wm.
  Williams, John[2]
  Williams, James[2]
  Williams, Squire[2]
  Williams, Isaac[2]
  Ward, T. B.
  White, James
  Watson, John (Betty)
  Waters, James
  Winter, William
  Waldo, Daniel
  Waldo, David
  Zachary, Alexander
  Zachary, John

[2] Turned off at Fort Hall and went to California.

[3] Died on the route.

[4] Turned back at the Platte.

"There were in Oregon at the time the train arrived the following
individuals, a few names, possibly, having been omitted from the list,
and the list not including the various missionaries named elsewhere:

  Armstrong, Pleasant
  Burns, Hugh
  Brown, ----
  Brown, William
  Brown, ----
  Black, J. M.
  Baldro, ----
  Balis, James
  Bailey, Dr.
  Brainard, ----
  Crawford, Medorem
  Carter, David
  Campbell, Samuel
  Campbell, Jack
  Craig, Wm.
  Cook, Amos
  Cook, Aaron
  Connor, ----
  Cannon, William
  Davy, Allen
  Doty, William
  Eakin, Richard
  Ebbetts, Squire
  Edwards, John
  Foster, Philip
  Force, John
  Force, James
  Fletcher, Francis
  Gay, George
  Gale, Joseph
  Girtmann, ----
  Hathaway, Felix
  Hatch, Peter H.
  Hubbard, Thomas J.
  Hewitt, Adam
  Horegon, Jeremiah
  Holman, Joseph
  Hall, David
  Hoxhurst, Weberly
  Hutchinson, ----
  Johnson, William
  Kelsey, ----
  King, ----
  Lewis, Reuben
  Le Breton, G. W.
  Larrison, Jack
  Meek, Joseph L.
  Matthieu, F. X.
  McClure, John
  Moss, S. W.
  Moore, Robert
  McFadden, ----
  McCarty, William
  McKay, Charles
  McKay, Thomas
  McKay, William C.
  Morrison, ----
  Mack, J. W.
  Newbanks, ----
  Newell, Robert
  O'Neil, James A.
  Pettygrove, F. W.
  Pomeroy, Dwight
  Pomeroy, Walter
  Perry, ----
  Rimmick, ----
  Russell, Osborn
  Robb, J. R.
  Shortess, Robert
  Smith, Sidney
  Smith, ----
  Smith, Andrew
  Smith, Andrew, Jr.
  Smith, Darling
  Spence, ----
  Sailor, Jack
  Turnham, Joel
  Turner, John
  Taylor, Hiram
  Tibbetts, Calvin
  Trask, ----
  Walker, C. M.
  Warner, Jack
  Wilson, A. E.
  Winslow, David
  Wilkins, Caleb
  Wood, Henry
  Williams, B.

The men in these lists, with their families, constituted the population
of Oregon in 1843, aside from the Hudson's Bay Company people."

Doctor Whitman himself wrote several valuable letters referring to
the immigration of 1843. The most important of these was one to the
Secretary of War, inclosing a proposed bill for a line of forts across
the plains to defend immigrations. This letter has such an important
bearing on the whole story of Whitman and his connection with the
immigration and the acquisition of Oregon that it is incorporated here.
And we would submit to the reader the difficulty which any candid
critic would experience in examining this letter and then denying
Whitman's part in "saving Oregon to the United States." Whitman's
letter was found among the files of the War Department, with the
following endorsement:

       *       *       *       *       *

"Marcus Whitman inclosing synopsis of a bill, with his views in
reference to importance of the Oregon Territory, War. 383--rec. June
22, 1844."

Portions of the letter follow:

  "To the Hon. James M. Porter,

  Secretary of War.

"Sir: In compliance with the request you did me the honor to make last
winter, while in Washington, I herewith transmit to you the synopsis of
a bill which, if it could be adopted, would, according to my experience
and observation, prove highly conducive to the best interests of the
United States generally, to Oregon, where I have resided for more than
seven years as a missionary, and to the Indian tribes that inhabit the
immediate country. The Government will now, doubtless for the first
time, be apprised through you, or by means of this communication, of
the immense immigration of families to Oregon which has taken place
this year. I have, since interview, been instrumental in piloting
across the route described in the accompanying bill, and which is
the only eligible wagon road, no less than three hundred families,
consisting of one thousand persons of both sexes, with their wagons,
amounting to 120,694 oxen, and 773 loose cattle.

"The emigrants are from different states, but principally from
Missouri, Arkansas, Illinois and New York. The majority of them are
farmers, lured by the prospect of bounty in lands, by the reported
fertility of the soil, and by the desire to be first among those who
are planting our institutions on the Pacific Coast. Among them are
artisans of every trade, comprising, with farmers, the very best
material for a new colony. As pioneers, these people have undergone
incredible hardships, and having now safely passed the Blue Mountain
Range with their wagons and effects, have established a durable road
from Missouri to Oregon, which will serve to mark permanently the route
of larger numbers each succeeding year, while they have practically
demonstrated that wagons drawn by horses or oxen can cross the
Rocky Mountains to the Columbia River, contrary to all the sinister
assertions of all those who pretended it to be impossible.

"In their slow progress, these persons have encountered, as in all
former instances, and as all succeeding emigrants must, if this or some
similar bill be not passed by Congress, the continual fear of Indian
aggression, the actual loss through them of horses, cattle and other
property, and the great labor of transporting an adequate amount of
provisions for so long a journey. The bill herewith proposed would, in
a great measure, lessen these inconveniences by the establishment of
posts, which, while having the possessed power to keep the Indians in
check, thus doing away with the necessity of military vigilance on the
part of the traveler by day and night, would be able to furnish them
in transit with fresh supplies of provisions, diminishing the original
burdens of the emigrants, and finding thus a ready and profitable
market for their produce--a market that would, in my opinion, more than
suffice to defray all the current expenses of such posts. The present
party is supposed to have expended no less than $2,000 at Laramie's
and Bridger's Forts, and as much more at Fort Hall and Fort Boise,
two of the Hudson's Bay Company's stations. These are at present the
only stopping places in a journey of 2,200 miles, and the only place
where additional supplies can be obtained, even at the enormous rate of
charge, called mountain prices, i. e., $50 the hundred for flour and
$50 the hundred for coffee; the same for sugar, powder, etc.

"Many cases of sickness and some deaths took place among those who
accomplished the journey this season, owing, in a great measure, to the
uninterrupted use of meat, salt and fresh, with flour, which constitute
the chief articles of food they are able to convey on their wagons, and
this could be obviated by the vegetable productions which the posts
in contemplation could very profitably afford them. Those who rely on
hunting as an auxiliary support, are at present unable to have their
arms repaired when out of order; horses and oxen become tender-footed
and require to be shod on this long journey, sometimes repeatedly, and
the wagons repaired in a variety of ways. I mention these as valuable
incidents to the proposed measure, as it will also be found to tend in
many other incidental ways to benefit the migratory population of the
United States choosing to take this direction, and on these accounts,
as well as for the immediate use of the posts themselves, they ought to
be provided with the necessary shops and mechanics, which would at the
same time exhibit the several branches of civilized art to the Indians.

"The outlay in the first instance would be but trifling. Forts like
those of the Hudson's Bay Company, surrounded by walls enclosing all
the buildings, and constructed almost entirely of adobe, or sun-dried
bricks, with stone foundations only, can be easily and cheaply erected.
* * *

"Your familiarity with the Government policy, duties and interest
render it unnecessary for me to more than hint at the several objects
intended by the enclosed bill, and any enlargement upon the topics here
suggested as inducements to its adoption would be quite superfluous, if
not impertinent. The very existence of such a system as the one above
recommended suggests the utility of post-offices and mail arrangements,
which it is the wish of all who now live in Oregon to have granted
them; and I need only add that contracts for this purpose will be
readily taken at reasonable rates for transporting the mail across
from Missouri to the mouth of the Columbia in forty days, with fresh
horses at each of the contemplated posts. The ruling policy proposed
regards the Indians as the police of the country, who are to be relied
upon to keep the peace, not only for themselves, but to repel lawless
white men and prevent banditti, under the solitary guidance of the
superintendents of the several posts, aided by a well-directed system
to induce the punishment of crime. It will only be after the failure of
these means to procure the delivery or punishment of violent, lawless
and savage acts of aggression, that a band or tribe should be regarded
as conspirators against the peace, or punished accordingly by force of
arms.

"Hoping that these suggestions may meet your approbation, and conduce
to the future interest of our growing country, I have the honor to be,
Honorable Sir,

  "Your obedient servant,

  "MARCUS WHITMAN."

It may be added that Whitman was so thoroughly interested in the
idea of the line of forts across the continent that he wrote another
communication to the Secretary of War from Waiilatpu in 1847, October
16th, only about six weeks before his murder, setting forth with
similar force and clearness the wisdom of such a system.

During the four years that followed the coming of the "Great
Immigration," the mission at Waiilatpu was a center of light and help
to the incoming immigrations. Many incidents have been preserved
showing the industry, fortitude, and open-handed philanthropy of the
Whitmans. The earlier immigration usually stopped at Waiilatpu, coming
across the country in the vicinity of the present location of Athena
and Weston and down Pine Creek to the Walla Walla. The immigrants were
always short of provisions and generally had no money. To have a stock
of provisions at all equal to emergencies put a tremendous strain on
Doctor Whitman, and nobly did he meet the needs. Among many instances
of the helping hand of the missionaries are two given in Eells' life of
Whitman which we give as illustrative of many that might be given.

"Among the immigrants of 1844 was a man named Sager, who had a family
consisting of his wife and seven children, between the ages of infancy
and thirteen. The father died of typhoid fever on Green River, and the
mother sank under her burdens when she reached Snake River and there
died. The immigrants cared for the children until they reached Doctor
Whitman's, but would take them no farther. The doctor and his wife took
the strangers in at first for the winter, but afterward adopted them
and cared for them as long as they lived.

"Mrs. C. S. Pringle, one of these children, afterwards gave the
following account of this event. It was written in answer to a charge
made by Mrs. F. F. Victor that the doctor was mercenary, making
money out of the immigrants: 'In April, 1844, my parents started for
Oregon. Soon after starting we were all camped for the night, and
the conversation after awhile turned upon the probability of death
before the end of the journey should be reached. All told what they
would wish their families to do in case they should fall by the way.
My father said: 'Well, if I should die, I would want my family to
stop at the station of Doctor Whitman.' Ere long he was taken sick
and died, but with his dying breath he committed his family to the
care of Captain Shaw, with the request that they should be left at
the station of Doctor Whitman. Twenty-six days after his death his
wife died. She, too, requested the same. When we were in the Blue
Mountains, Captain Shaw went ahead to see about leaving us there.
The doctor objected, as he was afraid the board would not recognize
that as a part of his labor. After a good deal of talk he consented
to have the children brought, and he would see what could be done.
On the 17th day of October we drove up to the station, as forlorn a
looking lot of children as ever was. I was a cripple, hardly able to
walk, and the babe of six months was dangerously ill. Mrs. Whitman
agreed to take the five girls, but the boys must go on (they were
the oldest of the family). But the 'mercenary' doctor said, 'All or
none.' He made arrangements to keep the seven until spring and then
if we did not like to stay, and he did not want to keep us, he would
send us below. An article of agreement was drawn up in writing between
him and Captain Shaw, but not one word of money or pay was in it. I
had it in my possession for years after I came to the (Willamette)
Valley, having received it from Captains Shaw. Before Captain Shaw
reached The Dalles he was overtaken by Doctor Whitman, who announced
his intention of adopting the seven, on his own responsibility, asking
nothing of the Board for maintenance. The next summer he went to
Oregon City and legally became our guardian, and the action is on the
records of Clackamas County. Having done this, he further showed his
mercenary nature by disposing of our father's estate in such a way that
he could not realize a cent from it. He exchanged the oxen and old
cows for young cows, and turned them over to the two boys to manage
until they should grow to manhood; besides this, he gave them each
a horse and saddle, which, of course, came out of his salary, as we
were not mission children, as the three half-breeds were that were in
the family. After doing all this he allowed the boys opportunities to
accumulate stock by work or trade. Often he has said to us, 'You must
all learn to work, for father is poor and can give you nothing but an
education. This I intend to do to the best of my ability.'

"Another incident with an immigrant is here related, given almost in
the words of the narrator, Joseph Smith, who came to the country in
1846. He says: I was mighty sick crossing the Blues, and was so weak
from eating blue mass that they had to haul me in the wagon till we got
to Doctor Whitman's place on the Walla Walla River. Then Mother Whitman
came and raised the wagon cover and says, 'What is the matter with you,
my brother?' 'I am sick, and I don't want to be pestered much, either.'
'But, but, my young friend, my husband is a doctor, and can probably
cure your ailment; I'll go and call him.' So off she clattered, and
purty soon Doc. came, and they packed me in the cabin, and soon he had
me on my feet again. I eat up a whole band of cattle for him, as I had
to winter with him. I told him I'd like to work for him, to kinder pay
part of my bill. Wall, Doc. set me to making rails, but I only made two
hundred before spring, and I got to worryin' 'cause I hadn't only fifty
dollars and a saddle horse, and I reckoned I owed the doctor four or
five hundred dollars for my life. Now, maybe I wasn't knocked out when
I went and told the doctor I wanted to go on to Webfoot and asked him
how we stood; and doctor p'inted to a Cayuse pony, and says, 'Money I
have not, but you can take that horse and call it even, if you will.'"

It is worth noticing that though Mr. Smith says "Mother" Whitman, she
was only thirty-eight at the time.

But at that time, the very year of the final consummation of the great
work of Whitman, the treaty of 1846, giving Oregon up to latitude 49 deg.
to the United States, a consummation which must have made the brave
hearts of the heroic pair thrill with joy and gratitude, the shadow
was approaching, the end was near. The crown of heroism and service
must be still further crowned with martyrdom. Even since the death of
little Alice, the Indians at Waiilatpu had seemed to lose in growing
measure the personal interest which they had manifested. With the
coming of constantly growing immigrations and the apparent eagerness
of the whites to secure land, the natives felt increasing suspicion.
The more thoughtful of them, especially those who had been in the
"States" and had seen the countless numbers of the "Pale-faces,"
began to see that it was only a question of time when they would be
entirely dispossessed. Again, the unavoidable policies of the Hudson's
Bay Company were hostile to the American settler. While as kind and
courteous to the missionaries as men well could be and helpful to them
in their religious labors, it was a different matter when it came to
settlers swarming into the country with the Stars and Stripes at the
head of wagon trains and with the implements of husbandry in their
hands. The Indians were predisposed for many reasons to side with
the company. With it they did their trading. It preserved the wild
conditions of the country. The French-Canadian voyageurs and coureurs
des bois were much kinder and more considerate of the Indians than the
Americans and intermarried with them. Besides those general causes of
hostility to the Americans, there were certain specific events during
that period of doubt and suspicion which brought affairs to a focus and
precipitated the tragedy of the Whitman Massacre. Some have believed
that the murder of "Elijah" (as the whites called him), the son of
Peupeumoxmox, the chief of the Walla Wallas, apparently a fine, manly
young Indian, was a strong contributory cause. The young brave had gone
to California in 1844 and while near Sutter's Fort had become involved
in a dispute with some white settlers and had been brutally murdered.
The old chief Peupeumoxmox had brooded over this dastardly deed, and
though there is no evidence that he had any part in the massacre, there
was deep resentment among the Indians of the Walla Walla Valley and no
doubt many of them were in the mood to apply the usual Indian rule that
a life lost demanded a life in payment. Apparently the most immediate
influence leading to the massacre was due to an epidemic of measles
which swept the valley in 1847. Doctor Whitman was indefatigable in
ministering to the sick, but many died. The impression became prevalent
among the Indians that they were the victims of poison. This idea was
nurtured in their minds by several renegade Indians and half-breeds, of
whom Lehai, Tom Hill, and Jo Lewis were most prominent.

Seeing the gathering of clouds about the mission and the many warning
indications, Doctor Whitman had taken up the project of leaving Walla
Walla and going to The Dalles, a point where he had in fact at first
wished to locate, but had been dissuaded by the Hudson's Bay Company
officials. The story of the massacre has been many times told and may
be found in many forms. We can but briefly sketch its leading events.
Mr. Spalding of Lapwai was temporarily at Waiilatpu, and on November
27, 1847, he and Doctor Whitman went to the Umatilla in response to
a request for medical attention. Feeling uneasy about affairs at
home, Doctor Whitman returned on the next day, reaching Waiilatpu
late at night. On the following day, the 29th, while engaged with his
medicine chest, two Indians, who seem to have been leaders in the
plot, approached him, and while one, Tilaukait, drew his attention
by talking, the other, Tamahas, struck him with a tomahawk. He fell
senseless, though not yet dead. Jo Lewis seems to have directed the
further execution of the cruel conspiracy and soon Mrs. Whitman, shot
in the breast, fell to the floor, though not dying for some time. She
was the only woman slain. There were in all fourteen victims of this
dreadful attack. Several escaped, Mr. Spalding, who was on his way back
from the Umatilla, being one of them. After several days and nights of
harrowing suffering, he reached Lapwai. There were forty-six survivors
of the massacre, nearly all women and children. Many of these are said
to have been subjected to cruelty and outrage worse than death, though
it may be noted that some of the few living survivors of the present
date deny the common opinion. They were ransomed by Peter Skeen Ogden
of the Hudson's Bay Company, and transported to the Willamette Valley.
The full story of the war which follows belongs in the succeeding
chapter.

So ended in darkness, but not in shame, the mission at Waiilatpu. The
peaceful spot six miles west of Walla Walla, in the midst of the fair
and fruitful valley, is marked with a granite monument on the summit of
the hill, and a grave at the foot. There the dust of the martyrs rests
in a plain marble crypt upon the surface of which appear their names.
It is indeed one of the most sacred spots in the Northwest, suggestive
of patriotism, devotion, self-sacrifice, suffering, sorrow, tragedy,
and final triumph. In November, 1916, the remains of W. H. Gray and
Mary Dix Gray, his wife, were removed from Astoria and placed in the
grave at Waiilatpu. As associates from the first of the Whitmans, and
engaged in the same arduous struggle for the establishment of civilized
and Christian institutions in this beautiful wilderness, they are
fittingly joined with them in their final resting place.

By reason of priority in time as well as its connection with
immigration and public affairs, and also its tragic end, and perhaps,
too, the controversies that have arisen in connection with it, the
Whitman Mission has secured a place in history far more prominent than
that of any other, either east or west of the Cascade Mountains. But
it should not be forgotten that within a short time after the incoming
of white settlers, all the leading churches sent missionaries into the
Northwest, both for the Indians and whites. Next in point of time after
the Methodist missions of the Willamette Valley and the Presbyterian
and Congregational missions of the Upper Columbia and Snake rivers,
came the Catholic. It should be understood that in speaking of that
church as third in time, we speak of the era of the beginnings of
settlement. For it should be remembered that there had been visiting
Catholic priests among the Hudson's Bay posts long prior to the coming
of Jason Lee, the first of the Protestants. The French-Canadians
were almost universally of Catholic rearing, and the officers of the
company encouraged the maintenance of religious worship and instruction
according to the customary methods. There were not, however, any
regular permanent Catholic missions until a little after the Protestant
missions already described. The inauguration of regular mission work
by the Catholic Church grew out of the planting of a settlement at
Champoeg on the Willamette by Doctor McLoughlin during the years from
1829 on. Quite a little group of retired Hudson's Bay Company men,
French-Canadians with Indian wives and half-breed children, became
located on the fertile tract still known as French Prairie. So well
had the settlement thrived that in 1834, the year of the arrival of
Jason Lee in the same neighborhood, an application was made to Doctor
Provencher, Vicar Apostolic of Hudson Bay, to send a clergyman to that
point. Not till 1837 could the request be fulfilled. In that year
Rev. Modeste Demers went to the Red River, and the following year, in
company with Rev. Francis N. Blanchet, resumed the journey to Oregon.
In the progress of their journey they stopped at Walla Walla for a day.
Reaching Vancouver on November 24, 1838, they entered with zeal and
devotion upon their task of ministering both to the whites and Indians.
Remaining at Vancouver till January, 1839, Father Blanchet started on
a regular course of visitations, going first to the settlement on the
Willamette where there were twenty-six Catholic families and where
the people had already constructed a chapel. Next he visited Cowlitz
Prairie, where there were four families. These stations were, of
course, outside of the scope of the present work, but reference to them
indicates the time and place and manner of starting the great series
of Catholic missions which soon became extended all over Oregon. While
Father Blanchet was at Cowlitz, his fellow worker, Demers, started on
an extended tour of the upper Columbia region. In the course of this
he visited Walla Walla, Okanogan, and Colville, starting work among
the Indians by baptizing their children. From that time on Father
Demers or some one of the Jesuit priests made annual visits to Walla
Walla, adding children by baptism each year. In the meantime another
of the most important of the Catholic missionaries, and the one to
whom the world is indebted for one of the best histories of Oregon
missions, was on his way. This was Rev. Father Pierre J. De Smet. In
March, 1840, he set out for Oregon from the St. Joseph Mission at
Council Bluffs, journeying by the Platte River route. On June 25th he
reached Green River, long known as a rendezvous of the fur-traders.
There he held mass for the trappers and Indians. Referring to this in
a subsequent letter he writes thus: "On Sunday, the 5th of July, I had
the consolation of celebrating the Holy Sacrifice sub dio. The altar
was placed on an elevation, and surrounded with boughs and garlands
of flowers; I addressed the congregation in French and in English and
spoke also by an interpreter to the Flatheads and Snake Indians. It
was a spectacle truly moving for the heart of a missionary to behold
an assembly composed of so many different nations who all assisted at
our holy mysteries with great satisfaction. The Canadians sang hymns in
French and Latin, and the Indians in their native tongue. It was truly
a Catholic worship. The place has been called since that time by the
French-Canadians, la prairie de la Messe."

[Illustration: WHITMAN MONUMENT AT WAIILATPU, SIX MILES WEST OF WALLA
WALLA]

After a week at the Green River rendezvous, Father De Smet with his
Indian guides resumed the journey westward by way of the Three Tetons
to the upper waters of Snake River. While at Henry Lake he climbed a
lofty peak from which he could see in both directions and while there
he carved on a stone the words: "Sanctus Ignatius, Patronus Montium,
Die Julii 23, 1840." That was as far west as Father De Smet went at
that time. After two months among the Flatheads about the head of
Snake River, he returned to St. Louis in the last part of the year.
One point of interest in connection with this return, as showing the
disposition of the Indians to seek religious instruction, is that a
certain Flathead chief named Insula who accompanied Father De Smet
to St. Louis, had gone to Green River in 1835 to meet missionaries.
It is stated by Rev. Father E. V. O'Hara in his valuable "Catholic
History of Oregon" that Insula was much disappointed to find, not the
"black-gowns" as he had expected, but Doctor Whitman and Doctor Parker
on their reconnaissance. It is probably impossible to determine just
what distinction between different denominations of Christians may have
existed in the Indian mind, but it may be recalled that Whitman and
Parker while at Green River deemed the outlook so encouraging that they
decided that Whitman should return to the "States" for reinforcements,
while Parker went on with the Indians and made an extensive exploration
of the entire Oregon country. Father De Smet returned to the Flathead
mission in 1841 and in 1842 proceeded to Vancouver by way of the
Spokane. In the course of the journey he visited all the principal
Indian tribes in the Kootenai, Pend Oreille, Coeur d'Alene, and
Spokane countries. In the progress of this journey he made a brief
visit at Walla Walla. Returning to the East after twenty-five months
of missionary service in Oregon and then spending some time in Europe,
he returned with quite a reinforcement in the ship "L'Infatigable" in
1844. The ship was nearly wrecked on the Columbia River bar, and of the
experience De Smet gives a peculiarly vivid description. He deemed the
final safe entrance due to special interposition of Divine Providence
on account of the day, July 31st, being sacred to St. Ignatius. Father
De Smet was a vivid and interesting writer and a zealous missionary. He
greatly overestimated the number of Indians in Oregon, placing them at
a hundred and ten thousand and in equal ratio estimated the converts at
numbers hardly possible except by the most sweeping estimates.

The Catholic missions were gradually extended until they covered
points in the entire Northwest. The bishop of Oregon was Rev. Francis
N. Blanchet who was located near Salem. In 1845 and 1846 he made
an extensive tour in Canada and Europe for the purpose of securing
reinforcements. As a result of his journey and the action of the Holy
See the Vicariate was erected into an ecclesiastical province with the
three Sees of Oregon City, Walla Walla, and Vancouver Island. Rev. A.
M. A. Blanchet was appointed bishop of Walla Walla, and Father Demers
bishop of Vancouver Island, while Bishop F. N. Blanchet was promoted
to the position of archbishop of Oregon City. Bishop A. M. A. Blanchet
reached Fort Walla Walla on September 4, 1847, having come with a
wagon train by the usual emigrant road from St. Louis. This might be
regarded as the regular establishment of Catholic missions in Walla
Walla. The bishop was accompanied to Walla Walla by four oblate fathers
of Marseilles and Father J. B. A. Brouillet as vicar general, and also
by Father Rousseau and Wm. Leclaire, deacon. Bishop Blanchet located
among the Umatilla Indians at the home of Five Crows. The mission was
fairly established only a few days prior to the Whitman Massacre.
Bishop Blanchet went to Oregon City after the massacre and by reason
of the Indian war he found it impossible to return to Walla Walla. He
established St. Peter's Mission at The Dalles, and there he remained
till September, 1850. During that year there came instructions from
Rome to transfer the bishop of Walla Walla to the newly established
diocese of Nesqually. The diocese of Walla Walla was suppressed and
its administration merged with that of Colville and Fort Hall in the
control of the archbishop of Oregon City.

That event might be considered as closing the missionary stage of
Catholic missions in Walla Walla, though Father Brouillet remained
into the period of settlement and in conjunction with Father Arvidius
Junger, founded the Catholic Church at Walla Walla of what may be
called the modern period. There was during the period of the Hudson's
Bay Company and of the Indian wars, a location at Frenchtown, known as
St. Rose Mission. There was a little church building there until a few
years ago.

With the period of Indian wars it may be said that the missionary era
ended and after that sanguinary interim the modern period began in
Walla Walla.

[Illustration: Archbishop Francis N. Blanchet, 1838

Rev. J. B. A Brouillet, 1847

Bishop Modeste Demers, 1838

Bishop A. M. A. Blanchet, 1847

EARLY CATHOLIC MISSIONARIES]




CHAPTER VI

INDIAN WARS AND OPENING OF COUNTRY TO SETTLEMENT


In the preceding chapter we have narrated the Whitman Massacre. It was
followed by the first of the succession of wars which desolated Old
Oregon for about eleven years. During that time Walla Walla, as well
as the other parts east of the mountains, was swept clean of white
settlers. Not till the public proclamation of opening Eastern Oregon by
General Clarke in 1858 and the beginnings of immigration in the next
year can the epoch of Indian wars be said to have ended.

The war following the Whitman Massacre may be taken as the starting
point of this chapter. Great praise most be accorded to the Hudson's
Bay Company's people for promptness and efficiency in meeting the
immediate emergency. Dr. John McLoughlin, with whom we have become
acquainted in earlier chapters, had retired from the company and made
his home at Oregon City. This truly great man, a man for whom no
commendation seems too strong in the minds of the old-timers, had been
deciding during the years following the advent of the missionaries
that American possession of Oregon was inevitable and that in order to
ally himself with the future he should become an American. His humane
and liberal policy toward the American immigrants was disapproved
by the company in London, and in 1844 James Douglas was appointed
to succeed him. The good doctor thereby not only lost what was then
and in those conditions a princely salary, $12,000 per year, but was
charged by the company for the large supplies which he had advanced
to the Americans, who in many cases were unable to pay. Moving to the
Falls of the Willamette where he had taken up a valuable claim, he
started the process of naturalization. But after the Treaty of 1846,
his claim was contested by the representative of the Methodist Mission,
Rev. A. F. Waller, and the first territorial delegate to Congress,
Samuel R. Thurston, was chosen largely on the platform of hostility to
the Hudson's Bay Company and the British in general, and he secured
a provision in the Congressional land law debarring anyone who had
not acquired his final naturalization from holding a donation claim.
This law deprived Doctor McLoughlin of the main part of his property.
It was a cruel blow. He said with grief and bitterness that he had
intended in good faith to become an American citizen, but found that
he was rejected by the British and not received by the Americans and
was practically a man without a country. It may truthfully be said
that he died of a broken heart. It is gratifying to remember that
the Oregon Legislature, recognizing the injustice, made amends by
restoring his land claim. But this action came too late to do the "Old
King of Oregon" any good. We have digressed to make this reference to
Doctor McLoughlin, inasmuch as his change of location and condition
occurred just prior to the Oregon Treaty and the Whitman Massacre.
James Douglas, the new Chief Factor, while not at all equal in breadth
and philanthropy to Doctor McLoughlin, was an energetic and efficient
manager. Upon learning of the tragedy at Waiilatpu he immediately
dispatched Peter Skeen Ogden to rescue the survivors. As narrated in
Chapter Five, Ogden performed his duty with promptness and success,
and as a result the pitiful little company, almost entirely women and
children, were conveyed to the Willamette Valley, where nearly all of
them made their homes. A number of them are still living in different
parts of the Northwest.

When the tidings of the massacre reached the Willamette Valley, then
the chief settlement in Oregon, there was an immediate response by the
brave men who were carrying in that trying time the responsibility of
the government of the scattered little community. And yet the situation
was a peculiar and difficult one. The formal treaty placing Oregon
within possession of the United States had legally set aside the
Provisional Government. But Congress was absorbed, as it frequently
has been, in furthering the little schemes of individual members, or
in promoting the progress of slavery or some other tyrannical and
corrupt interest, and hence had done nothing to establish a territorial
government. In the emergency the Provisional Government assembled on
December 9th and provided for a force of fourteen companies of Oregon
volunteers to move immediately to the hostile country. Every feature of
equipment had to be secured by personal contribution, and the services
of the men were purely voluntary. It was a characteristic American
frontiersmen's army and movement. Several men well known in Walla Walla
and vicinity took part in this campaign. The commander of the force was
Cornelius Gilliam, an immigrant of 1845 from Missouri. His son, W. S.
Gilliam, was one of the best known and noblest of the pioneers of Walla
Walla County. He was truly one of the builders of this region. Daniel
Stewart, Ninevah Ford, William Martin, and W. W. Walter were among
the citizens of the Walla Walla country and adjoining region who were
in that historic army of the Cayuse war. While we shall not usually
load this work with lists of names or other purely statistical matter,
yet in the belief that the list of volunteers in the Cayuse war may
have a permanent reference value to possessors of this volume, we are
including here such a list derived from the "History of the Pacific
Northwest," published by the North Pacific Publishing Co. of Portland
in 1889:

First Company, Oregon Rifles: Captain, Henry A. G. Lee; first
lieutenant, Joseph Magone; second lieutenant, John E. Ross; surgeon, W.
W. Carpenter; orderly sergeant, J. S. Rinearson; first duty sergeant,
J. H. McMillan; second duty sergeant, C. W. Savage; third duty
sergeant, S. Cummings; fourth duty sergeant, William Berry; privates,
John Little, Joel McKee, J. W. Morgan, Joseph B. Proctor, Samuel K.
Barlow, John Richardson, Ed Marsh, George Moore, Isaac Walgamot, Jacob
Johnson, John Lassater, Edward Robeson, B. B. Rodgers,---- Shannon,
A. J. Thomas, R. S. Tupper, O. Tupper, Joel Witchey, G. W. Weston,
George Wesley, John Flemming, John G. Gibson, Henry Leralley, Nathan
Olney, ---- Barnes, J. H. Bosworth, Wm. Beekman, Benjamin Bratton, John
Balton, Henry W. Coe, John C. Danford, C. H. Derendorf, David Everst,
John Finner, James Kester,---- Pugh (killed by Indians near the Dalles
in a skirmish),---- Jackson (killed in a skirmish near the Dalles),
John Callahan; Alex McDonald (killed by a sentry, who mistook him for
an Indian at the camp on the east side of the Des Chutes). Forty-eight
men.

Second Company: Captain, Lawrence Hall; first lieutenant, H. D.
O'Bryant; second lieutenant, John Engart; orderly sergeant, William
Sheldon; duty sergeants, William Stokes, Peter S. Engart, Thos. R.
Cornelius, Sherry Ross; Color-bearer, Gilbert Mondon; privates, A.
Engart, Thos. Fleming, D. C. Smith, W. R. Noland, Jos. W. Scott, G.
W. Smith, A. Kinsey, John N. Donnie, A. C. Brown, F. H. Ramsey, S. A.
Holcomb, A. Stewart, Wm. Milbern, A. Kennedy, Oliver Lowden, H. N.
Stephens, P. G. Northrup, W. W. Walter, J. Z. Zachary, Sam Y. Cook,
J. J. Garrish, Thos. Kinsey, J. S. Scoggin, Noah Jobe, D. Shumake, J.
N. Green, J. Elliot, W. Williams, John Holgate, R. Yarborough, Robert
Walker, J. Butler, I. W. Smith, J. W. Lingenfelter, J. H. Lienberger,
A. Lienberger, Sam Gethard, John Lousingnot, A. Williams, D. Harper, S.
C. Cummings, S. Ferguson, Marshall Martin.

Third Company: Captain, John W. Owen; first lieutenant, Nathaniel
Bowman; second lieutenant, Thomas Shaw; orderly sergeant, J. C.
Robison; duty sergeants, Benj. J. Burch; J. H. Blankenship, James M.
Morris, Robert Smith; privates, George W. Adams, William Athey, John
Baptiste, Manly Curry, Jesse Clayton, John Dinsmore, Nathan English,
John Fiester, Jesse Gay, Lester Hulan, Stephen Jenkins, J. Larkin,
Joshua McDonald, Thomas Pollock, J. H. Smith, S. P. Thornton, William
Wilson, Benjamin Allen, Ira Bowman,---- Currier, George Chapel, William
Duke,---- Linnet, T. Dufield, Squire Elembough, Henry Fuller, D. H.
Hartley, Fleming R. Hill, James Keller, D. M. McCumber, E. McDonald,
Edward Robinson, Chris. Stemermon, Joseph Wilbert, T. R. Zumwalt,
Charles Zummond.

Fourth Company: Captain, H. J. G. Maxon; first lieutenant, G. N.
Gilbert; second lieutenant, Wm. P. Hughes; orderly sergeant, Wm. R.
Johnson; duty sergeants, O. S. Thomas, T. M. Buckner, Daniel Stewart,
Joseph R. Ralston; privates, Andrew J. Adams, John Beattie, Charles
Blair, John R. Coatney, Reuben Crowder, John W. Crowel, Manly Danforth,
Harvey Graus, Albert H. Fish, John Feat, Andrew Gribble, Wm. Hawkins,
Rufus Johnson, John W. Jackson, J. H. Loughlin, Davis Lator, John
Miller, John Patterson, Richard Pollard, Wm. Robison, Asa Stone, Thos.
Allphin, Wm. Bunton, Henry Blacker, Wm. Chapman, Samuel Chase, Sam
Cornelius, James Dickson, S. D. Earl, Joseph Earl, D. O. Garland,
Richmond Hays, Goalman Hubbard, Isaiah M. Johns, S. B. Knox, James
H. Lewis, Horace Martin, John McCoy, James Officer, Henry Pellet,
Wm. Russell, John Striethoff, A. M. Baxster, D. D. Burroughs, Samuel
Clark, John M. Cantrel, Asi Cantrel, Albert G. Davis, S. D. Durbin,
Samuel Fields, Rezin D. Foster, Isaac M. Foster, Horace Hart, Wm. Hock,
Wm. A. Jack, Elias Kearney, James Killingsworth, Isaac Morgan, N. G.
McDonnell, Madison McCully, Frederick Paul, Wm. M. Smith, H. M. Smith,
Jason Wheeler, John Vaughn, Reuben Striethoff, Wm. Vaughn, Wm. Shirley.

Fifth Company: Captain, Philip F. Thompson; first lieutenant, James
A. Brown; second lieutenant, Joseph M. Garrison; orderly sergeant,
George E. Frazer; duty sergeants, A. Garrison, A. S. Welton, Jacob
Greer, D. D. Dostins; privates, Martin P. Brown, William A. Culberson,
Harrison Davis, James Electrels, William Eads, Alvin K. Fox, William
J. Garrison, William Hailey, John A. Johnson, J. D. Richardson, Martin
Wright, William Smith, E. T. Stone, John Thompson, H. C. Johnson,
Joseph Kenny, Henry Kearney, Jacob Leabo, Daniel Matheny, William
McKay, John Orchard, John B. Rowland, John Copenhagen, Bird Davis, John
Eldridge, John Faron, C. B. Gray, Robert Harmon, James O. Henderson,
Green Rowland, William Rogers, Thomas Wilson, William D. Stillwell,
William Shepard, Alfred Jobe, T. J. Jackson, Jesse Cadwallader, Andrew
Layson, J. C. Matheny, Adam Matheny, Charles P. Matt, James Packwood,
Clark Rogers.

McKay's Company: Captain, Thomas McKay; first lieutenant, Charles
McKay; second lieutenant, Alexander McKay; orderly sergeant, Edward
Dupuis; duty sergeants, George Montour, Baptiste Dorio, David Crawford,
Gideon Pion; privates, John Spence, Louis Laplante, Augustine Russie,
Isaac Gervais, Louis Montour, Alexis Vatrais, Joseph Paino, Jno.
Cunningham, Jno. Gros, Louis Joe Lenegratly, Antoine Poisier, Antoine
Plante, Pierre Lacourse, Ashby Pearce, Antoine Lafaste, Nathan English,
Charles Edwards, Gideon Gravelle, Chas. Corveniat, Antoine Bonanpaus,
Nicholas Bird, Francis Dupres, William Torrie, Thomas Purvis, A. J.
Thomas, J. H. Bigler, Mango Antoine Ansure, Narcisse Montiznie, Edward
Crete.

English's Company: Captain, Levin N. English; first lieutenant, William
Shaw; second lieutenant, F. M. Munkers; orderly sergeant, William
Martin; duty sergeants, Hiram English, George Shaw, Thomas Boggs,
L. J. Rector; privates, Jackson Adams, L. N. Abel, William Burton,
Joseph Crauk, John Downing, Thos. T. Eyre, R. D. Foster, Alexander
Gage, Thomas Gregory, G. W. Howell, Fales Howard, J. H. Lewis, N.
G. McDonald, James Officer, Joseph Pearson, Jackson Rowell, William
Simmons, Lewis Stewart, Charles Roth, Daniel Waldo, George Wesley,
William Vaughn, L. N. English, Jr., Nineveh Ford, Albert Fish, A.
Gribble, Samuel Senters, Thomas Wigger, Richard Hays, Wesley Howell,
Richard Jenkins, G. H. March, William Medway, J. R. Payne, Benjamin
Simpson, Alexander York.

Martin's Company: Captain, William Martin; first lieutenant, A. E.
Garrison; second lieutenant, David Waldo; orderly sergeant, Ludwell J.
Rector; duty sergeants, William Cosper, Fales Howard, Joseph Sylvester,
Benjamin Wright; privates, J. Albright, H. Burdon, T. J. Blair, Joseph
Borst, George Crabtree, Joseph Crauk, Wesley Cook, Samuel Center, John
Cox, John Eads, Parnel Fowler, S. M. Crover, John Kaiser, Clark S.
Pringle, Israel Wood, Lewis Stewart, Pleasant C. Kaiser, Thomas Canby,
Sidney S. Ford, William Melawers, A. N. Rainwater, B. F. Shaw, Wm.
Waldo, Silas G. Pugh, G. H. Vernon, Isaiah Matheny, Thomas T. Eyre,
John C. Holgate.

Shaw's Company: Captain, William Shaw; first lieutenant, David
Crawford; second lieutenant, Baptiste C. Dorio; orderly sergeant,
Absalom M. Smith; duty sergeants, George Laroque, Vatall Bergeren,
George W. Shaw, Charles McKay; privates, John H. Bigler, O. Crum,
Joseph Despont, William Felix, Xavier Plante, Eli Viliell, F. M.
Mankis, Antonio Plante, Charles Edwards, Andrew Heeber, Xavier Gervais,
David Jones, John Pecares, Samuel Kinsey, Joseph Pearson, William
Towie, Peter Jackson, Alexander Laborain, William McMillen, B. F.
Nichols, Hiram Smead, William Marill, Francis Poiecor, George Westley.

Garrison's Company: Captain, J. M. Garrison; first lieutenant, A. E.
Garrison; second lieutenant, John C. Herren; orderly sergeant, J.
B. Kaiser; duty sergeants, George Crabtree, George Laroque, Joseph
Colester; privates, E. Biernaisse, Thomas R. Blair, John C. Cox, Joseph
Despart, Caleb M. Grover, Isaiah Matheny, John Picard, William Philips,
Henry Barden, Silas P. Pugh, Isaac Wood, Penel Fowler, Andrew Hubert,
Daniel Herren, Xavier Plante, Vitelle Bergeron.

[Illustration: LOG BUILDING OCCUPIED BY THE OFFICERS IN THE OLD FORT
WALLA WALLA, WHEN IN THE PRESENT LIMITS OF THE CITY. 1857-60

This building was upon the site now covered by the garage erected in
1917 by the Stone estate. The picture is reproduced from a crayon
sketch made by Lizzie Hungate (Mrs. H. A. Gardner), when a young
girl in St. Paul's school. The building was of cottonwood logs and
remained on the original site until 188--, when it was removed by C.
W. Phillips, who designed keeping it as a historical relic, but the
cottonwood logs soon decayed.]

Colonel Gilliam, though having had no military education, had the
American pioneer's capacity and fertility of resources, and conducted
his midwinter campaign with courage and energy. As already noted, Peter
Skeen Ogden of the Hudson's Bay Company, had ransomed the captives of
Waiilatpu long before even the scantily equipped regiment of Oregon
volunteers could take the field. But even though the first necessity,
that of rescuing the captives, had been filled, the command felt
that the situation compelled a definite campaign and the capture and
bringing to justice of the murderers. Hence Colonel Gilliam pressed on
his march as rapidly as possible. On the last day of February, 1848,
he crossed the Des Chutes River to a point where hostile Indians had
already taken a stand. A battle ensued the next day, resulting in the
defeat of the Indians and a treaty of peace with the Des Chutes tribe.
Pressing on toward Walla Walla, the command was checked at Sand Hollows
in the Lower Umatilla River Valley, by a strong force of Indians in
command of Five Crows, a Cayuse chief. This chieftain claimed the
powers of a wizard and declared that he could swallow all the bullets
fired at him by the whites. Another brave called War Eagle, or Swallow
Ball, made equal claims to invulnerability. The two chiefs undertook
to demonstrate their wizard powers by dashing out in front of the
volunteers. Tom McKay, who was the stepson of Doctor McLoughlin and
was then the captain of a company composed mainly of French Canadians,
could not withstand the challenge and sent a bullet from his trusty
rifle through the head of Swallow Ball. At the same time Charles McKay
sent a companion ball into the supposedly invulnerable anatomy of Five
Crows, wounding him so severely that he was out of the war henceforth.
After a desultory series of engagements, the Indians retreated and
Colonel Gilliam's command pushed on to Waiilatpu, which point they
reached on March 2d. At the desolate spot they discovered that the
remains of the martyrs of the Whitman Mission had been hastily interred
by the Ogden party, but that in the interval of time coyotes had
partially exhumed them. They reverently replaced the sacred remains in
one large grave, covering them with a wagon box found on the ground.
Them in that abandoned place the bones of the martyred band remained
unmarked for many years. As now known to all residents of Walla Walla,
a monument was reared upon the hill overlooking the scene of the
tragedy, and the remains were reinterred and covered with a marble slab
inscribed with the names of the victims of the massacre. A lock of long
fair hair was found near the ruined mission which there is every reason
to think was from the head of Mrs. Whitman. It is now preserved among
the precious relics in the museum of Whitman College.

With the volunteers was Joseph L. Meek, one of the Rocky Mountain
trappers who had settled in the Willamette Valley and had become
prominent in establishing the Provisional Government of Oregon in
1843. He now with a few companions was on his way across the continent
to carry dispatches to Washington announcing the Whitman Massacre
and urging the Government to make immediate provision for a proper
territorial government. Meek had come thus far with the troops, but now
passed beyond them on his difficult and dangerous journey. It may be
added that with much hardship from cold and near starvation he reached
St. Louis in the extraordinarily short time of seventy-two days.

The dilatory and scheming Congress and administration was roused by the
Whitman Massacre to some sense of the needs of far-away Oregon. A great
struggle ensued over the slavery question in which Calhoun, Davis,
Foote, and other southern senators made determined efforts to defeat
the prohibition of slavery in Oregon. They were overpowered by the
eloquence of Corwin, the determination of Benton and the statesmanship
of Webster, and on August 13, 1848, the bill to establish a territorial
government for Oregon with slavery prohibited passed Congress.
President Polk appointed Joseph Lane governor, Joseph Meek marshal,
and William B. Bryant judge in the new territory. Not till March 3,
1849, did they reach their stations and take up their duties. Of all
the history of the great congressional discussion with the momentous
national questions involved, there is a graphic account by Judge
Thornton, while Benton in his "Thirty Years in Congress" gives a vivid
and illuminating view.

Meanwhile the little army of Oregon volunteers were engaged in a
long-drawn and harassing series of marches and counter marches in
search of the guilty murderers. An adobe fort, called Fort Waters,
from Lieut. Col. James Waters, was built at Waiilatpu. The Cayuses
had counted upon the help of the other tribes, but the Nez Perces and
Spokanes repudiated their murderous kindred, and the Yakimas took an
attitude of indifference. Peupeumoxmox of the Walla Wallas, though
having more of a real grievance against the whites than any other
Indian on account of the brutal murder of his son, as related in the
preceding chapter, did not actively aid the hostiles. He played a wily
game, and was justly regarded with suspicion by the command.

In the midst of the tangle and uncertainty, and the scattering of the
guilty parties in all directions, Colonel Gilliam decided to make an
expedition northeasterly to the Tucanon and Snake rivers in the hope of
encountering and destroying the main force of the hostiles and bringing
the war to a conclusion at one blow. Reaching the mouth of the Tucanon,
a few miles below the present Starbuck, the colonel was outgeneraled by
the wily Indians who gave him to understand that the Indian camp was
that of Peupeumoxmox. Taking advantage of the delay the Cayuses drove
their large bands of stock into the Snake River and made them swim to
the north bank. The main body of Indians succeeded in getting away with
their valuable stock. The Palouses were doubtless aiding and abetting
them. Disappointed in his aims Colonel Gilliam gave the order to return
to Walla Walla. Upon reaching the Touchet in the near vicinity of
the present Bolles Junction, the Indians made a rush for the Touchet
River in the evident hope of entangling the troops at the crossing. A
desperate encounter took place, the hardest, and in fact the only real
battle of the year, in which the whites fought their way through the
stream and made their way to the Walla-Walla. Reaching Fort Waters at
Waiilatpu on March 16th, it was determined by a council of war that
Colonel Gilliam should go to The Dalles with 160 men in order to meet
and escort a supply train to the Walla Walla, while Lieutenant-Colonel
Waters should take command at the fort. On the way, just having crossed
the Umatilla, Colonel Gilliam while in the act of drawing a rope from
a wagon accidentally caught it in the trigger of a loaded gun. The
weapon was discharged and the commander was instantly killed. This was
a most lamentable loss, for Colonel Gilliam was not only an efficient
commander, but was one of the best of the Oregon pioneers, with the
capacity for a most useful career in the new land. Lieutenant-Colonel
Waters became colonel in command upon the announcement of the death
of Colonel Gilliam. He undertook at once a march to Lapwai under
the belief that the murderers were harbored among the Nez Perces.
Nothing definite was accomplished by this expedition. According to the
assertions of the Nez Perces Telaukaikt, one of the supposed leaders of
the Whitman Massacre, had fled. The Nez Perces delivered a number of
cattle and horses which they said belonged to the Cayuses. The attempt
to seize the murderers themselves being seemingly futile, Colonel
Waters returned again to the fort at Waiilatpu. It had now become
evident that the condition did not justify the retention of a regiment
in the Cayuse country. Governor Abernethy, still acting as head of the
Provisional Government of Oregon, decided to recall the main body of
troops. A small force under Major Magone was sent to Chimakain, the
mission near Spokane where Eells and Walker were located, in order to
bring that missionary band to a place of safety. It was found by Major
Magone that the Spokane Indians had been faithful to their teachers
and had guarded them from danger. Few things more thrilling have been
narrated in the hearing of the author than the accounts given by Mr.
Eells and Mr. Walker, and above all by Edwin Eells, oldest son of
Father Eells, of the conditions under which that devoted group existed
for some days when it was thought that the hostile Indians were on the
way to Spokane to destroy them. On one evening hearing an awful powwow
and hullaballoo from a crowd of mounted Indians and seeing them rapidly
approaching in the dim light, Father Eells went out bravely to meet
them, thinking it likely was the dreaded marauders, to discover in a
moment that it was their own Spokanes, armed for their defence.

Escorted by the company of volunteers, the missionaries of Chimakain
went to the Willamette Valley where the Walker family made their
permanent home, while Father Eells with his family remained twelve
years and then returned to the Walla Walla country to found Whitman
College and to make his home for a number of years at Waiilatpu.

While Major Magone was thus engaged in caring for the last of the
missionaries, Capt. William Martin was left at Fort Waters (Waiilatpu)
with fifty-five men to look out for the interests of immigrants who
might enter the country and to keep a vigilant eye upon the movements
of the savages. This Captain Martin, it may be remembered by some
readers, took up his residence at Pendleton in 1880 and was long a
leading citizen of that city. One of his sons now lives at Touchet
in Walla Walla County and one of his grandsons, of the same name as
himself, became one of the most noted athletes at Whitman College
and now occupies a place as physical director in a large eastern
university. Another small force in command of Lieutenant Rogers was
stationed at Fort Lee at The Dalles. But as to further operations in
the field they seemed to be at an end. The Cayuses scattered in various
directions, and other Indians, while making no resistance to the
whites, gave them little or no assistance. Finally in 1850 a band of
friendly Umatillas pursued a bunch of Cayuses under Tamsaky or Tamsucky
to the headwaters of the John Day River and after a severe struggle
killed Tamsaky and captured the most of his followers.

The last act in the tragedy was the execution of several Indian chiefs
who had voluntarily gone to Oregon City and had been seized and
subjected to trial as being the murderers of the Whitman party. There
is a very unsatisfactory condition of testimony about the real guilt
of this group of Indians. The Cayuse Indians claimed, and many of
the whites believed that one only of the five who were hung on June
3, 1850, was guilty. As a concluding glance at this grewsome event,
the reader may be interested in the following official declaration of
innocence of those Indians.

"Tilokite--I am innocent of the crime of which I am charged. Those who
committed it are dead, some killed, some died; there were ten, two
were my sons; they were killed by the Cayuses. Tumsucky, before the
massacre, came to my lodge; he told me that they were going to hold a
council to kill Doctor Whitman. I told him not to do so, that it was
bad. One night seven Indians died near the house of Doctor Whitman,
to whom he had given medicines. Tumsucky's family were sick; he gave
them roots and leaves; they got well. Other Indians died. Tumsucky came
often. I talked to him, but his ears were shut; he would not hear; he
and others went away. After a while some children came into my lodge
and told me what was going on. I had told Tumsucky over and over to
let them alone; my talk was nothing; I shut my mouth. When I left my
people, the young chief told me to come down and talk with the big
white chief, and tell him who it was, that did kill Doctor Whitman and
others. My heart was big; 'tis small now. The priest tells me I must
die tomorrow. I know not for what. They tell me that I have made a
confession to the marshal that I struck Doctor Whitman. 'Tis false! You
ask me if the priests did not encourage us to kill Doctor Whitman? I
answer no, no."

"Monday, 11:30 o'clock--I am innocent, but my heart is weak since I
have been in chains, but since I must die, I forgive them all. Those
who brought me here and take care of me, I take them all in my arms, my
heart is opened."

"Quiahmarsum (skin or panther's coat)--I was up the river at the time
of the massacre, and did not arrive until the next day. I was riding on
horseback; a white woman came running from the house. She held out her
hand and told me not to kill her. I put my hand upon her head and told
her not to be afraid. There were plenty of Indians all about. She, with
the other women and children, went to Walla Walla, to Mr. Ogden's. I
was not present at the murder, nor was I any way concerned in it. I am
innocent. It hurts me to talk about dying for nothing. Our chief told
us to come down and tell all about it. Those who committed the murder
are killed and dead. The priest says I must die tomorrow. If they kill
me, I am innocent."

"Monday, 11:30 A.M.--I was sent here by my chief to declare who the
guilty persons were; the white chief would then shake hands with me;
the young chief would come after me; we would have a good heart. My
young chief told me I was to come here to tell what I know concerning
the murderers. I did not come as one of the murderers, for I am
innocent. I never made any declarations to any one that I was guilty.
This is the last time that I may speak."

"Kloakamus--I was there at the time; I lived there, but I had no hand
in the murder. I saw them when they were killed, but did not touch or
strike any one. I looked on. There were plenty of Indians. My heart
was sorry. Our chief told us to come down and tell who the murderers
were. There were ten; they are killed. They say I am guilty, but it is
not so; I am innocent. The people do not understand me. I can't talk
to them. They tell me I must die by being hung by the neck. If they do
kill me, I am innocent, and God will give me a big heart."

[Illustration: Courtesy of Mr. Michael Kenny

FORT WALLA WALLA IN 1857]

"Monday, 11:30 A.M.--I have no reason to die for things that I did
not do. My time is short. I tell the truth. I know that I am close to
the grave; but my heart is open and I tell the truth. I love every
one in this world. I know that God will give me a big heart. I never
confessed to the marshal that I was guilty, or to any other person; I
am innocent. The priests did not tell us to do what the Indians have
done. This is my last talk."

"Siahsaluchus (or Wet Wolf)--I say the same as the others; the
murderers are killed; some by the whites, some by the Cayuses, and some
by others. They were ten in number."

"Monday, 11:30 A.M.--I have nothing more to say; I think of God. I
forgive all men; I love them. The priests did not tell us to do this."

"Thomahas--I did not know that I came here to die. Our chief told
us to come and see the white chief and tell him all about it. The
white chief would then tell us all what was right and what was wrong.
Learn us (how) to live when we returned home. Why should I have a bad
heart--after I am showed and taught how to live? My eyes were shut
when I came here. I did not see, but now they are opened. I have been
taught; I have been showed what was good and what was bad. I do not
want to die; I know now that we are all brothers. They tell me the same
Spirit made us all."

"Monday, 11:30 A.M.--Thomahas joined With Tilokite. My heart cries my
brother was guilty, but he is dead. I am innocent. I know I am going to
die for things I am not guilty of, but I forgive them. I love all men
now. My hope, the priest tells me, is in Christ. My heart shall be big
with good."

  "(Signed)
  HENRY H. CRAWFORD,
  Sergeant, Co. D, R. M. R.

  ROBERT D. MAHON,
  Corporal, Co. A, R. M. R."

Following the close of the Cayuse war there was a lull in hostilities
during which several white men came to the Walla Walla country or near
it, with a view to locating. In Col. F. T. Gilbert's valuable history
of Walla Walla and adjoining counties, published in 1882, we find the
data for a summary of the earliest settlers as follows:

The first settlers of all were William C. McKay, son of Thomas McKay
(who himself was the stepson of Dr. John McLoughlin) and Henry M.
Chase. These men were located on the Umatilla River in 1851 at a point
near the present Town of Echo. Doctor McKay later became a resident of
Pendleton where he was well known for many years. In 1852 Mr. Chase
went with Wm. Craig to the Nez Perce country near Lewiston where he
entered the cattle business. In 1855 he went to the region of the
present Dayton and a short time later to Walla Walla. He lived in Walla
Walla a number of years and was well known to all old-timers. He lived
upon the property now the site of St. Paul's School. Louis Raboin, a
Frenchman, though an American citizen, was in the Walla Walla country a
number of years beginning in 1851. In 1855 he located at what is now
the Town of Marengo on the Tucanon. P. M. Lafontain came to the region
in 1852 and located a claim adjoining that of Mr. Chase, near the
present Dayton, in 1855. Lloyd Brooke, George C. Bumford, and John F.
Noble came to Waiilatpu in 1852, and in the following year established
themselves there in the cattle business. There they remained till
driven out by the War of 1855. A. P. Woodward was a resident of the
Walla Walla country during the same period. It is proper to name here
Wm. Craig who had been a mountain man a number of years and became
located among the Nez Perce Indians at Lapwai in 1845. From him Craig
Mountains took their name. He was an important personage as interpreter
and peace-maker among the Nez Perces during the great war later. There
were several men drifting through the country employed as laborers by
Mr. Chase and by the cattle-men at Waiilatpu.

There was at that time quite a settlement on the Walla Walla around
what is now known as Frenchtown, about ten miles from the present city.
These were Hudson's Bay Company men. We find in the list of names
several whose descendants lived subsequently in that region, though
they mainly left during the Indian Wars and did not return. There
were two priests among them, Fathers Chirouse and Pondosa, and they
were assisted by two brothers. James Sinclair had at that time charge
of Fort Walla Walla on the Columbia. Though the region was then in
possession of the United States, the Hudson's Bay Company had not yet
delivered up its locations.

During this lull a very important event occurred. On March 3, 1853,
the Territory of Washington was created and Isaac I. Stevens was
appointed governor. The first Territorial Legislature laid out sixteen
counties. Among them was Walla Walla County. That was the first "Old
Walla Walla County." That it was much more extensive than the area
especially covered by this work will appear when the boundaries are
given, thus: "Beginning its line on the north bank of the Columbia at
a point opposite the mouth of Des Chutes River, it ran thence north to
the forty-ninth parallel." It therefore embraced all of what was then
Washington Territory east of that line, which included all of present
Idaho, about a fourth of present Montana, and about half of what is
now Washington. That was the first attempt at organized government in
Eastern Washington. The county seat was located "on the land of Lloyd
Brooke," which was at Waiilatpu. The Legislature further decreed:
"That George C. Bumford, John Owens, and A. Dominique Pambrun be,
and they are hereby constituted and appointed the Board of County
Commissioners; and that Narcises Remond be, and hereby is appointed
sheriff; and that Lloyd Brooke be, and is hereby appointed judge of
probate, and shall have jurisdiction as justice of the peace; all in
and for the County of Walla Walla." These appointees with the exception
of Mr. Owens (who lived near the present Missoula), were residents of
the region of Waiilatpu and Frenchtown. That county organization was
never inaugurated, and it remains as simply an interesting historical
reminiscence.

In March, 1855, another most notable event occurred, the first in a
series that made much history in the Northwest. This was the discovery
of gold at the junction of the Pend Oreille River with the Columbia.
The discoverer was a French half-breed who had previously lived at
French Prairie, Ore. The announcement of the discovery caused a
stampede to the east of the mountains and inaugurated a series of
momentous changes.

Governor Stevens had entered upon his great task of organizing the
newly created territory by undertaking the establishment of a number
of Indian reservations. The necessities of the case--both justice
to the Indians and the whites, as well as the proper development of
the country whose vast possibilities were beginning to be seen by
the farsighted ones--seemed to compel the segregation of the natives
into comparatively small reservations. The history of the laying out
of these reservations is an entire history by itself. There has been
controversy as to the rights and wrongs of the case which has been
best treated by Hazard Stevens in his "Life of Governor Stevens" (his
father) in defence, and by Ezra Meeker in his "Tragedy of Leschi" in
condemnation. Suffice it to say that the reservation policy was but
faintly understood by the Indians and occurring in connection with
the gold discoveries and the entrance of whites, eager for wealth
and opportunity, it furnished all the conditions requisite for a
first-class Indian war. Doubtless the great underlying cause was, as
usual in Indian wars, the perception by Indians that their lands were
steadily and surely passing out of their hands.

In 1854 and 1855 a general flame of war burst forth in widely separated
regions. There can be no question that there was an attempt at
co-operation by the tribes over the whole of Oregon and Washington.
But so wide and so scattered was the field and so incapable were the
Indians of intelligent unity of action that the white settlements were
spared a war of extermination. The centers of warfare were the Rogue
River in Southern Oregon, a number of points on Puget Sound, especially
Seattle and vicinity, and White River Valley.

In May, 1855, Governor Stevens with a force of about fifty men reached
Walla Walla for a conference with the tribes. The best authorities
on the conference are Hazard Stevens, then a boy of fourteen, who
accompanied his father, and Lieutenant Kip of the United States
Army. This meeting at Walla Walla was one of the most interesting
and important in the annals of Indian relationships with the United
States Government. There seems some difference of opinion as to the
exact location of the conference. It has generally been thought that
Stevens' camp was at what is now known as "Council Grove Addition,"
near the residence of ex-Senator Ankeny. When General Hazard Stevens
was in Walla Walla some years ago he gave his opinion that it was in
the near vicinity of the residence of Mrs. Clara Quinn. William McBean,
a son of the Hudson's Bay Company agent at Fort Walla Walla during the
Cayuse war, who was himself in Stevens' force, as a young boy, told the
author nearly thirty years ago that he believed the chief point of the
conference was almost exactly on the present site of Whitman College.
It appears from the testimony of old-timers that Mill Creek has changed
its course at intervals in these years, and that as a result the exact
identification is difficult. It seems plain, however, that the Indians
were camped at various places along the two spring branches, "College
Creek" and "Tannery Creek."

With his little force, Governor Stevens might well have been startled,
if he had been a man sensible of fear, when there came tearing across
the plain to the northeast of the council ground an army of twenty-five
hundred Nez Perces, headed by Halhaltlossot, known to the whites as
Lawyer. After the Indian custom they were whooping and firing their
guns and making their horses prance and cavort in the clouds of dust
stirred by hundreds of hoofs. But as it proved, these spectacular
performers were the real friends of the Governor and his party and
later on their salvation. Two days after, three hundred Cayuses, those
worst of the Columbia River Indians, surly and scowling, made their
appearance, led by Five Crows and Young Chief. Within two days again
there arrived a force of two thousand Yakimas, Umatillas, and Walla
Wallas. The "Valley of Waters" must have been at that time a genuine
Indian paradise. The broad flats of Mill Creek and the Walla Walla
were covered with grass and spangled with flowers. Numerous clear cold
steams, gushing in springs from the ground and overhung by birches
and cottonwoods, with the wild roses drooping over them, made their
gurgling way to a junction with the creek. Countless horses grazed on
the bunch-grass hills and farther back in the foothills there was an
abundance of game. No wonder that the Indians, accustomed to gather for
councils and horse-races, and all the other delights of savage life,
should have scanned with jealous eyes the manifest desire of the whites
for locations in a spot "where every prospect pleases and man alone is
vile."

It became evident to Governor Stevens that a conspiracy was burrowing
beneath his feet. Peupeumoxmox of the Walla Wallas and Kahmiakin of the
Yakimas were the leaders. The former was now an old man, embittered
by the murder of his son Elijah, and regarded by many as having been
the real fomenter of the Whitman Massacre. Kahmiakin was a remarkable
Indian. Winthrop, in his "Canoe and Saddle," gives a vivid description
of him as being an of extraordinary force and dignity. Governor Stevens
said of him: "He is a peculiar man, reminding me of the panther and the
grizzly bear. His countenance has an extraordinary play, one moment in
frowns, the next in smiles, flashing with light and black as Erebus
the same instant. His pantomime is great, and his gesticulations many
and characteristic. He talks mostly in his face and with his hands and
arms." He was a man of lofty stature and splendid physique, a typical
Indian of the best type. This great Yakima chief saw that his race was
doomed unless they could check White occupancy at its very beginning.
Restrained by no scruples (as indeed his civilized opponents seldom
were) he seems to have conspired with the Walla Wallas and Cayuses to
wipe out Stevens and his band, then rush to The Dalles and exterminate
the garrison there; then with united forces of all the Eastern Oregon
Indians sweep on into the principal settlements of the whites, those of
the Willamette Valley, and wipe them out. Meanwhile their allies on the
Sound were to seize the pivotal points there. Thus Indian victory would
be comprehensive and final. Preposterous as such an expectation appears
now to us, it was not, after all, so remote as we might think. Six or
seven thousand of these powerful warriors, splendidly mounted and well
armed, if well directed, crossing the mountains into the scattered
settlements of Western Oregon and Washington might well have cleaned
up the country, with the exception of Portland, which was then quite
a little city and in a position which would have made any successful
attack by Indians hopeless.

But the Nez Perces saved the day. Halhaltlossot perceived that the
only hope for his people was in peace and as favorable reservation
assignments as could be secured. He nipped the conspiracy in the bud.
Hazard Stevens gives a thrilling account of how the Nez Perce chief
went by night to the Governor's camp and revealed the conspiracy. He
moved his own camp to a point adjoining the whites and made it clear
that the hostiles could accomplish their aims only in the face of Nez
Perce opposition. This situation made the conspiracy impotent.

[Illustration: Lewis McMorris

J. J. Rohn

Dr. John Tempany

Michael Kenny

Joseph McEvoy

COMRADES AT FORT WALLA WALLA IN 1857]

Not all, however, of the Nez Perces approved the tactics of Lawyer.
There was a powerful faction that favored the Yakimas, Cayuses, and
Walla Wallas. While Governor Stevens had been gradually bringing the
main body of the Nez Perces to consent to a treaty assigning certain
reservations to them, and was flattering himself that with the aid
of Lawyer he was just about to clinch the deal, there was a sudden
commotion in the council, and into the midst there burst the old chief
Apashwayhayikt (Looking Glass). He had just been on a raid against
the Blackfeet, and hearing of the probable outcome of the Walla Walla
Council, had made a ride of 300 miles in seven days. With his little
band of attendants he came racing over the "bench" on which "Garden
City Heights" is now located, and with scalps of several slaughtered
Blackfeet dangling from his belt he rushed to the front, and fixing
his angry and reproachful eyes upon his tribesmen he broke forth into
a harangue which Hazard Stevens was told by some Indians began about
thus: "My people, what have you done? While I was gone you sold my
country. I have come home and there is not left me a place on which
to pitch my lodge. Go home to your lodges. I will talk with you."
Lieutenant Kip declares that though he could not understand the words,
the effect was tremendous and the speech was equal to the greatest
bursts of oratory that he had ever heard. The council broke up and the
nearly accepted treaty went to naught.

With great patience and skill Stevens and Lawyer rallied their
defeated forces and, in spite of the opposition of Looking Glass they
secured the acquiescence of the main body of the Indians to three
reservations. These were essentially the same as now known: the Yakima,
the Umatilla, and the Nez Perce. In case of the last, however, there
was a lamentable and distressing miscarriage of agreement and perhaps
of justice. William McBean, already mentioned as a half-breed boy
employed by Governor Stevens, stated to the author many years ago that
he discovered that the general impression among the Nez Perce Indians
was that by accepting the treaty and surrendering their lands in the
Touchet, Tucanon, and Alpowa countries, they would be assured of the
permanent possession of the Wallowa. Now, if there was any region more
suitable to Indians and more loved by them than another, it was that
same Wallowa, with its snowy peaks, its lakes and streams filled with
fish, its grassy upland with deer and elk, its thickets and groves with
grouse and pheasants. The understanding of the "Joseph band" of Nez
Perces was, according to McBean, that the loved Wallowa was to be their
special range. Upon that supposition they voted with Lawyer for the
treaty and that was the determining influence that secured its passage.
But twenty years later, white men began to perceive that the Wallowa
was also suitable to them. With that lack of continuity in dealing with
natives in face of a demand for land by whites which has made most of
our Indian treaties mere "scraps of paper," the administration (that of
Grant) forgot the understanding, the Indians were dispossessed, and the
Nez Perce war with the very people who had saved Stevens in 1855 was
precipitated in 1877. Young Joseph (Hallakallakeen) led his warriors
in the most spectacular Indian war in the history of this country, as
a result of which his band was finally overpowered and located on the
Nespilem, a part of the Colville reservation. Kamiakin had seemed to
agree to the treaty at Walla Walla. But he was only biding his time.
Governor Stevens, having, as he thought, pacified the tribes by that
group of treaties, proceeded on a similar mission to the Flatheads in
Northern Idaho. There, after long discussion, a treaty was negotiated
by which a million and a quarter acres was set aside for a reservation.
The next move of the Governor was across the Rocky Mountains to Fort
Benton.

But what was happening on the Walla Walla? No sooner was the Governor
fairly out of sight across the flower-bespangled plains, which extended
200 miles northeast from Walla Walla, than the wily Kamiakin began to
resume his plots. So successful was he, with the valuable assistance
of Peupeumoxmox, Young Chief, and Five Crows, that the treaties, just
ratified, were torn to shreds and the flame of savage warfare burst
forth across the entire Columbia Valley.

Hazard Stevens, in his invaluable history of his father, gives a vivid
picture of how the news reached them in their camp, thirty-five miles
up the Missouri from Fort Benton. Summer had now passed into autumn. A
favorable treaty had been made with the Blackfeet. On October 29th the
little party were gathered around their campfire in the frosty air of
fall in that high altitude when they discerned a solitary rider making
his way slowly toward them. As he drew near they soon saw that it was
Pearson, the express rider. Pearson was one of the best examples of
those scouts whose lives were spent in conveying messages from forts
to parties in the field. He usually traveled alone, and his life was
always in his hand. He seemed to be made of steel springs, and it had
been thought that he could endure anything. "He could ride anything
that wore hair." He rode 1,750 miles in twenty-eight days at one time,
one stage of 260 miles having been made in three days. But as he slowly
drew up to the party in the cold evening light, it was seen that even
Pearson was "done." His horse staggered and fell, and he himself could
not stand or speak for some time. After he had been revived he told his
story, and a story of disaster and foreboding it was, sure enough.

All the great tribes of the Columbia plains west of the Nez Perces had
broken out, the Cayuses, Yakimas, Palouses, Walla Wallas, Umatillas,
and Klickitats. They had swept the country clean of whites. The ride of
Pearson from The Dalles to the point where he reached Governor Stevens
is one of the most thrilling in our annals. By riding all day and
night, he reached a horse ranch on the Umatilla belonging to William
McKay, but he found the place deserted. Seeing a splendid horse in the
bunch near by, he lassoed and saddled him. Though the horse was as wild
as air, Pearson managed to mount and start on. Just then there swept
into view a force of Indians who, instantly divining what Pearson was
trying to do, gave chase. Up and down hill, through vale, and across
the rim-rock, they followed, sending frequent bullets after him, and
yelling like demons. "Whupsiah si-ah-poo, Whupsiah!" ("Kill the white
man!") But the wild horse which the intrepid rider bestrode proved his
salvation, for he gradually outran all his pursuers. Traveling through
the Walla Walla at night Pearson reached the camp of friendly Nez Perce
Red Wolf on the Alpowa the next day, having ridden 200 miles from The
Dalles without stopping except the brief time changing horses. Snow
and hunger now impeded his course. Part of the way he had to go on
snow-shoes without a horse. But with unflinching resolution he passed
on, and so now here he was with his dismal tidings.

The dispatches warned Governor Stevens that Kamiakin with a thousand
warriors was in the Walla Walla Valley and that it would be impossible
for him to get through by that route, and that he must therefore
return to the East by the Missouri and come back to his territory
by the steamer route of Panama. That meant six months' delay. With
characteristic boldness, Governor Stevens at once rejected the more
cautious course and went right back to Spokane by Coeur d'Alene Pass,
deep already with winter snows, suffering intensely with cold and
hunger, but avoiding by that route the Indians sent out to intercept
him. With extraordinary address, he succeeding in turning the Spokane
Indians to his side. The Nez Perces, thanks to Lawyer's fidelity, were
still friendly, and with these two powerful tribes arrayed against the
Yakimas, there was still hope of holding the Columbia Valley.

After many adventures, Governor Stevens reached Olympia in safety.
Govornor Curry of Oregon had already called a force of volunteers into
the field. The Oregon volunteers were divided into two divisions, one
under Col. J. W. Nesmith, which went into the Yakima country, and the
other under Lieut.-Col. J. K. Kelly, which went to Walla Walla. The
latter force fought the decisive battle of the campaign on the 7th,
8th, 9th and 10th of December, 1855. It was a series of engagements
occurring in the heart of the Walla Walla Valley, a "running fight"
culminating at what is now called Frenchtown, ten miles west of the
present City of Walla Walla.

The famous battle of the Walla Walla, being so conspicuous and so near
the present city, is worthy of some detail. The report of Col. J. K.
Kelley is as follows:

"On the evening of the 8th inst., I gave you a hasty report of our
battle with Indians up to the close of the second day's fight, and
then stated that at a future time I would give a more detailed account
of all transactions that occurred since the march from the Umatilla
River. Owing to active engagements in the field, and in pursuit of the
Indians, I have not hitherto had leisure to make that report.

"As soon as it was dark on the evening of the second, I proceeded with
my command from Fort Henrietta to Walla Walla, having left a detachment
of twenty-five men, under command of Lieutenant Sword, to protect the
former post. On the morning of the third we encamped on the bank of
the Walla Walla River about four miles from the fort; and, proceeding
to the latter place, I found it had been pillaged by the Indians, the
buildings much defaced and the furniture destroyed.

"On the morning of the fourth, a body of Indians was observed on the
opposite side of the Columbia, apparently making preparations to cross
the river with a large amount of baggage. Seeing us in possession of
the fort, they were deterred from making the attempt, when I sent a
small detachment down to a bar making into the Columbia immediately
below the mouth of the Walla Walla, and opposite to where the Indians
were, with directions to fire upon them and prevent the removal of
their packs of provisions. The width of the river at this place is
about 250 yards; and a brisk fire was at once opened upon the Indians,
which was returned by them from behind the rocks on the opposite shore.
No boats could be procured to cross the river in order to secure the
provisions or to attack the body of Indians, numbering about fifty, who
had made their appearance on the hill north of Walla Walla, who, after
surveying our encampment, started off in a northeasterly direction. I
at once determined to follow in pursuit of them on the following day.

"Early on the morning of the fifth I dispatched Second Major Chinn,
with 150 men, to escort the baggage and packtrains to the mouth of the
Touchet, there to await my return with the remainder of the forces
under my command. On the same morning I marched with about two hundred
men to a point on the Touchet River about twelve miles from its mouth,
with the view of attacking the Walla Walla Indians, who were supposed
to be encamped there. When I was near to and making towards the
village, Peupeumoxmox, the chief of the tribe, with six other Indians,
made their appearance under a flag of truce. He stated that he did not
wish to fight; that his people did not wish to fight; and that on the
following day he would come and have a talk and make a treaty of peace.
On consultation with Hon. Nathan Olney, Indian agent, we concluded
that this was simply a ruse to gain time for removing his village and
preparing for battle. I stated to him that we had come to chastise him
for the wrongs he had done to our people, and that we would not defer
making an attack on his people unless he and his five followers would
consent to accompany and remain with us until all difficulties were
settled. I told him that he might go away under his flag of truce if he
chose; but, if he did so, we would forthwith attack his village. The
alternative was distinctly made known to him; and, to save his people,
he chose to remain with us as a hostage for the fulfillment of his
promise, as did also those who accompanied him. He at the same time
said that on the following day he would accompany us to his village;
that he would then assemble his people and make them deliver up all
their arms and ammunition, restore the property which had been taken
from the white settlers, or pay the full value of that which could
not be restored; and that he would furnish fresh horses to remount my
command, and cattle to supply them with provisions, to enable us to
wage war against other hostile tribes who were leagued with him. Having
made these promises, we refrained from making the attack, thinking we
had him in our power, and that on the next day his promises would be
fulfilled. I also permitted him to send one of the men who accompanied
him to his village to apprise the tribes of the terms of the expected
treaty, so that they might be prepared to fulfill it.

"On the sixth, we marched to the village and found it entirely
deserted, but saw the Indians in considerable force on the distant
hills, and watching our movements. I sent out a messenger to induce
them to come in, but could not do so. And I will here observe that I
have since learned from a Nez Perce boy who was taken at the same time
with Peupeumoxmox, that instead of sending word to his people to make
a treaty of peace, he sent an order for them to remove their women and
children and prepare for battle. From all I have since learned, I am
well persuaded that he was acting with duplicity, and that he expected
to entrap my command in the deep ravine in which his camp was situated,
and make his escape from us. We remained at the deserted village until
about one o'clock in the afternoon; and seeing no hope of coming to any
terms we proceeded to the mouth of the Touchet with a view of going
from thence to some spot near Whitman's Station, where I had intended
to form a permanent camp for the winter.

"On the morning of the seventh, Companies H and K crossed the Touchet,
leading the column on the route to Whitman's Valley, and when formed
on the plain, were joined by Company B. A few persons in front were
driving our cattle; and a few were on the flanks of the companies
and near the foot of the hills that extended along the river. These
persons, as well as I can ascertain, were fired on by the Indians.
Immediately all the companies except A and F (who were ordered to
remain with the baggage) commenced an eager chase of the Indians in
sight. A running fight was the consequence, the force of the Indians
increasing with every mile. Several of the enemy were killed in the
chase before reaching the farm of La Rocque, which is about twelve
miles from the mouth of the Touchet. At this point they made a stand,
their left resting on the river covered with trees and underbrush,
their center occupying the flat, as this place was covered with clumps
of sagebrush and small sand knolls, their right on the high ridge of
hills which skirt the river bottom.

[Illustration: FORT WALLA WALLA]

"When the volunteers reached this point, they were not more than forty
or fifty men, being those mounted on the fleetest horses. Upon these
the Indians poured a murderous fire from the brushwood and willows
along the river, and from the sage bushes along the plain, wounding a
number of the volunteers. The men fell back. The moment was critical.
They were commanded to cross the fence which surrounds La Rocque's
field, and charge upon the Indians in the brush. In executing this
order, Lieutenant Burrows of Company H was killed; and Captain Munson
of Company I, Isaac Miller, sergeant-major, and G. W. Smith of Company
B, were wounded. A dispatch having been sent to Captain Wilson of
Company A to come forward, he and his company came up on the gallop,
dismounted at a slough, and with fixed bayonets pushed on through the
brush. In the course of half an hour Captain Bennett was on the ground
with Company F; and, with this accession, the enemy was steadily driven
forward for two miles, when they took possession of a farm house and
close fence, in attempting to carry which Captain Bennett of Company F
and Private Kelso of Company A were killed.

"A howitzer found at Fort Walla Walla under charge of Captain Wilson,
by this time was brought to bear upon the enemy. Four rounds were
fired, when the piece bursted, wounding Captain Wilson. The Indians
then gave way at all points; and the house and fence were seized and
held by the volunteers and the bodies of our men recovered. These
positions were held by as until nightfall, when the volunteers fell
slowly back and returned unmolested to camp.

"Early on the morning of the 8th the Indians appeared with increased
forces, amounting to fully six hundred warriors. They were posted as
usual in the thick brush by the river, among the sage bushes and sand
knolls, and on the surrounding hills. This day Lieutenant Pillow with
Company A and Lieutenant Hannah with Company H were ordered to take and
hold the brush skirting the river and the sage bushes on the plain.
Lieutenant Fellows, with Company F, was directed to take and keep the
possession of the point at the foot of the hill. Lieutenant Jeffries
with Company B, Lieutenant Hand with Company I, and Captain Cornoyer
with Company K, were posted on three several points on the hills, with
orders to maintain them and to assail the enemy on other points of the
same hills. As usual, the Indians were driven from their position,
although they fought with skill and bravery.

"On the ninth, they did not make their appearance until about ten
o'clock in the morning, and then in somewhat diminished numbers. As I
had sent to Fort Henrietta for Companies D and E, and expected them
on the tenth, I thought it best to act on the defensive and hold our
positions, which were the same as on the eighth, until we could get
an accession to our forces sufficient to enable us to assail their
rear and cut off their retreat. An attack was made during the day on
Companies A and H in the brushwood, and upon B on the hill, both of
which were repulsed with great gallantry by those companies, and
with considerable loss to the enemy. Companies F, I, and K also did
honor to themselves in repelling all approaches to their positions,
although in doing so one man in Company F and one in Company I were
severely wounded. Darkness as usual closed the combat, by the enemy
withdrawing from the field. Owing to the inclemency of the night, the
companies on the hill were withdrawn from their several positions,
Company B abandoning the rifle pits which were made by the men for its
protection. At early dawn on the next day, the Indians were observed
from our camp to be in possession of all points held by us on the
preceding day. Upon seeing them, Lieutenant McAuliffe of Company B
gallantly observed that his company had dug those holes, and that after
breakfast they would have them again. And well was his declaration
fulfilled; for in less than half an hour the enemy were driven from the
rifle pits, and had fled to an adjoining hill which they had occupied
the day before. This position was at once assailed. Captain Cornoyer
with Company K and a portion of Company I, being mounted, gallantly
charged the enemy on his right flank, while Lieutenant McAuliffe
with Company B, dismounted, rushed up the hill in face of a heavy
fire, and scattered them in all directions. They at once fled in all
directions to return to this battlefield no more; and thus ended our
long-contested fight.

"I have already given you a list of the killed and wounded on the
first two days of the battle. On the last two days, we had only three
wounded, whose names you will find subjoined to this report. J. Fleming
of Company A, before reported as mortally wounded, has since died. I
am happy to state, however, that Private Jasper Snook of Company H,
reported by me as mortally wounded, is in a fair way to recover. The
surgeon informs me that all the wounded in the hospital are now doing
well. The loss of the enemy in killed, during the four days, I estimate
at about seventy-five. Thirty-nine dead bodies have already been found
by the volunteers; and many were carried off the field by their friends
and comrades. So that I think that my estimate is about correct. The
number of their wounded must, of course, be great. In making my report,
I cannot say too much in the praise of the conduct of the officers
of the several companies and most of the soldiers under my command.
They did their duty bravely and well during those four trying days of
battle. To Second Major Chinn, who took charge of the companies in the
bush by the river, credit is due for his bravery and skill, also to
Assistant Adjutant Monroe Atkinson for his efficiency and zeal as well
in the field as in the camp. And here, while giving to the officers and
men of the regiment the praise that is justly due, I cannot omit the
name of Hon. Nathan Olney, although he is not one of the volunteers.
Having accompanied me in the capacity of Indian agent, I requested him
to act as my aid, on account of his admitted skill in Indian warfare;
and, to his wisdom in council and daring courage on the field of
battle, I am much indebted and shall never cease to appreciate his
worth.

"Companies D and E having arrived from Fort Henrietta on the evening
of the tenth, the next morning I followed with all the available
troops along the Nez Perces' trail in pursuit of the Indians. On Mill
Creek, about twelve miles from here, we passed through their village,
numbering 196 fires, which had been deserted the night before. Much
of their provisions were scattered along the wayside, indicating that
they had fled in great haste to the north. We pursued them until it
was too dark to follow the track of their horses, when we camped on
Coppei Creek. On the twelfth we continued the pursuit until we passed
some distance beyond the station of Brooke, Noble and Bumford on the
Touchet, when we found the chase was in vain, as many of our horses
were completely broken down and the men on foot. We therefore returned
and arrived in camp on yesterday evening with about one hundred head of
cattle which the Indians left scattered along the trail in their flight.

"On the eleventh, while in pursuit of the enemy, I received a letter
from Narcisse Raymond by the hands of Tintinmetzy, a friendly chief
(which I enclose), asking our protection of the French and friendly
Indians under his charge.

"On the morning of the twelfth, I dispatched Captain Cornoyer with his
company to their relief. Mr. Olney, who accompanied them, returned
to camp this evening, and reports that Captain Cornoyer will return
tomorrow with Mr. Raymond and his people, who now feel greatly relieved
from their critical situation. Mr. Olney learned from these friendly
Indians what we before strongly believed, that the Palouses, Walla
Wallas, Umatillas, Cayuses, and Stock Whitley's band of Des Chutes
Indians were all engaged in the battle on the Walla Walla. These
Indians also informed Mr. Olney that, after the battle, the Palouses,
Walla Wallas, and Umatillas had gone partly to the Grande Ronde and
partly to the country of the Nez Perces, and that Stock Whitley,
disgusted with the manner in which the Cayuses fought in the battle,
has abandoned them and gone to the Yakima country to join his forces
with those of Kamiakin. We have now the undisputed possession of the
country south of the Snake River; and I would suggest the propriety
of retaining this possession until such time as it can be occupied by
the regular troops. The Indians have left much of their stock behind,
which will doubtless be lost to us if we go away. The troops here will
not be in a situation for some time to go to the Palouse country, as
our horses at present are too much jaded to endure the journey; and we
have no boats to cross Snake River and no timber to make them nearer
than this place. But I would suggest the propriety of following up the
Indians with all possible speed, now that their hopes are blighted and
their spirits broken. Unless this be done, they will perhaps rally
again.

"Today I received a letter from Governor Stevens, dated yesterday,
which I enclose. You will perceive that he is in favor of a vigorous
prosecution of the war. With his views I fully concur.

"I must earnestly ask that supplies be sent forward to us without
delay. For the last three days none of the volunteers, except the two
companies from Fort Henrietta, have had any flour. There is none here,
and but little at that post. We are now living on beef and potatoes
which are found _en cache_; and the men are becoming much discontented
with this mode of living. Clothing for the men is much needed as the
winter approaches. Tomorrow we will remove to a more suitable point,
where grass can be obtained in greater abundance for our worn-out
horses. A place has been selected about two miles above Whitman's
Station, on the same (north) side of the Walla Walla; consequently I
will abandon this fort, named in honor of Captain Bennett of Company F,
who now sleeps beneath its stockade, and whose career of usefulness and
bravery was here so sadly but nobly closed.

  "Very respectfully, your ob't serv't,
  "JAMES K. KELLY,
  "Lieut.-Col., Com'g Left Col."

A most bitterly disputed feature of this battle was the killing
of Peupeumoxmox. It has been esteemed by many as nothing short of
murder. The author of this work found difference of opinion among the
old-timers formerly resident in Walla Walla, as Lewis McMorris and
James McAuliffe, as to the rights and wrongs of the case. The former
narrated a ghastly story as follows: The Indian chief having been taken
prisoner with several followers was under guard. In the hottest of the
fight they undertook to escape. The guards shot them down. The body of
the old chieftain was mutilated. His ears were cut off and put in a jar
of whiskey in order to preserve them, and subsequently they were nailed
to the State House at Salem. But, according to McMorris, the whiskey
in the jar disappeared. It was believed by the soldiers that a certain
lieutenant had taken it for beverage purposes, and it was common for
someone in camp to bawl out at night when he could not be identified,
"Who drank the whiskey off of Peupeumoxmox's ears?" This event, while
so repulsive, casts a certain light on the conditions. Perhaps a fuller
view can be obtained by quoting the official superintendent, Joel
Palmer, as follows:

"We arrived near the camp (Walla Wallas) just before night (the 5th
of December), and were met by Peupeumoxmox and about fifty of his men
with a white flag. They asked for a talk. We halted (Colonel Kelly's
command) and demanded what he wanted. He said peace. We told him to
come with us and we would talk. He said no. We then told him to take
back his flag and we would fight. He said no. We then told him to take
his choice--go back and fight or come and stop with us. He chose the
latter. We retained him until the next day. We tried to come to an
understanding, but could not. We still retained him as a prisoner, with
four of his men who came along with him. The next morning, the seventh,
a large force attacked us as we left camp. In trying to escape from
their guard during the seventh, they were killed."

As presenting the other view of the subject, we quote from Colonel
Gilbert as follows:

"An important event transpired that day which it would be more proper
to designate as a disgraceful tragedy enacted, that is omitted from
this official report. The following is an account of it, as given to
the writer by Lewis McMorris, who was present at the time and saw what
he narrated. * * * The combatants had passed on up the valley, and the
distant detonation of their guns could be heard. The flag of truce
prisoners were there under guard, and everyone seemed electrified with
suppressed excitement. A wounded man came in with his shattered arm
dangling at his side, and reported Captain Bennett killed at the front.
This added to the excitement, and the attention of all was more or less
attracted to the wounded man, when some one said, 'Look out, or the
Indians will get away!' At this, seemingly, every one yelled, 'Shoot
'em! Shoot 'em!' and on the instant there was a rattle of musketry on
all sides.

"What followed was so quick, and there were so many acting that
McMorris could not see it in detail, though all was transpiring within
a few yards of, and around him. It was over in a minute, and three of
the five prisoners were dead; another was wounded, knocked senseless
and supposed to be dead, who afterwards recovered consciousness, and
was shot to put him out of misery, while the fifth was spared because
he was a Nez Perce. * * * All were scalped in a few minutes, and later
the body of Yellow Bird, the great Walla Walla chief, was mutilated in
a way that should entitle those who did it to a prominent niche in the
ghoulish temple erected to commemorate the infamous acts of soulless
men. Let us draw a screen upon this affair that has cast a shadow
over the otherwise bright record of Oregon volunteers in that war,
remembering, when we do so, that but few of them were responsible for
its occurrence."

Following this decisive victory of Colonel Kelly and his command, in
December, 1855, on the Walla Walla, a second regiment of Washington
volunteers was despatched for Walla Walla in the summer of 1856 in
command of Col. B. F. Shaw. On July 17, 1856, Colonel Shaw gained a
brilliant victory over the allied forces of the savages in the Grande
Ronde. While this important campaign was in progress, Governor Stevens
had his hands full in Western Washington. The little settlement
at Seattle had been nearly destroyed. Many of the settlers in the
scattered settlements on the sound had lost their lives, their homes
were destroyed and their stock driven off. In the spring the Klickitat
Indians had made a sudden dash upon the settlements on the Columbia
River between the White Salmon and the Cascades. A certain young
lieutenant, afterwards somewhat distinguished, fought his first battle
at the latter point. It was Phil Sheridan. In spite of these absorbing
events in Western Washington and at the Cascades, Governor Stevens,
realizing the vital importance of holding the allegiance of the Nez
Perces, proceeded to Walla Walla for another council. His location was
about two miles above the camp of 1855. Shortly after his arrival, Col.
E. J. Steptoe of the regular army made camp at the location of the
present fort.

And now came on the second great Walla Walla council. The tribes were
fathered as before, and were aligned as before. The division of Nez
Perces under Lawyer stood firmly by Stevens and the treaty. The others
did not. The most unfortunate feature of the entire matter was that
Colonel Steptoe, acting under General Wool's instructions, thus far
kept secret, refused to grant Stevens adequate support and subjected
him to humiliations which galled the fiery Governor to the limit. In
fact, had it not been for the vigilance of the faithful Nez Perces of
Lawyer's band, Stevens and his force would surely have met the doom
prepared for them at the first council. The debt of gratitude due
Lawyer is incalculable. Spotted Eagle ought to be recorded, too, as of
similar devotion and watchfulness. Governor Stevens afterward declared
that a speech by him in favor of the whites was equal in feeling,
truth, and courage to any speech that he ever heard from any orator
whatever.

But in spite of oratory, zeal, and argument, nothing could overcome
the influence of Kamiakin, Owhi, Quelchen, Five Crows and others of
the Yakimas and Cayuses. Nothing was gained. They stood just where
they were a year before. The fatal results of divided counsels between
regulars and volunteers were apparent.

The baffled Governor now started on his way down the river, but not
without another battle. For, as he was marching a short distance south
of what is now Walla Walla City, the Indians burst upon his small force
with the evident intention of ending all scores then and there. But
Colonel Steptoe established a rude stockade fort on Mill Creek in what
is now the heart of the present Walla Walla City, and went into winter
quarters there in 1856-57. Governor Stevens returned to Olympia and
launched forth a bitter arraignment against Wool. The latter, however,
was in a position of vantage and issued a proclamation commanding all
whites in the upper country to go down the river and leave the Cascade
Mountains as the eastern limit of the white settlement. Thus ended for
a time this unsatisfactory and distressing war. To all appearances
Kamiakin and his adherents had accomplished all they wanted.

But this was not the end. Gold had been discovered in Eastern
Washington. Vast possibilities of cattle raising were evident on those
endless bunch-grass hills. Although there was as yet little conception
of the future developments of the Inland Empire in agriculture and
gardening, yet the keen-eyed immigrants and volunteers had scanned the
pleasant vales and abounding streams of the Walla Walla and Umatilla
and Palouse, and had decided in their own minds that, Wool or no Wool,
this land most be opened. In 1857 the Government, as already noted,
decided on a change of policy and sent Gen. N. S. Clarke to take
Wool's place. General Clarke opened the gates, and the impatient army
of land hunters and gold hunters began to move in. Meanwhile, Colonel
Wright and Colonel Steptoe, though formerly they had closely followed
Wool's policy, now began to experience a change of heart. Out of these
conditions the third Indian war, in 1858, quickly succeeded the second,
being indeed its inevitable sequence.

Three campaigns marked this third war. The first was conducted by
Colonel Steptoe against the Spokanes and Coeur d'Alenes, and ended in
his humiliating and disastrous defeat. The second was directed by Major
Garnett against the Yakimas, resulting in their permanent overthrow.
The third was conducted by Colonel Wright against the Spokanes and
other northern tribes who had defeated Steptoe. This was the Waterloo
of the Indians, and it ushered in the occupation and settlement of the
upper Columbia country.

The Steptoe expedition, the first of that series of campaigns, was
one of the most disastrous in the history of Indian warfare. When the
command had reached a point near Four Lakes, probably the group of
which Silver Lake is largest, a formidable array of Indians met them,
all the hosts of the Spokanes, Pend Oreilles, and allied tribes. Seeing
the dangerous situation into which they were running, Steptoe gave the
word to retreat.

The force turned back and that night all seemed well. But at 9 o'clock
the next morning, while the soldiers were descending a canon to Pine
Creek, near the present site of Rosalia, a large force of Indians burst
upon them like a cyclone. As the battle began to wax hot the terrible
consequences of the error of lack of ammunition began to become
manifest. Man after man had to cease firing. Capt. O. H. P. Taylor and
Lieutenant Gaston commanded the rear-guard. With extraordinary skill
and devotion they held the line intact and foiled the efforts of the
savages to burst through. Meanwhile the whole force was moving as
rapidly as consistent with formation on their way southward. Taylor and
Gaston sent a messenger forward, begging Steptoe to halt the line and
give them a chance to load. But the commander felt that the safety of
the whole force depended on pressing on. Soon a fierce rush of Indians
followed, and, when the surge had passed, the gallant rear-guard was
buried under it. One notable figure in the death-grapple was De May, a
Frenchman, trained in the Crimea and Algeria, and an expert fencer. For
some time he used his gun barrel as a sword and swept the Indians down
by dozens with his terrific sweeps. But at last he fell before numbers
and one of his surviving comrades relates that he heard him shouting
his last words, "O my God, my God, for a sabre!"

But the lost rear-guard saved the rest. For they managed to hold
back the swarm of foes until nightfall, when they reached a somewhat
defensible position a few miles from the towering cone of what is now
known as Steptoe Butte. There they spent part of a dark, rainy, and
dismal night, anticipating a savage attack. But the Indians, sure of
their prey, waited till morning. Surely the first light would have
revealed a massacre equal to the Custer massacre of later date, had not
the unexpected happened. And the unexpected was that old Timothy, the
Nez Perce guide, knew a trail through a rough canon, the only possible
exit without discovery. In the darkness of midnight the shattered
command mounted and followed at a gallop the faithful Timothy, on
whose keen eyes and mind their satiation rested. The wounded and a few
footmen were dropped at intervals along the trail. After an eighty-mile
gallop during the day and night following, the yellow flood of Snake
River suddenly broke before them between its desolate banks. Saved! The
unwearied Timothy threw out his own warriors as a screen against the
pursuing foe, and set his women to ferrying the soldiers across the
turbulent stream.

Thus the larger part of the command reached Fort Walla Walla alive.

With the defeat of Steptoe, the Indians may well have felt that they
were invincible. But their exultation was short-lived. As already
noted, Garnett crushed the Yakimas at one blow, and Wright a little
later repeated Steptoe's march to Spokane, but did not repeat his
retreat. For in the battle of Four Lakes, on September 1st, and that
of Spokane Plains on September 5th, Wright broke forever the power and
spirits of the northern Indians.

The treaties were thus established at last by war. The reservations,
embracing the finest parts of the Umatilla, Yakima, Clearwater, and
Coeur d'Alene regions, were set apart, and to them after considerable
delay and difficulty the tribes were gathered.

With the end of this third great Indian war and the public announcement
by General Clarke that the country might now be considered open to
settlement, immigration began to pour in, and on ranch and river, in
mine and forest, the well-known labors of the American state-builders
and home-builders were displayed. The ever-new West was repeating
itself. Almost immediately upon the tidings of General Clarke's
proclamation, a motley throng of prospective miners, cowboys, pioneer
merchants, promoters and adventurers of all kinds began to pour into
the "Upper Country." The fur-traders, foreign missionaries, scouts, and
advance guard of pioneers were passing off the stage and the modern
builders were coming. The varied activities and enterprises of these
builders of the foundations during the decades of the '60s and '70s,
which may be styled the first division of the era of modern times will
compose Part Two of this volume.




PART II

SETTLEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT




CHAPTER I

THE PERMANENT ORGANIZATION OF WALLA WALLA COUNTY AND FOUNDING OF THE
CITY


In an earlier chapter we have narrated the first attempts by the first
Legislature of Washington Territory, in 1854, to establish Walla
Walla County. It consisted of the entire territory east of a line
running north from a point on the Columbia River opposite the mouth
of the Des Chutes River, practically at the present Fallbridge. Thus
the county included all of the present Eastern Washington, with the
entire present State of Idaho and about a fourth of Montana. The only
settlement in that vast area was around Waiilatpu and Frenchtown.
Though officers for the proposed county ware appointed, they did not
qualify and the proposed county never completed its organization. Then
came on the Indian wars, lasting till Colonel Wright's decisive victory
at Spokane in August and September, 1858, closed that era. Following
that event General Clarke's proclamation opened the "Upper Country" to
settlement. Not till the spring of 1859, however, did Congress ratify
the treaties for the three reservations, Nez Perce, Umatilla, and
Yakima. But almost immediately upon General Clarke's proclamation the
impatient immigration began to enter the Walla Walla Valley. We may
consider the immigrants of 1858 and 1859 as the vanguard of permanent
settlement. Yet, it should not be forgotten that several names of
permanent importance are found in the annals of 1851-55, during the
period between the Cayuse war and the Great War of 1855-58. Those names
appeared in the chapter on the Indian Wars.

A number of the pioneers of 1858-59 had been connected with those
wars, either as members of the United States army or as volunteers.
Others came from Oregon and California, full of the restless spirit
of the country and time, eager for the possibilities of a new land.
Those first locations were mainly in the near vicinity of the present
City of Walla Walla, with a few on the Touchet. While it is hardly
possible to avoid some omissions, we will endeavor to present a list
of those who, most of them with families, settled in the years named,
a few coming even prior to 1858. Some of them, it may be stated, came
and "looked" and then returned for family or equipment and came back
in a year for a permanence. A few here given left the country after
a few years, and others were simply transients. But in general they
with their families became essential factors in the upbuilding life
of the region. Among them were business men and professional men,
but the majority were stockmen. It was not realized that the general
body of upland was adapted to grain production. The first settlers
generally sought locations convenient to water, with bottom land where
they thought grain and vegetables might flourish, but with the range
of luxuriant bunch-grass as the essential consideration. Apparently
the first to become actually established in permanent locations were
Thomas Page, James Foster, Charles Russell, J. C. Smith, Christian
Maier, John Singleton, and Joseph McEvoy, all in the near vicinity of
Fort Walla Walla. That fort, it should be understood, was the one of
the present location, laid out in 1857, following the first American
fort of the name in the city limits of Walla Walla on Mill Creek near
the American Theater of today. Among the pioneer business men of the
same time were three worthy of special note whose coming inaugurated
the business history of Walla Walla. These were Dorsey S. Baker, Almos
H. Reynolds, and William Stephens. Worthy of special mention in this
connection is Mrs. Almos H. Reynolds, the first white woman to reside
in the Walla Walla Valley, after the period of the Whitman Mission.
Mrs. Reynolds, nee Lettice Millican, was a member of the immigration
of 1843, lived during childhood and youth in Oregon, was married to
Ransom Clark and came with him in 1855 to a donation land claim on
Yellowhawk Creek. Driven from their home by the Indian War of 1855, Mr.
and Mrs. Clark returned to Oregon, and there Mr. Clark died in 1859.
With remarkable fortitude and courage, Mrs. Clark returned at once to
complete residence and make proof on the valuable claim, the Government
having cancelled the lapse of time covered by the wars. In 1861 Mrs.
Clark was married to Mr. Reynolds and the remainder of the lives of
both was spent in the city which they did so much to advance.

In connection with the reference to the Ransom Clark donation land
claim, it is of interest to record the fact that there were five such
claims established in the Walla Walla Valley. To those not familiar
with the early history of Oregon it may be well to explain that the
Provisional Government in 1843 provided that each American citizen in
Oregon might locate 320 acres of land, or each married couple might
have double that amount. That offer was one of the great incentives
to immigration, though it would, of course, have been nugatory if the
United States had not got the country. When Oregon was acquired by the
United States that law was confirmed by Congress. The law lasted but
ten years after the acquisition of Oregon, and almost all the locations
under it were in the Willamette and Umpqua valleys. There were a few,
however, in the Cowlitz Valley and on the north side of the Columbia
and on streams entering Puget Sound. Mr. and Mrs. Clark were the
only locators who came here from the Willamette Valley purposely to
locate a donation claim. There were, however, three former members of
the Hudson's Bay Company who located donation claims in the vicinity
of Frenchtown. These were Louis Dauney, Narcisse Remond (or Raymond
it appears on the Land Office map), and William McBean. In addition
to those four donation claims, the United States Government allowed
the American Foreign Missionary Society a square mile of land at the
Whitman Mission, and in 1859 Cushing Eells purchased their right and
established himself upon the claim. The St. Rose Mission also had a
filing at Frenchtown, but did not complete proof.

[Illustration: THE ORIGINAL RANSOM CLARK CABIN

Built in 1859, and occupied by Mrs. Clark, then a widow, and her three
children, who are now living in Walla Walla and who appear in the
picture; Charles W. Clark, Lizzie Clark (Mrs. B. L. Baker), and William
S. Clark]

A number of names of the "advance guard" will be found in this chapter
under the heads of county and city officials. In order, however, to
present all in one view, we are giving here as complete a list as
possible of the settlers of 1857-58-59. It is derived in part from the
record in "Historic Sketches" by Col. F. F. Gilbert, and in part from
the records of the Inland Empire Pioneer Association, supplemented by
personal inquiry by the author. It is inevitable that a name here and
there should be omitted and the author and publishers will appreciate
any further information from pioneer sources.

PIONEERS PRIOR TO 1860

  John F. Abbott
  H. C. Actor
  Charles Albright
  Milton Aldrich
  Newton Aldrich
  C. R. Allen
  F. M. Archer
  Wm. H. Babcock
  Chester N. Babcock
  D. S. Baker
  S. D. Baldwin
  W. A. Ball
  Joseph Bauer
  Charles Bellman
  Wm. Bingham
  A. A. Blanchard
  Mrs. Elizabeth J. Blanchard
  P. J. Boltrie
  E. Bonner
  D. D. Brannan
  E. H. Brown
  H. N. Bruning
  James Buckley
  John Bush
  John Cain
  J. M. Canaday
  C. H. Case
  J. Clark
  Ransom Clark and sons
  Charles and William
  Mrs. Ransom Clark
  George E. Cole
  J. M. Craigie
  Louis Dauney
  George Delaney
  W. S. Davis
  N. B. Denny
  J. M. Dewar
  James Dobson
  Jesse Drumheller
  N. B. Dutro
  N. Eastman
  R. A. Eddy
  Cushing Eells
  W. L. Elroy
  S. H. Erwin
  Edward Evarts
  J. H. Fairchild
  Wm. Fink
  J. Foresythe
  James W. Foster
  J. Freedman
  James Fudge
  James Galbreath
  S. S. Gilbreath
  Thomas Gilkerson
  W. S. Gilliam
  Braziel Grounds
  Ralph Guichard
  W. R. Hammond
  Joseph W. Harbert
  Solomon Hardman
  Martin H. Hauber
  Daniel Hayes
  Samuel E. Hearn
  Joseph Hellmuth
  H. H. Hill
  Henry Howard
  Thomas Hughes
  Lycurgus Jackson
  Samuel Johnson
  James Johnston
  Wm. B. Kelly
  Robert Kennedy
  Michael Kenny
  James Kibler
  L. L. Kinney
  Wm. Kohlhauff
  J. M. Lamb
  Samuel Legart
  A. G. Lloyd
  J. C. Lloyd
  Francis F. Loehr
  James McAuliffe
  Wm. McBean
  M. C. McBride
  Robert McCool
  Thomas McCoy
  Joseph McEvoy
  J. W. McGhee
  Neil McGlinchy
  Wm. McKinney
  Lewis McMorris
  Wm. McWhirk
  Christian Maier
  John Mahan
  John Makin
  John Manion
  Pat Markey
  S. R. Maxson
  John May
  Wm. Millican
  R. G. Moffit
  Louis A. Mullan
  Lewis Neace
  James O'Donnell
  John O'Donnell
  Robert Oldham
  Frank Orselli
  Thomas P. Page
  A. D. Pambrun
  Edward D. Pearce
  Jonathan Pettyjohn
  John Picard
  Francis Pierrie
  George T. Pollard
  P. Powel
  I. T. Reese
  Mrs. C. Regan
  R. H. Reighart
  A. H. Reynolds
  R. A. Rice
  Thomas Riley
  A. B. Roberts
  A. H. Robie
  J. J. Rohn
  Charles Russell
  Mrs. Louisa Saunders
  Louis Scholl
  Mrs. Elizabeth Fulton Scholl
  Marshall Seeke
  J. M. Sickler
  John M. Silcott
  J. A. Sims
  Charles Silverman
  John Singleton
  J. C. Smith
  S. D. Smith
  H. H. Spalding
  Wm. Stephens
  B. F. Stone
  Frank Stone
  Christian Sturm
  T. J. Sweazea
  W. J. Terry
  John Tempany
  Augustus Von Hinkle
  W. W. Walter
  A. G. P. Wardle
  R. Warmack
  John Welch
  E. B. Whitman
  Jonas Whitney
  Mrs. M. A. Wightman
  W. W. Wiseman
  Thomas Wolf
  F. L. Worden

As it was becoming evident that Walla Walla possessed the resources and
attractions for drawing and sustaining a large population of the best
American citizenship, the Legislature of the territory passed an act
on January 19, 1859, to provide a government for Walla Walla County.
Meanwhile, however, the limits of the county had been greatly reduced,
for in 1858 Spokane County had been laid out and this embraced the
larger part of the vast area covered by the first Walla Walla County.
In 1859, Klickitat County (spelled Clikatat in the Act), embracing
the area between the Columbia River and the Cascades, was erected.
By these two acts Walla Walla County was reduced to the area south
of Snake River and east of the Columbia. Or it would have been so
reduced, if the organization of Spokane County had been practically
accomplished. But it was not, and in 1863, the new Territory of Idaho
was established by act of Congress, and at about the same time Stevens
County in Washington was laid out, covering Eastern Washington east
of the Columbia and north of Snake River, and including the abortive
County of Spokane. Not till 1879 did Spokane become a separate county.
It is interesting to note also that with Stevens the County of Ferguson
was created, including what now composes the counties of Kittitas,
Yakima, and Benton. In the general shuffle of time and fate the name
of Ferguson has disappeared, but Stevens still remains to perpetuate
geographically (there is little need historically) the name of the
doughty and invincible first Governor of Washington Territory, though
the land area covered by the name has been greatly reduced by the
successive subtractions of Whitman, Spokane, Adams, Franklin, Grant,
Lincoln, Okanogan, Chelan, and Ferry counties.

By the act of 1859 referred to, the necessary officers of Old Walla
Walla County were established as follows: County Commissioners, John
Mahan, Walter R. Davis, and John C. Smith (better known as Sergeant
Smith); Sheriff, Edward D. Pearce; Auditor, R. H. Reighart; Probate
Judge, Samuel D. Smith; Justice of the Peace, J. A. Sims. Commissioners
Mahan and Davis met at Walla Walla on March 15, 1859, and to fill
vacancies left by the non-acceptance of the auditor and sheriff,
appointed James Galbreath for the former and Lycurgus Jackson for
the latter position. At a meeting of the commissioners on March 26,
1859, they found it necessary to make changes again in the personnel
of county officers. As a result the following assumed office in their
respective places: E. H. Brown, probate judge; Lycurgus Jackson,
assessor; Neil McGlinchy county treasurer; and William B. Kelly,
superintendent of schools.

The next stage in the political evolution of the county was the
appointment of a date for general election. This was set for the
following July. The county was divided into two voting precincts,
Steptoeville, and Dry Creek. The former seems to have included the
region centering around the United States Fort Walla Walla, and
thence down Mill Creek to the Walla Walla. There was a general habit
of designating the region around the fort as Steptoeville, a clumsy
and illogical name, for it is not euphonious nor would it seem that
it would have been popular, for certainly the officer who met such
disastrous defeat at the hands of the Spokane Indians did not bring
great glory to the Stars and Stripes nor great security to possible
settlement. Fortunately the name was not preserved. The election place
in "Steptoeville" was appointed at the house of W. J. Terry but that
was subsequently changed to "The Church at Steptoeville." The only
church here at that time seems to have been a Catholic church built at
some time in 1859 on the location of the subsequent McGillivray house,
afterward occupied by Jacob Betz, near the present home of George
Welch. The "church," we may say in passing, consisted of poles stuck
in the ground and covered with shakes. It had no floor and its only
seating facilities consisted of one bench. J. A. Sims, Wm. B. Kelly,
and Wm. McWhirk were the judges and Thomas Hughes the clerk for the
election in "Steptoeville" precinct. In Dry Creek precinct, which seems
to have included all the rest of the county to the east and north, the
election board consisted of E. Bonner, J. M. Craigie, and Wm. Fink.
The clerk was W. W. Wiseman. The polling place was at the residence
of J. C. Smith. That was the first real election in Walla Walla
County or anywhere in Eastern Washington, though there had been "kind
of" an election in 1855 among the few settlers around Waiilatpu and
Frenchtown. It is worth noting that the retiring board of commissioners
had two meetings prior to the election. One of these was on June 6th,
and at that meeting it was voted to pay $20.00 per month for the rent
of a building for a courthouse and to impose a tax of seven mills. At a
meeting on July 2d the resignation of James Galbreath was presented and
Augustus Von Hinkle was appointed for the vacancy. At the same meeting
the name of Waiilatpu was substituted for Steptoeville.

The election of July seems to have duly occurred, but apparently the
records have been lost. That officers were duly chosen appears from
the fact that on September 5th the new board of commissioners met and
determined their terms of service: Charles Russell, one year; John
Mahan two years and Wm. McWhirk three years. The following incumbents
of county offices were elected: I. T. Reese, auditor; Lycurgus Jackson,
sheriff; Neil McGlinchy, treasurer; Thomas P. Page, assessor; C. H.
Case, surveyor; J. M. Canaday, justice of the peace. I. T. Reese was
granted $40.00 per month for the building used as the courthouse,
and that building was nearly opposite the present courthouse. The
county hired the upper story, the lower being a saloon. On November
17, 1859, the board of commissioners voted to locate the county seat
at the point first named "Steptoeville," then Waiilatpu, but now by
their vote duly christened Walla Walla. Thus, on November 17, 1859,
the "Garden City" officially entered the world under the name by which
the Indians at the junction of the Big Rivers introduced themselves
to Lewis and Clark, the first white explorers, and preserved, though
with many changes of spelling, through the era of the Hudson's Bay
Company, and by that company applied to the fort on the Columbia. Now
by the action of the first elected board of county commissioners the
musical name was attached to the newly established town of 1859. It
is worthy of notice that the name is commonly supposed to mean the
"Valley of Waters," referring to the numerous springs in the vicinity
of the city. The author has been told by "Old Bones," an Indian of the
Cayuse tribe who lived for many years near Lyons' Ferry on Snake River
and was known to all old-timers, that the name was understood by the
natives to signify that section of country below Waiilatpu, "where the
four creeks meet;" viz., the Walla Walla, Touchet, Mill Creek, and
Dry Creek. The Walla Walla above that point was commonly known to the
Indians as "Tum-a-lum." The sound "Wall" is common in Indian words
all over the Northwest as Willamette, Wallula, Wallowa, Waiilatpu,
or, as some got it, Wallatpu. Many poetical and some prosaic accounts
have been given of the origin of the name. Among others, Joaquin
Miller, "Poet of the Sierras," insisted that when the French voyageurs
first looked down from the Blue Mountains ("Les Montagnes Bleues" in
their Gallic speech) upon the fair fertile valley, they exclaimed:
"Voila, Voila!" (Behold, behold!) and thus the name became fixed. This
fantastic idea is, however, easily disproved by the fact that Lewis and
Clark, who entered the country by Snake River, got the name from the
Indians on the Columbia near the mouth of the Walla Walla. In the same
connection, while speaking of the local names used by the aborigines,
it is of interest to observe that the commonplace appellation of Mill
Creek for the beautiful stream which flows through Walla Walla City has
supplanted a far more fit and attractive native name. It is somewhat
variously pronounced and hence spelled. Rev. Henry Spalding gives it as
Pasha. Thomas Beall of Lewiston gives it as Pashki. Others have gotten
the sound as Paskau, or Pashkee. It seems to signify "sunflower."
Mr. Beall regards the name as applying rather to the tract of land
extending a mile or two above Walla Walla where the sunflower is very
frequent than to the creek itself. Another mellifluous name said to
be used by some of the natives is "Imchaha." It is truly regrettable
that so common a name as Mill Creek should have become fastened upon so
attractive a feature of the city.

As indicated above, the location of the United States Fort Walla Walla
was largely determinative of the location of the city. The first
business of the region arose for the purpose of providing supplies for
the fort. Several of those whom we have named in the "Advance Guard"
were directly connected with that business. An example is found in
Charles Russell who was connected with the quartermaster's department
of the fort, and seeing the heavy burden of transporting supplies from
the Willamette Valley determined to test the valley land. Accordingly
he sowed eighty acres to barley at a point north of the fort on what
later became the Drumheller place. It yielded fifty bushels to the
acre. In the same season Mr. Russell raised a hundred acres of oats
on the place which he soon after took up on the creek which bears his
name. That might be regarded as the inauguration of agriculture in this
vicinity though it should be remembered that Dr. Whitman twenty years
before had raised prolific crops of all kinds at Waiilatpu. Wm. McWhirk
was the first merchant in Walla Walla. He erected a tent for a store
in the spring of 1857 at a point near what is now the corner of Main
and Second streets. During the fall of the same year, Charles Bellman
set up another tent store at the point occupied by the Jack Daniels
saloon for many years at the site of the present "Togs." Apparently the
old-timers are at variance as to the builder and location of the first
actual building. Some have asserted that Wm. McWhirk erected, in the
summer of 1857, a cabin on the north side of Main Street, nearly where
the Farmers' Savings Bank now stands, and that in the fall of the same
year Charles Bellman put up a structure a little east of that at about
the point of the Young and Lester florist location. In April, 1858,
Lewis McMorris erected a slab and shakes structure for Neil McGlinchy
on about the present southwest corner of Main and Third. Various rude
buildings appeared in 1858, some for residences, some for saloons
(which we regret to record seems to have been a very active line of
business at that time). These were constructed by James Galbreath, W.
A. Ball, Harry Howard, Michael Kenny, William Terry, John Mahan, James
Buckley, and Thomas Riley. The first building with floor, doors, and
glass windows was erected by Ralph Guichard and Wm. Kohlhauff at the
point now occupied by the White House Clothing Store at the northwest
corner of Main and Third.

At that time there were two rival locations: one at the point started
by McWhirk, McGlinchy, and Bellman, and the other at a cabin built by
Henry Howard, known as the "half-way house;" i.e., half-way to the
fort. Spirituous refreshment seems to have been much appreciated by
the gallant defenders of their country at the Fort Walla Walla of that
time, and a half-way house was quite a desirable accessory of a trip
to "town." As we have already noted, there was a difference of opinion
as to the name of the town, but that of Walla Walla finally prevailed
over all rivals. On November 17, 1859, the commissioners laid out the
town with the following boundaries: Commencing in the center of Main
Street at Mill Creek, thence running north 440 yards, thence running
west one-half mile to a stake, thence running south one-half mile to
a stake, thence running east one-half mile to a stake, thence running
north to the place of commencement; 160 acres in all.

The town government was organized by the appointment of a recorder,
I. T. Reese, and three trustees, F. C. Worden, Samuel Baldwin, and
Neil McGlinchy. The town was surveyed by C. H. Case, providing streets
eighty feet wide running north and south, and one hundred feet wide
running east and west. The lots were laid out with a sixty-foot front
and a depth of 120 feet. They were to be sold for $5.00 each, with the
addition of $1.00 for recording, and no one person could buy more than
two of them. Ten acres also were set aside for a town square and the
erection of public buildings, but this was reduced to one acre.

The first lots sold were those taken by I. T. Reese and Edward Evarts,
both in block 13, the sale being recorded November 30, 1859. On
December 22d, of the same year, 150 acres of land was surveyed into
town property for Thomas Wolf and L. C. Kinney, the former soon selling
his interest to the latter.

The original plat of the town is not now in existence, having been
destroyed, probably by the fire of 1865. The earliest survey on record
is a plat made in October, 1861, by W. W. Johnson, which purports to be
a correction of the work of C. H. Case.

On November 5, 1861, the board declared the survey made by W. W.
Johnson to be official, and W. A. George was employed as an attorney
to secure for the county a preemption title to the land on which Walla
Walla was built. W. W. Johnson was appointed to take steps to secure
the title at the Vancouver land office, but he did not do so, and thus
the effort of the county to secure the site failed. This ended what
might be called the embryonic stage in the municipal life of Walla
Walla, and we find the next stage to be actual incorporation.

The City of Walla Walla was originally incorporated by an act of the
Territorial Legislature, passed on January 11, 1862. By the provisions
of said act the city embraced within its limits the south half of the
southwest quarter of section 20, township 7 north, range 36 east,
of the Willamette meridian. The charter made provision also for the
election, on the first Tuesday in April of each year, of a mayor,
recorder, five councilmen, marshal, assessor, treasurer and surveyor,
all vacancies, save in the offices of mayor and recorder, to be
filled by appointment by the council, which was also given the power
of appointing a clerk and city attorney. No salary was to attach to
the offices of mayor or councilman until the population of the city
had reached one thousand individuals, when the stipend awarded these
officers was to be fixed by an ordinance enacted by the council. The
charter designated the following officers to serve until the first
regular election under said charter: Mayor, B. P. Standefer; recorder,
James Galbreath; councilmen, H. C. Coulson, B. F. Stone, E. B. Whitman,
D. S. Baker, and M. Schwabacher; marshal, George H. Porter. The council
assembled on the 1st of March to perfect its organization, when it
developed that Mr. Schwabacher was ineligible for office, as was also
Mr. Coulson, who proved to be a non-resident. Mr. Stone presiding, the
council proceeded to fill the two vacancies by balloting, and James
McAuliff and George E. Cole thus became members of the council, S.
F. Ledyard being appointed clerk. The council again met, pursuant to
adjournment, on the 4th of the same month, when Mr. Cole was chosen
chairman; Edward Nugent, city attorney; and Messrs. McAuliff, Whitman
and Stone were appointed to prepare a code of rules for the government
of the council.

Four hundred and twenty-two votes were cast at the first election, held
April 1, 1862, the following being the result: Mayor, E. B. Whitman;
councilmen, J. F. Abbott, R. Jacobs, I. T. Reese, B. F. Stone and B.
Sheideman; recorder, W. P. Horton; marshal, George H. Porter; attorney,
Edward Nugent; assessor, L. W. Greenwell; treasurer, E. E. Kelly;
surveyor, A. I. Chapman; clerk, S. F. Ledyard. On the 11th of April,
W. Phillips was appointed councilman in place of J. F. Abbott, while
in the succeeding year it appears that H. Hellmuth had been appointed
in the place of B. F. Stone. The recorder resigned in January, 1863,
his successor, J. W. Barry, being chosen at a special election held
on the last day of that month. H. B. Lane succeeded Mr. Greenwell as
assessor; on April 11, 1862, Henry Howard was appointed treasurer, and
W. W. DeLacy, surveyor, while in January, 1863, H. B. Lane was noted as
clerk. The city revenue for the first six months aggregated $4,283.25,
of which sum liquor and gaming licenses contributed $1,875. When it is
remembered that this was at the height of the gold excitement, this
last item may be well understood.

During the last quarter of the year the revenue of the new city was
$2,714.19, but so large were the expenditures that the opening of the
year 1863 found in the treasury a balance of less than five dollars.
The value of property in the city was assessed in 1862 at $300,000, the
succeeding year witnessing the increase of the same to $500,000.

Such may be regarded as the establishment of Walla Walla City up to
the time of incorporation. During the period from January 19, 1859,
the appointment by the Legislature of the Territory of officers for
the county, down to the date of the incorporation of the city, the
county organization had been launched after the typical American
fashion. The two only absolutely sure things in this world--death and
taxes--were established. It is certain that there were deaths in that
time, and at the meeting of the county commissioners on May 7, 1860, a
tax levy of seven mills was voted. At the same meeting the county was
redivided into voting precincts for the coming election in July. It
gives some conception of the points of the beginnings of settlements to
note that the precincts were as follows: Walla Walla, Dry Creek, Snake
River, East Touchet, and West Touchet. Coppei Creek was the dividing
line between the two last-named precincts. The following extract from
Colonel Gilbert's "Historic Sketches" will give a view of conditions:

"At this election the question of whether a tax for building a
courthouse and jail should be levied, was submitted to the people, and
though, as before stated, no returns are on file, a negative vote is
indicated from the fact that neither were built at that time, prisoners
being sent to Fort Vancouver for incarceration. From their official
bonds it appears that the following named were the successful aspirants
for office at the election of July, 1860:

  Auditor and Recorder--James Galbreath.
  Sheriff--James A. Buckley.
  Surveyor--M. J. Noyse.
  Assessor--C. Langley.
  Coroner--Almiron Dagget.
  Justice of Peace, Walla Walla--William J. Horton.
  Justice of Peace, Dry Creek--John Sheets.
  Justice of Peace, East Touchet--Horace Strong.
  Justice of Peace, West Touchet--Elisha Everetts.
  Justice of Peace, ---- ---- --William B. Kelly.

"No footprint of transactions coming under supervision of the board
while this set of officers were acting, prior to October 12, 1861,
remains, and we are forced to skip the intervening time, and commence
again with the latter date. A county election had occurred in July,
1861, and W. H. Patton, S. Maxson and John Sheets appear at this time
as the board of commissioners. November 5th, Sheriff James Buckley, who
was ex officio tax collector, was appointed county assessor in place of
S. Owens, who, having been elected in 1861, failed to qualify. On the
8th of the same month a contract was given Charles Russell to build a
county jail at a cost of $3,350. He finished the work in 1862, was paid
$6,700 in script for it, and in 1881 re-purchased the same building
from the county for $120, and, tearing it down, moved it out to his
ranch.


CONDITION OF THE COUNTY IN 1860

"Up to 1861, there had been nothing of special moment, calculated for
inducing emigration to settle in the vicinity of the Blue Mountains.
There was unoccupied land enough in various parts of the United States
to prevent its soil from being much of an inducement, and, at that
time the agricultural portion of Eastern Washington was supposed to
exist in limited quantities. There was, practically, no market for
farm products, as they would not pay the expense of shipment, and,
outside of the garrison, its employes and dependents, there was no
one to purchase them; still a few people had found their way into the
country from Oregon, in 1859 and 1860, with stock, and had taken up
ranches along the various streams. Very few came to locate with a view
of establishing a home here, their purpose being to graze stock for
a few years and then abandon the country, raising some grain in the
meantime for their own use, and possibly a little to sell, if anybody
should wish to buy. Had the military post been abandoned in 1860, but
few whites would have remained east of the Cascades, and stock raising
would have been the only inducement for any one to remain there."

Perhaps in no other way can we give so perfect a view of the Walla
Walla of 1861 as by extracts from the first issue of the _Washington
Statesman_. The beginning of the paper was itself one of the most
notable events of the time. It was not only the first newspaper in
Walla Walla, but the first in the whole vast region between the
Missouri and the Cascade Mountains. We are indebted to Dr. Frank Rees
for the opportunity to use the priceless treasure of a complete file
of the paper for the period from the first number, November 29, 1861,
through the remainder of that year and those following. We find at
the heading of this paper that it was issued every Friday morning and
that N. Northrop, R. D. Smith and R. R. Rees were the editors and
proprietors, and that the office was on Main Street, Walla Walla, W. T.
The rates of subscription were $5.00 per year, $2.50 for six months,
and 25 cents for a single copy.

We quote here several paragraphs from the opening editorial:

"We send forth this morning, with our congratulations, the first number
of the _Washington Statesman_, and respectfully solicit the attention
of the people of Walla Walla and county to its pages. From a careful
consideration of the demands of the people to whom we shall look
for support in sustaining a weekly newspaper at this point, we feel
warranted in the conviction that we are inaugurating an enterprise
which will be a means of vastly enhancing the development, prosperity,
and permanent interests of this most favorable section of the upper
country, and which, conducted with prudence and economy, will be
reasonably remunerative to its projectors.* * *

"That a weekly publication, devoted to the various interests of the
country, containing all the news which may be gathered from different
quarters, is essentially needed in the Walla Walla Valley, we premise
no permanent resident will deny; this admitted, we have no misgivings
as to the disposition of the people to come forward and promptly
sustain an enterprise so materially calculated to further their own
interests as a community. Hence, we expect at least that every man who
is fortunate enough to possess a home in this beautiful valley will at
once subscribe for the _Statesman_, and pay for it in advance. Home
pride will prompt every man to do thus much for the benefit of the
vicinity in which he has chosen his residence, even if he already has
more papers than he finds time to read."

Following this introduction the editorial points out the special need
of the farmer, the stockraiser, the merchant, and the mechanic in the
existence and support of such a paper.

The editorial then proceeds to indicate its policy as follows:

"As indicated in our prospectus, the _Statesman_ will be independent
on all subjects. By independent we do not mean neutral; but, when
occasion requires, we shall express our views fearlessly upon all
subjects legitimate for newspaper discussion; and in doing this, we
shall be our own advisers and regulate our own business in our own
way. The _Statesman_ will not be devoted to the interests or claims of
any political party; but ignoring partisan measures, will adhere to
and support those measures which in our judgment are best calculated
to preserve and perpetuate the bonds of our national union, under
whose yet waving and revered flag alone we hope for success. * * *
Arrangements will soon be completed for obtaining all the items of news
from the different leading points in the mines, and from various places
within this territory and Oregon bearing relations to us commercially
or otherwise. * * *

"The coming season with us at home will be an auspicious one. Adding to
the importance of the developments which must immediately follow in the
train of an immigration to the upper country in extent unparalleled,
the course and progress of which our people should all be made aware
of--adding to this the mighty results developing in the East, it can
readily be seen that material is afforded for making up a paper which
will be indispensable to the people of this section, as well as those
of the territory at large.

"We shall liberally distribute copies of this number in the different
sections where we desire the paper to circulate; and we take the
present occasion to request the people generally of this valley and
the upper country to call and furnish themselves with copies for
distribution in their several neighborhoods, thereby lending us a hand
in obtaining a subscription list as early as possible."

We find most of the news items in this first number of the _Statesman_
to pertain to the mines in Idaho. There is a correspondence between
Henry M. Chase and Capt. E. D. Pearce in regard to certain captive
children in the hands of the Indians. The tone of this correspondence
shows something of the strenuous conditions of those days of war and
pioneer settlement.

The most notable local event apparently was the Firemen's ball, given
by the members of the Union Hook and Ladder Company at the Walla Walla
Hotel. This news item declares that the ball was a successful and
brilliant affair and that the smiling faces and social congratulations
of the large number of ladies and gentlemen present well attested how
eminently successful had been the efforts of the firemen to render the
occasion in every respect a pleasant one. The mottoes displayed in
the room were quite interesting as showing what the ambitious firemen
of that first period wanted to set forth as guiding them. The motto
of the Union Hook and Ladder Company was "We Destroy to Save." There
were several mottoes from Portland and The Dalles fire companies, as
follows: "Willamette No. 1, Conquer We Must;" "Multnomah No. 2, On
Hand;" "Columbian No. 3, Always Willing;" "Young America No. 4, Small,
but Around;" "Vigilance Hook and Ladder Company, We Climb;" "Dalles
Hook and Ladder Company, We Raze to Save."

Another local item of some interest is to the effect that the Robinson
Theatrical Troupe had been performing in the city for several weeks,
almost every night having crowded houses and appreciative audiences.
A little description is given of the new theater, which it states is
situated in the lower part of town, but a short walk from the business
part of the city. The city editor exhorts all the people in town to
patronize this theater for the sake of spending a pleasant evening.

Another item of historic interest is the statement that orders have
been forwarded to Lieutenant Mullan instructing him to send back his
escort of one hundred United States soldiers, who had been laying out
the great road known as the "Mullan Road." The party at that time was
in the Bitter Root Mountains, and it was considered impracticable for
them to cross those mountains in the winter season.

Although, as will be seen from the date of this paper, the time was the
opening of the Civil war, yet it is noticeable that there was a great
scarcity of information in regard to that great event. The latest news
of any kind from the East is dated November 15th, just two weeks before
the date of publication of the paper.

Another news item is to the effect that on account of an unpardonable
delay in the arrival of material, press, and fixtures, from The Dalles,
the publication of the first issue was delayed beyond expectation. The
proprietors seem to feel very bad over this delay.

The advertisements in this first number of the _Statesman_ are of
great interest. Among a number beyond our space to quote here we
find an entire column devoted to the wholesale and retail business
of Kyger & Reese. They seem to have been prepared to deal in almost
every conceivable object of need in the way of clothing, groceries,
hardware, crockery, drugs, medicines, books and stationery, as well as
some supply of the spirituous refreshments which were so much desired
at that time. We find several advertisements of stage companies; among
others the Walla Walla and Dalles Stage Company, which advertises to
make the run between the two places in two days. Miller and Blackmore
were the proprietors. We find also the advertisement of Abbott's
Livery, Sale and Exchange Stables on Main Street. The Oregon Steam
Navigation Company advertises the steamers Julia, Idaho, and Tenino,
running between Portland and the Nez Perce mines with portages at
the Cascades and The Dalles. The fare from Portland to The Dalles
was $8.00, with an extra charge for portage at the Cascades. Animals
from Portland to The Dalles were $5.00. The fare from Des Chutes to
Wallula was $15.00. A number of names prominent later on in the legal
and medical history of Walla Walla, appear in the advertising columns.
Among the physicians we find L. C. Kinney, L. Terry, R. Bernhard, J.
A. Mullan, L. Danforth, and I. H. Harris. Among the lawyers we find W.
A. George and I. N. Smith. We find a very small advertisement by D. S.
Baker, in which the strong point is of a fire-proof, brick building.
That was the only fire-proof, brick building in Walla Walla at that
time.

By way of comparison with the present cost of living, it is of some
interest to give the Walla Walla prices current as appearing in that
issue of the _Statesman_. The following are the items:

  Bacon--Per lb., 25c.
  Flour--Per hundred, $5 to $6.
  Beans--Per lb., 12c to 15c.
  Sugar--China, 18c to 20c; New Orleans, 23c to 25c; Island 20c to 22c;
    crushed, 26c.
  Rice--Per lb., 18c to 20c.
  Dried Apples--Per lb., 20c to 25c.
  Yeast Powders--Per doz., $4 to $6.
  Candles--Per lb., 60c.
  Soap--Hill's, per lb. 17-1/2c; Fay's, 16c.
  Tobacco--Per lb., 60c to $1.
  Nails--Per lb., 16-2/3c.
  Butter--Fresh Rolls, per lb., 75c; Oregon, 50c.
  Eggs--Per doz., $1.
  Oats--Per lb., 2-1/2c to 3c.
  Wheat--Per bushel, $1.25 to $1.50.

The reader of that first issue of the _Statesman_ would readily arrive
at the conclusion that business was booming in Walla Walla and that
there was a demand for almost all of the commodities common in any new
and active community. The philanthropist is somewhat pained indeed to
observe the large amount of attention paid to the liquor business in
its various forms. The Nez Perce mines and the various stage lines
seemed to demand a large share of attention, both in advertising and in
news items. After all, people are very much the same from generation to
generation and we can readily infer that what the people of Walla Walla
were in the '60s, their children and grandchildren are largely the same
in this year of grace, 1917.

In the early history of the territory before government was organized
to protect life and punish criminals, the miners organized courts of
their own to try those who committed any crime within the camp, but
there were no courts to try the criminals whose work was outside of the
miner's camp. As a result crime flourished in the towns that supplied
the camps and on the road between the town and the camp.

There were organized bands of criminals who plundered the merchant
in the town, the packer and the stage on the road, and the miners to
and from the different camps. The members of these organizations had
pass words by which they could make themselves known to each other,
routes along which they operated, stations where members of the gang
were located. They also had members in every camp and town engaged
in various occupations, trades and callings. Stage stand tenders
and sometimes the drivers themselves were members of the gang, and
when organized government was established they succeeded in getting
themselves elected to the office of sheriff, marshal, etc. These men
knew when every pack train started, what it had, where it went and how
much gold dust it brought back on its return; watched every stranger
and learned his business; took notice of every good horse; knew of the
departure of every stage, the number of passengers and the probable
treasure carried. The lone traveler was robbed of his horse by a false
bill of sale. The returning packers were held up, robbed and sometimes
murdered. The stage was stopped, the passengers ordered out and
relieved of all their money and other valuables. Frequently the Wells
Fargo box containing thousands of dollars would be among the prizes
taken from the stage.

One of the most noted of these road agents was Henry Plummer. He came
of a good family, was gentlemanly in bearing, dignified in deportment,
of strong executive ability and a fine judge of human nature. While a
young man he drifted west, became a successful gambler and acquainted
with various phases of a criminal's life. In the spring of 1861 he
came to Lewiston, Idaho. This town was then the head of navigation on
the Snake River, had a population of several hundred, among whom were
thieves, gamblers, escaped convicts and criminals of all kinds. These
he organized into a band of highwaymen, to operate on the road between
Walla Walla, Washington, and Orofino, Idaho, directing the operations
from Lewiston which was a midway ground. Two sub-stations were located,
one at the foot of Craig Mountain, east of Lewiston, and the other
west, at the junction of Alpowai and Pataha creeks. These were called
"shebangs" and were the rendezvous of a band of robbers. Soon robberies
and murders on this road were common, but the respectable, law abiding
citizens were in the majority and they soon organized themselves into
a law and order body, which made the operations of the robber gang
dangerous and unprofitable.

The mines at Orofino were soon worked out. This, together with the
citizen's organizations and the fear on the part of Plummer of being
exposed for crimes committed by him while in California, caused him to
flee from Idaho and go to Montana. Upon his arrival there he apparently
desired to reform and live the life of a law abiding citizen. He
married a nice young woman and entered upon an honorable means of
earning a living. But he was a criminal by nature, environment and
practice and not strong enough, had he desired it, to break with his
old associates and habits and like all criminals was haunted by fear of
detection.

When he left Idaho a companion by the name of Cleveland went with him.
They were together when Plummer was married near Fort Benton and they
both a little later went to Bannack. He and Cleveland had a bitter
quarrel over the young lady who married Plummer. This, together with
his fear of his associates in crime, made him suspicious and in a
saloon brawl a short time later he shot Cleveland. This started him
again on a carnival of crime that has no parallel in the history of the
Northwest, and just as he had organized the criminals when in Idaho, he
again organized them in Montana on a much larger scale. These men were
bound by an oath to be true to each other and were required to perform
such service as came within the defined meaning of their separate
positions in the band. The penalty of disobedience was death. If any
one of them, under any circumstances, divulged any of the secrets or
guilty purposes of the band, he was to be followed and shot down at
sight. The same doom was prescribed for any outsider who attempted an
exposure of their criminal designs, or arrested any of them. Their
great object was declared to be plunder in all cases, without taking
life if possible, but if murder was necessary, it was to be committed.
Their password was "innocent." Their neckties were fastened with a
sailor's knot, and they wore mustaches and chin whiskers. Plummer
himself was a member of the band.

The duties of these men may be gained from the work assigned them
as revealed by one of their number. Henry Plummer was chief of the
band; Bill Burton, stool pigeon and second in command; George Brown,
secretary; Sam Burton, roadster; Cyrus Skinner, fence, spy and
roadster; George Shears, horse-thief and roadster; Frank Parrish,
horse-thief and roadster; Hayes Lyons, telegraph man and roadster; Bill
Hunter, telegraph man and roadster; Ned Ray, council-room keeper at
Bannock City; George Ives, Stephen Marshland, Dutch John (Wagner), Alex
Carter, Johnny Cooper, Buck Stinson, Mexican Frank, Bob Zachary, Boone
Helm, Clubfoot George (Lane), Billy Terwiliger, Gad Moore, roadsters.

But Plummer soon ran his course. He was captured and had to pay the
penalty for his crimes. "Red" Yager, a member of Plummer's gang,
was hanged by a vigilance committee. Before his execution he made
a confession, giving the names of all the members of the band and
stating that Plummer was the leader. Plummer, with two others of the
organization, were at Bannock. No trouble was experienced in arresting
the other two, one being captured in a cabin, the other stretched out
on a gambling table in a saloon. But great care had to be exercised
in the arrest of the leader of the band, who was cool-headed and a
quick shot. Those detailed to capture him went to his cabin and found
him in the act of washing his face. When informed that he was wanted
he manifested no concern but quietly wiped his face and hands. He
announced that he would be ready to go within a short time, threw down
the towel and smoothed out his shirt sleeves, then advanced toward a
chair to get his coat, but one of the party, by great good fortune,
saw a pistol in the pocket and replied, "I will hand you your coat,"
at the same time taking possession of the pistol. Otherwise Plummer
would likely have killed one or all of those attempting to capture
him. He, with the other two criminals arrested were escorted in the
bright moonlight night to the gallows which Plummer himself had
erected the year before and used in the hanging of a man, he being at
that time sheriff. As they appeared in sight of the gallows the other
criminals cursed and swore, but Plummer was begging for his life. "It
is useless," said one of the vigilantes, "for you to request us to
spare your life, for it has already been settled that you are to be
hung." Plummer then replied, "Cut off my ears, cut out my tongue, strip
me naked, let me go. I beg you to spare my life. I want to live for
my wife, my poor absent wife. I want to settle my business affairs.
Oh, God." Then falling upon his knees, the tears streaming from his
eyes, and with his utterance choked with sobs, he continued: "I am
too wicked to die. I cannot go bloodstained and unforgiven into the
presence of the Eternal. Only spare me and I will leave the country."
But all this was to no purpose. His time had come and the leader's
stern order, "Bring him up," was obeyed. Plummer, standing under the
gallows, took off his necktie, threw it to a young man who had boarded
with him, saying, "Keep that to remember me by," and then turning to
the vigilantes, he said, "Now, men, as a last favor, let me beg that
you will give me a good drop." The favor was granted and Plummer, one
of the most noted outlaws ever known to the Northwest, was no more.




CHAPTER II

TIMES OF COWBOYS, MINERS, AND VIGILANTES


The two essentials of a city seem to be: first, a location in a
region of such resources as to attract and provide industries for the
maintenance of an incoming and ever increasing population; and, second,
such a location as will be a natural point of exchange of commodities
with more or less distant centers of production, and as a corollary of
this, feasible facilities of transportation. Four towns were started
in the "Upper Country" in the early sixties, which were to stand these
tests of a city location. They were: Walla Walla, Umatilla, Wallula,
and Lewiston. The obvious disadvantage of the first was that it was
not on navigable water, and water carriage was then the cheap and
convenient way of conveying any large amounts of freight or passengers.
Its countervailing advantage, and the reason why by common consent
settlers sought it in preference to the river towns was that it was
right in the center of resources. While the first settlers had no
conception of the future of agriculture and horticulture, it was clear
that a region near enough the mountains to be easily accessible to
timber, and abounding in streams of the purest water, with infinite
grazing resources, was a paradise to the stockman. And while with the
first influx of settlers in 1858, 1859, and 1860, there was not yet
any knowledge of the event which within a few months was to transform
the entire history of the Inland Empire, i. e., the discovery of gold
in Idaho, yet the minds of the people of the time were quivering with
the feverish anticipations of fortune engendered by the California
mining history. Hence the settlers in Walla Walla in 1860 were right
on the qui vive for "big things." Such reasons, together with the very
important fact that the United States Fort Walla Walla was located
there (for the same reasons of grass, water, and timber) were potent
in determining the growth of the largest town. Umatilla and Wallula
had the very marked advantage of water transportation to a limitless
degree, but on the other hand, the arid climate and the barren soil
(barren without irrigation, of which nothing was conceived at that
time), and distance from the timber counter-balanced the advantage.
If it had then been fully realized, what we now know, that Lewiston
combined nearly all advantages, with no disadvantages, the site at
the junction of the Snake and Clearwater would have seemed to possess
unequalled attractions. But Lewiston was at that time so far up Snake
River and so remote from general apprehension as a center of production
that Walla Walla had an easy lead in attracting incoming settlers.

In 1859 and 1860 the chief lines of business, as already indicated,
were cattle-raising and supplying the Fort. The suitability of this
country to stock-raising was obvious to the fur-traders of the Hudson's
Bay Company regime, and they had quite a number of cattle at Fort Walla
Walla (Wallula), at "Hudson's Bay," near the present Umapine, and at
the near vicinity of what is now Touchet. Doctor Whitman brought with
him several head of cattle and even two calves across the plains in
1836 and afterwards secured more from Doctor McLoughlin at Vancouver.
In the early '50s, Messrs. Brooke, Bumford, and Noble located at
Waiilatpu for the same business, while H. M. Chase and W. C. McKay
on the Umatilla in 1851 started in the same kind of enterprise. From
these various sources the idea had become disseminated that Walla Walla
was the place for the cowboy. That was inaugurated the first movement
which, interrupted for a period by gold excitement, was resumed with
even greater energy as the demands of the mines for provisions became
known, and for a number of years was the dominating interest of Old
Walla Walla County.

The stock business was, however, interwoven in a curious and
interesting way with all the other lines of enterprise. Especially was
this true of the mining and transportation interests. The three were
dovetailed together by reason of the fact that food and pack trains
were vital necessities of the mines.

The mining history of the "Upper Country" began in the spectacular way
usual with discoveries of the precious metals. Colonel Gilbert tells
a fantastic tale of the train of circumstances which led to the first
prospecting tour into what became the great gold field of Central
Idaho. This tale involves E. D. Pearce, who, as we have seen, was one
of the early office-holders of Walla Walla County. He is described as
a man of somewhat imaginative and enthusiastic character, quick to
respond to the calls of opportunity. He had been in the gold mines of
California before coming to Walla Walla, and while there had become
acquainted with a Nez Perce Indian who in some way had drifted into
that region. This Indian impressed Mr. Pearce with his dignity and
intelligence and excited his interest in a romantic story of his home
in the mountain fastnesses of Idaho. He declared that he, with two
companions, while encamped in the mountains had seen in the night a
light of surpassing brilliance, like a refulgent star. The Indians
regarded the distant glow with awe, deeming it the eye of the Great
Spirit. In the morning, however, plucking up sufficient courage to
investigate, they discovered a glittering ball like glass embedded in
the rock. They could not dislodge it from its setting and left it,
thinking it a "great tomanowas." Pearce became impressed with the
thought that the Indians had found an enormous diamond of incalculable
value, and he determined that, if ever the opportunity was afforded,
he would seek its hiding place. Accordingly, having reached Walla
Walla after many wanderings, he bethought himself of the diamond and
organized a company of seven men, whose names with the exception of
that of W. F. Bassett, do not seem to be recorded in the account. They
made their way in 1860 into the wild tangle of mountains on the sources
of the Clearwater. The party were looking for gold, but Pearce had
the diamond in mind. Indians coming in contact with the party became
suspicious and ordered them out. Pearce, however, pretending to obey
orders, induced a Nez Perce squaw to guide the party into the heart
of the mountains of the north fork of the Clearwater. There, Bassett,
while prodding around in the soil of a small creek, discovered shining
particles. Gold! It was only a few cents worth, but it was enough.
That was the first discovery of gold in Idaho. The place was the site
of the Oro Fino mines. Extracts from a former account written by the
author, in which are incorporated items from the _Washington Statesman_
will indicate the progress of the discovery and the effects on the
newly-started town of Walla Walla.

"After washing out about eighty dollars in gold, the party returned
to Walla Walla, making their headquarters at the home of J. C. Smith
on Dry Creek, and finally so thoroughly enlisting his interest
and co-operation that he fitted out a party of about fifteen men,
largely at his own expense, to return to the new gold fields for the
winter. Sergeant Smith's party reached the mines in November, 1860,
arousing the antipathy and distrust of the Indians, who appealed to
the Government officers for the protection of their reserve from
such encroachments. A body of soldiers from Fort Walla Walla started
out for the mines, with the intention of removing the interlopers,
but the heavy snowfall in the mountains rendered the little party of
miners inaccessible, so they were not molested. During the winter the
isolated miners devoted their time to building five log cabins, the
first habitations erected in Oro Fino, sawing the lumber by hand.
They also continued to work for gold under the snow, and about the
first of January, 1861, two of the men made a successful trip to the
settlements, by the utilizing of snow-shoes, while in March Sergeant
Smith made a similar trip, taking with him $800 in gold dust. From this
reserve he was able to pay Kyger & Reese of Walla Walla the balance
due them on the prospecting outfit which had been supplied to the
adventurous little party in the snowy mountains. The gold dust was sent
to Portland, Ore., and soon the new mines were the subject of maximum
interest, the ultimate result being a "gold excitement" quite equal to
that of California in 1849, and within a few months the rush to the new
diggings was on in earnest, thousands starting forth for the favored
region."

The budding City of Walla Walla profited materially by the influx of
gold-seekers, who made their way up the Columbia River and thence moved
forward to Walla Walla, which became the great outfitting headquarters
for those en route to the gold country. At this point were purchased
provisions, tools, camp accoutrements and the horses or mules required
to pack the outfits to the mines. Through this unforeseen circumstance
there was now a distinctive local market afforded for the products of
the Walla Walla country, and the farmer who had produce of any sort
to sell might esteem himself fortunate, for good prices were freely
offered. Nearly all the grain that had been produced in the country was
held, in the spring of 1861, in the mill owned and operated by Simms,
Reynolds & Dent, the total amount being less than twenty thousand
bushels. This surplus commanded a high price, the farmers receiving
$2.50 per bushel for their wheat, while at the mines the operators
were compelled to pay $1 a pound for flour manufactured therefrom.
The inadequacy of the local supply of food products was such that,
had not additional provender been transported from Oregon, starvation
would have stared the miners in the face. This fact gave rise to the
almost unprecedented prices demanded for the products essential to the
maintenance of life. New mining districts were discovered by the eager
prospectors and all was hustle and activity in the mining region until
the fall of 1861. In November of that year many of the miners came to
Walla Walla for the winter, bringing their hard-earned treasure with
them and often spending it with the prodigality so typical of the
mining fraternity in the early days.

Although many of the diggings yielded from six to ten dollars per day,
many of the operators feared the ravages of a severe winter and fully
realized the animus of the merchants at Oro Fino, who refused to sell
their goods, believing that starvation would ultimately face the miners
and that they could then secure any price they might see fit to demand.
In November of the year noted, the prices at Oro Fino were quoted as
follows on certain of the necessaries of life: flour, $25 per 100
pounds; beef, 30 cents per pound; coffee, not to be had; candles, not
for sale; and bacon and beans, exceedingly scarce. That the prospectors
and miners should seek to hibernate nearer civilization and take refuge
in Walla Walla was but natural under the circumstances.

During the rush to the mining districts, both in 1861 and 1862, Walla
Walla was the scene of the greatest activity; streets were crowded; the
merchants were doing a thriving business, and pack trains moved in a
seemingly endless procession toward the gold fields. The excitement was
fed by the glowing reports that came from the mining districts, and the
natural result was to augment the flood of gold-seekers pouring into
the mining districts in the spring of 1862, as will be noted later on.
As an example of the alluring reports circulated in the latter part
of 1861, we may appropriately quote from the _Washington Statesman_
of that period. From an editorial in said publication we make the
following extract:

"S. F. Ledyard arrived last evening from the Salmon River mines, and
from him it is learned that some six hundred miners would winter
there; that some two hundred had gone to the south side of the river,
where two streams head that empty into the Salmon, some thirty miles
southeast of present mining camp. Coarse gold is found, and as high
as one hundred dollars per day to the man has been taken out. The big
mining claim of the old locality belongs to Mr. Weiser, of Oregon,
from where $2,680 were taken on the 20th, with two rockers. On the
21st, $3,360 were taken out with the same machines. Other claims were
paying from two to five pounds per day. Flour has fallen to 50 cents
per pound, and beef, at from 15 to 25 cents, is to be had in abundance.
Most of the mines supplied until first of June. Mr. L. met between
Slate Creek and Walla Walla, en route for the mines, 394 packs and 250
head of beef cattle."

In the issue of the _Statesman_ for December 13, 1861, appears the
following interesting information concerning the mines and the
inducements there offered:

"The tide of emigration to Salmon River flows steadily onward. During
the week past, not less than two hundred and twenty-five pack animals,
heavily laden with provisions, have left this city for the mines. If
the mines are one-half so rich as they are said to be, we may safely
calculate that many of these trains will return as heavily laden with
gold dust as they now are with provisions.

"The late news from Salmon River seems to have given the gold fever
to everybody in this immediate neighborhood. A number of persons from
Florence City have arrived in this place during the week, and all bring
the most extravagant reports as to the richness of the mines. A report,
in relation to a rich strike made by Mr. Bridges of Oregon City, seems
to come well authenticated. The first day he worked on his claim (near
Baboon gulch) he took out fifty-seven ounces; the second day he took
out 157 ounces; third day, 214 ounces, and the fourth day, 200 ounces
in two hours. One gentleman informs us that diggings have been found
on the bars of Salmon River which yield from twenty-five cents to two
dollars and fifty cents to the pan, and that on claims in the Salmon
River, diggings have been found where "ounces" won't describe them,
and where they say the gulches are full of gold. The discoverer of
Baboon gulch arrived in this city yesterday, bringing with him sixty
pounds of gold dust, and Mr. Jacob Weiser is on his way with a mule
loaded with gold dust."

Within the year more than one and one-half millions of dollars in gold
dust had been shipped from the mining districts--a circumstance which
of itself was enough to create a widespread and infectious gold-fever.
Anticipating the rush for the mines in the year 1862, a great deal of
livestock had been brought to the Walla Walla country in the latter
part of 1861, while the demands for food products led many ranchers to
make provisions for raising greatly increased crops of grain and other
produce to meet the demands of the coming season.

The winter of 1861-2 was one of utmost severity, and its rigors
entailed a gigantic loss to residents throughout the eastern portion
of Washington Territory--a section practically isolated from all other
portions of the world for many weeks. It has been said that this "was
the severest winter known to the whites on the Pacific Coast." The
stock in the Walla Walla country perished by the thousands, the animals
being unable to secure feed and thus absolutely starving to death.
From December to March the entire country here was effectually hedged
in by the vast quantities of snow and the severely cold weather. Not
until March 22d do we find the statement in the local newspaper that
warm rains had set in and that the snow had commenced to disappear. One
result is shown in the further remark that "Occasionally the sun shines
out, when the sunny side of the street is lined with men." The loss of
stock in this section during that memorable winter was estimated at
fully one million dollars, hay having reached the phenomenal price of
$125 per ton, while flour commanded $25 per barrel in Walla Walla. It
may not be malapropos to quote a list of prices which obtained in the
Oro Fino mining region in December, 1861: bacon, fifty to sixty cents
per pound; flour, twenty-five to thirty dollars per 100 weight; beans,
twenty-five to thirty cents per pound; rice, forty to fifty cents per
pound; butter, seventy-five cents to one dollar; sugar, forty to fifty
cents; candles, eighty cents to one dollar per pound; tea, one dollar
and a quarter to one and a half per pound; tobacco, one dollar to one
and a half; coffee, 50 cents.

In view of subsequent gold excitements in Alaska, how familiarly will
read the following statements from the _Washington Statesman_ of
March 22, 1862: "From persons who have arrived here from The Dalles
during the week, we learn that there were some four thousand miners
in Portland fifteen days ago, awaiting the opening of navigation to
the upper country. Hundreds were arriving by every steamer, and the
town was literally filled to overflowing." Under date of April 5th,
the same paper gives the following pertinent information: "From one
hundred and thirty to one hundred and forty passengers, on their way
to the mines, come up to Wallula on every steamer, and the majority of
them foot it through to this place (Walla Walla)." By the last of May
it was estimated by some that between twenty-five and thirty thousand
persons had reached or were en route to the mining regions east of the
Cascades, but conservative men now in Walla Walla regard that a great
overestimate. The merchants of Walla Walla profited largely through the
patronage of the ever advancing column of prospectors and miners, but
the farmers did not fare so well, owing to the extreme devastations of
the severe winter just passed. Enough has been said to indicate the
causes which led to the rapid settlement and development of Eastern
Washington and Oregon--an advancement that might have taken many years
to accomplish had it not been for the discovery of gold in so romantic
a manner. The yield of gold reported through regular channels for the
year 1862 aggregated fully seven million dollars, and it is certain
that several millions were also sent out through mediums which gave no
record.

[Illustration: MULKEY APARTMENTS, WALLA WALLA]

In February, 1862, food products and merchandise commanded the
following prices at Florence: flour, $1 per pound; bacon, $1.25;
butter, $3; cheese, $1.50; lard, $1.25; sugar, $1.25; coffee, $2.00;
tea, $2.50; gum boots per pair, $30; shovels, from twelve to sixteen
dollars.

That year of 1861 was a great year in the annals of Walla Walla County.
Cattle drives, gold discovery, hard winter, Civil war! The last named
stupendous event was shared by the pioneer communities on the Walla
Walla and its tributary streams, but it affected them in a unique
manner. This was nothing less than the period of the Vigilantes. While
this organization was due to a variety of conditions, the state of
affairs which led to its existence grew out of the conflict of opinions
about the war. Yet it must be said that the character of population
that flowed into Walla Walla after the gold discoveries and the
establishment of the town as the leading outfitting place for the mines
was a suitable seed-bed for the growth of conditions which at sundry
times and places in the West have produced vigilance committees. This
peaceful and law-abiding "Garden City" of 1917, a center of homes and
educational institutions, conspicuous for morality, intelligence, and
comfort, was in the '60s about as "tough" a collection of human beings
as could be found. It was indeed a motley throng that poured in as
the mining excitement grew and spread. The best and the worst jostled
each other on the dusty and unsightly streets with their shacks and
tents and saloons and dance halls. Philanthropists and missionaries
and educators were represented by Revs. Eells, Spalding, Chamberlain,
Berry and Flinn, Father Wilbur, Bishop Scott, Father Yunger, and Bishop
Brouillet. Some of the noblest and most liberal-minded and honest of
business men, some of whom continue to this day, gave character and
standing to the commnunity and laid foundations upon which the goodly
superstructure of the present has been reared. We have but to call up
the names of Baker, Rees, Moore, Paine, O'Donnell, Whitman, Guichard,
Reynolds, Stone, Jacobs, Johnson, Isaacs, Sharpstein, Abbott, Reese,
Boyer, McMorris, Stine, Thomas, Drumheller, Painter, Ritz, Kyger,
Cole, and others too numerous to mention, among the business men of
that time, to know that the best was then in existence. Old timers
delight to tell how John F. Boyer was intrusted by miners with sacks
of gold-dust while they were gathering supplies and packing for new
ventures, with never a receipt or stroke of pen to bind him, yet never
a dream that he would fail to restore every ounce just as he received
it. But the men of this type, some with wives of the same high type
(though most of them were young men without families), were daily and
nightly jostled by the miscellaneous throng of gamblers, pickpockets,
highway robbers, hold-ups, and prostitutes who ordinarily fatten on the
gold-dust bags and belts of the miners assembled at their yearly supply
stations. Strange stories are told about the number and variety and
unique names and characters of the various "joints" in the Walla Walla
of the decade of the '60s. In some newspaper a few years ago appeared
an alleged reminiscence of a visitor to Walla Walla, in which he tells
of going to a saloon, in which the floor was covered with sawdust. That
was usual enough, but the odd thing was that each patron received with
his drink a whiskbroom. Puzzled as to the purpose of the latter, the
visitor waited for developments. He soon discovered that the whiskey
was so strenuous as to be pretty sure to induce a fit, and the use of
the broom was to sweep off a place on the dirty floor to have a fit on,
after which the refreshed and enlightened (?) patron of the place would
return the broom and proceed on his way.

Such were the mongrel conditions of life during the first years of the
Civil war. It is not surprising therefore, that such a juxtaposition
of forces should have caused a perfect carnival of crime, and that out
of it as a defence by the decent elements of the community should have
arisen the organization of the Vigilance Committee.

Two incidents prior to the formation of the Vigilantes indicate the
uneasy condition induced by the presence of the soldiers at the fort
and the considerable number of southern sympathizers in the community.
In the _Washington Statesman_ of April 19, 1862, we find an account
of a riot at the theater out of which a correspondence arose between
Mayor E. D. Whitman of Walla Walla and Col. Henry Lee, commander of the
post. This is also made the subject of editorial comment and from this
comment we glean the following paragraphs as showing the state of mind
at that time.

"We publish today an interesting correspondence between Mayor Whitman
and Lieut. Colonel Lee, growing out of the recent unfortunate affray at
the theater and the conduct of some of the soldiery since that event.
* * * On the part of the citizens who were engaged in the affray,
notwithstanding the fact that officers of the law had been suffered
to be stricken down and their authority contemned and boldly set at
defiance, we are satisfied they cherished no disposition to aggravate
the difficulty either by word or deed. Remaining within the limits of
the city, they have peaceably and quietly pursued their accustomed
business. Not so the soldiers. Cherishing unjustifiably an excited and
hostile disposition, they imitated the unwarrantable conduct of their
fellows on the night in question, by parading our streets with an armed
force, thus exhibiting a total and wanton disregard for law and civil
authorities. The mildest terms that can be applied to this procedure
must characterize it as a high-handed outrage upon the rights of the
people of this city, and a gross insult to the dignity and authority of
their laws."

The editorial proceeds to score Colonel Lee severely for his answer to
the protestations of Mayor Whitman. It appears in brief that a group
of soldiers had gone to the theater and made so much disturbance as to
nearly break up the program and in an attempt to put them out one of
the soldiers was killed. The next morning a band of from seventy-five
to one hundred soldiers came armed into the town and seized the sheriff
and took possession of the street. Colonel Lee, in his statement of
the case, disclaimed all responsibility and declared that the man who
killed the soldier was a notorious criminal named "Cherokee Bob." The
colonel sarcastically expresses surprise that the citizens of Walla
Walla did not take interest enough in the matter to have Cherokee Bob
arrested, and he states that he himself would heartily co-operate in
any attempt to enforce law and order. He says that he will answer
for the good conduct of the men under his command if the mayor will
do the same for the citizens of the town. He declares that his men
will not disturb the citizens if they are let alone. Mayor Whitman,
in responding to this, declares that the soldiers initiated all the
trouble by their incivility at the theater and that when an attempt was
made by the proper peace officers to enforce order the fracas ensued
in which three citizens, including two peace officers, were wounded,
one mortally, and one soldier was killed and one wounded. This seems
to have been the most serious affray in that part of the history of
the old town. It, like other events of the kind, seems to have been
mixed up somewhat with the war conditions of the country, a good many
of the people of the town being southern sympathizers and regarding the
soldiers as representatives of the National Government.

About a month later, another affray took place which is described as
follows in the columns of the _Statesman_:

"On last Saturday afternoon, while the convention for the nomination
for county officers was in session in this city, an affray occurred
between a soldier belonging to the garrison and a citizen named
Anderson residing some miles from this place in Oregon. Offensive words
were passed between them, when Anderson seized a stone and threw it
violently at the soldier, striking him on the head and felling him
prostrate to the ground. Citizens who witnessed the act denounce it
as unjustifiable and cowardly. The city marshal was present but for
reasons best known to himself did not arrest the offender. Anderson
was intoxicated and quarrelsome and should have been arrested. Another
officer of the law immediately issued a warrant, but in the meantime
Anderson had escaped. There was quite a gathering of soldiers present
who were aware of the above facts, some of whom even saw and read the
warrant. On the same evening an armed company of soldiers marched
through our streets, took possession of our city, and surrounded the
jail building in which the marshal was at the time attending to his
duties. They demanded his arrest and threatened to effect it before
they left the city. Shouts of "hang him," "He's a damn secessionist"
and other mob-like expressions were used. It was to all intents and
purposes a mob and the crowd were becoming excited and boisterous,
when Captain Curry approached the spot and succeeded, after a short
controversy, in getting them into line and marched them back to their
quarters. We understand Anderson has left for Salmon River. On Monday
morning the marshal tendered his resignation to the council, a meeting
of which body was immediately held and another officer appointed."

The editor proceeds to comment upon the fact that while the marshal
seems to have been grossly derelict in his duty, there was no reason
to charge the officers or the citizens of the town with being
secessionists and that the idea of conspiring against the garrison was
"all bosh." He charges that the soldiers were frequently drunk and
objects of danger to the people of the town.

It is interesting to notice that in the same issue of the _Statesman_,
June 28th, the regular Union ticket for the election to take place on
July 14th appears and has for its motto, "The Union Must and Shall be
Preserved."

It is evident from the _Statesman_ as well as from the recollections
of old-timers that there was a very strong secessionist influence in
Walla Walla at that time. The general attitude of the _Statesman_ is
interesting to the historian because it represents so large a class
of the citizens of the United States at that time. While the paper is
uncompromisingly for the Union, it is mortally afraid of the question
of emancipation and of anything like "nigger equality." Its tone toward
President Lincoln is rather critical and in several cases it charges
him with being swayed by abolitionists. As time went on the Union
sentiment became more and more pronounced. Mr. F. W. Paine gives us an
anecdote which shows the tension in the year 1863, as follows:

In 1863 Delazon Smith and Dave Logan were candidates respectively on
the democratic and republican tickets in Oregon for representative to
Congress. They met to speak in the vicinity of Milton, a commnunity
which at that time was intensely democratic. A number of Walla Walla
republicans, among whom were Mr. Paine and Charles Painter (and all
who knew Mr. Painter will recall that although one of the kindest of
men and best of neighbors, he was an intense republican and not at
all averse to fighting for his opinions) went to Milton to lend their
encouragement to the republican side. Reaching a sort of public house
in the vicinity, they waved a flag which they had taken along and
finally put it up on a corner of the building. The proprietor coming
out and discovering it, inquired of Mr. Paine if it were his, to which
Mr. Paine made answer that although the flag was not his, it had come
with the company of which he was a member, and he presumed it was the
intention to let it remain where they had put it until they were ready
to take it down themselves. The proprietor then demanded that it should
be taken down. The republicans replied that that flag would not go down
as long as there was a man left who had put it there. A fracas seemed
imminent and in fact began when the proprietor of the house, whose
valor seems to have been considerably of a spirituous nature, backed
out and the flag remained.

Besides the influence of divided politics, and the friction between
the soldiers and the citizens, besides all the general lawlessness
of that period of miners, cowboys, and Indians, there was a special
feature of the times which aided in leading to the formation of the
Vigilance Committee. This was the existence of organized bands of
thieves and cattle-rustlers all over the Northwest. The ramifications
of these groups of law-breakers extended from California to Montana and
Idaho. The recently published book by Ex-Governor W. J. McConnell of
Idaho, in regard to early times in the mines of Northern Idaho and the
Boise Basin, the Magruder murder, and the operations of the Vigilantes
in those sections, with many other similar incidents, gives a vivid
picture of the times of horse-thieves, cattle-thieves, and gold-dust
thieves. In fact, as it was an era of thieves and highwaymen of all
sorts, so it was also an era of vigilance committees over the same era
as a necessary defense against desperadoes. Judge Thomas H. Brents, as
his friends well knew, had a fund of hair-raising stories of his own
experiences as an express rider during that period. Another man well
known around Walla Walla and throughout Eastern Oregon as an express
rider during the same time was no less a person than Joaquin Miller,
"The Poet of the Sierras."

A number of incidents scattered through the columns of the _Statesman_
in 1863, 1864, 1865, indicate the kind of events which led directly to
the formation of the Vigilantes. For instance, in the issue of May 2,
1863, is an account of the discovery of about a hundred horses which
were cached away in a mountain valley at the head of the Grande Ronde
River. It was believed by those who discovered them that they had been
driven there by a bunch of "road agents" who had been hung at Lewiston
a few months before. In the issue of the _Statesman_ of June 20th of
the same year, there is an item about the recovery of seventeen stolen
horses on Coppei Creek near Waitsburg by a vigilance committee. In the
next number is an item to the effect that the same men that had stolen
the seventeen horses came back and ran away six more, and sent word
back that they had the horses on the north side of Snake River and they
dared the owners to come over for them. They said that there were seven
of them and they had three revolvers each and they would be glad to see
company. The farmers of Coppei organized a well armed force and crossed
the river. They discovered the horses and took possession of them, but
the vainglorious road agents were nowhere in sight.

In the _Statesman_ of April 14, 1865, we find the first definite
account of the operations of the Vigilantes. It appears that a certain
individual called "Dutch Louie" had been taken, according to his
account, from his bed by Vigilantes at the hour of midnight, and hanged
until he was nearly dead, in order to make him testify against someone
whom he did not want to name. It appears at the same time that there
was an anti-Vigilantes organization which took possession of another
man who was in the habit of coming to town and getting "d. d.," and
tried to compel him to give evidence against the Vigilantes. In the
next issue of the _Statesman_ there is an account of the pursuit of
cattle thieves who had run away sixty cattle from the Wild Horse Creek,
and had come to a halt on Mill Creek three miles above Walla Walla.
Mr. Jeffries followed them with a posse of citizens and found some of
the cattle, and according to the story one of the thieves was hung by
the Vigilantes, although the paper intimates that the story of the
hanging was without foundation. In the same issue there is an account
of Mr. Samuel Johnson (and he was well known for many years as one of
the prominent citizens of the Walla Walla country) having lost sixty
head of cattle out of his band and following them by a trail from the
Touchet to a point on the Columbia River sixty miles above Priest
Rapids. The same paper also has an item about the "skeedaddling" of
thieves, and it gives a suggestion that there is a point beyond which
endurance ceases to be a virtue, and that the farther these worthies
"skeedaddle" the less chance there will be of their being found some
morning dangling at a rope's end.

The _Statesman_ of April 21, 1865, contains an account of some regular
"hangings" by the vigilance committee. It seems that on the Sunday
morning previous, a man named McKenzie was found hanging to a limb near
the racetrack, which at that time was a short distance below town. It
appeared from reliable testimony that he was implicated in the theft
of the cattle stolen from Mr. Jeffries. During the same week, two men
named Isaac Reed and William Wills, were caught at Wallula, charged
with stealing horses, and they traveled the same road as McKenzie.
Before taking their final jump-off, they acknowledged that they were
members of a regular band who had a large number of stolen horses on
the Columbia somewhere above Wallula, and that there had just been a
fight among the members of the band, in which one had been killed.
During the same week the famous hanging of "Slim Jim" was consummated
from a tree which still stands in the southern part of town. He was
charged with having assisted "Six-toed Pete" and Waddingham to escape
from the county jail. The author of this work derived much of his
information in regard to the period of the Vigilantes from Richard
Bogle and Marshall Seeke, both well known for many years in Walla
Walla, now deceased, but all who were residents of the town during 1864
and 1865 are sufficiently familiar with the events of the time. They
do not, however, seem to be inclined to talk very much about it. The
general supposition is that the most prominent citizens of Walla Walla
were either actively or by their support concerned in the organization.
They had secret meetings and passed upon cases brought before them
with great promptness, but with every attempt to get at the essential
facts. In case they decided that the community would be better without
some given individual, that individual would receive an intimation to
that effect. In case he failed to act upon the suggestion within a few
hours, he was likely to be found adorning some tree in the vicinity
of the town the next morning. Although to modern ideas the Vigilantes
seem rather frightful members of the judiciary, yet it is doubtless
true that that swift and summary method of disposing of criminals was
necessary at that time and that as a result of it there was a new reign
of law and order.

The most famous of all the cases during that period, was that of Ferd
Patterson. This famous "bad man" had begun his career in Portland by
killing a captain in the Union army, as a result of an encounter which
took place in one of the principal saloons of that city. This man,
Captain Staple, lifted his glass and cried out, "I drink to the success
of the Union and the flag!" Patterson was a southerner and when all
the men about him lifted their glasses he threw his down exclaiming,
"The Union and the flag be damned!" The other men cried out to Captain
Staple, "Bring him back and make him drink!" The captain turned to
follow Patterson, who was upon the stairs, and at the instant a
revolver shot rang out and the captain fell with a bullet in his heart.
Patterson, however, was acquitted on the ground of self-defense. In
fact, like other professional "bad men," he was skilled in getting his
opponent to draw first and then with his great quickness he would send
a deadly shot before the opponent could pull his trigger. After several
similar instances, Patterson came to Walla Walla and was located for a
time at what is now called Bingham Springs. It was a station at that
time on the main stage line between The Dalles and Boise, and had a
good hotel, bath-house, and other conveniences for travelers. On a
certain day there appeared at Bingham Springs the sheriff of Boise,
whose name was Pinkham. Pinkham was a strong Union man and Patterson,
as we have seen, just the reverse; and the two parties at that time
were so well balanced that it was just a turn of the hand which would
hold supremacy. Meeting Patterson one day, as he was just emerging
from the bathing pool, Pinkham slapped him in the face. Patterson
said, "I am alone today without my gun, but one of these days I will
be fixed for you and settle this matter." Pinkham replied, "The sooner
the better." A few days after this, Patterson walked up and slapped
Pinkham. Both men drew their revolvers, but Patterson's shot took
effect first, and another man was added to his long score. The brief
item in respect to this Pinkham affray appears in the Walla Walla
_Statesman_ of July 28, 1865.

Some weeks passed by and Patterson came to Walla Walla where he was
supported mainly by various light-fingered arts and gambling games
in which he was an adept. It was considered by many that he was too
dangerous a man to have in the community, but it was a very difficult
matter to get any evidence against him. Very few dared to incur his
enmity. Finally, a man named Donnehue, who was a night watchman in
the town, took upon himself to try, convict, and execute the famous
gambler all in one set of operations. It appears from the account given
by Richard Bogle that between eight and nine o'clock on February 15,
1866, Patterson had entered his barber shop, which was then situated on
Main Street, between Third and Fourth, as it would be at the present
time. While the barber was engaged upon the countenance of the gambler,
Donnehue entered and stood for some little time watching the operation,
and just at the moment of completion of the combing of his hair, about
which the gambler was very particular, Donnehue suddenly stepped up and
shouted, "You kill me or I'll kill you." And at the same moment he let
fly a bullet from his revolver. Patterson, who was a man of magnificent
physique, although mortally wounded, did not fall but endeavored to
reach his own gun; and while doing so, and in fact having gotten out
upon the street, Donnehue emptied the revolver into the staggering form
of his antagonist. Patterson died within a few minutes and Donnehue was
arrested at once without resistance upon his part, and taken to jail.
He was never tried, but soon after left town, with his pockets lined
with gold dust, according to reports. It was generally supposed for
many years that the Vigilantes had passed upon Patterson's case and had
appointed Donnehue to execute their sentence in the only way that could
be done without loss of somebody else's life. We are informed, however,
by one of the most reliable old-timers in Walla Walla, a man still
living, that the Vigilantes did not pass upon Patterson's case and that
his death was pure murder on the part of Donnehue. However that may be,
there is no question but that the community drew a long sigh of relief
when it was known that Ferd Patterson had been retired from active
participation in its affairs. With the death of Patterson, and the
close of the Civil war, and still more as a result of the beginnings of
farming, it may be said that the era of the Vigilantes came to an end.
They gradually disbanded without anyone knowing exactly how or why, and
by degrees there came to be established an ever-growing reign of law
and order in Old Walla Walla.

As constituting a vivid narrative in the history of the Vigilantes,
we include here a historic sketch by Prof. Henry L. Tolkington of the
State Normal School of Idaho. It appeared in the _Lewiston Tribune_ of
August 19, 1917. It will constitute a part of a book now in preparation
by Professor Tolkington entitled "Heroes and Heroic Deeds of the
Pacific Northwest."

While the conclusion does not occur within the limits of Old Walla
Walla County, it is a part of the same story and is intensely
characteristic of those times.




CHAPTER III

POLITICAL HISTORY TO TIME OF COUNTY DIVISION


In previous chapters we have presented the facts in relation to the
first attempt at organization of Walla Walla County in 1854, prior to
the period of great Indian wars. We took up again the reorganization
and development in 1859 with the incoming of permanent population. We
also mentioned the first charter and the inauguration of permanent city
government. In the chapter dealing with the beginnings of industries we
showed the first locations at the different points which have become
the centers of population in the four counties.

It remains in this chapter to take up the thread with the growing
communities and the government over them which composed the old county
down to 1875, when Columbia County was created, embracing what are now
the three counties of Columbia, Garfield and Asotin, and thus reducing
Walla Walla County to its present limits. After that we shall trace the
story of the successive subtractions of Garfield from Columbia and then
Asotin from Garfield.

The authorities to which we have had recourse are first the county
records, so far as available; second, the files of the newspapers
covering the periods; third, Col. F. F. Gilbert's Historic Sketches,
published in 1882, to which frequent reference has been made and
which seems in general to be very reliable; and fourth, the memory
of pioneers still living or from whom data were secured prior to
their death. In respect to the public records it may be said that a
destructive fire on August 3, 1865, of which an account is given in
the _Statesman_ of the 4th, destroyed the records, though the more
important ordinances and other acts of city and county government had
appeared in the _Statesman_ and from that source were replaced.

The most important events in the political history were connected with,
first, the county, its legislative and local officers, and the chain of
circumstances going on to county divisions; second, the city government
and the movement of laws and policies through various reorganizations
to the present; and third, the place occupied by the old county in
relation to state and national affairs.

In the way of a general view of political conditions in the period from
the creation of county offices by the Legislature of the Territory on
January 19, 1859, through the period of war, it may be said that the
prevailing sentiment was at first strongly democratic. The majority of
the settlers in Old Oregon, from which had come a large proportion of
the earlier comers to Walla Walla, were from Missouri, Illinois, Iowa,
with quite a sprinkling from Tennessee and Kentucky and democratic
views preponderated in the sections from which the majority came. With
that strange inconsistency which has made American political history a
chaos for the philosopher and historian, that early democratic element
here and elsewhere was in general bitterly opposed to "abolitionists
and black republicans." While a great majority of them did not favor
slavery and to a considerable extent had left slave states to get
rid of it, yet they were mortally afraid of "nigger equality." When
the war broke out there was a considerable element that were carried
so far by their hatred of abolitionists that they even became rank
"Secesh." That, however, was a temporary sentiment. The feeling of
union and the preservation of an undivided nation gradually asserted
itself, and by the time the war was half through democrats as well as
republicans stood firmly on the platform of the maintenance of the
Union. One of the best expressions of that sentiment is found in the
resolutions of the democratic convention on May 23, 1863, reported
in the _Statesman_ of the 30th. We had these expressions: "That the
democracy are unalterably attached to the union of these states."
"That the right of secession is not reserved to the States." "That the
Federal Government has a right to maintain the constitution and enforce
the laws, if need be, by force of arms, and so far as the acts of the
present administration tend to these desirable ends, it has our cordial
support and no further." Then as an offset, the fourth resolution
declares: "That the democracy of Washington Territory view the declared
intention of such men as Horace Greeley and Charles Sumner--who desire
the prosecution of the present civil war for the abolition of slavery,
and who utterly scout the idea of any peace which is not founded on
the condition that the social fabric of the insurgent states is to be
totally uprooted--with abhorrence."

A good evidence of this is the inability of men brought up with certain
views and prejudices to grasp the logic of events. Then as since,
"there are none so blind as those that won't see." That sentiment was
also well shown in the continuance of the campaign of 1863, in which
Geo. E. Cole of Walla Walla was democratic candidate for Territorial
Delegate. An editorial in the _Statesman_ of June 5, 1863, commends
Mr. Cole as a Union man and a democrat. In the same issue appears the
resolutions of the Clarke County Democratic Convention which had been
adopted in substance by the territorial convention which nominated Mr.
Cole, and to which the democrats of Walla Walla pledged themselves at
a ratification meeting on July 11th. As showing the stamp of thought
prevailing at that time in the party, it is of interest to read these
resolutions:

"Resolved, That the democracy (of Clarke County) are for the Union,
and the whole Union, and in favor of the vigorous prosecution of the
efforts of the Government in crushing the present unholy and wicked
rebellion, when such efforts are not actuated by any other motives
than a single desire to maintain the honor and dignity of the nation
and enforcement of the laws. That we are opposed to the conclusion of
any peace involving in its terms the acknowledgment of the so-called
Southern Confederacy, and that we hereby pledge ourselves, come weal
or woe, in life and death, now and forever, to stand by and defend the
flag of our country in its hour of peril."

It is indeed one of the most significant evolutions in American
history; that of the gradual passing over from a support of slavery
by the larger part of the democratic party to a stage where they no
longer supported that "sum of all villainies" and yet had a profound
hatred of "abolitionists," to the point where they perceived that the
maintenance of the Union was the great essential, whether slavery
was lost or saved, and yet further to the point, which many reached,
of an unflinching support of Abraham Lincoln in his abolition as
well as Union policies. It is all an exhibition of the evolution of
nationalism, to which free labor is essential. And in that evolution,
the West has borne the larger part. The sentiment of state pride, the
local prejudices and narrow vision common in the older states and which
in the South became intertwined with slavery and produced economic and
political deformity and arrested development, was shuffled off when
people of East and North and South and Europe all joined to lay the
foundations of genuine American states in new regions unhampered and
undistorted by caste and prejudice. This state of affairs in the West
prepared the way for a new democracy, a national democracy, a genuine
democracy for all men. The transformation of Walla Walla politics
was simply a sample of a movement taking place all over the country.
As a result, during the decades of the sixties and seventies, many
former democrats, notably some who had been brought up in Missouri and
other slave states, finding the democratic party, as they thought,
still a laggard on progressive issues developed by the war and
reconstruction, left the party and joined the republicans. Doubtless
the _Statesman_ may be taken as a good exponent of the prevailing
democratic views in Walla Walla. It was strong for the Union, but was
horribly afraid of "abolitionists." When W. H. Newell acquired the
paper in November, 1865, he adopted the policy of supporting President
Johnson against Congress. The republican party steadily gained, and
in subsequent decades Walla Walla County, as all other parts of the
states of Washington and Oregon, became overwhelmingly republican. By
the progress of the same evolution, progressive politics have had a
powerful hold upon the people of these states, as well as of the entire
Pacific Coast, and the support given to democratic candidates, state
and national, in 1916, is a thoroughly logical development. The people
have been consistent, though party names have not.

One of the interesting facts not generally realized is that Walla Walla
County in the sixties contained so large a part of the population of
the territory. In the _Statesman_ of December 30, 1864, we find a
report from Edwin Eells, enrolling officer of the county, in which it
appears that the draft enrollment in Walla Walla County was 1,133,
while in the entire territory it was 4,143.

A few figures at various times in the sixties will be found of interest.

The vote for Territorial Delegate in 1863 by counties was as follows,
as given in the _Statesman_ of August 22:

           GEORGE E. COLE,  J. O. RAYNOR,
              DEMOCRAT       REPUBLICAN

  Chehalis            22               21
  Clallam             45               27
  Clarke             173              100
  Clickitat           25               37
  Cowlitz             39               57
  Island              72               31
  Jefferson          148              120
  King                68               93
  Kitsap             130               99
  Lewis               63               77
  Pacific             11               90
  Pierce              95              106
  Sawamish            36               19
  Skamania            48               35
  Snohomish           35               30
  Spokane             56               12
  Thurston           132              171
  Wakiakum           ...               12
  Walla Walla        398              140
  Whatcom             32               56
                    ----             ----
  Total            1,628            1,333

A few figures at various times in the sixties will be found of
interest. In the county election of June, 1864, we find the following
vote by precincts:

  PRECINCT  DEMOCRATIC  REPUBLICAN

  Walla Walla          287              149
  Lower Touchet         11               33
  Upper Touchet         41               49
  Snake River            2                7
  Wallula                1               12
  Pataha                 2               10
                      ----             ----
  Total                344              260

The _Statesman_ of September 9, 1864, says that nine-tenths of the
immigrants coming in at that time were Democrats.

That claim was not quite realized, however, in the election of June 5,
1865, for the republican candidate for Territorial Delegate, Arthur A.
Denny, received 336, while the democrat, James Tilton, had 406.

Though the population was small and scattered there were many
intricacies involving county and city politics. Into those details we
cannot go. Doubtless some of them would best rest in oblivion.

We incorporate here, as valuable for reference, the list of legislative
choices and of the chief county officers beginning with 1863 and
extending through all elections prior to county division in 1875.

1863

Daniel Stewart, joint councilman; S. W. Babcock, F. P. Dugan, L. S.
Rogers, representatives; W. S. Gilliam, sheriff; L. J. Rector, auditor;
C. Leyde, assessor.

1864

J. H. Lasater, attorney; Alvin Flanders, joint representative; A. L.
Brown, F. P. Dugan, E. L. Bridges, representatives; W. G. Langford,
councilman; J. H. Blewett, probate judge; James McAuliff, treasurer;
W. H. Patton, assessor; Charles White, surveyor; H. D. O'Bryant,
commissioner; A. J. Theboda, coroner.

1866

B. L. Sharpstein, councilman; D. M. Jessee, R. Jacobs, R. R. Rees, H.
D. O'Bryant, T. P. Page, representatives; James McAuliff, treasurer; H.
M. Hodgis, assessor; W. G. Langford, superintendent of schools; T. G.
Lee and H. A. Livingston, commissioners.

1868

W. H. Newell, councilman; J. M. Vansycle, joint councilman; W.
P. Horton, E. Ping, J. M. Lamb, P. B. Johnson, B. F. Regan,
representatives; H. M. Chase, probate judge; A. Seitel, sheriff; J.
H. Blewett, auditor; J. D. Cook, treasurer; C. Ireland, assessor; C.
Eells, superintendent of schools; S. M. Wait, W. T. Barnes, and A. H.
Reynolds, commissioners.

1870

Daniel Stewart, councilman; N. T. Bryant, joint councilman; D.
Ashpaugh, J. H. Lasater, John Scott, A. G. Lloyd, E. Ping, T. W.
Whetstone, representatives; N. T. Caton, attorney; R. Guichard, probate
judge; James McAuliff, sheriff; H. M. Chase, auditor; A. Kyger,
treasurer; A. C. Wellman, assessor; J. L. Reser, superintendent of
schools; C. C. Cram, Francis Lowden, I. T. Reese, commissioners.

1872

Fred Stine, councilman; C. H. Montgomery, joint councilman; N. T.
Caton, O. P. Lacy, E. Ping, C. L. Bush, John Bryant, and H. M. Hodgis,
representatives; I. Hargrove, probate judge; B. W. Griffin, sheriff; R.
Jacobs, auditor; R. R. Rees, treasurer; W. F. Gwynn, assessor; A. W.
Sweeney, superintendent of schools; D. M. Jessee, W. P. Bruce, and S.
L. King, commissioners.

1874

E. Ping, councilman; W. W. Boon, joint councilman; R. G. Newland, J.
B. Shrum, P. M. Lynch, John Scott, A. G. Lloyd, and H. M. Hodgis,
representatives; T. J. Anders, attorney; R. Guichard, probate judge;
G. F. Thomas, sheriff; R. Jacobs, auditor; R. R. Rees, treasurer; S.
Jacobs, assessor; A. W. Sweeney, superintendent of schools; Charles
White, C. S. Bush, C. C. Cram, commissioners.

This was the last election prior to county division. The elections
after that event will appear in chapter one of part three.

In the early times they seem to have had a frank and outspoken and
energetic manner of writing about each other, and the inference is
plain that they talked in a similar way. Each man had ready access to
his hip pocket, and was commonly qualified to support his views by
force of arms when necessary. We find as a sample a discussion between
Sheriff E. B. Whitman and certain critics in the _Statesman_ of May 30
and June 13, 1863. It pertains to the arrest of one Bunton. An address
signed by sixty-nine residents of the Coppei appears in the earlier
issue. In it is charged that a flagrant and wilful murder had been
committed by William Bunton on the person of Daniel S. Cogsdill and
that Sheriff Whitman made no effort to arrest Bunton, and when, at the
instance of citizens, Deputy Hodgis arrested Bunton, and delivered him
to Whitman that the latter was too merciful to the prisoner to put him
in jail; "but at the request of Bunton put him in charge of a lame or
a crippled man, with, as we believe, the intention of his escape."
They therefore declare that they have no protection when the high and
responsible office of sheriff is filled by the friends of murderers and
thieves. They therefore recommend that the commissioners should remove
said Whitman and appoint "Deputy Hodgis or some other good man."

Sheriff Whitman makes in reply a lengthy and moderate explanation, the
main point of which was that the county jail was so insecure that by
the advice of Judge Wyche he put Bunton in the hands of J. O. Putman,
one of the signers of the above statement, and that after some trouble
Bunton got away. In the issue of June 13, the citizens returned to
the attack with renewed energy, and this brought from Mr. Whitman a
vitriolic response. He begins: "Editor _Statesman_: As your columns
seem to be at the disposal of parties who may wish to belch forth
personal slander, persecution, malignity, and falsehood, it is but
just that the party vilified should have the opportunity of replying
through the same medium. Upon reading the article, dated at Coppei, I
thought I would let the matter rest upon its own merits, as the style
and manner in which it is written shows that it originated from a
vindictive, mischievous, and depraved appetite for notoriety, which at
times controls men of depraved tastes." Among the sixty-nine signers of
the document were some who were, as also Sheriff Whitman himself was,
among the most worthy of the foundation builders, and who now all rest
in honored graves. We are giving the incidents here as a historical
curiosity, and as showing how men's minds were keyed up in those days
of war and vigilantes to a high pitch.


EFFORT TO ANNEX WALLA WALLA COUNTY TO OREGON

One of the most exciting political questions of the sixties was that of
annexation of Walla Walla County to Oregon. We find in the _Statesman_
of October 20, 1865, a report of a mass meeting of October 18, at
which resolutions were passed advocating the annexation and inviting
the people of Oregon, through their Legislature, to unite in the
movement, and also calling on the representatives and senators from
Oregon and the Territorial Delegate, A. A. Denny, to use all honorable
means to induce Congress to take that action. They mention, which is
historically interesting, that the people of Oregon in accepting their
Constitution had done so with the understanding that the line should
follow the natural boundary of the Columbia and Snake rivers. The
convention also censured Judge J. E. Wyche, judge of the First Judicial
District of Washington Territory, located at Walla Walla. The committee
composing the resolutions consisted of J. H. Lasater, A. Kyger, and
Drury Davis. J. H. Blewett introduced a resolution calling on President
Johnson to remove Judge Wyche. The resolution was lost. A committee
consisting of A. J. Cain, A. L. Brown, and H. P. Isaacs was appointed
to draft petitions, one to Congress and the other to the Oregon
Legislature, looking to the execution of the plan.

In the same issue of the _Statesman_ a call appears for a meeting to
"take such steps as they may deem proper to frustrate the designs of
those who would saddle upon the people of this county a proportion
of the debt of the bankrupt State of Oregon, with her peculiar
institutions."

It is asserted that Anderson Cox was the prime mover in the
annexation project, though his name does not appear in the report
in the _Statesman_. The Oregon Legislature was nothing loth to add
this desirable section to the limits of the mother state and duly
memorialized Congress to that effect. Years passed by, and in 1875,
just after county division had been effected, Senator J. K. Kelly of
Oregon introduced a bill providing for the submission of the question
to the people of Walla Walla and Columbia counties. This bill failed,
as did also one to the same effect in the House by Representative
LaFayette Lane of Oregon. The failure of the annexation plan produced
additional activity in projects looking to statehood. There was during
that period (and it has not entirely ceased to this day) a good deal of
friction between the Walla Walla section and the Puget Sound section.
The former had early commercial and political relations with Portland
of a far more intimate nature than with the Sound. The majority of the
leading business men were from Oregon. The common feeling was that the
Sound was very selfish and narrow in its dealings with the eastern
section, desiring its connection mainly for taxation purposes. It was
largely from that feeling that annexation projects arose. The Sound, on
the other hand, had accused the Walla Walla section of being disloyal
to the state and seeking local advantage. Opposition in the territory
therefore delayed action. According to statements made by Hollon Parker
to the author a number of years ago, he himself made a special trip to
Washington to head off the movement. At any rate, it was never carried.
Walla Walla County had at the time of the presidential election of 1876
a sufficient majority of Democrats to have toppled the slight scale by
which Hayes held the presidency over Tilden, and if the county had been
in Oregon Tilden would have had a majority and the Electoral Commission
would never have been created, and quite a section of national history
would have had another version.

In 1865 the Territorial Delegate was Arthur Denny of Seattle. The
Statesman refers to him as the "Abolition Candidate." Passing on to
1867 we find national, state, and local affairs of a very strenuous
nature. Perhaps the insertion here of extracts from a book written
by the author sometime ago will convey a clear view of the course of
events in the elections of 1867 and 1869.


POLITICAL REVIEW

A review of the political situation in 1867 shows that there was an
extraordinary interest and activity in the ranks of both the democrats
and the republicans. The principal point of contest and interest was
in the selection of a delegate to Congress, each party having a number
of aspirants for the important office. The people east of the Cascades
felt that they were entitled to have a candidate selected from their
section of the territory, inasmuch as the honor had hitherto gone
to a resident of the Sound country. From the eastern section of the
territory were five democrats and two republicans whose names were
prominently mentioned in this connection, and while the republican
convention for Walla Walla County sent an uninstructed delegate to the
territorial convention, a vigorous effort had been made in favor of
the candidacy of Judge J. E. Wyche. At the county democratic convention
the delegates chosen were instructed to give their support to W. G.
Langford, of Walla Walla, so long as seemed expedient. They were also
instructed to deny their support to any candidate who endorsed in
any degree the project of annexing Walla Walla County to Oregon. In
the territorial convention Frank Clark of Pierce County received the
nomination of the democracy for the office of congressional delegate,
the balloting in the convention having been close and spirited.
The republican territorial convention succeeded in running in the
proverbial "dark horse," in the person of Alvin Flanders, a Walla
Walla merchant, who was made the nominee, defeating three very strong
candidates.

Owing to the agitation of the Vigilance question, referring to
diverging opinions of the citizens as to the proper method of
administering justice, the politics of the county were in a peculiarly
disrupted and disorganized condition, and the Vigilance issue had
an unmistakable influence on the election, as was shown by the many
peculiarities which were brought to light when the returns were
fully in. The democrats of the county were particularly desirous of
electing certain of their county candidates, and it is stated that
the republicans were able to divert many democratic votes to their
candidate for delegate to Congress by trading votes with democrats
and pledging their support to local democratic candidates. The fact
that such bartering took place is assured, for while the returns gave
a democratic majority of about two hundred and fifty in Walla Walla
County for all other officers, the delegate received a majority of only
124. This action on the part of the Walla Walla democrats secured the
election of the republican candidate, whose majority in the territory
was only ninety-six.

The result of the election in the county, held on the 3d of June,
was as follows: Frank Clark, the democratic candidate for delegate,
received 606 votes, and Alvin Flanders, republican, 482 votes. The
other officers elected were as follows: Prosecuting attorney, F. P.
Dugan; councilman, W. H. Newell; joint councilman (Walla Walla and
Stevens counties), J. M. Vansycle; representatives, W. P. Horton, E.
Ping, J. M. Lamb, P. B. Johnson and B. F. Regan; probate judge, H. M.
Chase; sheriff, A. Seitel; auditor, J. H. Blewett; treasurer, J. D.
Cook; assessor, C. Ireland; surveyor, W. L. Gaston; superintendent of
schools, C. Eells; coroner, L. H. Goodwin; county commissioners, S. M.
Wait, D. M. Jessee (evidently an error in returns, as W. T. Barnes, a
democrat, was elected), and A. H. Reynolds.

The sheriff resigned on November 7, 1868, and on the same day James
McAuliff was appointed to fill the vacancy. A. H. Reynolds resigned
as commissioner, in May, 1869, Dr. D. S. Baker being appointed as his
successor. Of the successful candidates noted in the above list, all
were democrats except P. B. Johnson, J. D. Cook, C. Eells, S. M. Wait
and A. H. Reynolds.

Again in this year was there to be chosen a delegate to Congress, and
the democracy of Walla Walla County instructed their delegates to the
territorial convention to insist upon the nomination of a candidate
resident east of the Cascade Range--the same desideratum that had been
sought at the last preceding election. In the convention F. P. Dugan,
J. D. Mix, B. L. Sharsptein and W. H. Newell, of Walla Walla, were
balloted for, but the nomination went to Marshall F. Moore, ex-governor
of the territory.

The republican nomination was secured by Selucius Garfielde,
surveyor-general of the territory. The names of two of Walla Walla
County's citizens were presented before the convention, Dr. D. S. Baker
and Anderson Cox. The nomination of Garfielde proved unsatisfactory
to many of the party adherents and dissention was rampant. The
disaffection became so intense in nature that a number of the most
prominent men in the party ranks did not hesitate to append their
signatures to a circular addressed to the "downfallen republican
party," said document bearing fifty signatures in all. On the list
appeared the name of the delegate in Congress and the chief justice
of the territory. The circular called for a radical reorganization of
the party, charged fraudulent action in the convention and made many
sweeping assertions. This action provoked a strong protest, and the
disaffected contingent did not nominate a ticket of their own, and Mr.
Garfielde was elected by a majority of 132. He received in Walla Walla
County 384 votes, while his opponent, Mr. Moore, received 740.

According to all data available, the political pot boiled furiously
throughout the territory as the hour of election approached. Lack
of harmony was manifest in both parties, and, as before, the chief
interest centered in the election of a delegate to represent the
territory in the Federal Congress. Those office-holders who were most
vigorously protestant and visibly disaffected were summarily removed
from office in January of this year by the President of the United
States, this action having been recommended by the congressional
delegate, Mr. Garfielde, who thus drew upon himself still greater
dislike and opposition. A change in the existing laws made it necessary
to elect a delegate again this year, and a strong attempt was made
to defeat Mr. Garfielde, who was confident of being returned to
office. There could be no reconciliation of the warring elements in
the republican party. The republican territorial convention of 1869
had appointed an executive committee, whose personnel was as follows:
Edward Eldridge, M. S. Drew, L. Farnsworth, P. D. Moore, B. F. Stone,
Henry Cook and J. D. Cook. In February a circular was issued by Messrs.
S. D. Howe, A. A. Manning, Ezra Meeker, G. A. Meigs, A. A. Denny and
John E. Burns, who claimed to have constituted the executive committee.
The convention as called by the regular committee met in April and
renominated Mr. Garfielde. The recalcitrant faction presented the name
of Marshall Blinn in the convention, the bolters not being strong
enough to hold a separate convention, but hoping to gain sufficient
votes to prevent the nomination of Garfielde.

The democratic convention was far more harmonious, the nomination
going to Judge J. D. Mix, one of the most honored citizens of Walla
Walla, and one enjoying a wide acquaintance throughout the territory.
The campaign developed considerable acrimony between the factions of
the republican party, but the results of the election showed that the
disaffected wing gained but slight popular endorsement. Six thousand
three hundred and fifty-seven votes were cast in this election,
representing a gain of 1,300 over the preceding year. Garfielde was
elected, securing a majority of 736 over Mix, the total vote for
Blinn being only 155. Upon the question of holding a constitutional
convention there were 1,109 votes cast in opposition, and 974 in favor.

[Illustration: RESIDENCE OF FATHER VAN DE VEN, WALLA WALLA]

[Illustration: ST. MARY'S HOSPITAL, WALLA WALLA]

By reason of the change in the law the county election also was held
a year earlier than usual, occurring June 6, 1870. The democracy
was victorious in the county, electing their entire ticket with the
exception of superintendent of schools. For delegate James D. Mix
received in his home county 670 votes, while Selucius Garfielde
had 527. The officers elected in the county were as follows:
Prosecuting attorney, N. T. Caton; councilman, Daniel Stewart; joint
councilman (Walla Walla, Stevens and Yakima counties), N. T. Bryant;
representatives, David Aspaugh, James H. Lasater, John Scott, A. G.
Lloyd, Elisha Ping and T. W. Whetstone; probate judge, R. Guichard;
sheriff, James McAuliff; auditor, H. M. Chase; treasurer, A. Kyger;
assessor, A. C. Wellman; surveyor, A. H. Simmons (he was succeeded
by Charles A. White, who was appointed to the office May 1, 1871);
school superintendent, J. L. Reser; coroner, L. H. Goodwin; county
commissioners, C. C. Cram, F. Louden and I. T. Rees.

The officials elected in the county this year did not assume their
respective positions until the succeeding year. The officers elected
in the preceding year had been chosen for a term of two years, and
they contended that the change in the law of the territory which made
it necessary to hold the election in 1870, instead of 1871, did not
invalidate their right to hold office until the expiration of their
regular term. The matter was brought into the courts for adjudication,
in a test case, the prosecuting attorney-elect against the incumbent
of the office at the time of the last election. In July James W.
Kennedy, judge of the first district, rendered a decision in favor of
the defendant, holding that officers elected in 1869 retained their
positions until 1871, thus reducing the term of the officials last
elected to one year.


COUNTY COURTHOUSE

One of the burning questions at all times in political life has been
the County Courthouse. As the county dedicated its first courthouse
in the year 1867, it is incumbent that we make a brief reference to
the same at this juncture. As early as 1864, the grand jury had made
a report on this matter, and from said document we make the following
pertinent extracts: "We, the grand jury, find that it is the duty of
the county commissioners to furnish offices for the different county
officers. This we find they have not done. Today the offices of the
officers are in one place, tomorrow in another, and we hope at the
next meeting of the board of county commissioners that they will, for
the sake of the integrity of Walla Walla County, furnish the different
county officers with good offices." Notwithstanding this merited
reproof, no action of a definite character was taken by the board of
commissioners until a meeting of March 11, 1867, when it was voted to
purchase of S. Linkton a building on the corner of Alder and Third
streets, the same to be paid for in thirty monthly installments of $100
each. A further expenditure of $500 was made in fitting up the building
for the use of the county, and thus Walla Walla County was able to
hold up a dignified head and note with approval her first courthouse.
That the structure was altogether unpretentious and devoid of all
architectural beauty it is perhaps needless to say. The executives of
the county were at least provided with a local habitation.

Though the housing of the county was a lame affair a number of years
passed before there was any permanent action. During nearly all
elections from 1869 on we find a vote on two general questions: a
constitutional convention and a courthouse. In 1869 there was a vote of
24 for, and 286 against a constitutional convention.

The interval of elections was changed following the election of 1869,
so that the next occurred on June 6, 1870. That of 1872 took place on
November 5th.

In August, 1870, the City Council deeded to the county the block of
land on Main Street on which the permanent courthouse was built. In the
election of 1872 the vote in favor of building a courthouse was 815 to
603. A vote, as usual, was taken on constitutional convention, with the
result of 57 affirmative and 809 negative.

Since the majority had expressed their desire for a courthouse the
commissioners in February, 1873, set on foot the arrangements for
plans, and those presented by T. P. Allen were accepted. These called
for a brick structure with stone foundation, two stories, dome,
main part with an ell. Meanwhile various schemes for inducing the
commissioners to locate farther from the center of town by offering
land, with a view to enhancing the values of land adjoining, were
under consideration. After having turned down several such plans and
pronounced in favor of the block donated by the city, the commissioners
rather suddenly changed their decision and accepted four blocks between
Second and Fourth streets, a quarter mile north of Main Street. A
first-class ruction arose over this decision. Changes were made in the
plans also, by which the building was reduced in size and dignity.
Finally, as Gilbert says, with some degree of keenness, "the last act,
and under the circumstances, the most judicious one, was not to erect
the building at all."

After this the courthouse plans rested awhile, and no action was taken
until after county division. The question of constitutional convention,
however, kept pegging away, and in the election of 1874, the result was
similar to that of previous elections, 24 for, and 236 against.

It will be found of value to incorporate here the list of Territorial
Delegates and Governors. Walla Walla was well represented in the list,
both before and after county division, as also both before and after
statehood.


TERRITORIAL DELEGATES

  1857--I. I. Stevens, democrat.
  1859--I. I. Stevens, democrat.
  1861--W. H. Wallace, republican.
  1863--George E. Cole, democrat--from Walla Walla.
  1865--A. A. Denny, union.
  1867--Alvin Flanders, union--from Walla Walla.
  1869--Selucius Garfielde, republican; J. D. Mix, of Walla Walla,
    democratic candidate.
  1870--Selucius Garfielde, republican.
  1872--O. B. McFadden, democrat.
  1874--Orange Jacobs, republican; B. L. Sharpstein, democratic
    candidate, Walla Walla.

The next election came in 1876 and there was a considerable falling
off in the vote on account of county division in the previous year. It
may be worth noting that the total vote of Walla Walla County in each
election was as follows: 1857, 39; 1859, 164; 1861, 361; 1863, 590;
1865, 742; 1867, 1,088; 1869, 1,124; 1870, 1,201; 1872, 1,555; 1874,
1,549.

In the election of 1876, the total vote was 938. It is also interesting
to note that in every single election up to the time of county
division and in fact to 1878, when T. H. Brents of Walla Walla was the
candidate, the county went democratic, and that, as we shall see later,
the republicans carried most elections after that date to the present
time.


TERRITORIAL GOVERNORS

  1853-6--I. I. Stevens.
  1857-8--Fayette McMullan.
  1859-60--W. H. Wallace.
  1862-5--William Pickering.
  1866-7--George E. Cole.
  1867-8--Marshall F. Moore.
  1869-70--Alvin Flanders.
  1870-2--E. S. Salamon.
  1873-9--E. P. Ferry.

Three of the above incumbents of the gubernatorial chair were Walla
Walla men: Cole, Flanders, and Salamon.

In 1869 Philip Ritz of Walla Walla was United States Marshal. S. C.
Wingard, for many years one of the most honored of the citizens of
Walla Walla, was United States attorney in 1873, and associate justice
in 1875-82. After his long service under the Federal Government he made
his home in Walla Walla until his death at an advanced age.


WALLA WALLA CITY

Turning now from the county and its relations to the territorial and
national Government, to Walla Walla City, we may for the sake of
topical clearness repeat a little of what was given in earlier chapters.

By act of the Legislature of January 11, 1862, Walla Walla became an
incorporated city, with the limits of the south half of the southwest
quarter of section 20, township 7 north, range 36 east. The charter
provided for the election, on the first Tuesday of each April, of a
mayor, recorder, five councilmen, marshal, assessor, treasurer and
surveyor. All vacancies were to be filled by appointment of councilmen,
except mayor and recorder. The council also had the power to appoint a
clerk and attorney.

The first election under the charter occurred on the first day
of April, 1862, at which election the total vote was 422. In the
_Statesman_ of April 5 there is a criticism in rather mild and
apologetic terms for the loose and careless manner in which the judges
allowed voting. The assertion is made that men who were well known
to reside miles out of the city were allowed to vote. Not over three
hundred voters, according to the paper, were bona fide residents. A
well considered warning is made that such a beginning of city elections
will result in a general illegal voting and ballot-box stuffing. In the
_Statesma_n of April 12 is a report of the first council meeting on
April 4. At this first meeting the votes of the election of the first
were canvassed, showing that out of the 422 votes, E. B. Whitman had
received 416. The recorder chosen was W. P. Horton, whose vote was 239
against 173 for W. W. Lacy. The councilmen chosen, whose votes ran from
400 to 415, were I. T. Rees, J. F. Abbott, R. Jacobs, B. F. Stone and
B. Sheideman.

George H. Porter was chosen marshal by a vote of 269, with 136 for A.
Seitel and 17 for A. J. Miner. E. E. Kelly was the choice for treasurer
by the small margin of 219 to 200 for D. S. Baker. The assessor was L.
W. Greenwell by 413 votes. A. L. Chapman was chosen surveyor by 305
against 119 for W. W. Johnson. S. F. Ledyard was appointed clerk by the
council, B. F. Stone was chosen president of the council at the meeting
of April 10.

One of the first questions which the council had to wrestle with, as it
has been most of the time since, was revenue and the sources thereof.
The saloon business being apparently the most active of any at that
time became very naturally the foundation of the revenue system. People
supposed then, as many have since, that they could lift themselves by
their boot straps and that a traffic which cost a dollar for every
dime that it brought into the treasury was essential to the life of
the town. However, a "dry town" at that day and age and in a place
whose chief business was outfitting for the mines and serving as a
home for miners off duty, would have been so amazing that the very
thought would have been sufficient to warrant an immediate commitment
for lunacy. If the spirits of the city authorities and citizens of
that date could return and see the Walla Walla of 1917, with not a
legal drop of intoxicating fluid, it is safe to say that "amazement"
would but feebly express their mental state. According to the revenue
ordinance of that first council, a tax was to produce about a third,
and licenses and fines the remainder of the city income. During the
first six months the total revenue was $4,283.25, and the licensing of
liquor sales and gambling tables amounted to $1,875. Tax amounted to
about $1,430. The rest of the revenue was from fines. We may note here
by way of comparison that in 1866 the city revenue was $15,358.97, of
which $9,135.13 was from licenses.

The year of 1862 was one of great activity. A. J. Cain laid out
his addition, though the plat was not recorded till the next year.
The _Statesman_ of October 18th gives a glowing account of the
improvements, stating that fifty buildings had been completed during
the summer and that thirty more were in progress of construction. Most
of these were no doubt flimsy wooden structures, but it is mentioned
that the buildings of Schwabacher Brothers and Brown Brothers & Co.
had been nearly completed. At the head of Second Street A. J. Miner
was erecting a planing mill, and a sash and door factory. Beyond the
city limits Mr. Meyer had put up a brewery (this afterwards developed
into the Stahl brewery on Second Street). In Cain's addition, where
there had been only eight houses, the number was more than doubled.
As a matter of fact, though there was much improvement at that time,
our fair City of Walla Walla of the present, with its elegant homes
and trees and flowers and broad verdant lawns, with paved streets and
bountiful water supply, would not recognize the ragged, dusty, dirty,
little shack of a town of which the _Statesman_ was so proud in 1862.
The ease with which the people of that time have adjusted themselves to
all the conveniences and elegancies of the present day, shows something
of the infinite adaptability of human nature, and still more it shows
that the foundation builders of the pioneer days had it in them to
create all the improvements of later days. Raw as Walla Walla must have
looked in the '60s, the essential conditions were there which have made
our later age; rich soil, water, good surrounding country, industry,
taste, brains, home spirit, good citizenship--and a certain reasonable
amount of time. There we have all the elements that wrought between the
Walla Walla of 1862 and that of 1917.

[Illustration: Courtesy of F. W. Paine

WALLA WALLA IN 1866]

Early Walla Walla had the usual experience with fires, such occurring
on June 11, 1862; May 8, 1864; August 3, 1865; and July 4, 1866. As
a result of the first, Joseph Hellmuth undertook to organize a fire
department. His public spirit was not very cordially supported, but
subscriptions to the amount of $1,600 were received, and by advancing
$500 himself, he secured an old Hunneman "tub" engine.

The most destructive of these early fires was that of August 3, 1865.
The _Statesman_ of August 4th gives a full account of it, estimating
the loss so far as obtained at that time at $164,500. The paper adds
$20,000 for loss not then reported. The heaviest losses were sustained
by the Dry Goods Company of S. Elias & Brother, by the store and
warehouse of C. Jacobs & Co., and by the Bank Exchange Saloon and
dwelling house of W. J. Ferry. The building used for courthouse, with
the county and city records, was destroyed. In 1863, a fire company was
organized, Fred Stine being the leader in the enterprise.

Perhaps the most vital feature of a growing city is pure and abundant
water supply. Walla Walla was fortunate in early days in the presence
of a number of springs of pure cold water. But though that supply was
abundant for a small place, increasing demands made some system of
distribution imperative. There was also need for sufficient pressure
for fire defense.

While the water system was at first a private enterprise, it became
public property in due course of time, and hence it is suitable to
begin the story in this chapter.

In 1866 and 1867 four of the most energetic citizens of the town took
the initial steps in providing a system of water distribution. H. P.
Isaacs, J. C. Isaacs, A. Kyger and J. D. Cook obtained a charter in
1866 and the next year established at a point near the present Armory
Hall a plant consisting of a pump, a large tank, and a supply of wooden
pipe. It almost makes one's bones ache in these effete days to think
of the amount of labor which the pipes for that pioneer water system
demanded. The pipe consisted of logs bored lengthwise with augurs by
hand. It would not comport with the dignity of a historical work to
suggest that the whole proceeding was a "great bore," but it was duly
accomplished and the pipes laid. Water was derived from Mill Creek,
but the system seems to have been somewhat unsatisfactory to the
projectors, and Mr. Isaacs entered upon a much larger undertaking, that
of establishing reservoirs in the upper part of town. It was not until
after the date of county division that the reservoir system was fully
installed. In 1877 the reservoirs were built on both sides of Mill
Creek, one on what is now the property of the Odd Fellows Home and the
other in the City Park. These reservoirs were filled from the large
springs and for some years supplied the needs of the town. Mr. Isaacs
is deserving of great praise for his unflagging energy in endeavoring
to meet that primary need of the town. The corporate name of Mr.
Isaacs' enterprise was the Walla Walla Water Company. The controlling
ownership was ultimately acquired by the interests represented by the
Baker-Boyer Bank, and Mr. H. H. Turner became secretary and manager.
That, however, was long subsequent to county division and the further
history of the water system belongs to another chapter.

We perhaps should interject at this point the explanation that although
chapters preceding this have been carried to the present date, we are
bringing the political history of the city to the stage of county
division only in order to harmonize with that of the county, and that
point in case of the county constitutes a natural stage by reason
of the marked change in all political connections occasioned by the
division.

Among miscellaneous events having political connections may be
mentioned that omnipresent and usually disturbing question of the
fort. We have earlier spoken of its first location at the point now
occupied by the American Theater, right in the heart of the city,
and its removal in 1857 to the present location. It was maintained
at full strength until the close of the Indian wars and then during
the period of the Civil war there was a full supply of men and
equipment. At times, as already narrated in an earlier chapter, there
was much friction between civilians and the military. The merchants
and saloon-keepers, however, considered the presence of the Fort very
desirable from a pecuniary standpoint. There were in those early days,
as there have been more recently, an element in the city that attached
an exaggerated importance to the presence of the soldiers as a business
matter, while there was also another sentiment which became the most
persistent and inherited one in the history of the town; that is, the
sentiment that while the officers and their families composed the
social elite, the common soldiers were taboo. This was perhaps the
nearest to a caste system ever known in the free and unconventional
society of Old Walla Walla. Between those two viewpoints, the business
and the social, there was the larger body of citizens who shrugged
their shoulders over the whole question, deeming it unimportant either
way. But when by order of Colonel Curry the Fort was abandoned, save
for a small detachment, in the winter of 1865-6, there went up a great
protest, and all the machinery, congressional and otherwise, was set
in motion, as has been so familiar since down to the present date, to
secure orders for the maintenance of the post.

No results were attained, however, and the Fort remained abandoned,
until 1873.

Congress had, in fact, passed a law in 1872, for the sale of the
military reservation, authorizing the Secretary of the Interior to cut
it up into blocks and lots and dispose of it as his judgment warranted.
The tract was surveyed and laid out by instructions from Washington.
But as a result of the famous Modoc war in Southern Oregon, the view
prevailed at headquarters that the rehabilitation and reoccupation
of Fort Walla Walla would be wise. Accordingly, in August, 1873, six
companies were established at the Fort, and from that date for nearly
forty years the military was a constant factor in the life of this
section.

The expenditures were very considerable. It is estimated in Gilbert's
Historic Sketches of 1882 that the Fort was then purchasing annually
about 10,000 bushels of oats, 5,000 bushels of barley, 500 tons of
hay, 200 tons of straw, 500 barrels of flour, besides large quantities
of meat, wood, and other supplies. Perhaps the most excited and
acrimonious discussions, public and private, in newspapers and
otherwise, have dealt with the retention of the Fort, or with some
phase of its life. Most of the features of the story came at a date
long after county division.

Another event of that period, not strictly political, yet belonging to
the public life of the community, was the completion on June 1, 1870,
of the telegraph line between Portland and Walla Walla, via Wallula.
This line was built by the O. S. N. Company. The office was at the
southwest corner of Third and Main streets, and James Henderson was
first operator. Mayor Stone sent this message to Mayor Goldsmith: "To
the Mayor of Portland: Greeting. Allow me to congratulate you upon the
completion of the telegraph that places the first city of Washington
Territory in direct communication with the first city of Oregon, and
to express the hope that it is but the precursor of the iron rail that
is to unite us still more indissolubly in the bonds of interest and
affection."

A prompt response in like spirit came from Mayor Goldsmith of Portland.

Another event of importance, which also prepared the way for infinite
political maneuvers and back-room deals was the establishment in 1871
of the Walla Walla Land District. As first constituted, the district
embraced all of the territory east of the Cascade Mountains. Some
appointees came from the East to fill the various positions, though the
majority of them were local men, usually of the highest character. In
this, as in other departments of government depending to some degree on
the favor or otherwise of members of Congress, there has been a certain
proportion of pie-counter politicians who have kept up a regular
procession toward the land office.

William Stephens, registrar, and Anderson Cox, receiver, were the
first in the office, opening the doors on July 17, 1871. P. B. Johnson
followed Mr. Stephens in 1875 and J. F. Boyer became receiver in 1872.
Better men could not have been found in the Inland Empire.

Such may be regarded as the essential events to the limits of our space
in the history of Walla Walla County and City to the time of county
division. We have already given the tabulation of county officials,
as well as that of those of the Territorial Delegates and Governors,
together with such others as especially belonged to this region. We
incorporate here a list of city officials to the same date.


CITY OFFICERS AND COUNCIL OF WALLA WALLA


1865

  Mayor--George Thomas.
  Council--W. A. Ball, I. T. Rees, Fred Stine, B. Sheideman,
    Wm. Kohlhauff, O. P. Lacy.
  City Clerk--A. L. Brown.

1866

  Mayor--C. B. Whiteman.
  Recorder--W. P. Horton.
  Marshal--W. J. Tompkins.
  Treasurer--H. E. Johnson.
  Assessor--O. P. Lacy.
  Council--Fred Stine, I. W. McKee, Cal P. Winesett, Geo. Baggs,
    John J. Ryan.

1867

  Mayor--James McAuliff.
  Recorder--O. P. Lacy.
  Marshal--E. Delaney.
  Assessor--M. Leider.
  Treasurer--H. E. Johnson.
  Surveyor--W. L. Gaston.
  Council--C. P. Winesett, I. T. Rees, Wm. Kohlhauff, J. F. Abbott,
    W. Brown.

1868

  Mayor--James McAuliff.
  Recorder--Lewis Day.
  Treasurer--H. M. Chase.
  Council--J. F. Abbott, Fred Stine, H. Howard, Wm. Kohlhauff, A. Kyger.

1869

  Mayor--Frank Stone.
  Recorder--O. P. Lacy.
  Marshal--E. Delaney.
  Treasurer--H. E. Johnson.
  Assessor--J. E. Brown.
  Surveyor--A. H. Simmons.
  Council--James Jones, W. S. Miner, Thos. Tierney, P. M. Lynch,
    Thos. Quinn.

1870

  Mayor--Dr. E. Shiel.
  Recorder--W. P. Horton.
  Marshal--E. Delaney.
  Treasurer--H. E. Johnson.
  Assessor--J. M. Rittenhouse.
  Surveyor--A. H. Simmons.
  Council--J. F. Abbott, H. M. Chase, G. P. Foor, Wm. Kohlhauff,
    N. T. Caton.

1871

  Mayor--E. B. Whitman.
  Recorder--W. P. Horton.
  Marshal--E. Delaney.
  Treasurer--H. E. Johnson.
  Assessor--M. W. Davis.
  Surveyor--A. L. Knowlton.
  Council--R. Jacobs, P. M. Lynch, N. T. Caton, G. P. Foor, Frank Orselli.

1872

  Mayor--E. B. Whitman.
  Recorder--O. P. Lacy.
  Marshal--John P. Justice.
  Treasurer--H. E. Johnson.
  Assessor--M. W. Davis.
  Surveyor--A. L. Knowlton.
  Council--Sig. Schwabacher, N. T. Caton, M. C. Moore, I. H. Foster,
    John Stahl.

[Illustration:
Courtesy of W. P. Winans
WALLA WALLA IN 1876]

1873

  Mayor--E. B. Whitman.
  Recorder--I. D. Sarman.
  Marshal--John P. Justice.
  Treasurer--H. E. Johnson.
  Assessor--M. W. Davis.
  Surveyor--A. L. Knowlton.
  Council--M. C. Moore, N. T. Caton, I. H. Foster, Wm. Neal, John Fall.

1874

  Mayor--James McAuliff.
  Marshal--John P. Justice.
  Recorder--O. P. Lacy.
  Treasurer--C. T. Thompson.
  Assessor--J. B. Thompson.
  Council--F. G. Allen, Z. K. Straight, Wm. Kohlhauff, Ed C. Ross.

1875

  Mayor--James McAuliff.
  Marshal--John P. Justice.
  Recorder--J. D. Laman.
  Treasurer--F. Kennedy.
  Assessor--S. Jacobs.
  Council--O. P. Lacy, Ed C. Ross, M. Belcher, J. D. Laman, Wm. Kohlhauff.

1876

  Mayor--Jas. McAuliff.
  Marshal--John P. Justice.
  Treasurer--H. E. Holmes.
  Assessor--S. Jacobs.
  Council--G. P. Foor, Wm. Kohlhauff, A. H. Reynolds, O. P. Lacy, M.
  Belcher.

It remains in this chapter to speak of the events leading to the
division of Old Walla Walla County. The first movement in that
direction originated at Waitsburg. That active place, in the center of
one of the fairest and most fertile tracts in all this fertile region,
had come into existence in 1865. We find an item in the _Statesman_
of June 30, 1865, to this effect: "Waitsburg is the name of a town
just beginning to grow up at Wait's Mill on the Touchet. The people
of that vicinity have resolved to celebrate the coming 4th, and are
making arrangements accordingly. W. S. Langford of this city has
accepted an invitations to deliver the oration. "In 1869 a sentiment
developed that the large area south of Snake River, 3,420 square miles,
was too large for a single county, and that it was only a question
of time when there must be another county. Not seeming to realize
that if such event occurred the natural center must be farther east
than Waitsburg, the citizens of the "Mill Town" pushed vigorously for
their project of division, with their own town as the seat of a new
county. A petition signed by 150 citizens was conveyed to Olympia by
a delegation who presented it to the Legislature. Though their effort
failed it served to keep the plan of division alive, and with a rapid
flow of immigration into the high region of the Upper Touchet, the
movement for a new county constantly grew. We have already spoken of
the early locations on the Touchet and Patit. In 1871 and 1872, there
became a concentration of interests which made it clear that a town
would develop. It became known as Dayton from Jesse N. Day. Here was
a location more suitable geographically than Waitsburg, and sentiment
rapidly gathered around Dayton as the natural vantage point for a new
county. Elisha Ping was chosen to the Territorial Council in 1874 to
represent Walla Walla County, and as a citizen and prominent land owner
of Dayton he became the center of the movement.

The first boundary proposed called for a line running directly south
from the Palouse ferry on Snake River to the state line, thus putting
Waitsburg just within the new county. This was not acceptable to that
place. If it could not be the county seat, it preferred to play second
fiddle to Walla Walla rather than to Dayton. Mr. Preston went to Walla
Walla to represent the Waitsburg sentiment. As a result a remonstrance
against county division was prepared and forwarded to the Legislature.
Representatives Hodgis, Lloyd, Lynch and Scott took positions in
opposition to division. A. J. Cain and Elisha Ping conducted the
campaign from the standpoint of Dayton. It became a three cornered
combat in the Legislature. The Walla Walla people, as almost always
is the case in a growing county, though it is very poor and selfish
policy, opposed any division. The Waitsburg influence was for division
provided it could have the county seat but otherwise opposed, and
the Dayton influence was entirely for division with the expectation
that Dayton would become the county seat. Like most county division
and county seat fights, this was based mainly on motives of transient
local gain and personal advantage, rather than on broad public policy
for the future. But so long as human nature is at such a rudimentary
stage of evolution it would be too idealistic to expect otherwise. But
whether with large motives or small, the final outcome, as well as the
subsequent divisions by which Garfield and Asotin were laid out, was
for progress and efficiency. Walla Walla interests were overpowered in
the Legislature and a bill creating Ping County was duly passed. This,
however, encountered a snag, for Governor Ferry vetoed it. Another
bill, avoiding his objections, naming the new county Columbia, was
finally passed and on Nov. 11, 1875, Columbia County duly came into
existence, embracing about two-thirds of Old Walla Walla County, being
bounded by Snake River and the state line on the north, east and south,
and by Walla Walla County on the west.

The history of the erection of Garfield and Asotin counties will belong
properly to a later chapter, and with this final view of old Walla
Walla County as it had existed from 1859 to 1878, we pass on.




CHAPTER IV

THE EARLY TRANSPORTATION AGE


It is but trite and commonplace to say (yet these commonplace
sayings embody the accumulated experience of the human race) that
transportation is the very A. B. C. of economic science. There can be
no wealth without exchange. There is no assignable value either to
commodities or labor without markets.

New communities have always had to struggle with these fundamental
problems of transportation. Until there can be at least some exchange
of products there can be no real commercial life and men's labor
is spent simply on producing the articles needful for daily bread,
clothing and shelter. Most of the successive "Wests" of America have
gone through that stage of simple existence. Some have gotten out of
it very rapidly, usually by the discovery of the precious metals or
the production of some great staple like furs so much in demand and so
scarce in distant countries as to justify expensive and even dangerous
expeditions and costly transportation systems. During nearly all the
first half of the nineteenth century the fur trade was that agency
which created exchange and compelled transportation.

After the acquisition of Oregon and California by the United States
there was a lull, during which there was scarcely any commercial life
because there was nothing exchangeable or transportable.

Then suddenly came the dramatic discovery of gold in California which
inaugurated there a new era of commercial life and hence demanded
extensive transportation, and that was for many years necessarily by
the ocean. The similar discovery in Oregon came ten years later. As we
saw in Chapter Two of this part there came on suddenly in the early
'60s a rushing together in old Walla Walla of a confused mass of eager
seekers for gold, cattle ranges, and every species of the opportunities
which were thought to exist in the "upper country." As men began to get
the measure of the country and each other and to see something of what
this land was going to become, the demand for some regular system of
transportation became imperative.

The first resource was naturally by the water. It was obvious that
teaming from the Willamette Valley (the only productive region in the
'50s and the first year or two of the '60s) was too limited a means
to amount to anything. Bateaux after the fashion of the Hudson's Bay
Company would not do for the new era. Men could indeed drive stock over
the mountains and across the plains and did so to considerable degree.
But as the full measure of the problem was taken it became clear to the
active ambitious men who flocked into the Walla Walla country in 1858,
1859, and 1860, and particularly when the discovery of gold became
known in 1861, that nothing but the establishment of steamboats on the
Columbia and Snake rivers would answer the demand for a real system of
transportation commensurate with the situation.

To fully appreciate the era of steamboating and to revive the memories
of the pioneers of this region in those halcyon days of river traffic,
it is fitting that we trace briefly the essential stages from the first
appearance of steamers on the Columbia River and its tributaries. To
accomplish this section of the story we are incorporating here several
paragraphs from "The Columbia River," by the author: The first river
steamer of any size to ply upon the Willamette and Columbia was the
Lot Whitcomb. This steamer was built by Whitcomb and Jennings. J. C.
Ainsworth was the first captain, and Jacob Kamm was the first engineer.
Both of these men became leaders in every species of steamboating
enterprise. In 1851 Dan Bradford and B. B. Bishop inaugurated a
movement to connect the up-river region with the lower river by getting
a small iron propeller called the Jason P. Flint from the East and
putting her together at the Cascades, whence she made the run to
Portland. The Flint has been named as first to run above the Cascades,
but the author has the authority of Mr. Bishop for stating that the
first steamer to run above the Cascades was the Eagle. That steamer
was brought in sections by Allen McKinley to the Upper Cascades in
1853, there put together, and set to plying on the part of the river
between the Cascades and The Dalles. In 1854 the Mary was built and
launched above the Cascades, the next year the Wasco followed, and in
1856 the Hassalo began to toot her jubilant horn at the precipices of
the mid-Columbia. In 1859 R. R. Thompson and Lawrence Coe built the
Colonel Wright, the first steamer on the upper section of the river. In
the same year the same men built at the Upper Cascades a steamer called
the Venture. This craft met with a curious catastrophe. For on her very
first trip she swung too far into the channel and was carried over the
Upper Cascades, at the point where the Cascade Locks are now located.
She was subsequently raised and rebuilt, and rechristened the Umatilla.

This part of the period of steamboat building was contemporary with the
Indian wars of 1855 and 1856. The steamers Wasco, Mary, and Eagle were
of much service in rescuing victims of the murderous assault on the
Cascades by the Klickitats.

While the enterprising steamboat builders were thus making their
way up-river in the very teeth of Indian warfare steamboats were in
course of construction on the Willamette. The Jennie Clark in 1854 and
the Carrie Ladd in 1858 were built for the firm of Abernethy, Clark
and Company. These both, the latter especially, were really elegant
steamers for the time.

The close of the Indian wars in 1859 saw a quite well-organized steamer
service between Portland and The Dalles, and the great rush into the
upper country was just beginning. The Senorita, the Belle, and the
Multnomah, under the management of Benjamin Stark, were on the run from
Portland to the Cascades. A rival steamer, the Mountain Buck, owned by
Ruckle and Olmstead, was on the same route. These steamers connected
with boats on the Cascades-Dalles section by means of portages five
miles long around the rapids. There was a portage on each side of the
river. That on the north side was operated by Bradford & Company, and
their steamers were the Hassalo and the Mary. Ruckle and Olmstead owned
the portage on the south side of the river, and their steamer was the
Wasco. Sharp competition arose between the Bradford and Stark interests
on one side and Ruckle and Olmstead on the other. The Stark Company was
known as the Columbia River Navigation Company, and the rival was the
Oregon Transportation Company. J. C. Ainsworth now joined the Stark
party with the Carrie Ladd. So efficient did this reinforcement prove
to be that the transportation company proposed to them a combination.
This was effected in April, 1859, and the new organization became
known as the Union Transportation Company. This was soon found to be
too loose a consolidation to accomplish the desired ends, and the
parties interested set about a new combination to embrace all the steam
boat men from Celilo to Astoria. The result was the formation of the
Oregon Steam Navigation Company, which came into legal existence on
December 20, 1860. Its stock in steamboats, sailboats, wharfboats, and
miscellaneous property was stated at $172,500.

Such was the genesis of the "O. S. N. Co." In a valuable article by
Irene Lincoln Poppleton in the _Oregon Historical Quarterly_ for
September, 1908, to which we here make acknowledgments, it is said
that no assessment was ever levied on the stock of this company, but
that from the proceeds of the business the management expended in gold
nearly three million dollars in developing their property, besides
paying to the stockholders in dividends over two million and a half
dollars. Never perhaps was there such a record of money-making on such
capitalization.

The source of the enormous business of the Oregon Steam Navigation
Company was the rush into Idaho, Montana, and Eastern Oregon and
Washington by the miners, cowboys, speculators, and adventurers of
the early '60s. The up-river country, as described more at length in
another chapter, wakened suddenly from the lethargy of centuries, and
the wildness teemed with life. That was the great steamboat age. Money
flowed in streams. Fortunes were made and lost in a day.

When first organized in 1860, the Oregon Steam Navigation Company had a
nondescript lot of steamers, mainly small and weak. The two portages,
one of five miles around the Cascades and the other of fourteen miles
from The Dalles to Celilo Falls, were unequal to their task. The
portages at the Cascades on both sides of the river were made by very
inadequate wooden tramways. That at The Dalles was made by teams. Such
quantities of freight were discharged from the steamers that sometimes
the whole portage was lined with freight from end to end. The portages
were not acquired by the company with the steamboat property, and as
a result the portage owners reaped the larger share of the profits.
During high water the portage on the Oregon side at the Cascades had
a monopoly of the business and it took one-half the freight income
from Portland to The Dalles. This was holding the whip-hand with a
vengeance, and the vigorous directors of the steamboat company could
not endure it. Accordingly, they absorbed the rights of the portage
owners, built a railroad from Celilo to The Dalles on the Oregon side,
and one around the Cascades on the Washington side. The company was
reorganized under the laws of Oregon in October, 1863, with a declared
capitalization of $2,000,000.

Business on the river in 1863 was something enormous. Hardly ever did
a steamer make a trip with less than two hundred passengers. Freight
was offered in such quantities at Portland that trucks had to stand in
line for blocks, waiting to deliver and receive their loads. New boats
were built of a much better class. Two rival companies, the Independent
Line and the People's Transportation Line, made a vigorous struggle to
secure a share of the business, but they were eventually overpowered.
Some conception of the amount of business may be gained from the fact
that the steamers transported passengers to an amount of fares running
from $1,000 to $6,000 a trip. On April 29, 1862, the Tenino, leaving
Celilo for the Lewiston trip, had a load amounting to $10,945 for
freight, passengers, meals, and berths. The steamships sailing from
Portland to San Francisco showed equally remarkable records. On June
25, 1861, the Sierra Nevada conveyed a treasure shipment of $228,000;
July 14th, $110,000; August 24th, $195,558; December 5th, $750,000. The
number of passengers carried on The Dalles-Lewiston route in 1864 was
36,000 and the tons of freight were 21,834.

It was a magnificent steamboat ride in those days from Portland to
Lewiston. The fare was $60; meals and berths, $1 each. A traveler
would leave Portland at 5 A. M. on, perhaps, the Wilson G. Hunt, reach
the Cascades sixty-five miles distant at 11 A. M., proceed by rail
five miles to the Upper Cascades, there transfer to the Oneonta or
Idaho for The Dalles, passing in that run from the humid, low-lying,
heavily timbered West-of-the-mountains, to the dry, breezy, hilly
East-of-the-mountains. Reaching The Dalles, fifty miles farther east,
he would be conveyed by another portage railroad, fourteen miles more,
to Celilo. There the Tenino, Yakima, Nez Perce Chief, or Owyhee was
waiting. With the earliest light of the morning the steamer would head
right into the impetuous current of the river, bound for Lewiston, 280
miles farther yet, taking two days, sometimes three, though only one
to return. Those steamers were mainly of light-draught, stern-wheel
structure, which still characterizes the Columbia River boats. They
were swift and roomy and well adapted to the turbulent waters of the
upper river.

[Illustration: STEAMERS ASOTIN, SPOKANE AND LEWISTON IN PORT AT
LEWISTON]

The captains, pilots, and pursers of that period were as fine a set of
men as ever turned a wheel. Bold, bluff, genial, hearty, and obliging
they were, even though given to occasional outbursts of expletives
and possessing voluminous repertoires of "cusswords" such as would
startle the effete East. Any old Oregonian who may chance to cast his
eyes upon these pages will recall, as with the pangs of childhood
homesickness, the forms and features of steamboat men of that day;
the polite yet determined Ainsworth, the brusque and rotund Reed,
the bluff and hearty Knaggs, the frolicsome and never disconcerted
Ingalls, the dark, powerful, and nonchalant Coe, the patriarchal beard
of Stump, the loquacious "Commodore" Wolf, who used to point out to
astonished tourists the "diabolical strata" on the banks of the river,
the massive and good-natured Strang, the genial and elegant O'Neil, the
suave and witty Snow, the tall and handsome Sampson, the rich Scotch
brogue of McNulty, and dozens of others, whose combined adventures
would fill a volume. One of the most experienced pilots of the upper
river was Captain "Eph" Baughman, who ran steamers on the Snake and
Columbia rivers over fifty years, and is yet living at the date of
this publication. W. H. Gray, who came to Waiilatpu with Whitman as
secular agent of the mission, became a river man of much skill. He gave
four sons, John, William, Alfred, and James, to the service of the
river, all four of them being skilled captains. A story narrated to the
author by Capt. William Gray, now of Pasco, Wash., well illustrates
the character of the old Columbia River navigators. W. H. Gray was
the first man to run a sailboat of much size with regular freight up
Snake River. That was in 1860 before any steamers were running on that
stream. Mr. Gray built his boat, a fifty ton sloop, on Oosooyoos Lake
on the Okanogan River. In it he descended that river to its entrance
into the Columbia. Thence he descended the Columbia, running down the
Entiat, Rock Island, Cabinet, and Priest Rapids, no mean undertaking of
itself. Reaching the mouth of the Snake he took on a load of freight
and started up the swift stream. At Five-mile Rapids he found that his
sail was insufficient to carry the sloop up. Men had said that it was
impossible. The crew all prophesied disaster. The stubborn captain
merely declared, "There is no such word as fail in my dictionary." He
directed his son and another of the crew to take the small boat, load
her with a long coil of rope, make their way up the stream until they
got above the rapid, there to land on an islet of rock, fasten the rope
to that rock, then pay it out till it was swept down the rapid. They
were then to descend the rapid in the small boat. "Very likely you may
be upset," added the skipper encouragingly, "but if you are, you know
how to swim." They were upset, sure enough, but they did know how to
swim. They righted their boat, picked up the end of the floating rope,
and reached the sloop with it. The rope was attached to the capstan,
and the sloop was wound up by it above the swiftest part of the
rapid to a point where the sail was sufficient to carry, and on they
went rejoicing. Any account of steamboating on the Columbia would be
incomplete without reference to Capt. James Troup, who was born on the
Columbia, and almost from early boyhood ran steamers upon it and its
tributaries. He made a specialty of running steamers down The Dalles
and the Cascades, an undertaking sometimes rendered necessary by the
fact that more boats were built in proportion to demand on the upper
than the lower river. These were taken down The Dalles, and sometimes
down the Cascades. Once down, they could not return. The first steamer
to run down the Tumwater Falls was the Okanogan, on May 22, 1866,
piloted by Capt. T. J. Stump.

The author enjoyed the great privilege of descending The Dalles in the
D. S. Baker in the year 1888, Captain Troup being in command. At that
strange point in the river, the whole vast volume is compressed into
a channel but 160 feet wide at low water and much deeper than wide.
Like a huge mill-race this channel continues nearly straight for two
miles, when it is hurled with frightful force against a massive bluff.
Deflected from the bluff, it turns at a sharp angle to be split in
sunder by a low reef of rock. When the Baker was drawn into the current
at the head of the "chute" she swept down the channel, which was almost
black, with streaks of foam, to the bluff, two miles in four minutes.
There feeling the tremendous refluent wave, she went careening over and
over toward the sunken reef. The skilled captain had her perfectly in
hand, and precisely at the right moment, rang the signal bell, "Ahead,
full speed," and ahead she went, just barely scratching her side on
the rock. Thus close was it necessary to calculate distance. If the
steamer had struck the tooth-like point of the reef broadside on, she
would have been broken in two and carried in fragments on either side.
Having passed this danger point, she glided into the beautiful calm bay
below and the feat was accomplished. Capt. J. C. Ainsworth and Capt.
James Troup were the two captains above all others to whom the company
entrusted the critical task of running steamers over the rapids.

In the _Overland Monthly_ of June, 1886, there is a valuable account
by Capt. Lawrence Coe of the maiden journey of the Colonel Wright from
Celilo up what they then termed the upper Columbia.

This first journey on that section of the river was made in April,
1859. The pilot was Capt. Lew White. The highest point reached was
Wallula, the site of the old Hudson's Bay Fort. The current was a
powerful one to withstand, no soundings had ever been made, and no
boats except canoes, bateaus, flatboats, and a few small sailboats,
had ever made the trip. No one had any conception of the location of a
channel adapted to a steamboat. No difficulty was experienced, however,
except at the Umatilla Rapids. This is a most singular obstruction.
Three separate reefs, at intervals of half a mile, extend right across
the river. There are narrow breaks in these reefs, but not in line with
each other. Through them the water pours with tremendous velocity, and
on account of their irregular locations a steamer must zigzag across
the river at imminent risk of being borne broadside on to the reef. The
passage of the Umatilla Rapids is not difficult at high water, for then
the steamer glides over the rocks in a straight course.

In the August _Overland_ of the same year, Captain Coe narrates the
first steamboat trip up Snake River. This was in June, 1860, just at
the time of the beginning of the gold excitement. The Colonel Wright
was loaded with picks, rockers, and other mining implements, as well as
provisions and passengers. Most of the freight and passengers were put
off at Wallula, to go thence overland. Part continued on to test the
experiment of making way against the wicked-looking current of Snake
River. After three days and a half from the starting point a few miles
above Celilo, the Colonel Wright halted at a place which was called
Slaterville, thirty-seven miles up the Clearwater from its junction
with the Snake. There the remainder of the cargo was discharged, to be
hauled in wagons to the Oro Fino mines. The steamer Okanogan followed
the Colonel Wright within a few weeks, and navigation on the Snake
may be said to have fairly begun. During that same time the City of
Lewiston, named in honor of Meriwether Lewis, the explorer, was founded
at the junction of the Snake and Clearwater rivers.


THE PIONEER STAGE LINES

While the river traffic under the ordinary control of the O. S. N.
Company, though with frequent periods of opposition boats, was thus
promoting the movements of commercial life along the great central
artery, the need of reaching interior points was vital. The only way of
doing this and providing feeders for the boats was by stage lines and
prairie schooners. As a result of this need there developed along with
the steamboats a system of roads from certain points on the Columbia
and Snake rivers. Umatilla, Wallula, and Lewiston became the chief of
these. And in the stage lines we have another era of utmost interest
and importance in the old time days.

J. F. Abbott was the pioneer stage manager of old Walla Walla. It
is very interesting to note his advertisements as they appear in
the earliest issues of the _Washington Statesman_. But he began
before there was any _Statesman_ or paper of any kind between the
Cascade Mountains and the Missouri River. For in 1859 he started the
first stages between Wallula and Walla Walla. In 1860 he entered a
partnership with Rickey and Thatcher on the same route. In 1861 a new
line was laid out by Miller and Blackmore from The Dalles to Walla
Walla. The stage business went right on by leaps and bounds. In 1862
two companies started new lines, Rickey and Thatcher from Walla Walla
to Lewiston through the present Walla Walla, Columbia, Garfield and
Asotin counties, and Blackmore and Chase between Wallula and Walla
Walla. During the next two decades the stage business became one of
the great factors in the growth of the whole vast region from Umatilla
eastward into the mining regions of Oro Fino, Florence, Boise Basin,
and ultimately into Wyoming and Utah.

The most prominent manager on the longer routes and one of the most
prominent and useful of all the business men of early Walla Walla, was
George F. Thomas. He laid out a route from Wallula to Boise by way of
Walla Walla and the Woodward Toll Gate Road over the Blue Mountains.

In 1864 there came into operation the first of the great stage
systems having transcontinental aims and policies. This was the
Holladay system. That period was the palmy time for hold-ups, Indians,
prairie-schooners, and all the other interesting and extravagant
features of life, ordinarily supposed to be typical of the Far-West
and so dominating in their effect on the imagination as to furnish the
seed-bed for a genuine literature of the Pacific Coast, most prominent
in California with the illustrious names of Bret Harte and Mark Twain
in the van, and with Jack London, Rex Beach, and many more in later
times pursuing the same general tenor of delineation. The Northwest has
not yet had a literature comparable with California's, but the material
is here and there will yet be in due sequence a line of story writers,
poets and artists of the incomparable scenery and the tragic, humorous
and pathetic human associations of the Columbia and its tributaries,
which will place this northern region of the Pacific in the same rank
as the more forward southern sister. Indeed we may remark incidentally
that the two most prominent California poets, Joaquin Miller and Edwin
Markham, belonged to Oregon, the latter being a native of the "Webfoot
State."

The amount of business done by those pioneer stage lines was
surprising. In the issue of the _Statesman_ of December 20, 1862, it is
estimated that the amount of freight landed by the steamers at Wallula
to be distributed thence by wheel averaged about a hundred and fifty
tons weekly, and that the number of passengers, very variable, ran from
fifty to six hundred weekly. As time went on rival lines became more
and more active and rates were lowered as competition grew more keen.
The author recalls vividly his first trip from Wallula to Walla Walla
in his boyhood in the summer of 1870.

The steamer was jammed with passengers who disembarked and made a rush
for something to eat in the old adobe hotel on the river bank at the
site of the old Fort Walla Walla. There were a dozen or so stages, the
driver of each vociferating that on that day passengers were carried
free to Walla Walla. It is asserted that on some occasions competition
became so hot that the rival stage managers offered not only free
transportation, but free meals as a bonus. Whenever one line succeeded
in running off competitors the rates were plumped right back to the
ordinary figure. In view of the wagon traffic of that period it is not
surprising that sections of the road are yet worn several feet deep and
that for years there were four or five tracks. They never worked the
roads, but depended purely on nature, Providence, and the movement of
teams to effect any changes. With the somewhat strenuous west winds
which even yet are sometimes noticed to prevail on the lower Walla
Walla it is not wonderful that a good part of the top dressing of that
country has been distributed at various points around Walla Walla,
Waitsburg, Dayton, "and all points east." How regular teamsters got
enough air to maintain life out of the clouds of dust which enveloped
most of their active moments is one of the unexplained mysteries of
human existence.

The closing scene of the stage line drama may be said to have been the
establishment in 1871 of the Northwestern Stage Company. It connected
the Central Pacific Railroad at Kelton, Utah, with The Dalles,
Pendleton, Walla Walla, Colfax, Dayton, Lewiston, Pomeroy, and "all
points north and west." During the decade of the '70s that stage line
was a connecting link not only between the railroads and the regions as
yet without them, but was also a link between two epochs, that of the
stage and that of the railroad.

It did an extensive passenger business, employing regularly twenty-two
stages and 300 horses, which used annually 365 tons of grain and 412
tons of hay. There were 150 drivers and hostlers regularly employed for
that branch of the business.


THE RAILROAD AGE

But a new order was coming rapidly. As the decades of the '60s and
'70s belonged especially to the steamboat and the stage, so the
decade of the '80s belonged to the railroad. It is one of the most
curious and interesting facts in American history that during the
period between about 1835, the coming of the missionaries and the
period of the discoveries of gold in Idaho in 1861 and onward, there
was an obstinate insistence in Congress, especially the Senate--a
great body indeed, but at times the very apotheosis of conservative
imbecility--that Oregon could never be practically connected with the
older parts of the country, but must remain a wilderness. But there
were some Progressives. When Isaac I. Stevens was appointed governor of
Washington Territory in 1853 he had charge of a survey with a view of
determining a practical route for a northern railroad.

It is very interesting to read his instructions to George B. McClellan,
then one of his assistants. "The route is from St. Paul, Minn., to
Puget Sound by the great bend of the Mississippi River, through a
pass in the mountains near the forty-ninth parallel. A strong party
will operate westward from St. Paul; a second but smaller party will
go up the Missouri to the Yellowstone, and there make arrangements,
reconnoiter the country, etc., and on the junction of the main party
they will push through the Blackfoot country, and reaching the Rocky
Mountains will keep at work there during the summer months. The third
party, under your command, will be organized in the Puget Sound
region, you and your scientific corps going over the Isthmus, and will
operate in the Cascade range and meet the party coming from the Rocky
Mountains. The amount of work in the Cascade range and eastward, say
to the probable junction of the parties at the great bend of the north
fork of the Columbia River, will be immense. Recollect, the main object
is a railroad survey from the headwaters of the Mississippi River to
Puget Sound. We must not be frightened by long tunnels or enormous
snows, but must set ourselves to work to overcome them."

Growing out of the abundant agitation going on for twenty years after
the start given it by Governor Stevens, the movement for a Northern
Pacific Railroad focalized in 1870 by a contract made between the
promoters and Jay Cooke & Company to sell bonds. It is interesting to
recall that Philip Ritz of Walla Walla, one of the noblest of men and
most useful of pioneers, was one of the strong forces in conveying
information about the field and inducing the promoters to turn their
attention to it. In fact Messrs. Ogden and Cass, two of the strongest
men connected with the enterprise, afterwards stated that it was
a letter from Mr. Ritz that drew their favorable attention to the
possibilities of this country. Work was begun on the section of the
Northern Pacific Railroad between Kalama on the Columbia and Puget
Sound in 1870, but the financial panic of 1873 crippled and even ruined
many great business houses, among others Jay Cooke & Co., and for
several years construction was at a stand still. In 1879 the Northern
Pacific Railroad Co. was reorganized, work was resumed and never
ceased till the iron horse had drunk both out of Lake Superior and the
Columbia River.

One of the most spectacular chapters in the history of railroading in
the Northwest was that of the "blind pool" by which Henry Villard,
president of the Oregon Railway and Navigation Co., obtained in 1881
the control of a majority of the stock of the N. P. and became its
president. The essential aim of this series of occult finances was to
divert the northern road from its proposed terminus on Puget Sound and
annex it to the interests centering in Portland.

In 1883 the road was pushed on from Duluth to Wallula and thence
by union with the O. R. & N. was carried on down the Columbia. The
feverish haste, reckless outlay, and in places dangerous construction
of that section along the crags and through shaded glens and in front
of the waterfalls on the banks of the great river, constitute one of
the dramas of building. Even more spectacularly came the gorgeous
pageantry of the Villard excursion in October, 1883, in which Grant,
Evarts, and others of the most distinguished of Americans participated,
and in which Oregon and the Northwest in general were entertained in
Portland with lavish hospitality, and in which Villard rode upon the
crest of the greatest wave of power and popularity that had been seen
in the history of the Northwest. But in the very moment of his triumph
he fell with a "dull, sickening thud." In fact even while being lauded
and feted as the great railroad builder he must have known of the
impending crash. For skillful manipulations of the stock market by the
Wright interests had dispossessed Villard of his majority control, a
general collapse in Portland followed, and the Puget Sound terminal was
established at the "City of Destiny," Tacoma. Not till 1888, however,
was the great tunnel at Stampede pass completed and the Northern
Pacific fairly established upon its great route.

Since the completion of the main line of the N. P. R. R. it has
sprouted out feeders in many directions. The most interesting and
important of these to the Walla Walla Valley is the Washington and
Columbia River Railroad, commonly known in earlier times as the Hunt
Road. That road was started as the Oregon and Washington Territory
R. R. by Pendleton interests in 1887. Mr. G. W. Hunt, a man of great
energy and ability, and possessed of many peculiar and original views
on religion and social conditions as well as railroads, came to the
Inland Empire at that time and perceiving the great possibilities in
this region, made a contract to construct the line. Finding within a
year that the projectors were not succeeding in raising funds Mr.
Hunt took over the enterprise. In 1888-90 he carried out a series of
lines from Hunt's Junction, a short distance from Wallula, to Helix and
Athena and finally to Pendleton in Umatilla County, Ore., and to Walla
Walla, Waitsburg and Dayton, with a separate branch up Eureka Flat,
that great wheat belt of Northern Walla Walla County. The hard times of
the next year so affected Mr. Hunt's resources that he felt obliged to
place his fine enterprise in the hands of N. P. R. R. interests. But
it still retained the name of Washington and Columbia River Railroad
and was operated as a distinct road. The first president following Mr.
Hunt was W. D. Tyler, a man of so genial nature and brilliant mind as
to be one of the conspicuous figures in Walla Walla circles during his
residence in this region and to be remembered with warm friendship by
people in all sorts of connections, afterward living in Tacoma until
his lamented death. He was followed by Joseph McCabe who was a railroad
builder and manager of conspicuous ability and who continued at the
head of the line until he was drawn to important railroad work in New
England. The third president of the road was J. G. Cutler who ably
continued the work so well begun. In 1907 the line was absorbed by the
Northern Pacific and has since that date been managed as a section of
that line. Mr. Cutler continued for a time as the general manager until
failing health compelled his retirement and to the deep regret of a
large circle of friends and business associates he died within a few
months of his retirement. S. B. Calderhead, who had been during the
presidencies of Mr. McCabe and Mr. Cutler the traffic manager of the
original road, became the general freight and passenger agent of the
division in 1907 and continues to hold the position at this time. The
road has been extended to Turner in the heart of the barley belt of
Columbia County. It does an extraordinary business for the amount of
mileage and population. Within the year of the completion of the lines
to Dayton, Pendleton, and the Eureka Flat branch, a total mileage of
162.73 miles and with a scanty population at that date of 1890, the
road conveyed about forty thousand tons of freight into the regions
covered and carried out about a hundred and thirty thousand tons of
grain and 20,000 tons of other freight.

The other transcontinental line in which the Walla Walla country is
especially interested is the Oregon Railroad and Navigation Company's
line. This acquired the Walla Walla and Columbia River line in 1878 and
the property of the O. S. N. Co. in 1879. Henry Villard was the great
organizer of the O. R. and N. line, which was a portion of the Union
Pacific system, covering the territory between Huntington and Portland.
Of Villard's operations in this connection with the N. P. R. R. we have
already spoken. Although the attempt to divert that system down the
Columbia proved a failure, the O. R. and N. R. R. has become one of
the great systems of the United States, and as a part of the present
Oregon and Washington system it performs a vast commercial service in
the regions covered by its lines. By the acquisition of the Walla Walla
and Columbia River R. R. (Dr. Baker's road) and the O. S. N. Co. lines
and steamboats (for that was mainly a river system) the O. R. and N.
R. R. succeeded practically to the whole pioneer system of steamboats
and stage lines of the previous era. It has become a vast factor in the
commercial life of the Columbia River region and by its branches north
and west has become a competitor with the Northern Pacific and Great
Northern systems throughout the state. Its chief lines in the counties
covered by this work are that from Pendleton to Spokane, going right
through the heart of the region, with branches from Bolles Junction
to Dayton and Starbuck to Pomeroy. It joins with the N. P. R. R. in a
line from Riparia on the north side of the Snake River to Lewiston,
by which the splendid country centering around that city is reached
and by which the equally beautiful and productive region of Asotin and
Garfield counties on the west and south of Snake River are indirectly
touched. To reach that highly productive region the company maintains
several steamers which ply during the proper stage of water and convey
millions of bushels of grain from Asotin and other points down the
river to railroad connections. One of the important developments of
the line is the Yakima branch, extending from Walla Walla to that city
and projected, as is supposed, to ultimate connections on Puget Sound
and possibly through the Klickitat country about the base of Mount
Adams to Portland, tapping an entirely new country of great and varied
resources. In 1914 the main line between Portland and Spokane was
constructed down the Snake from Riparia to Wallula.

The Northern Pacific and Oregon-Washington railroads have not far from
the same mileage in these counties, the latter somewhat larger, and do
approximately the same amount of local business. A general estimate
by one of the best informed railroad men of Walla Walla is that the
combined receipts for freight in Walla Walla County alone--the present
county--for the last year was about one million dollars for outgoing
and about six hundred thousand dollars for incoming freight.


WALLA WALLA AND COLUMBIA RIVER RAILROAD

We have reserved for special consideration the most interesting and
from the historical standpoint the most important of all the railroads
of Walla Walla, the Walla Walla and Columbia River, Doctor Baker's
road. The history of this enterprise is most intimately connected with
the development of this region. It is not only a rare example of the
growth of a local demand and need, but constitutes a tribute to the
genius of its builder, one of the most unique and powerful of all the
capable and original builders of the "Upper Country."

To trace the movements leading to the creation of this vital step in
the commercial evolution of Walla Walla, we must turn to the files of
the _Washington Statesman_. In the issue of May 3, 1862, we find the
leading editorial devoted to urging the need of a railroad. It notes
the fact that Lewiston and Wallula are endeavoring to divert the trade
from Walla Walla and that with $500,000 invested in the city, as much
more in the country, and with crops yielding $250,000, besides stock,
the people of Walla Walla cannot rest content with the exorbitant
expense of freighting by teams to and from the river. It says bitterly
that those engaged in freighting have thought it a fine thing to get
from twenty dollars to one hundred dollars per ton for carrying freight
in from Wallula. It urges people to bestir themselves and provide a
railroad, which, it declares, if it cost $750,000 or even $1,000,000 to
build, will save that amount in the next ten years.

The issue of June 7 returns to the charge, dealing in more specific
figures, estimating the probable expense of the thirty miles of road
not to exceed $600,000. It appeared from this article that the
Legislature of the previous year had granted a charter for the purpose,
and as the editor urges, the people have but to take advantage of the
opportunity open to them to secure the results.

The _Statesman_ of August 23, 1862, gives the provisions of that
charter with the list of those named in it. The names of these men are
worthy of preservation, as showing the personnel of the most active
business forces of that date. They are as follows: A. J. Cain, E. B.
Whitman, L. A. Mullan, W. J. Terry, C. H. Armstrong, J. F. Abbott, I.
T. Reese, S. M. Baldwin, E. L. Bonner, W. A. Mix, Charles Russell, J.
A. Sims, Jesse Drumheller, James Reynolds, D. S. Baker, G. E. Cole, S.
D. Smith, J. J. Goodwin, Neil McGlinchy, J. S. Sparks, W. A. George,
J. M. Vansycle, W. W. DeLacy, A. Seitel, W. A. Ball, B. F. Stone, J.
Schwabacher, B. P. Standifer, S. W. Tatem, W. W. Johnson and "such
others as they shall associate with them in the project."

It is worth noting that in the issue of September 6th, an item is made
of the fact that fares to The Dalles have been lowered, being $10 to
The Dalles and only 50 cents from there to Portland. It is declared in
the item that that is a scheme of the Navigation Company to crush out
opposition. The opposition line of that year was in control of Doctor
Baker, who was associated in the enterprise with Captain Ankeny, H. W.
Corbett, and Captain Baughman. Their steamer on the lower river was
the E. D. Baker and on the upper river the Spray. Doctor Baker had
previously undertaken a portage railroad at the Cascades, but had been
compelled to retire before the O. S. N. Co. So for the new undertaking
they were obliged to use stages over the five miles of portage between
the lower and the upper Cascades. The Spray and the Baker, it may
be said, carried on a lively opposition but in the _Statesman_ of
March 21, 1863, we find that the O. S. N. Co. had bought out the
line and once more monopolized the traffic. Affairs and time were
both moving on and we find valuable data in three successive issues
of the _Statesman_, December 20 and 27, 1862, and January 3, 1863.
That of December 20th repeats the names given in the charter and some
further provisions of that document. Among other requirements was that
forbidding the railroad to charge passengers over 10 cents per mile or
over 40 cents per ton per mile for freight. Comparison shows how the
world has changed. Railroads in this state at present cannot charge
more than three cents a mile for passengers, and as for freight, when
we remember how we "kick" now at exorbitant freight rates, and yet
remind ourselves that the rate on wheat from Walla Walla to Portland
is $2.85 per ton, or less than twelve mills per ton mile, we realize
the change. But it must be remembered that building a railroad in 1863
in the Walla Walla country was a very different proposition from the
present. The _Statesman_ figures that even if traffic did not increase
there would be a weekly income for the road of $2,400 or about one
hundred and thirty thousand dollars a year. Allowing the cost to be
$700,000, with interest at 10 per cent or $70,000 a year, there would
be a margin of $65,000 per annum for operating and contingencies. "Who
is there," demands the _Statesman_, "amongst our settled residents that
cannot afford to subscribe for from one to ten shares of stock at $100
per share?"

In the paper of December 27th, another editorial urges citizens to
attend a meeting the next week to consider the vital subject.

The meeting duly occurred on the last day of December, 1862, and is
reported in the _Statesman_ of January 3, 1863. The meeting was called
to order by E. B. Whitman and W. W. Johnson acted as secretary. Mention
is made of a letter from Capt. John Mullan stating that there was a
prospect of securing from two hundred and fifty thousand dollars to
three hundred thousand dollars worth of stock in New York. A group
of men at money centers was appointed to act as commissioners for
receiving subscriptions for stock. A committee consisting of W. W.
Johnson, W. A. Mix, and R. R. Rees was appointed to draw up articles of
association and by-laws for the company. On March 14th a meeting was
held to listen to the report of the committee.

It appears from the issue of April 11, 1863, that a new opposition
steamer, the Kius, had made her first trip from Celilo to Wallula,
beating the Spray by an hour. Fares had been cut again, being only
$3.50 from Celilo to Wallula. The following number of the _Statesman_
notes the interesting item that the Kius had made a trip the previous
week to the mouth of the Salmon River on the Snake, and proposed to
continue investigations with a view to determining the practicability
of a regular route. In the paper of April 25th is an editorial
deprecating the "cut-throat competition" on the river, pointing out
the fact that heavy stocks of goods had been imported under previous
rates and that the carrying in of freight at ruinous rates will
embarrass the regular merchants under the old rates. In the same issue
announcement is made of the important fact that the railroad portages
of the O. S. N. Co. at both the Cascades and The Dalles had just come
into operation. By May 9th, it appeared that another rapid change in
freight rates had taken place, both lines receipting freight from
Portland to Lewiston at $25 per ton. For some time the rate from The
Dalles to Wallula had been $3 per ton. But a little time passed and the
omnipresent O. S. N. Co. bought out the opposition boats Iris and Kius,
and up the rates went with another jump. The figures were:

  Freight--Portland to The Dalles       $15.00 per ton
           Portland to Wallula           50.00 per ton
           Portland to Lewiston          90.00 per ton
  Passage--Portland to The Dalles         6.00
           Portland to Wallula           18.00
           Portland to Lewiston          28.00

Meanwhile development in the mines and on the stock ranges and
farms and even in horticulture was going on apace. But the railroad
enterprise hung fire and several years passed by without results. The
community seems to have been waiting for the man with the brains,
nerve, resolution, and resources to lead and take the risk. The man was
there and he had all the requisites from his first entrance to Walla
Walla in 1839 except the resources. This was no less a man than Dr.
D. S. Baker. During the years of agitation he had been prospering in
business and by 1868 was coming into a position where he could see his
way to take the initiative in what he had recognized all the time as
the great next step in the growth of the Walla Walla country, as well
as one in the advancement of his own personal fortunes. The thought of
a sort of community ownership had never left the minds of the original
promoters although they had failed to come to a focus. On March 23,
1868, there was a meeting which was the outcome of a second era of
popular discussion. That meeting eventuated in the actual incorporation
of the Walla Walla and Columbia River Railroad. The incorporators were
D. S. Baker, A. H. Reynolds, I. T. Reese, A. Kyger, J. H. Lasater, J.
D. Mix, B. Scheideman, and W. H. Newell. They planned to place $50,000
of stock in the city, $200,000 in the county, and $100,000 with the O.
S. N. Co. An act of Congress of March 3, 1869, granted a right of way
and authorized the county commissioners to grant $300,000 in aid of
the road, subject to approval of the people by special election. The
election was set for June 21, 1871. Expressions of public opinion made
it so clear that the proposal would be defeated at the polls that the
order for election was revoked. The incorporators of the road now made
a proposition that in case the people of the county would authorize an
issue of $300,000 in bonds, they would build a strap-iron road within
a year, would place the money from down freights in the hands of the
county commissioners as a sinking fund, allow the commissioners to fix
freight rates, provided they were not less than $2 per ton nor so high
as to discourage shipping, and secure the county by first mortgage on
the road. An election was held on September 18, 1871. A two-thirds
majority was required out of a total vote of 935, and the proposition
was lost by eighteen. Thus the second attempt at a publicly promoted
railroad for Walla Walla went glimmering.

Doctor Baker now felt that the time had arrived for pushing the
enterprise to a conclusion by private capital. A new organization with
the same name was effected, of which the directors were D. S. Baker,
Wm. Stephens, I. T. Reese, Lewis McMorris, H. M. Chase, H. P. Isaacs,
B. L. Sharpstein, Orley Hull, and J. F. Boyer. Grading was begun at
Wallula in March, 1872.

Meanwhile many rumors and proposals as to railroad building were
in the air. In 1872 the Grande Ronde and Walla Walla R. R. Co. was
incorporated, and a survey made thirty-six miles to the Umatilla River.
But there the movement ceased. A very interesting project came into
existence in 1873 for the Seattle and Walla Walla R. R., and in the
prosecution of plans for this, A. A. Denny and J. J. McGilvra visited
this region and held public meetings in Walla Walla, Waitsburg, and
Dayton. Five directors, S. Schwabacher, W. F. Kimball, Jesse N. Day, W.
P. Bruce, and W. M. Shelton were appointed to represent this section.
Great enthusiasm was created, but the project, feasible though it
seemed and backed though it was by reliable men, never got beyond the
stage of agitation. Another enterprise which occasioned great public
interest was the Portland, Dalles, and Salt Lake R. R. designed as a
rival to the O. R. & N. system. That never got beyond the promotion
era. The most interesting locally of these incipient railroads was
the Dayton and Columbia River R. R. incorporated in August, 1874.
Its proposal was to build a narrow gauge from Dayton to Wallula via
Waitsburg and Walla Walla. The plans contemplated a boat line to
Astoria with railroad portages at Celilo and the Cascades. That would
have been a great enterprise, but it was beyond the resources of its
promoters, and it died "a-bornin'."

While these gauzy visions were flitting before the minds of the people
of old Walla Walla County, Doctor Baker was going right on with his
own road, in the peculiarly taciturn, quiet and unremitting manner
characteristic of him. In March, 1874, the road was completed from
Wallula to the Touchet, the first eight miles with wooden rails,
capped with strap-iron. Maj. Sewall Truax was the engineer in charge.
Strap-iron rails were laid on the "straightaway" sections as far as
Touchet, with T-iron on the curves and heavier grades. The expense of
getting ties and iron was very great and the execution of the work was
costly and harassing. Nothing but Doctor Baker's pertinacity in the
face of many obstacles carried the work to a successful conclusion.
An attempt to run tie timber down the Grande Ronde River to the Snake
and thence to Wallula proving unsuccessful, the doctor turned to the
Yakima. That effort proved the winning card, but the cost was great.
The ties cost over a dollar apiece at Wallula.

But from the first the road justified its cost and demonstrated its
utility. In the year that it was completed to Touchet over four
thousand tons of wheat was carried out and 1,126 tons of merchandise
was brought in. In January, 1875, Doctor Baker proposed to the people
of the county that he would complete the road to the city if $75,000
were subscribed to the capital stock. A meeting was held at which it
was decided impossible to raise that sum. The company returned with
another proposition; i. e., that they would complete the road if the
people would secure a tract of three acres for depot grounds and right
of way for nine miles west of town, and subscribe $25,000 as a subsidy.
After much wrestling and striving this proposal was accepted. On
October 23, 1875, the rails were laid into Walla Walla and during the
remainder of that year 9,155 tons of wheat were hauled over them to the
river.

Thus that monumental work (monumental considering the times and
resources available, though of course of small extent compared with the
railways of the present) was brought to a triumphant conclusion.

A peculiar condition arose in the next year after completion which has
historical bearings of much interest. According to the account as given
by Col. F. T. Gilbert the advance of rates from $5 per ton to Wallula
to $5.50 caused a revolt on the part of shippers, although the haul
by team before was more than twice as much. Shippers urged the county
commissioners to put the wagon road in good condition as a weapon to
curb railway monopoly. As the directors of the road did not reduce
rates, a movement ensued in the Grange Council looking to boycotting
the railroad. The feasibility of a canal from Waiilatpu to Wallula was
considered. Some wheat and some merchandise were transported by teams
at $5 per ton. A movement was started at Dayton to haul freight to the
mouth of the Tucanon, where the O. S. N. steamers might pick it up and
carry to Portland for $8 per ton. It cost $4.50 to reach the boats.
That was the state of affairs which produced Grange City at the point
where the Walla Walla-Pendleton branch of the O. W. R. R. now leaves
the main line between Spokane and Portland. It was thought at one time
that Grange City might become quite a place. One interesting feature of
that period was the construction of a steamer named the Northwest at
Columbus by the firm of Paine Brothers and Moore and its operation on
the Snake River for about two years. The Northwest did a fine business,
but like its predecessors was absorbed by the O. S. N. Co.

It was discovered after sufficient experience that teams could
not compete with the railroad and the attempts at that method of
transportation were abandoned.

In the year 1876, the O. S. N. Co. received at Wallula 16,766 tons of
freight, of which 15,266 came by rail and 1,500 by teams. It delivered
for conveyance to Walla Walla 4,054 tons, of which all but 513 was
conveyed by rail. Doctor Baker's ownership and management of the Walla
Walla and Columbia River R. R. was brief but profitable, for in 1878
he sold out a six-seventh interest to the O. R. & N. Co. The remaining
seventh was sold to Villard when he bought the O. R. and N. properties.

The pioneer chapter of railroading in Walla Walla was ended. Whatever
the personal idiosyncracies of Doctor Baker and whatever may have
been thought as to his aggressiveness in business, it becomes evident
with the retrospect of history that he was a far seeing, sagacious,
energetic, and successful business man and that his career in Walla
Walla was one of its greatest constructive forces.


NEW ERA OF WATER TRANSPORTATION

It remains in this chapter only to take a glance at the next great
stage in transportation. We have spoken of the old steamer lines as
composing the first of those stages, the stage lines the second, and
the railroads the third. The fourth may be called the new era of water
transportation. This era is as yet only dawning, but it is obvious
that the opening of the Columbia and Snake rivers to traffic by means
of canals and locks and improvement of channels will create a new
development of production and commerce. As far back as 1872 Senator
Mitchell of Oregon brought before Congress the subject of canal and
locks at the Cascades. The matter was urged in Congress and in the
press, and as a result of ceaseless efforts the people of the Northwest
were rewarded in 1896 with the completion of the canal at the Cascades.
While that was indeed a great work, it did not, after all, affect the
greater part of the Inland Empire.

Its benefits were felt only as far as The Dalles. The much greater
obstructions between that city and the upper river forbade continuous
traffic above The Dalles. Hence the next great endeavor was to secure a
canal between navigable water at Big Eddy, four miles above The Dalles,
and Celilo, eight and a half miles above Big Eddy. It is of great
historic interest to call up in this connection the unceasing efforts
of Dr. N. G. Blalock of Walla Walla to promote public interest in this
vast undertaking and to so focalize that interest backed by insistent
demands of the people upon Congress as to secure appropriations and
to direct the speedy accomplishment of the engineering work necessary
to the result. Like all such important public matters, this had its
alternating advances and retreats, its encouragements and its reverses,
but patience and perseverance and the strong force of genuine public
benefit triumphed at last over all obstacles. It is indeed melancholy
to remember that Doctor Blalock, of whose good deeds and public
benefactions this was but one, passed on before the improvements were
completed. But it is a satisfaction to remember, too, that before his
death, in April, 1913, he knew that the appropriations and instructions
necessary to insure the work had been made. In fact, the work continued
from that time with no pause or loss.

The Celilo Canal was completed and thrown open to navigation in
April, 1915. In the early part of May the entire river region joined
in a week's demonstration which began at Lewiston, Idaho, and ended
at Astoria, Oregon. Nearly all the senators, representatives and
governors in the northwest attended. Schools and colleges had a
holiday, business was largely suspended, and the entire river region
joined a great jubilee. A fleet of steamers traversed the entire course
from Lewiston down, 500 miles. Lewiston, Asotin, and Clarkston were
hostesses on May 3; Pasco, Kenewick, Wallula and Umatilla on May 4;
Celilo, where the formal ceremonies of dedication occurred, and The
Dalles, May 5; Vancouver and Portland May 6; Kalama and Kelso May 7;
and Astoria May 8, and there the pageant ended with a great excursion
to the Ocean Beach.

As expressing better in the judgment of the author than he could
otherwise do, the profound significance of that great step in the
history of the commercial development of this section and as giving
a view of the historic sequences of old Walla Walla County, he is
venturing to incorporate here an address delivered by himself on May 4
at Wallula in connection with that celebration:


 Officials and Representatives of the National and State Governments,
 and Fellow Citizens of the Northwest:

It is my honor to welcome you to this historic spot in the name of
the people of the Walla Walla Valley; the valley of many waters, the
location of the first American home west of the Rocky Mountains and the
mother of all the communities of the Inland Empire. On the spot where
we stand the past, the present and the future join hands. Here passed
unknown generations of aborigines on the way from the Walla Walla
Valley to ascend or descend the Great River, to pass in to the Yakima
country, or to move in either direction to the berry patches or hunting
grounds of the great mountains; here the exploring expedition of Lewis
and Clark paused to view the vast expanse of prairie before committing
themselves to what they supposed to be the lower river; here flotillas
of trappers made their rendezvous for scattering into their trapping
fields and for making up their bateau loads of furs for sending down
the river. On this very spot was built the old Hudson's Bay fort,
first known as Nez Perce, then as Walla Walla; here immigrants of
'43 gathered to build their rude boats on which a part of them cast
themselves loose upon the impetuous current of the Columbia, while
others re-equipped their wagon trains to drive along the banks to The
Dalles. Each age that followed, the mining period, the cowboy period,
the farming period, entered or left the Walla Walla Valley at this very
point. Here the first steamboats blew their jubilant blasts to echo
from these basaltic ramparts, and here the toot of the first railway
in the Inland Empire started the coyotes and jackrabbits from their
coverts of sagebrush. Wheresoever we turn history sits enthroned. Every
piece of rock from yonder cliffs to the pebbles on the beach, fairly
quivers with the breath of the past, and even the sagebrush moved by
the gentle Wallula zephyr, exhales the fragrance of the dead leaves of
history.

But if the past is in evidence here, much more the present stalks
triumphant. Look at the cities by which this series of celebrations
will be marshalled and the welcome that will be given to the flotilla
of steamers all the way from Lewiston to Astoria. Consider the
population of the lands upon the river and its affluents, nearly a
million people, where during the days of old Fort Walla Walla the only
white people were the officers and trappers of the Hudson's Bay Company.

But if the present reigns here proudly triumphant over the past, what
must we say of the future? How does that future tower! Where now are
the hundreds, there will be thousands. Where now are the villages,
will be stately cities. We would not for a moment speak disrespectfully
of the splendid steamers that will compose this fleet by the time it
reaches Portland; but we may expect that after all they will be a mere
bunch of scows in comparison with the floating palaces that will move
in the future up and down the majestic stream.

Therefore, fellow citizens of the Northwest and representatives of
the National Government, I bid you a threefold welcome in the name
of the past, present and future. And I welcome you also in the name
of the commingling of waters now passing by us. While this is indeed
Washington land on either side of the river, this is not Washington's
river. This shore on which we stand is washed by the turbid water of
Snake River, rising in Wyoming and flowing hundreds of miles through
Idaho and then forming the boundary between Idaho and Oregon before
it surrenders itself to the State of Washington. And, as many of you
have seen, half way across this flood of waters we pass from the
turbid coloring of the Snake to the clear blue of the great northern
branch, issuing from the glaciers of the Selkirks and the Canadian
Rockies nearly a thousand miles away, augmented by the torrents of the
Kootenai, the Pend Oreille, the Coeur d'Alene and Spokane, draining the
lakes, the snow banks, the valleys and the mountains of Montana and
Idaho. And two or three miles below us this edge of river touches the
soil of Oregon, to follow it henceforth to the Pacific. This is surely
a joint ownership proposition. And, moreover, this very occasion which
draws us together, this great event of the opening of the Celilo Canal,
is made possible because Uncle Sam devoted five millions of dollars to
blasting a channel through those rocky barriers down there on the river
bank. It is a national, not simply a Northwest affair.

But while we are thus welcoming and celebrating and felicitating
and anticipating we may well ask ourselves what is, after all, the
large and permanent significance of this event. I find two special
meanings in it: one commercial and industrial, the other patriotic
and political. First, it is the establishment of water transportation
and water power in the Columbia Basin on a scale never before known.
Do we yet comprehend what this may mean to us and our descendants in
this vast and productive land? It has been proved over and over again
in both Europe and the United States that the cost of freightage
by water is but a fraction, a fifth, a tenth, or sometimes even a
fifteenth of that by land--but, note this is under certain conditions.
What are those conditions? They are that the waterways be deep
enough for a large boat and long enough for continuous long runs.
The average freight rate by rail in the United States is 7.32 mills
per ton mile. By the Great Lakes or the Mississippi River it is but
one-tenth as much. Freight has in fact been transported from Pittsburgh
to New Orleans for half a mill a ton a mile, or only a fifteenth.
Hitherto, on account of the break in continuity in the Columbia at
Celilo, we have not been able to realize the benefits of waterway
transportation. The great event which we are now celebrating confers
upon us at one stroke those benefits. Not only are the possibilities
of transportation tremendous upon our river, but parallel with them
run the possibilities of water power. It has been estimated that a
fourth of all the water power of the United States is found upon the
Columbia and its tributaries. By one stroke the canalization of rivers
creates the potentialities of navigation, irrigation and mechanical
power to a degree beyond computation. Our next great step must be the
canalization of Snake River, and that process at another great stroke
will open the river to continuous navigation from a point a hundred
miles above Lewiston to the ocean, over five hundred miles away. Then
in logical sequence will follow the opening of the Columbia to the
British line, and the Canadian Government stands ready to complete that
work above the boundary until we may anticipate a thousand miles of
unbroken navigation down our "Achilles of rivers" to the Pacific. Until
this great work at Celilo was accomplished we could not feel confidence
that the ultimate end of continuous navigation was in sight. Now we
feel that it is assured, the most necessary stage is accomplished. It
is only a question of time now till the river will be completely opened
from Windemere to the ocean. We welcome you, therefore, again on this
occasion in the name of an assured accomplishment.

The second phase of this great accomplishment which especially appeals
to me now is the character of nationality which belongs to it. While
this is a work that peculiarly interests us of the Northwestern States,
yet it has been performed by the National Government. Uncle Sam is the
owner of the Celilo Canal. It belongs to the American people. Each of
us owns about a ninety millionth of it and has the same right to use it
that every other has. This suggests the unity, the interstate sympathy
and interdependence, which is one of the great growing facts of our
American system. In this time of crime and insanity in Europe, due
primarily to the mutual petty jealousies of races and boundaries, it
is consolation to see vision and rationality enough in our own country
to disregard petty lines and join in enterprises which encourage us
in the hope of a rational future for humanity. It is a lesson in the
get-together spirit. Every farm, every community, every town, every
city from the top of the Rocky Mountains and from the northern boundary
to Astoria shakes hands with every other this day. And not only so
but every state in the Union joins in the glad tribute to something
of common national interest. But while we recognize the significance
of this event in connection with interstate unity we must note also
that the Columbia is an international river. It is, in fact, the only
river of large size which we possess in common with our sister country,
Canada. About half of it is in each country. Its navigability through
the Canadian section has already been taken up energetically by the
Canadian Government. Think of the unique and splendid scenic route that
will sometime be offered when great steamboats go from Revelstoke to
Astoria, a thousand miles. Scenically and commercially our river will
be in a class by itself.

Such are some of the glowing visions which rise before our eyes in the
welcome with which we of the Walla Walla Valley greet you. I began by
a threefold welcome in the name of the past, present and future. I
venture to close in the name of the native sons and daughters of Old
Oregon. There are many of these within the sound of my voice. Perhaps
to such sons and daughters a few lines of "Our Mother Oregon" may
come with the touch of sacred memory. Let me explain that Old Oregon
includes Washington and Idaho, and in composing these lines I used the
name "Our Mother Oregon" to include our entire Northwest:

  Where is the land of rivers and fountains,
  Of deep-shadowed valleys and sky-scaling mountains?
        'Tis Oregon, our Oregon.
  Where is the home of the apple and rose,
  Where the wild currant blooms and the hazel-nut grows?
        'Tis Oregon, bright Oregon.
  Where are the crags whence the glaciers flow,
  And the forests of fir where the south winds blow?
        In Oregon, grand Oregon.
  Where sleep the old heroes who liberty sought,
  And where live their free sons whom they liberty taught?
        In Oregon, free Oregon.
  What is the lure of this far western land,
  When she beckons to all with her welcoming hand?
        It is the hand of Oregon.
  Oh, Oregon, blest Oregon,
  Dear Mother of the heart;
  At touch of thee all troubles flee
  And tears of gladness start.
  Take thou thy children to thy breast,
  True keeper of our ways,
  And let thy starry eyes still shine
  On all our coming days,
        Our Mother Oregon.


ERA OF GOOD ROADS

In closing this chapter we may express the conviction that while this
fourth era of transportation--a new period of steamboat traffic--is
surely coming, though yet but in its dawn, there is now taking
shape still a fifth era of transportation. This is to be nothing
less than an era of good roads and transportation by auto trucks as
feeders to steamboat lines. The most conspicuous fact at the time of
publication of this work in this section as in the country at large is
the movement in the direction of good roads as the logical sequence
of the development of automobiles. This movement will inevitably
become coupled with that of improvement of rivers as of cheap water
transportation. With this improvement of rivers will be another
sequence, that is, the creation of cheap electric power.

We are at the dawn of a day in which the two most vital needs of
mankind, after production, that is, transportation and power, are to
be provided at a low degree of cost not hitherto conceived of. As a
backward glance in our own section it is well nigh incredible to call
up that the cost of transporting a ton of freight by steamer with
portages at certain points from Portland to Wallula has run from $10.00
to $60.00, and from Wallula to Walla Walla, by wagon, from $8.00 to
$20.00 or $30.00, and by the first railroad from $4.00 to $5.50, while
at the present time the railroad rate (which we think is high) on
wheat from Walla Walla to Portland is $2.85 per ton, and only $1.65 by
steamer from Wallula to Portland. Our imaginations are strained almost
to the breaking point when we recall that experience on improved rivers
in Europe and the older America shows that by continuous improved
rivers, supplemented by good roads, it may cost not to exceed a dollar,
possibly not more than half a dollar from Walla Walla to Portland. That
new era is near at hand.

[Illustration: GARDENING IN OLD WALLA WALLA COUNTY]




CHAPTER V

THE DEVELOPMENT OF INDUSTRY IN OLD WALLA WALLA COUNTY TO THE PERIOD OF
COUNTY DIVISION AND AFTERWARDS IN THE PRESENT WALLA WALLA


We have given in the first chapter of this volume a view of the
physical features, geological formation, and climate of this region. It
was obvious from that description that the Walla Walla country, like
most of Eastern Washington, Northeastern Oregon, and even Northwestern
Idaho, would be thought of at first inspection as a stock country.
The army of early immigrants that passed through on their way to the
Willamette Valley saw the upper country only at the end of the long,
hot, dry summers, when everything was parched and wilted. It did not
seem to them that any part would be adapted to agriculture except the
small creek bottoms. They could, however, see in the oceans of bunch
grass, withered though it was by drought, ample indications that stock
to almost limitless extent could find subsistence.

Hence with the opening of the country in 1859 the first thought of
incoming settlers was to find locations along the creeks where a few
acres for garden and home purposes might be found, and then a wide
expanse of grazing land adjoining where the real business might be
conducted. The first locations from 1859 and until about 1870 denote
the dominance of that idea. We have already noted the beginnings of
stock raising during the Hudson's Bay Company regime and the period
of the Whitman mission. We have seen that Messrs. Brooke, Bumford and
Noble started the same industry at Waiilatpu in 1851 and later on
the Touchet and maintained it until expelled by Indians in 1855. H.
M. Chase laid the foundations of the same on the Umatilla in 1851 in
conjunction with W. C. McKay, and later upon the Touchet near where
Dayton is now located. J. C. Smith on Dry Creek in 1857 had the same
plans.

The incoming of settlers in 1859 and 1860 and the location of the Fort
induced a mercantile class to gather in the vicinity of that market.
When gold discoveries set every one agog with excitement, the first
effect was to create a line of business almost entirely adapted to
supply miners' needs. The second effect speedily following was to
lead thoughtful men to consider the region as a suitable location for
producing first hand the objects of demand. Stock was foremost among
those demands. The Indians already had immense droves of "cayuse"
horses, and considerable herds of cattle. Many cattle were driven in in
1861. The hard winter of 1861-2 caused severe loss to cattle raisers,
but so well were the losses repaired that it was reported in 1863 that
there were in the valley, including the Touchet region, 1,455 horses,
438 mules, 1,864 sheep, 3,957 cattle, and 712 hogs. According to the
_Statesman_ 15,000 pounds of wool were shipped out in that year. Sheep
increased with extraordinary rapidity. The valley became a winter
feeding ground and the sheep were driven in from the entire Inland
Empire. The _Statesman_ asserts that in the winter of 1855-6 there were
200,000 head in the valley. They were worth at that time only a dollar
a head. From that time on the stock business in its various branches
became more definitely organized and shipments to the East and to
California went on apace. It was not, however, for some years that the
importation of blooded stock for scientific betterment was carried on
to any considerable degree. It would be impossible within our limits
to give any complete view of the leading promoters in the different
lines. Practically every settler in the country had some stock. Those
who may be said to have been leaders during the decade of the '60s in
introducing stock into the various pivotal points of the old county may
be grouped under some half dozen territories, which have later become
the centers of farming sections and in several instances the sites of
the existing towns.

This list cannot in the nature of the case be exhaustive, for, as
already noted, every settler had more or less stock. In naming some
rather than others, we would not wish to be making any invidious
comparisons, but rather selecting a few in each pivotal place, who came
in earliest and had the greatest continuity of residence and the most
constructive connection with the business. Naturally first in order may
be named the vicinity of Walla Walla City as it has become, and the
region adjoining it on the south into Oregon.

Perhaps typical of the larger stockmen of the earliest period were
Jesse Drumheller and Daniel M. Drumheller. The former of the brothers
came first to Walla Walla from The Dalles with the United States
troops in the War of 1855-6, as manager of transportation. When the
wars were ended he settled on the place now owned by Charles Whitney.
Subsequently he made his home for many years on the place west of
town known to all inhabitants of the region. The younger brother came
to the region in 1861 and located at what is still known as Hudson's
Bay, and from that time on the two were among the foremost in driving
stock in from the Willamette Valley and in extending their ranges
in all directions. Like so many others they were wiped out in the
hard winter of 1861-2, but nothing daunted, recognizing the superior
adaptability of the region they renewed their drives and within a few
years had stock, at first horses and cattle and then sheep, ranging
from Couse Creek in Umatilla County to the Snake River. One of their
greatest ranges was just north of the present Freewater and westward
to the present Umapine and Hudson's Bay. Besides the Drumhellers
some of the most prominent stockmen in that region ranging along the
state line were John Bigham, W. S. Goodman, the Fruits, Girards,
Shumways, Ingalls, and Fords. Nineveh Ford was one of the most noted
of early Oregon pioneers and coming in that early day into the upper
country became one of the permanent builders of Umatilla County. The
Berry and Cummings families were a little farther north. Among the
leaders in introducing a high grade of horses and cattle and later on
in farming on a large scale, as well as connected with every public
interest of importance, were the Resers, of whom the second and third
generations are present-day leaders in all phases of the life of
their communities. Their places were in the fertile foothill belt
southeast of Walla Walla. In the same general section were many others
whose main dependence at first was cattle, but who entered into the
raising of grain earlier than those in other sections, by reason of
the manifest advantages in soil and rainfall. Among such may be named
Daniel Stewart, Christian Meier, Stephen Maxson, Thomas McCoy, S. W.
Swezea, Orley Hull, Philip Yenney, Brewster Ferrel, James M. Dewar,
the McGuires, Sheltons, Copelands, Barnetts, and Fergusons. Two of the
prominent business men living in town might be mentioned as interested
in stock raising and doing much to promote it, Dr. D. S. Baker and John
Green. Among the most prominent pioneers in the section on Mill Creek,
who afterwards were leaders in grain raising, but like all others
turned their first attention to stock, were Robert Kennedy, W. S.
Gilliam, James Cornwell, J. M. Lamb, Joseph Harbert, E. G. Riffle, W.
J. Cantonwine, David Wooten, Thomas Gilkerson, J. Kibler and a little
later several leading families, those of Evans, Thomas, Kershaw, Lyons,
and Aldrich.

Another great section of the cattle ranges was on Dry Creek and
northward over the hills to and beyond the Touchet. Among the earliest
settlers in that region whose first business was stock raising, but who
afterward became pioneers a second time by entering into grain raising
were Jonathan Pettyjohn, W. W. Walter, John Marion, J. C. Smith, S. H.
Erwin, A. A. Blanchard and the Lamars. At a somewhat later date, but
among the most important of all the cattle men of the valley, now known
and honored by all in his advanced age, is Francis Lowden, whose ranges
were in the middle and lower valley, and whose son, Francis, Jr., has
become one of the leading meat market men in the Inland Empire. Mr.
Lowden imported the first high-grade cattle, Shorthorns, and that was
in 1864. Another growing center, at first for stock, then for farming,
then for fruit, and finally for towns, was the upper Touchet, of which
Waitsburg, Dayton, and Huntsville have become centers. As we have
stated earlier, some of the first locations were made on the Touchet.
The first settler at the junction of the Touchet and Coppei was Robert
Kennedy in 1859, but the next year he moved to his permanent place
near Walla Walla. During 1859 and the few years following there were
located, at first engaged in cattle raising, but soon to branch out
into farming, A. T. Lloyd, J. C. Lloyd, A. G. Lloyd, G. W. Loundagin,
George Pollard, James Woodruff, Isaac Levens, Joseph Starr, Luke
Henshaw, Martin Hober, Jefferson Paine, Philip Cox, W. P. Bruce and
Dennis Willard.

Farther up the Touchet, going on to the Patit and beyond in the
vicinity of the present Dayton, Henri M. Chase and P. M. La Fontain had
located before the great Indian wars, as already related. In the second
stage of settlement, beginning in 1859, F. D. Schneble and Richard
Learn upon the present location of Dayton, and near by Elisha Ping, J.
C. Wells, Thomas and Israel Davis, S. L. Gilbreath (Mrs. Gilbreath was
the first white woman to live in Columbia County), Jesse N. Day, Joseph
Ruark, Joseph Boise, G. W. Miller, John and James Fudge, and John and
Garrett Long, may be regarded as most distinctively the pioneers in the
stock business, proceeding on within a few years to the usual evolution
into farming and other branches of growing communities.

The region of what is now Garfield and Asotin counties had an early
history similar to that of the Walla Walla, Mill Creek, Touchet,
Coppei, and Patit regions, though not so complete. Settlers entered
during that same stage of the '60s and sought stations on the creeks
from which desirable cattle ranges extended. One of the earliest of all
settlers of the old Walla Walla County was Louis Raboin at the point
on the Tucanon now known as Marengo. Raboin might justly be called a
pioneer of the pioneers, not only in stock raising, but in everything.
Governor I. I. Stevens, in his report of railroad explorations,
mentions him as located with his Indian wife and six children on the
Tucanon, and the possessor of fifty horses and many cattle, and as
having four acres of land in which potatoes and wheat were growing.
The governor calls him Louis "Moragne'." According to Gilbert that
name, from which Marengo was derived, had a curious origin. It seems
that Raboin had been, like almost all the early French settlers of
the Inland Empire, engaged in the trapping business. He was of a
lively, active disposition and known by his comrades as "Maringouin"
(mosquito). This cognomen became corrupted by the English-speaking
people and finally became "Marengo."

Incoming settlers, seeking water courses for homes and bunch-grass
hills and prairies for stock ranges after the usual fashion, were not
long in discovering the best locations on the Pataha, Tucanon, Alpowa,
and Asotin, and small spring branches, and cabins and cattle began to
diversify that broad expanse through which Lewis and Clark had wandered
in 1806, and with which Bonneville and other fur hunters of the '30s
were delighted.

It was fully equal to the Touchet, Walla Walla, and Umatilla, with
their tributaries toward the west. The advance guard upon the Pataha
and the vicinity where Pomeroy now stands were Thomas Riley, James
Rafferty, James Bowers, Parson Quinn, J. M. Pomeroy, from whom the town
was named, Daniel McGreevy, and the brothers James and Walter Rigsby,
Joseph S. Milan, Henry Owsley, Charles Ward, and Newton Estes.

Among the streams on which early settlements were made was the Alpowa,
the pleasant sounding name of which signified in Nez Perce "Spring
Creek." H. M. Spalding, the missionary, made a station there among
the natives of the band of Red Wolf and in 1837 or 1838 planted apple
seeds from which some trees still exist. Timothy, famous in the
Steptoe campaign, in which he saved the command from destruction and
was afterwards rewarded after the usual fashion of the white race in
dealing with Indians by being deprived of a country, was located on the
Alpowa. His daughter was the wife of John Silcott of Lewiston, one of
the most noted of early settlers.

Asotin Creek, with its tributaries, at the eastern limit of the region
of which this history treats, is another section with a distinctive
life of its own. It is one of the most beautiful and productive
sections of this entire area, but being a little to one side of the
sweep of travel and settlement, having no railroads to this day, was
later of settlement than the other sections. Jerry McGuire is named as
the first permanent settler on the Asotin, though there were several
transients whom we will name later.

We will emphasize again that we are not trying here to name all the
settlers of these sections, but rather those who from continuity of
residence and subsequent connections become most illustrative of that
first stage of settlement.

[Illustration: CABIN BUILT BY M. PETTIJOHN IN 1858 Jonathan Pettijohn
is the man shown in the picture.]

A great impetus was given to the systematic development of the various
branches of the stock business by the entrance of certain firms of
dealers during the decade of the '70s. In Colonel Gilbert's history of
Walla Walla and other counties he presents valuable data secured from
the foremost of these dealers, as also one of the foremost of all the
citizens of Walla Walla, William K. Kirkman. After having been engaged
in Idaho and California in the cattle business, in the course of which
time he operated more or less in and out of Walla Walla, Mr. Kirkman
took up his permanent residence here in 1871. He formed a partnership
with John Dooley and from that time until the lamented death of the
two members of the firm they were one of the great forces in the
organization of the industry of marketing both livestock and dressed
meat. From the valuable data secured by Colonel Gilbert from Mr.
Kirkman and from Mr. M. Ryan, Jr., another prominent dealer, we gather
the estimate of 259,500 cattle driven out of the Inland Empire during
the period from 1875 to 1880. Prices were variable, ranging from $9 to
$25 per head, usually $10. W. H. Kirkman, son of W. K., relates this
interesting incident. He was, as a boy, riding with his father on the
range, when they encountered a number of extra fine fat cattle, and the
father, looking over them with delight said, "Look there, my boy, every
one of them is a $20 gold piece!" It might be added that those same
cattle now would be worth $100 apiece. It is surprising to see from the
exhibit given in the figures the large number of dealers operating in
the country at that time. There were no less than forty-five firms or
individuals engaged in shipping, mainly to Eastern markets, though a
considerable amount went to California, Portland, or Puget Sound.

It is of interest to see the enumeration by the assessor of the
quantity of stock given at two different dates following 1863, for
which the figures have already been given. In 1870 the assessment rolls
show the following: Horses, 5,787; mules, 1,727; cattle, 14,114; sheep,
8,767; hogs, 5,067. In 1875 a great change occurred of which we shall
speak at length, that is the division of the county, by which Walla
Walla County was reduced to its present limits. We may, therefore,
take that year as the proper one for final figures on the old county.
The year 1875, according to the assessor, had the following livestock
population: Horses, 8,862; mules, 401; cattle, 17,756 (there were
22,960 the previous year); sheep, 32,986; hogs, 8,150.

We find various local items strewn through the files of the _Statesman_
dealing with stock which are worthy of preservation. In issue of
January 10, 1862, mention is made of a steer handled by Lazarus and
brother, which weighed, dressed, 1,700 pounds.

A few weeks later it is stated that a cow and calf were sold for
$100. That will be remembered as the winter of the extreme cold
weather. There are numerous items speaking of suffering and loss of
stock. It was well nigh exterminated in some quarters. But it did not
take long to change appearances, at least in the cattle that lived
through the winter, for an item in the number of June 14 speaks of the
fattest cattle and best beef that the editor had ever seen, and of
the fact that large herds of cattle were going to the mining regions
of Salmon River and South Fork. It is estimated in the issue of
October 25, 1862, that 40,000 head of cattle had been brought into the
East-of-the-mountain country during the year.


PIONEER RACE TRACK

It appears that during the summer of 1862 a race track was laid out by
Mr. Porter at a point on the Wallula Road three miles west of town,
known as the Pioneer Race Course. A race is reported in the _Statesman_
of September 27, in which a roan mare won a purse of $100 from a cream
horse. That perhaps may be considered the beginning of the Walla Walla
Fair.

The sheep business seems to have moved on apace during those early
years, for in the paper of May 23, 1803, we learn that A. Frank & Co.
had just shipped 10,000 pounds of wool to Portland, and expected to
ship 7,000 more in a short time. Among the most prominent sheep men
whose operations have covered a field in many directions from Walla
Walla is Nathaniel Webb, one of the honored pioneers. In recent times,
operating especially in the Snake River region, leading sheep raisers
have been Davin Brothers, Adrian Magallon, and Leon Jaussaud, all
Frenchmen.


THE FARMING INDUSTRY

From stock we turn to farming as the next great fundamental industry
to take shape. We have already noted the fact that there was little
comprehension of the great upland region, rolling prairies and swelling
hills, as adapted to raising grain. Yet we know that Doctor Whitman
had demonstrated the practicability of producing all standard crops
during the ten years of his residence at Waiilatpu. Joseph Drayton of
the Wilkes Expedition speaks with surprise of his observations there
in 1841, seeing "wheat in the field seven feet high and nearly ripe,
and corn nine feet in the tassel." He also saw vegetables and melons in
great variety. The Hudson's Bay people had fine gardens near Wallula,
at the time of the arrival of the Whitmans in 1836, and later on at the
Touchet and on Hudson's Bay, as it is now known, southeast of Walla
Walla. They had abundant provision also for dairy and poultry purposes.

Hence farming and gardening and fruit raising had been abundantly
tested in the more favorably situated locations long prior to the
founding of Walla Walla. With the establishment of the Fort at its
present location, Capt. W. R. Kirkwood laid out a garden, the success
of which showed the utility of that location. The next year Charles
Russell, then the wagon master at the fort, tested the land north of
the post, afterwards owned by Mr. Drumheller, with eighty acres of
barley, securing a yield of fifty bushels to the acre. He raised 100
acres of oats on the place which he afterwards took up on Russell
Creek. The location must have been on the land now owned by O. M.
Richmond, and there is remarkable evidence of the productiveness of
that land in that it has produced nearly every year to the present. It
is worth relating that after Mr. Russell had sowed the oats the Indians
were so threatening that he abandoned the place, and cattle ate the
growing grain so closely that there seemed no hope of a crop. But in
June, the Indians having withdrawn, Mr. Russell went out and fenced
the field, the oats sprung up anew and yielded fifty bushels to the
acre. In the same year of 1858, Walter Davis seeded 150 acres to oats
at a place on Dry Creek. The Indians warned him to leave, but a squad
of soldiers went out and cut the oats for hay. In 1860 Stephen Maxson
raised a fine crop of wheat on the place on Russell Creek still owned
by his descendants.

Perhaps the operations of Messrs. Russell, Davis, and Maxson may be
considered the initiation of the grain production in the Inland Empire.
Probably there would have been but a slow development had not the
discovery of gold stimulated the demand for all sorts of agricultural
products.

In 1863 a few experiments on the higher land began. Milton Evans has
told the author that in that year he tried a small piece of wheat a few
miles northeast of Walla Walla, but that it was a complete failure,
and hence the impression already common was confirmed that the upland
was useless, except for grazing. In 1867, however, John Montague raised
a crop of oats, over fifty bushels to the acre, on land apparently
afterwards part of the Delaney place northeast of town. Even that was
not generally accepted as any proof of the use of the uplands. Some of
the old-timers have said to the author that they seemed determined that
grain should not grow on those lands.

But with the rapid influx of settlers and the flattering returns from
the trade in provisions with the mines, the more desirable places in
the foothill belt, and then on the benches and plains and then on the
hills, were taken up, and by 1875 it was generally understood that a
great wheat belt extended along the flanks of the Blue Mountains all
the way from Pendleton to Lewiston, with a somewhat variable width upon
the plains. Not until another decade was it understood that the grain
belt covered the major part of what now composes the four counties of
our story.

We find in the valuable history of Colonel Gilbert, to which we have
made frequent reference, so good a summary of certain essential data
in respect to the development to date of publication in 1882 of that
great fundamental business of wheat raising, in which are included also
certain allied data of importance, that we insert it at this point in
our narrative.

"An agricultural society was organized in July of this year, 1866,
by an assemblage of citizens at the courthouse, on the 9th of that
month, when laws and regulations were adopted, and the following
officers chosen: H. P. Isaacs, president; A. Cox and W. H. Newell, vice
presidents; J. D. Cook, treasurer; E. E. Rees, secretary; and Charles
Russell, T. G. Lee, A. A. Blanchard, executive committee. For the fair
to be held on the 4th, 5th and 6th of the ensuing October, the last
three gentlemen became managers and the following executive committee:
H. P. Isaacs, J. D. Cook, J. H. Blewett and W. H. Newell.

In 1867 the grain yield of the Blue Mountain region exceeded the
demand, and prices that had been falling for several years left
that crop a drug. It was sought to prevent an entire stagnation of
agricultural industries, by shipping the surplus down the Columbia
River to the seaboard. Freights on flour at that time were: From
Wallula per ton to Lewiston, $15; to The Dalles, $6; to Portland, $6;
and the following amounts were shipped:

To Portland, between May 27 and June 13, 4,156 barrels; to The Dalles,
between April 19 and June 2, 578 barrels; to Lewiston, between April 18
and May 14, 577 barrels; total to June 13 by O. S. N. Company, 5,311
barrels.

The same year Frank & Wertheimer shipped from Walla Walla 15,000
bushels of wheat down the Columbia, thus starting the great outflow of
bread products from the interior.

In 1868 Philip Ritz shipped fifty barrels of flour from the Phoenix
mills in Walla Walla to New York, with the following result: (It was
the first of Washington Territory products seen in the East.)

First cost of flour, $187.50; sacks for same, $27.00; transportation to
San Francisco, $100.00; freight thence to New York, $107.80; total cost
in gold, $422.30; profit realized on the transaction, $77.46, or $1.55
per barrel.

Wheat had fallen to 40 cents per bushel in Walla Walla because of the
following scale of expenses of shipping to San Francisco:

Freight per ton to Wallula, $6.00; thence to Portland, $6.00; thence
to San Francisco, $7.00; drayage, $1.50; commission, $2.00, $3.50;
primage and leakage, $1.00; bagging, $4.50, $5.50; total expense to San
Francisco, $28.00.

In 1869 there was a short crop, due to the drought and want of
encouragement for farmers to raise grain. June 14, a storm occurred of
tropical fierceness, during which a waterspout burst in the mountains,
and sent a flood down Cottonwood Canon that washed away houses in the
valley. In consequence of the short crop, wheat rose to 80 cents per
bushel in Walla Walla, and flour to $5.50 per barrel. In November hay
brought $17 per ton, oats and barley 2 cents per pound, and butter
37-1/2 cents.

Having traced agricultural development from its start and through its
years of encouragement, till quantity exceeding the home demand had
rendered it a profitless industry in 1868 and 1869, let us glance at
the causes leading to a revival of inducements for tilling the soil in
the Walla Walla country. It should be borne in mind that the farmers in
the valley and along creeks nearer the mines than this locality, were
supplying the principal mountain demand, and the only hope left was
to send produce to tide water and thus to the world's market. What it
cost to do this had been tried with practical failure as a result. This
shipping to the seaboard was an experimental enterprise, and there was
not sufficient assurance of its paying to justify farmers in producing
quantities for that purpose, consequently not freight enough of this
kind to warrant the Oregon Steam Navigation Company in putting extra
steamers or facilities on the river to encourage it. The outlook was,
therefore, gloomy. This was a state of things which caused an agitation
of the railway question, resulting in the construction of what is more
familiarly known as Baker's Railroad, connecting Walla Walla with
navigable waters. The building of this road encouraged the farmers to
raise a surplus, it encouraged the Oregon Steam Navigation Company to
increase the facilities for grain shipment, it caused a reduction of
freight tariffs all along the line and made it possible for a farmer
to cultivate the soil at a profit. Something of an idea of the result
may be gathered from an inspection of the following exhibit of increase
from year to year, of freights shipped on Baker's Road to Wallula
en route for Portland. Between 1870 and 1874, down freights shipped
yearly at Wallula did not exceed 2,500 tons. In 1874 Baker's Road had
been completed to the Touchet, and carried freight from that point to
Wallula at $1.50 per ton. In 1875 it was completed to Frenchtown and
charged $2.50. Walla Walla rates averaged $4.50.

Freight tonnage from Touchet in 1874 to Wallula aggregated 4,021 tons;
in back freight, 1,126 tons; from Frenchtown in 1875 to Wallula, 9,155
tons; back freight, 2,192 tons; from Walla Walla in 1876 to Wallula,
15,266; back freight, 4,043; from Walla Walla in 1877 to Wallula,
28,806 tons; back freight, 8,368 tons; from Walla Walla in 1878 to
Wallula, 35,014 tons; back freight, 10,454." Such are Colonel Gilbert's
statements.

The estimated wheat production in the entire upper country in 1866
was half a million bushels, of which half was credited to the Walla
Walla Valley. From that time on to the present there has been a steady
development of wheat raising throughout the region south of Snake
River, as well as north and throughout the Inland Empire.

[Illustration: WHEAT HARVESTING IN WALLA WALLA COUNTY

Thirty-two horses. Combined harvesting and threshing. Ground too hilly
for tractors.]

In the decade of the '70s there came to Walla Walla a man destined to
leave upon the entire region the impress of one of the most remarkable
characters in far vision, noble aims, and philanthropic disposition
that ever lived within the State of Washington. We refer to Dr. N.
G. Blalock. Eminent in his profession, his ceaseless industry and
progressive aims did more perhaps than any other single life to broaden
and advance all phases of the section in which he lived and wrought.
He was the pioneer in wheat raising on large scale, as well as in many
other lines of activity and experiment. Making, though not retaining,
several fortunes, his life work was to mark out the way for others
less venturesome, to follow to success not alone in the acquirement
of wealth, but in the nobler and more enduring products of education,
philanthropy, patriotism, public service, and genuine piety. Coming
to Walla Walla in 1872 and entering at once upon an extensive medical
practice, Doctor Blalock had a vision of the future as well as the
capacity to utilize at once the varied opportunities offered by the
soil, the climate, and the location. He saw the splendid wild acres of
land by the thousands lying in all directions and determined to make
a thorough test of its adaptability to raise wheat on a large scale.
He made a bargain for a tract of 2,200 acres six miles south of Walla
Walla for a price of ten bushels of wheat per acre, to be paid from the
first crop. The expense of breaking so large a body of land was great,
but the first crop yielded thirty-one bushels per acre, a sufficient
demonstration of the capacity of the land.

In 1881 the crop on the tract averaged thirty-five and one-fourth
bushels, while 1,000 acres of it yielded 51,000 bushels. The acreage
and the yield, very carefully ascertained, was reported to the
Government and stood then, and probably does yet, as the largest yield
from that amount of land ever reported. Even more remarkable yields,
but on smaller areas, have been known. Milton Aldrich produced on his
Dry Creek ranch, on 400 acres, an average of sixty-six bushels of
wheat and the next year there was a volunteer crop of forty bushels.
Recently in the same vicinity Arthur Cornwell obtained an average of
seventy-three bushels per acre. A hundred and ten bushels of barley per
acre have been grown on the Gilkerson ranch on Mill Creek.

An item of historic interest may be found in an estimate of cost made
for a special number of the _Union_ during the first years of the
industry by Joseph Harbert, one of the most prominent pioneers and
successful farmers in the valley. The crop was on 400 acres, which
yielded 10,000 bushels of blue-stem wheat. At fifty cents per bushel
for the crop, this will be seen to represent a profit of about two
thousand three hundred dollars from land worth $12,000, or nearly
twenty per cent. from which, however, should come wages of management.

The land was summer fallowed in 1894 and valued at thirty dollars
per acre. The estimate is in a locality where water and material to
work with are reasonably convenient. The land is not very hilly and
comparatively easy to work. The report is as follows:

                                                    Mos.
  Itemized Expenses                          Crop  In. Pd.  Inst.    Total
  Planting, 90c per acre                  $ 360.00   20   $ 60.00  $ 420.00
  Harrowing, 11c per acre                    44.00   ..      7.83     51.83
  Plowing, second time, June, 1894          360.00   18     54.00    414.00
  Harrowing before sowing                    44.00   16      5.87     49.87
  500 bu. seed wheat, highest market price  250.00   ..      ....    250.00
  Cleaning seed wheat                         9.00   15      1.12     10.12
  125 lbs. vitriol at 6c                      7.50   ..       .94      8.44
  Using vitriol on wheat                      8.00   ..      1.00      9.00
  Sowing, October, 1894, 15c per acre        60.00   14      7.00     67.00
  Harrowing after sowing, 11c                44.00   ..      5.14     49.14
  Cutting, $1.00 per acre                   400.00    4     13.33    413.33
  4,400 sacks, $49.00 per M                 215.60   ..      7.18    222.78
  Thirty pounds of twine, 33-1/3c            10.00   ..       .33     10.33
  Threshing 10,000 bushels, 4-1/2c          450.00   ..     15.00    465.00
  Hauling to railroad, 2-1/2c per sack      110.00   ..      3.66    113.66
  Warehouse charges to Jan. 1, 1896         120.00   ..      ....    120.00
                                          --------   --  --------  --------
  Total cost                             $2,492.10   ..   $182.40 $2,674.50

It may be added that estimates of cost by a number of prominent farmers
in the period of 1890 and thereabouts, indicated that the expense of
sowing, seeding, harvesting, and putting into the warehouse, ran from
twenty-one to forty cents a bushel, varying according to locality,
yield, and other conditions.

At a usual price of fifty or sixty cents a bushel, there was not a
large margin above the interest on investment, maintenance of stock,
machinery, improvements, and taxes. Nevertheless the farmers of this
section felt every encouragement to continue, unless it were in the
evil harvest year of 1893-4, when the price ran about twenty-five
to thirty-five cents a bushel, and when rains, floods, strikes, and
general calamity threatened to engulf, and did actually engulf some
of the best farms. It is a historical fact that had it not been for
the liberality of the banks in the four counties south of Snake River,
which held obligations from a large number of the best-known farmers,
there would have been widespread disaster. Thanks to the banks, as
well as to the persistence and fortitude of the farmers and the solid
resources of the country, these counties emerged from those years of
depression with less injury and repaired their losses more quickly than
any other section of the entire Northwest, or perhaps of the whole
country.

It may be added in connection with cost of wheat raising, that within
the years since the opening of the present century there has been an
enormous outlay by farmers in all kinds of farm machinery, the combines
having become the usual means of harvesting, and traction engines for
the combines and to some degree for plowing having superseded horse
power. But cost of labor and general rise of prices have pushed up
expenses, until now the most of farmers would estimate the cost of a
bushel of wheat at fifty cents or more, some say even a dollar. As
an offset to this there has come a great advance in price, insomuch
that the farmers of Walla Walla and its sister counties have become
the lords of the land. One of the most pleasing results of this new
order of things is that the farmers, being almost entirely free from
debt, have begun to build comfortable and even elegant homes, both
on the farms and in the cities and to surround themselves with the
conveniences of life, as automobiles, and to spend money in travel
and luxuries which make some of the old-timers, accustomed to the
deprivations of pioneer days, open their eyes with wonder, and possibly
even disapproval. It is not observable, however, that the young folks
on the farms have any backwardness in utilizing the good things of life
which are the logical consummation of the foresight and industry of
parents and grandparents. It is probable that no people in the United
States have more reliable and steady incomes and greater sources for
all the needs and enjoyments of life than do the farmers of old Walla
Walla County.

The experience of other sections was similar to that of the region
immediately around Walla Walla. The first thought was of stock ranges,
with such small patches of farming land adjacent to the creeks as
might supply the family needs. It is stated that Elisha Ping and G. W.
Miller raised crops of wheat and oats on the present site of Dayton in
1860. For the oats they received seven cents a pound and for the wheat
two dollars a bushel. The location of the subsequent Dayton became a
regular station on the stage line from Walla Walla to Lewiston, and
that fact led J. M. Pomeroy, a little later the founder of the town
named for him, to raise a crop of barley for horse feed. That was in
1863. As time passed on, and especially after the founding of flouring
mills by S. M. Wait, there came a general movement to raise grain crops
on the hills and plains and it was discovered, as a little earlier
around Walla Walla, that the entire region was the very home land for
grain. Within a few years it was found that barley of especially fine
quality and heavy yield was one of the best crops, and Columbia County
has become the center of barley production. Almost the entire county,
with the exception of the timbered mountain belt, has become a grain
field. Within recent years the region around and particularly east of
Dayton has become the leading center of corn production.

Garfield and Asotin counties repeated the experience of Walla Walla
and Columbia; first stock ranges, then a few acres along the creeks as
an experiment, soon the breaking up of the rich sod on the high plains
and flats; and within a few years, a perfect ocean of waving grain over
the greater part of the area. The first settlers already named in the
section of this chapter on stock raising were the pioneers also in the
wheat business, as the Rigsby brothers, J. M. Pomeroy, James Bowers,
Parson Quinn, and others. Garfield and Asotin counties are in general
more elevated than Walla Walla and Columbia, and their frontage on
Snake River is more abrupt. This has given rise, first to a margin of
ideal fruit and garden land between the river and the bluffs, which in
case of Asotin is of considerable breadth, and in case of both of them
has raised the question of conveying grain from the high plateaus to
the river. In some places this has given rise to contrivances which are
a great curiosity to strangers, the "grain-chutes" and "bucket lines,"
as devices to lower the grain from warehouses on the precipitous
bank, sometimes eighteen hundred feet above the steamer landing.
There is not yet a railroad on the south bank of Snake River, and
water transportation is the only available means of getting the vast
quantities of grain from those high prairies near the river to market.

Items appear in the various issues of the _Statesman_ during the first
years of its existence in regard to grain raising which possess great
historical interest. An editorial appears in the issue of February 1,
1862, urging farmers to go into grain raising extensively and declaring
that all the indications point to a demand from the mines for all kinds
of farm products.

An advertisement for supplies at the Fort on July 19 calls for 375 tons
of oats, 100 tons of oat straw, and 1,200 cords of wood. Mention is
also made in the paper of the farm of J. W. Shoemaker a short distance
below the garrison, where grain to the value of $3,000, and garden
produce to the value of $1,500, was raised.


FLOUR MILLING

One of the most important features of industry allied to grain
production was flour milling. The first flour mill was erected in
1859 by A. H. Reynolds in partnership with J. A. Sims and Capt. F. T.
Dent, the latter being a brother of Mrs. U. S. Grant. It was located
on the land then owned by Jesse Drumheller, now part of the Whitney
place. In the issue of March 29, 1862, is an advertisement of the Pasca
Mills by Sims and Mix, which must have been the same mill built by Mr.
Reynolds. In 1862 Mr. Reynolds built another mill, known as the Star
Mill, on the Yellowhawk, near the present residence of his son, H. A.
Reynolds. This was subsequently acquired by W. H. Gilbert. Mention is
made in the _Statesman_ of August 2, 1862, of the flour mill of J. C.
Isaacs. Apparently this is a confusion in name of the brothers, as the
author is credibly informed that the mill opened at that time was the
Excelsior mill built by H. P. Isaacs, subsequently the leading mill
man of the Walla Walla country and one of the leaders in all forms of
enterprise. The name Excelsior was later replaced by North Pacific. It
was located on the mill race, whose remains still cross Division Street
and was actively employed until about 1895. There is an advertisement
in the _Statesman_ of March 21, 1863, to the effect that Graham flour
and corn meal were being turned out at Mr. Reynolds' mill. In the
number of March 31, 1865, is the announcement that Kyger and Reese,
who were among the most extensive general merchants in Walla Walla,
had leased the water power and site of E. H. Barron just below town on
Mill Creek and were making ready to install a first-class mill, having
three run of four-foot burrs and a capacity of 150 barrels a day. The
firm were also establishing a distillery. It would seem that the latter
manufactory was in larger demand than the former, for it was completed
sooner. The mill, however, began grinding in October of that year.
That mill became the property of Andrew McCalley in 1873, and after
his death in 1891 was maintained by his sons until the property was
lost by fire in 1897. One of the most important mills of the valley
was that built by Messrs. Ritz and Schnebly about a quarter of a mile
below the McCalley mill, known first as the Agate and then as the
Eureka, conducted for some time by W. C. Painter, then sold to Welch
and Schwabacher, and in turn disposed of by them in 1880 to Dement
Brothers, and managed up to the present time by F. S. Dement. The mill
is now known as Dement Brothers' mill and is one of the most extensive
in the Inland Empire, making a specialty of choice breakfast cereals
and through them as well as its high-grade flour carrying the name of
Walla Walla, Wash., around the globe.

The mills on the Touchet speedily followed those on Mill Creek. S.
M. Wait, from whom the beautiful little city at the junction of the
Touchet and the Coppei took its name, was the pioneer mill man as well
as the founder of the town. The _Statesman_ of June 2, 1865, mentions
the fact that Mr. Wait's mill was just open and that it was one of the
best equipped in the country and produced a grade of flour equal to
the best from Oregon. A town soon began to grow at the location of the
mill. Mr. Wait sold the mill to Preston Brothers and the stock to Paine
Brothers and Moore of Walla Walla. The latter firm acquired an interest
in the mill, but subsequently disposed of all their holdings to Preston
Brothers, under whom the mill became one of the largest mill properties
in the Northwest, being connected with large mills at Athena, Ore., and
elsewhere, and under the more recent management of Messrs. Shaffer,
Harper, and Leonard, conducting one of the most extensive milling lines
in the country.

[Illustration: NORTH PACIFIC MILLS (ISAAC'S MILL) WALLA WALLA

First rolling mill on the Pacific coast. Erected in 1862. Capacity
two hundred and fifty barrels. Many mills were erected before this,
but this was the first to introduce rollers instead of the old mill
stone.]

Mr. Wait inaugurated also the milling business in what is now Columbia
County. Going to that region in 1871 where Jesse N. Day, from whom
Dayton was named, had been endeavoring since 1864 to launch a town
with but scanty success, Mr. Wait proposed to build a mill, provided
inducements were offered. Mr. Day accordingly agreed to give five acres
of land as a site, with a block of land for residences, and upon that
Mr. Wait and William Metzger proceeded to launch the milling business
at Dayton. In building that mill, with a brick building for a store
and a planing mill, Messrs. Wait and Metzger laid out about $25,000, a
large amount for those days. At the same time the Dayton Woolen Mill
was undertaken, A. H. Reynolds being chief owner, F. S. Frary the
secretary and manager and Mr. Wait the president of the company. The
woolen mill had a land site of seven acres donated by John Mustard and
a building was erected at a cost of $40,000. The new town of Dayton
was booming in consequence of these investments. The flour mill proved
a great success and with various changes of ownership is now one of
the great mill properties of the country, but the woolen mill, from
which so much was expected, did not prove a financial success and was
closed in 1880. It is rather a curious fact that no one of the woolen
enterprises in the Inland Empire has met with large success except that
at Pendleton, Ore., the success of which has been so great that it is a
puzzle that others have mainly failed.

The great development of wheat raising in what is now Garfield County
led, as elsewhere in the region, to flouring mills. The pioneer mill at
Pomeroy was started in 1877 by W. C. Potter and completed the following
year by Mr. Pomeroy.

Three miles above Pomeroy and for some years a rival to the lower town
was Pataha City. It was on land taken up at first by James Bowers in
1861 and acquired in 1868 by A. J. Favor, who undertook a few years
later to start a town. In pursuance of his plans he offered land for
mill sites, and as a result J. N. Bowman and George Snyder constructed
a mill in 1878. Subsequently John Houser became the great mill man of
that entire section and his mill became one of the most widely known
in the Inland Empire. He made a specialty of shipping flour to San
Francisco for the manufacture of macaroni, the large percentage of
gluten in the wheat of that region fitting it especially for that use.
The son of Mr. Houser, Max Houser, going to Portland in about 1908,
has become known the world over as the most daring and extensive wheat
buyer on the Pacific Coast and has acquired a fortune estimated at six
millions. The pioneer flouring mill of Asotin was built in 1881 at the
town of that name by Frank Curtis and L. A. Stimson. The town itself
upon one of the most beautiful of locations on Snake River, with the
magnificent wheat fields of the Anatone flats on the high lands to
the south and west, and a superb belt of fruit land extending down the
river and broadening out at Clarkston, was laid out in 1878.

Other mills were established at later dates, of which the most
extensive were the mill at Prescott, erected by H. P. Isaacs in 1883,
the City mill on Palouse Street in Walla Walla, built in 1898 by Scholl
Brothers; Long's mill, a few miles below Dayton; the Corbett mill at
Huntsville.

In summarizing grain raising as the leading industry of old Walla
Walla County it may be said that for several years past the total
production for the four counties has been about 12,000,000 bushels
per year. The value has, of course, varied much according to price.
It is conservatively estimated that the value of the grain crops,
including flour and feed in various manufactured forms for 1916, was
approximately $15,000,000.


GARDENS AND ORCHARDS

As grain raising put a finer point upon industry than its predecessor,
stock raising, so in turn the gardens and orchards have yet more
refined and differentiated the forms of industry and the developments
of life in the growing communities of our story. As already related
these lines of production had been tested by the Hudson's Bay Company
and by the missionaries, Whitman and Spalding. It was, therefore, to
be expected that even in the first years of settlement some attempts
would be made to start orchards and gardens. The first nursery in
Walla Walla seems to have been laid out in 1859 on the Ransom Clark
donation claim on the Yellowhawk. In 1859 trees were set out on the J.
W. Foster place. It is said that Mr. Foster brought his trees here on
muleback over the Cascade Mountains. We are informed by Charles Clark
of Walla Walla that most of Mr. Foster's trees were secured from Ransom
Clark. In 1860 A. B. Roberts set out an orchard within the present
city limits of Walla Walla on what later became the Ward place. In
1861 a notable step in fruit raising was taken by the coming of one
of the most important of all the great pioneers of the Inland Empire.
This was Philip Ritz. We find in the _Statesman_ of December 5, 1861,
announcement that Mr. Ritz had arrived with a supply of trees from his
nursery at Glen Dale near Corvallis, Ore., and that the trees were for
sale at the store of John Wright. Subsequent items in the _Statesman_
furnish an interesting exposition of the progress of both gardens and
orchards. The _Statesman_ was wide awake as usual to the needs of
the country and did not fail to exhort the citizens of Walla Walla
to prepare for the demand which it was sure would come. On March 29,
1862, mention was made of the fact that green fruit, presumably apples,
from the Willamette Valley, was selling for from twenty to fifty cents
per pound. The paper expresses surprise that farmers are so slow
about setting out trees. On June 21, 1862, it was announced with much
satisfaction that scarcely had the snow from that extremely cold winter
melted before there were radishes, lettuce, onions, and rutabagas
brought in from foot hill gardens, and that there were new potatoes in
the market by June 14th. The issue of July 26th notes the fact of green
corn in abundance and that of August 2d declares that the corn was
equal to that of the Middle Western States, and that fine watermelons
were in the market. August 16th is marked by thanks to G. W. Shoemaker
for a fine watermelon and the statement that there were others to come
that would weigh forty pounds. In the number of August 30th it appears
that Mr. Shoemaker brought to the office a muskmelon weighing eighteen
pounds, and in the same issue is an item about a 103-pound squash
raised by S. D. Smith. John Hancock is credited on September 6th with a
watermelon of thirty-three pounds. Complaint is made, however, in the
same number, of the fact that there is a meager supply of apples, plums
and pears from the Willamette, and that the apples sell for twenty-five
cents apiece, or fifty cents a pound. The _Statesman_ of September 27th
has the story of Walter Davis of Dry Creek sending a squash of a weight
of 134-1/2 pounds and twelve potatoes of a weight of twenty-nine pounds
to the Oregon State Fair at Salem. Lamentable to narrate it appears
later that these specimens of Walla Walla gardening disappeared. The
_Statesman_ indulges in some bitter scorn over the kind of people on
the other side who would steal such objects. In an October number
mention is made that James Fudge of Touchet had brought in three
potatoes weighing eight pounds. In the _Statesman_ of December 20th is
an item to the effect that Philip Ritz has a large assortment of trees
and shrubs at the late residence of J. S. Sparks. It is also stated
that Mr. Ritz is going to try sweet potatoes. In the issue of January
17, 1863, is the statement that Mr. Ritz had purchased land of Mr.
Roberts for a nursery. In successive numbers, beginning February 28th,
is Mr. Ritz's advertisement of the Columbia Valley nursery, the value
of the stock of which is stated at $10,000. It seems to have been an
extraordinary stock for the times, and the enterprise and industry of
Mr. Ritz became a great factor in the development of the fruit business
as well as many other things. There are several interesting items later
on in 1863, showing that gardening, particularly the raising of onions,
was advancing rapidly. In the spring of 1865 A. Frank & Co. shipped
40,000 pounds of onions to Portland. In the _Statesman_ of July 4,
1863, it is stated that John Hancock had corn fifteen feet high. During
1863 and 1864 there was much experimenting with sorghum. T. P. Denny is
mentioned as having brought a bottle of fine sorghum syrup, and it is
stated that Mr. Ritz was experimenting with Chinese and Imphee sugar
cane. Mr. Ritz was succeeding well with sweet potatoes, and a fine
quality of tobacco was being produced. The biggest potato story was
of a Mechannock potato from Mr. Kimball's garden on Dry Creek, which
weighed four and one-half pounds. In several numbers in September,
1863, mention is made of delicious peaches brought in by A. H. Reynolds.

In short, it was well demonstrated that conditions were such that it
might be expected that Walla Walla would become, and it has for some
years been known as, the "Garden City."

In the '60s and '70s a considerable amount of land south and west
of Walla Walla was brought into use for gardening, and in various
directions orchards were set out. One of the finest was that of W.
S. Gilliam on Dry Creek. Everything looked encouraging for fruit
raising at that early day, but in 1883 there came a bitter cold day,
twenty-nine degrees below zero, far colder than ever known at any other
time in Walla Walla, a most disastrous dispensation of nature, for many
orchards, especially peaches and apricots, perished.


FIVE REGIONS

Broadly speaking, it may be said that there are five regions in Old
Walla Walla County which have become important centers of fruit raising
and intensive farming in general, since fruit raising, gardening,
dairying, and poultry raising have to varying degrees gone right along
together. The first in age and extent is the region immediately around
Walla Walla; the second that of Clarkston and down the Snake River to
Burbank; the third that on the Touchet from Dayton to Prescott; the
fourth the long narrow valley of the Tucanon; and the fifth that on the
lower Walla Walla from Touchet and Gardena to the Columbia and thence
through Attalia and Two Rivers to Burbank at the mouth of Snake River.
There are, of course, some excellent orchards and gardens in portions
not covered in this enumeration, and it is also proper to say that the
most productive and compact single body of country is that portion of
the Walla Walla Valley south of the state line extending to Milton, Ore.

It is impossible within our limits to describe these different areas
in detail. Each has some distinctive features. The youngest and least
developed is that of the lower Walla Walla and the Columbia River. By
reason of great heat and aridity and long growing season, that region
is peculiarly adapted to grape culture and melon raising. Alfalfa
produces four and five cuttings and the prospect for successful
dairying is flattering. The expense of reclaiming the land and
maintaining irrigating systems is high, but when fairly established
it may be expected to be one of the most attractive and productive
sections.

The Walla Walla section has had the advantage of time and population
and in the nature of the case has become most highly developed. In
garden products Walla Walla asparagus, onions, and rhubarb may be said
to be champions in the markets of the country. One of the important
features of Walla Walla gardening is the Walla Walla hothouse vegetable
enterprise on the river, five miles west of the city, conducted by F.
E. Mojonnier. This is the largest hothouse in the Inland Empire and,
with one exception, in the entire Northwest. It has two and a half
acres under glass and does a business of thousands of dollars with the
chief markets north and east.

In orchards Walla Walla, while not in general in the same class
for quantity with Yakima and Wenatchee, has the distinction of
possessing two of the largest and perhaps most scientifically planted
and cultivated orchards in the entire state; the Blalock and the
Baker-Langdon orchards. The latter contains 680 acres of apples, is on
sub-irrigated land of the best quality, and may be considered the last
word in orchard culture. The manager, John Langdon, reports for 1917,
200,000 boxes, or about three hundred car loads, worth on cars at Walla
Walla, at present prices, about three hundred thousand dollars. It is
anticipated that when in full bearing at the age of twelve to fourteen
years, the yield will be 1,000,000 boxes. Doctor Blalock was the great
pioneer in fruit raising, as in grain-raising, on a large scale. The
story of his carrying on the gigantic enterprise with inadequate
resources to a triumphant conclusion, though not himself being able to
retain possession, is one of the greatest stories in the Inland Empire.

The Touchet belt may be said to be distinguished by its special
adaptability to high grade apples of the Rome Beauty and Spitzenberg
varieties as well as by the extraordinary and profitable production.
In that belt are two orchards which while not remarkable for size have
had about the most remarkable history of any in the state. These are
the Pomona orchard of J. L. Dumas and that of J. D. Taggard between
Waitsburg and Dayton. There are a number of other orchards of high
grade in the Touchet Valley, and it may be anticipated that within a
few years that rich and beautiful expanse will be a continuous orchard.
Conditions of soil and climate make it ideal for apple-raising.

[Illustration: VIEW OF A WALLA WALLA COUNTY ORCHARD]

[Illustration: PICKING FRUIT IN OLD WALLA WALLA COUNTY]

The valley of the Tucanon, a ribbon of fertile soil deep down in the
timbered heights of the Blue Mountains and lower down its course
surrounded by the wide flats and benches of Garfield and Columbia
counties, is the natural home for berries and "truck" of all sorts. The
strawberries and melons are of the finest. The sparkling stream--one of
the finest fishing streams by the way affords limitless opportunity for
easy and economical irrigating and the soil is of the best, even in a
region where good soil is no curiosity.

The Snake River section, extending down the western and southern
bank of the river from Asotin, with frequent breaks on account of
the bluffy shores, its largest expansion being at Clarkston, with
considerable areas at Alpowa, Kelly's Bar, Ilia and other points, is
a unique region. We shall speak at greater length of the Clarkston
and Asotin regions, but it may be said in general terms that the
long narrow belt of land bordering the river, having its counterpart
on the opposite side in Whitman County, has long been recognized as
the very homeland of the peach, apricot, nectarine, grape, berries
of all sorts, and melons. It is of low elevation, from seven hundred
and fifty feet at Asotin to about four hundred at Page. It is almost
semi-tropical in climate, its products getting into market nearly as
early as those from Central California. Injurious frosts in blossom
time are almost unknown. The soil is a soft warm friable volcanic ash
with loam surface. Though there is no railroad and not even continuous
wagon roads on the river bank, there are numerous points of approach
down the valleys and coulees entering the river, and the stream itself
affords water navigation for large steamers about half the year, and
for small boats at all times. With the system of canalization now in
contemplation by the Government the river will become continuously
navigable throughout the year and will possess infinite possibilities
both for power and navigation. It should also be stated here that
Asotin County has a larger acreage in fruit trees than any other of the
four counties.


SUMMARY OF RECENT PRODUCTION

While we shall speak of certain special features of each section in our
descriptive chapter covering the present time, we may properly give
here a summary of recent production for the four counties.

The reader is asked to recall the earlier figures in order that he
may form a proper conception of the change wrought. We present here
the figures preserved in the office of the Commercial Club of Walla
Walla for the year 1916. They are given in round numbers, but may be
considered reliable and conservative.

      Production, 1916                                  Value to Growers
  Wheat--11,000,000 bushels                                  $12,100,000
  Barley--1,300,000 bushels                                      910,000
  Corn--250,000 bushels                                          200,000
  Alfalfa--140,000 tons                                        1,800,000
  Apples--1,000,000 boxes                                      1,000,000
  Prunes--5,000 tons                                             200,000
  Cherries--800 tons                                              80,000
  Onions--260,000 sacks                                          322,500
  Asparagus--500 tons                                             50,000
  Miscellaneous, including hay other than alfalfa, vegetables
    other than onions and asparagus                               600,000
  Livestock, dairy products, poultry, wool, flour and chop       8,000,000
  Total agricultural, horticultural, and stock products         25,262,500

The United Staten census report for 1910 gives a population for the
four counties of 49,003. H we allow for 10 per cent increase in 1916,
we shall have approximately fifty-four thousand people in Old Walla
Walla County. The year 1916 represents, therefore, a gross income
of nearly $468 for each man, woman, and child in the area. This, it
most of course be observed, is the income from the soil, and takes no
account of the earnings of the manufacturing, mercantile, professional,
and laboring classes. It is safe to say that few regions in the United
States or the world can match such an income representing the absolute
increase in wealth taken right from the earth. It is no wonder that the
farmers of our four counties have automobiles and household luxuries
galore, and when harvest time is over take trips to California,
Honolulu, or "back East," or, before the war, to Europe. It is of
interest to add here the approximate areas in cultivation in the four
counties. It was reported in 1916 as follows:

  Grain lands, in hearing and in summer-fallow--
    Walla Walla County                               500,000 acres
    The other counties                               500,000 acres
  Fruit lands--
    Asotin County                                      3,500 acres
        (Note: An underestimate of Asotin County.)
    Walla Walla County                                  2,690 acres
    Columbia County                                     1,045 acres
    Garfield County                                       525 acres


MANUFACTURING

We have confined our attention thus far to what might be regarded as
the natural fundamental industries of stock raising, farming, and
horticulture.

But along with those essential industries to which the country was
naturally adapted, there went of necessity some mercantile and
manufacturing enterprises. Later on the professional classes became
interrelated to all the others. While the region covered by our four
counties is not naturally a manufacturing country, yet from the first
there have been those whose tastes and interests have lead them to
mechanical pursuits. In a growing community where the foundation
products are those of the soil and yet where the building arts are in
constant demand there must necessarily be some manufacturing. Most of
the enterprises of that nature in this section have been connected
either with building materials or with agricultural implements.
Saw-mills came in almost with the dawn of civilized life. Hence we are
not surprised to find that the first pioneer in Walla Walla, Dr. Marcus
Whitman, built a sawmill. That mill was on Mill Creek, apparently
nearly where the present Shemwell place is located. As is not known to
many there was a small saw-mill on the grounds of the United States
Fort. The flume ran nearly along the present course of Main Street and
the mill was on the northern edge of the military reservation opposite
Jesse Drumheller's residence. Doubtless it was those mills which
gave our beautiful creek its unfortunate name, in place of the more
attractive native name of Pasca or Pashki, "sunflower."

The _Statesman_ of December 13, 1861, notices the building of a
saw-mill on the Coppei by Anderson Cox, one of the foremost of the
early citizens of Walla Walla, who also had large interests in and
around Waitsburg. Another prominent old-timer, W. H. Babcock, is
reported in the issue of June 2, 1865, as having purchased a saw-mill
on the Walla Walla. One of the earliest sawmills, built at the close of
1862, was on Mill Creek in Asotin. There were various little mills in
the timber land of the Blue Mountains. In the '80s Dr. N. G. Blalock
and a little later Dr. D. S. Baker inaugurated the business of fluming
from the mountains to Walla Walla. In the case of the former this was
a calamitous business venture, but the latter with his usual sound
judgment made a great success of the enterprise.

The most extensive lumbering business of Walla Walla in the
earlier days was that still known by the corporate name of the
Whitehouse-Crawford Co. This company was founded in 1880 by Messrs.
Cooper and Smuck. In 1888 G. W. Whitehouse and D. J. Crimmins became
chief owners, though Mr. Cooper retained his connection with the
business. In 1905 J. M. Crawford acquired the business, being joined
by his brother J. T. Crawford, in 1909. The business has become very
extensive, having numerous branches, with the general name Tum-a-Lum
Lumbering Co. There have been established in more recent years the
Walla Walla Lumber Co., the Oregon Lumber Co., and the Bridal Veil
Lumber Co., all doing large lines of business.

A large amount of capital has been invested in the manufacturing of
agricultural machinery. The most extensive establishment in these
lines in Walla Walla was the Hunt Threshing Factory founded in 1888
by Gilbert Hunt and Christopher Ennis, who purchased the machine shop
of Byron Jackson, which became the property of Mr. Hunt in 1891. The
special output of the factory was the "Pride of Washington Separator,"
but subsequently iron work and belting and wind mills and other lines
were added. Owing to financial difficulties precipitated by the hard
times beginning in 1907 this great establishment, which employed from
seventy-five to a hundred men, was obliged to close its doors.

For a number of years the northwestern branch of the Holt Harvester
Works, of which Benjamin Holt was manager, was located in Walla Walla.
It conducted an immense business, particularly in the "side-hill"
harvester and in tractors. The main northern house is now located in
Spokane, while the Walla Walla branch is managed by E. L. Smith and Co.

Among the other manufacturing enterprises worthy of larger notice
than our space permits may be named the Brown-Lewis Corporation, the
Ringhoffer Brothers Saddle-tree Factory, the Webber Tannery, the
Washington Weeder Works, the Walla Walla Iron Works, and the Cox-Bailey
Manufacturing Co., now succeeded by separate enterprises of the two
partners. From a historical point of view the iron foundry conducted
by J. L. Roberts during the decade of the '90s was one of the most
conspicuous industries. The foundry business was later conducted by the
Hunt Company.

It will give a view of the distribution of business houses and
industries to insert here the tabulation of these on file in the
Commercial Club office.


TRADES, PROFESSIONS AND MISCELLANEOUS CALLINGS

  Accountants (public)                       4
  Apartment houses                           8
  Architects                                 3
  Banks                                      5
  Bakeries                                   6
  Barber shops                              20
  Bowling alleys                             2
  Blacksmith shops                          10
  Bottling works                             2
  Coal and wood yards                        7
  Contractors and builders (all kinds)      33
  Dentists                                  20
  Doctors--a--physicians and surgeons       27
      b--Osteopaths                          6
      c--Chiropractors                       3
  Dressmakers and fitters                   24
  Electricians                               5
  Electric light plants                      1
  Garages                                   14
  Gas plants                                 1
  Hospitals and sanatoriums                  3
  Hotels                                     4
  Lawyers                                   24
  Liveries--a--horse                         3
      b--Auto                                3
  Machine shops                              5
  Moving picture theaters                    4
  Newspapers                                 4
  Painter and paper hangers                  4
  Plumbing shops                             4
  Pool and billiard halls                    6
  Photograph galleries                       4
  Printing offices                           4
  Real estate dealers                       31
  Restaurants                               22
  Rooming houses
  Shoe repair shops                          6
  Tailor shops                              12

  Tin shops                                  3
  Undertakers                                3
  Veterinarians                              4

[Illustration: KING DAVID TREES, THREE YEARS OLD, TRAVIS]

WHOLESALE HOUSES

  Commission (fruit and produce)             4
  Grain dealers                             19
  Groceries                                  2
  Alfalfa mills                              2
  Brick yards                                1
  Broom factories                            1
  Candy factories                            4
  Cement or concrete stone manufacturing     1
  Cereal mills                               2
  Cigar factories                            4
  Cold storage plants                        1
  Creameries                                 2
  Cheese factories                           2
  Feed mills                                 2
  Flour mills                                3
  Foundries                                  3
  Fruit drying plants                        2
  Ice manufacturers                          1
  Laundries                                  3
  Lumber yards                               9
  Monument manufacturers                     2
  Green houses                               3
  Packing Houses--Meat                       1
  Fruit                                      3
  Pickle works                               1
  Sash and door factories and planing mills  3
  Stone quarries                             1
  Tile factories                             1
  Vinegar manufacturers                      2
  Wagon and vehicle manufacturers            2
  Warehouses (grain)                         4
  Saddle tree factory                        1
  Self Oiling Wheel & Bearing Co.            1

RETAIL STORES

  Automobile                                12
  Book and stationery                        3
  Cigar                                     21
  Clothing                                   7
  Confectionery                              3
  Department                                 3
  Drug                                       8
  Dry goods                                  8
  Electrical  supply                         3
  Flour and feed                             3
  Furniture                                  4
  General                                    2
  Grocery                                   35
  Hardware                                   6
  Harness and saddlery                       6
  Implement                                  5
  Jewelry                                    5
  Meat                                       5
  Millinery                                  8
  Shoe                                       8
  Variety--5 and 10 cent                     2
  Ladies' suits and cloaks                   2

Perhaps no one business fact is so good a commentary on the financial
condition of a community as the bank deposits.

The banks of Walla Walla have had during the year 1917 an average of
seven million dollars deposits. On January 1, 1918, deposits exceeded
eight millions.

As we shall see, the banks of the other cities of the district have
similar or even greater amounts in proportion to population. It would
doubtless be safe to estimate the bank deposits of the four counties at
eleven million dollars, or over two hundred dollars per capita.

As a means of indicating the financial status of Walla Walla, with
Garfield and Columbia counties, the following clipping from a local
paper of October 16, 1917, will be of permanent value:

"Announcement of the official allotment of Liberty loan bonds to each
bank in the Walla Walla district comprising Garfield, Columbia and
Walla Walla counties, was made for the first time last evening by P.
M. Winans, chairman of the executive committee, following receipt of
a telegram from the Federal Reserve Bank at San Francisco, giving the
total minimum and maximum allotments for this district. As soon as
these figures were learned the allotments for each of the fourteen
banks in the district were figured on a basis of deposits at the last
federal call.

"The minimum allotment for the district was placed by the Federal
Reserve Bank at $1,483,000 and the maximum allotment at $2,457,842.
From the way the campaign has been going it will require every energy
to raise the minimum, which is 50 per cent more than the allotment for
the district for the first Liberty bond issue.

"This time Walla Walla County alone must subscribe $1,044,000 or as
much as the entire district subscribed for the first loan. The City
of Walla Walla must subscribe $874,000 to report the minimum desired.
Columbia County must subscribe $240,000 and Garfield County $199,000."


BANK ALLOTMENTS

The official allotment which each of the fourteen banks of the district
was expected to subscribe among its customers, follows:

  Walla Walla--
    First National Bank           $235,000
    Baker-Boyer National Bank      243,000
    Third National Bank            109,000
    Peoples State Bank             135,000
    Farmers Savings Bank           152,000
  Touchet State Bank, Touchet        7,000
  First State Bank, Prescott        12,000
  First National Bank, Waitsburg   121,000
  Exchange Bank, Waitsburg          30,000
  Columbia National Bank, Dayton   146,000
  Broughton National Bank, Dayton   85,000
  Bank of Starbuck, Starbuck         9,000
  Pomeroy State Bank, Pomeroy      132,000
  Knettle State Bank, Pomeroy       67,000
                                ----------
                                $1,483,000

It may be added that the amount actually subscribed exceeded the
maximum, being $2,647,000.


ANNUAL COUNTY FAIR

One feature of constant interest in any growing American community is
the annual county fair. As a yearly jubilee, a display of products,
and a general "get-together" agency, this characteristic feature of
American rural life is entitled to a large place. It co-ordinates
industries, creates enterprise, kindles ambition, and promotes
the spirit of mutual helpfulness in pre-eminent degree. The Walla
Walla fairs have had essentially the familiar features of all such
institutions; i. e., the exposition of agricultural, horticultural, and
other products. Since the fairs have been held at the present grounds
south of the city, the exhibition of livestock and the horse racing
features, and in the three prior years to the date of this work, the
"Pioneer Days," have become leading events and have drawn thousands of
visitors from all parts of the country.

The first fairs were somewhat broken and irregular.

Apparently the germ of our county fairs was the establishment of a race
course on the flat west of town running around the hill adjoining what
is now the Coyle place, by George H. Porter. In the _Statesman_ of
October 18, 1862, is quite a flaming advertisement of the races. They
were to last four days, October 30th to November 2d. There were to be
purses of $100, $50 and $150 for winners, with 20 per cent for entries.
Buckley's Saloon was to be headquarters for making entries. Admission
was to be 50 cents. The proprietor seems to have been somewhat on the
order of a "bad man," as he later became involved in a murder case.

On July 9, 1866, an agricultural society was organized, of which the
officers were: President, H. P. Isaacs; vice presidents, Anderson
Cox, and W. H. Newell; treasurer, J. D. Cook; secretary, R. R. Rees;
executive committee, Charles Russell, T. S. Lee and A. A. Blanchard.
Under the management of this society the first county fair was held on
October 4, 5 and 6, 1866.

Another organization, known as the Washington Territory Agricultural,
Mining, and Art Fostering Society, undertook the maintenance of fairs
in 1870. In September of that year the first of a series was held until
1873. Finding that the grounds were too far from the city they were
sold and the fairs discontinued.

In 1875 C. S. Bush laid out a racetrack at the place where Watertown
now exists, and there a fair was held in October of that year. That
place was for many years the location of races and fairs and public
gatherings of all sorts.

During that same year of 1875 the first definite organization looking
to promoting immigration was organized, and a thirty-page pamphlet was
published setting forth the attractions of the Walla Walla Valley for
business and residence.

As years passed increasing interest in the annual meets led to an
attempt to give them a permanent character, and in 1897 the Fruit
Growers Association, of which Dr. N. G. Blalock was president,
undertook to finance and manage the fairs with a degree of system
which had not hitherto prevailed. The first fair under the auspices of
the Fruit Growers was held in the courthouse. The two succeeding were
held in Armory hall. In 1900 a pavilion was erected on Second Street
and for several years the annual fairs were held at that place. As an
illustration of the character of the fairs of that stage of history we
are incorporating here an account of the fair of 1900, taken from the
October number of the _Inland Empire_ magazine:

"The Fourth Annual Fruit Fair of the Walla Walla Valley was held in
the City of Walla Walla October 1 to 7 inclusive, and was in every
way the most successful and satisfactory exposition ever attempted
in Southeastern Washington. This was true as to the financial aspect
of the fair, as to the attendance and as to the quality of fruit on
display.

"Nature was responsible for the latter feature of the success of the
fair, as she is responsible for much that goes to make up the category
of the virtues of the Walla Walla Valley. Give our agriculturists and
horticulturists a year with a well regulated rainfall, and frost which
considerately stays away when not wanted, and they will with diligence
and careful culture produce grapes, pears, apples and most every kind
of fruits and vegetables of such quality and size as are seen in no
other part of the Union.

"In 1899 the fair continued six days, but this year a full week was
given, and the attendance exceeded that of previous years by over
three thousand paid admissions. The visitors were not restricted to
Walla Walla and the immediate vicinity; fully one thousand came from
Waitsburg, Dayton and other neighboring towns, and 500 from Pendleton,
Milton, Athena, and various points in our sister state. The scope of
the fruit fair is broadening and exhibits are received from an ever
increasing extent of territory.

"From a financial point of view, the officers of the exposition have
every reason to be congratulated. The gross proceeds of the fair were
something over seven thousand dollars, and about eleven hundred dollars
of this is profit, and is deposited as a nest egg for the fair of 1901.
This is the first year in the history of the fairs that any material
profit has resulted in dollars and cents. Last year $80 was taken in
over and above expenses, and the year before nothing. Better management
is responsible for this result, and a more thorough appreciation of the
requirements of the fair.

[Illustration: HEAVILY LOADED LIMB OF JONATHAN APPLES, CLARKSTON]

[Illustration: APPLE TREE ON THE PROPERTY OF WHITE BROTHERS AND CRUM,
WAWAWAI, SNAKE RIVER]

"T. H. Wagner's military band, of Seattle, furnished music for the
fair, giving concerts every afternoon and evening.

"Mrs. Jennie Houghton Edmunds was the vocal soloist, and Herr
Rodenkirchen, who is known to fame in the East and West, was their
cornet soloist.

"One of the special features of the programme of the fair was an Indian
war dance. A score of bucks and half dozen squaws from the Umatilla
Reservation were the performers, and their presence recalled to many of
the visitors the days when the proximity of redskins was a consummation
devoutly to be dreaded.

"The woman's department was this year under the direction of Mrs. John
B. Catron, and formed the most interesting and tasteful display at the
fair. A part was devoted to collections of Indian curios and relics,
and this department was always crowded with visitors. Lee Moorehouse
of Pendleton has on exhibition many of his photographs of Indians and
scenes on the Umatilla Reservation, pictures which even now are of
interest, and which fifty years hence, when the development of the
country has crowded the redskins further to the wall, will be of great
historical value.

"More than ever before have the people of this valley appreciated the
value of fruit fairs and industrial expositions. Here the farmers and
those interested in the various lines of agriculture and horticulture
have an opportunity to see the results of each others' labors and
profit by their experience. They are encouraged by the success of
others, and obtain suggestions which are invaluable in their work.
They learn in what direction the efforts of their neighbors are
being exerted, and keep in touch with the development of the various
agricultural pursuits.

"The Belgian hare exhibit, prepared by S. C. Wingard and E. A. Coull,
was a feature not before seen at these fairs. This exhibition, with its
hundreds of dollars' worth of valuable imported specimens of Belgian
hares and fancy stock, was perhaps the most valuable at the fair, and
of the greatest interest because of its novelty. Belgian hare culture
is yet in its infancy, and the gentle long-eared creature was the
center of attraction for those who wished to know more of these animals
which are monopolizing so much attention among breeders of pet stock.

"The railroads doing business in Walla Walla took a most active
interest in the fair. Two pretty and unique booths were erected and
they proved among the attractive features of the event.

"The Northern Pacific and Washington & Columbia River railways took
the cue of the Boxers and a pretty pagoda was designed. The structure
was erected near the band pavilion and was provided with seats and
accommodations for the ladies and children. The pagoda was built
of native woods and finished with moss brought from Tacoma for the
purpose. The work was artistically done. At night a number of colored
electric lights gave a finishing touch to the scene. The design was
largely the idea of Manager McCabe and Passenger Agent Calderhead, of
the Washington & Columbia River Railway.

"The booth of the Oregon Railway & Navigation Company was located
near the main entrance and it was neatly planned. A commodious square
booth was finished and trimmed with grains and fruits taken from the
company's experimental farm near the city. The ceiling was made of
a variety of handsomely colored wools in the unwoven state, blended
together with artistic effect. The walls of the booth were hung with
pictures, and chairs and reading offered rest and entertainment to all.
The booth was in charge of General Agent Burns and C. F. Van De Water."

The officers of the association for 1900 were as follows: W. A. Ritz,
president; C. F. Van De Water, secretary; O. R. Ballou, superintendent;
Mrs. J. B. Catron, superintendent of the woman's department.


VARIED ASPECTS OF THE FAIR

The Fair assumed different aspects in different years, sometimes taking
on as the predominant interest the exhibition of fruit and vegetables,
and at other times stock and machinery. At still other times the "horse
race" was the dominant feature.

In 1903 a new organization was effected known as the Walla Walla Race
Track Association. At a meeting of a number of the leading men of
the city and county, of which Judge T. H. Brents was chairman, the
following were elected trustees of the association: W. S. Offner,
Joseph McCabe, R. B. Caswell, James Kidwell, Wm. Hogoboom, John
McFeeley, Chris Ennis, W. G. Preston and Frank Singleton. Under the
auspices of the association the first of a new series of fairs was
held in the autumn of 1903 at the present location upon the land
known as the "Henderson" tract, purchased by the association. The
name of the association became changed to the Walla Walla County Fair
Association. In 1906 the pavilion still used was erected. In 1907
the dominant interest was the "Harvest Festival," the chief features
of which were carried out within the city. This will be remembered
as quite a gorgeous pageant. J. J. Kauffman was duly crowned as King
Rex, and Hattie Stine became queen of the carnival as Queen Harriet.
Both coronations were signalized by spectacular parades and general
hilarity which made that celebration the most memorable of the series.
In 1908, August 8th, a greet disaster occurred at the Race Track,
the destruction by fire of the barns, together with several valuable
horses, entailing severe loss both to the association and to several
individuals, especially Wm. Hogoboom. In the same year the street
railway line was extended from the city to the grounds. As indicating
the personnel of the association of that period, it will be valuable
to present here the names of the officers and trustees: T. H. Brents,
president; Grant Copeland, vice president; R. E. Guichard, secretary;
trustees, E. Tausick, M. Toner, W. A. Ritz, Sam Drumheller, Mordo
McDonald, J. H. Morrow, J. G. Kidwell, Frank Singleton, Wm. Hogoboom,
C. L. Whitney, B. F. Simpson, Ben C. Holt, J. P. Kent, J. Smith, and
Wm. Kirkman. Throughout the period to the present the association has
been an incorporated organization, with the stock distributed widely
among the farmers and business men of the community. Judge Brents
continued as president until 1914, when bodily infirmity forbade
further continuance, and his lamented death soon followed. Robert
Johnson became secretary in 1907 and in 1909 W. A. Ritz became manager,
being chosen president in 1914 upon retirement of Judge Brents. Messrs.
Ritz and Johnson became so closely identified from that time on as
to be associated with every feature of the history of the Fair. The
woman's department was conducted with equal efficiency during the same
period by Mesdames J. B. Catron, W. A. Ritz, and W. D. Lyman.


FRONTIER DAYS

In 1913, feeling that the common routine had rather palled, the
managers decided to inaugurate a new order of things, and as a
result the "Frontier Days" came into existence, with its spectacular
displays of "bulldogging," relay races, stage-coach races, cowboys,
cow-girls, Indians, etc., one of the last stands of the Wild West. In
spite of the great success of these exhibitions as a means of drawing
crowds and creating interest, the frontier days were not a financial
success. After the meeting of 1915, the Fair Association decided not
to continue, and hence there was no fair of any kind upon the grounds
in 1916. There was conducted, however, a Merchants' Carnival upon the
streets which while perhaps tame in comparison with its predecessors
served to signalize the autumn season and to create a period of good
fellowship and community enjoyment. During 1915 and 1916 the question
of purchase of the Fair Grounds by the county became one of the
especial subjects of local politics. A general spirit of caution and
economy prevailed, and the proposition failed of a sufficient vote in
the election of 1916. The grounds remain, therefore, in possession
of the County Fair Association, and it is just to the members of the
association to say that the thanks of the entire community are due them
for their patriotism and genuine life in maintaining at a financial
loss this important feature of community progress.

With the cessation of the regular Fair there was a lively demand in
every direction for something that would keep the Queen Mother of the
Inland Empire upon the map as an autumn amusement center. In response
to this public call, George Drumheller, the greatest wheat farmer
of the Inland Empire (and for that matter doubtless the greatest
individual wheat farmer in the world, having about twenty thousand
acres of wheat land), rose to the occasion and prepared a program for a
new exhibition, "The Pioneer Pow-wow." The personnel of the management
was as follows: George Drumheller, managing director; O. C. Soots,
secretary; Tom Drumheller, arena director; Bill Switzler, assistant
arena director; John Neace, Jim McManamon, and George Marckum, judges;
A. G. Busbee, chief announcer; Ben Corbett, assistant announcer.

As a permanent record of the Pow-wow we are incorporating here the
summary of it as given in the _Walla Walla Bulletin_ at the close of
the events:

"After three days of some of the finest riding, roping and feature
cowboy work ever in the West, the first annual Pioneer Pow-wow came to
a close last night. The Pow-wow was a success from every standpoint; so
successful, in fact, that plans will be made for a second and greater
Pow-wow next year, probably to be put on under management of a new
county fair association, for which the event this year was a benefit.

"Yesterday's great show in the arena and on the track at the fair
grounds eclipsed, if possible the performances of the two preceding
days, and the large crowd which filled the grand stand until there was
not a reserved seat left and overflowed the north bleachers was brought
to its feet time and again with excitement.

"All in all the Pow-wow program for the three days was voted by nearly
all who saw it the finest Wild West show ever staged here, and the
success of the enterprise reflects great credit upon George Drumheller,
well known farmer and stockraiser of the valley, who managed the show,
and upon Sec. O. C. Soots, secretary of the Commercial Club, who acted
as secretary for the enterprise, as well as upon each one of the other
officials.

"A feature of the program yesterday afternoon was the cowboys' relay
race, in which the crowd was probably more interested than in any other
event. Nep Lynch was the winner and by defeating Drumheller can lay
claim to the championship of the world in this event.

"When Drumheller's horse got away from him for an instant on the second
change yesterday the race was changed from a neck and neck contest
between Drumheller and Lynch to an easy victory for the latter. On
Friday Lynch was also victor, while on Thursday Drumheller came in
ahead by a length.

"The cowboys' bucking contest for the Pow-wow went to Yakima Canute,
and the choice of the judges after the finals yesterday proved popular
with the crowd who gave the clever rider a big hand. The prize $250
saddle and $2.50 cash goes to the winner of this event.

"The three riders who were chosen for the finals yesterday were Leonard
Stroud, Yakima Canute and Dave White, and they drew as mounts for the
final bucking events Sundance, Culdesac and Speedball, respectively.
The three animals are probably the toughest buckers in the world.
Sundance tossed a rider over his head Thursday, while Culdesac had a
record of two down for the Pow-wow. Speedball also had proved one of
the hardest to ride. All three riders showed great skill, although
White was forced to pull leather when the halter rope was jerked out of
his hand.

"Another relay feature that was popular with the crowd during the
entire Pow-wow was the cow-girls' relay race. Mabel De Long was the
winner, with Donna Card and Josephine Sherry second and third. Miss De
Long proved unusually skillful on the change and frequently jumped from
one horse to another without touching the ground.

"Both the steer-roping and bulldogging was the greatest ever seen here.
Tommy Grimes was the first with a total time of 63-3/4 seconds for two
throws, while Jim Lynch took the bulldogging contest with a total time
of 63-3/4 seconds for two throws. Lynch's time yesterday afternoon,
twenty-one seconds, is one of the fastest records ever made for this
event.

"One pleasing feature of the Pow-wow this year was that not a single
cowboy or animal was seriously hurt during the entire three days.
This was not because the show was more tame than before, because such
was not the case, but was due partly to good fortune and more to the
skillful management throughout.

[Illustration: W. P. WINANS AND THE IMMIGRANT WAGON, SHOWN AT THE
FRONTIER DAYS OF 1915]

"A feature of yesterday's program was the drill given by Maj. Paul H.
Weyrauch's battalion of field artillery. The battalion, about three
hundred strong, executed a review in the arena, passing in front of
Major Weyrauch, reviewing officer. The boys made a great showing for
the short time that they have been in training, going through their
maneuvers like clock work. Major Weyrauch and his men were given a
great hand by the audience and the most impressive moment of the day
came during the drill, when the band played "The Star Spangled Banner,"
the soldiers stood at attention, and the great crowd rose to its feet
as one man, with the men standing bare-headed until the last strains of
the national anthem had died away.

"A. G. Busbee, who had been the efficient chief announcer at the
Pow-wow for the three days, gave the spectators yesterday a thrilling
exhibition of bulldogging at the close of yesterday afternoon's
bulldogging contest. Busbee, clad in his full Indian regalia, downed
one of the steers in front of the grandstand. He declared afterwards
that he could have won the event if he had been allowed to enter.
Officials of the Pow-wow needed Busbee as announcer and refused to run
any risks of his being laid out.

"George Drumheller, managing director of the Pow-wow, said last night
that he was not yet in a position to say how successful the Pow-wow
had been financially, but that he hoped to at least break even, and
possibly clear a little for the benefit of the fair association.

"'It's play with us.' he said. 'The boys like it and it gives them
something to talk about during the winter. The people supported the
show well, and I hope something of the kind can he arranged again next
year.'"

One of the most pleasing features of the Pioneer Pow-wow, as well
as of the Frontier Days preceding was the prominence given to the
pioneers. In 1915 a log-cabin was erected on the fair grounds as a
typical pioneer rest home during the period of the fairs. This was the
rallying place of the gray haired sires and mothers of the valley,
and significant and beautiful were the reunions of the "Builders" of
old Walla Walla at that point. At the Pioneer Pow-wow the address
to the pioneers was given by Governor M. C. Moore, last territorial
governor and one of the most honored of the pioneers. His address at
the gathering of 1917 was so fitting and constitutes so complete a
retrospect of the history of the region that we believe it will be seen
with deep regard by the pioneers in this history.

We therefore take from the columns of the _Walla Walla Union_ the
report, as follows:

"These pioneer meetings are significant events; they afford opportunity
for meeting old friends. They are occasions for retrospection and
reminiscence. We live over again in memory, 'the brave days of old.'
We recount the courage, the lofty purpose, the sacrifices of the early
settlers, not only of those still living, but of those who have crossed
the Great Divide."

These words, taken from the speech of ex-Governor Miles C. Moore,
delivered at the Pioneers' barbecue meeting at the fair grounds
yesterday noon, explain the significance of the Pioneer Pow-wow to
the early settlers of this country, to whose memory the big fall
celebration is dedicated. That the sturdy old plainsmen appreciated
the honor was evident by their numbers and the hearty manner in which
they participated in this event. Hundreds of them were present and all
pronounced the juicy beefsteaks served by the Royal Chef Harry Kidwell,
to be near-perfect.

The pioneers' program was short but filled with interest and the social
time that followed was hugely enjoyed. Judge E. C. Mills made a short
address and vocal solos were rendered by Mrs. F. B. Thompson and A. R.
Slimmons and a reading by Mrs. Thomas Duff. Mrs. A. G. Baumeister was
chairman of the committees in charge.

Ex-Governor Moore's address, coming from one of the most prominent
northwest pioneers, was the feature of the program, and was most
interesting to the early settlers. It is given in full as follows:

"Walla Walla is proud to act as host today to the pioneers and feels
she is entertaining old friends.

"Many of you came here long years ago and saw the city in its earliest
beginnings; saw it when it was only a frontier trading post--an
outfitting point for miners bound to the mines of Pierce City, Orofino
and Florence in Northern Idaho and to Boise in Southern Idaho--all new
camps. A little later Kootenai in British Columbia, and the mining
camps of Western Montana became the Mecca of the gold seeker.

"Many of them outfitted here and were followed by pack trains laden
with supplies. Many of you will remember the tinkle of the mule bell
which the pack mules followed in blind obedience.

"All day long these pack trains filed in constant procession through
the streets of the busy little city, bound on long journeys through the
mountains to the various mining camps.

"Indians, gaudy with paint and feathers, rode their spotted,
picturesque cayuse in gay cavalcades along the trails leading to town
to trade for fire water and other less important articles of barter.

"Covered ox wagons laden with dust begrimed children and household
goods 'all the way from old Missouri,' ranchmen, and cowboys in all
their pristine swagger and splendor helped to make up the motley throng
that filled the streets. The cow-girl who rides a horse astride had not
then materialized.

"The packers and many of the miners came here to 'winter' as they
expressed it in those days. They spent their money prodigally and
unstintingly in the saloons, in the gambling and hurdy-gurdy houses,
and in the spring would return to the source for fresh supplies of gold.

"Some of the more successful would return to the States and all
expected to when they had 'made their pile.' None of us had any idea of
making this a permanent place of residence or of being found here fifty
years later. As youngsters we sang with lusty voices:

  'We'll all go home in the spring, boys,
  We'll all go home in the spring.'

Later as the years went by and we did not go, there was added by the
unsentimental, this refrain:

  'Yes, in a horn;
  Yes, in a horn.'

"This describes conditions existing in old Walla Walla fifty years ago,
or in the decade between 1860 and 1870, and are some of the moving
pictures painted on the film of my brain when in the fall of 1863 I
wandered, a forlorn and homesick lad, into this beautiful valley.
Friends and acquaintances I had none, except the two young men who came
with me from Montana.

"My resources were exceedingly slender, and the question of how meal
tickets were to be obtained was much on my mind. That was fifty-four
years ago--and like many of you present here today I watched the years
go by with gradually increasing faith in the country's resources; a
faith that ripened into love for the beautiful valley, its people and
its magnificent surroundings. Walla Walla all these years has been my
home, her people became my people, her interests were my interests. It
is hoped you will pardon these personal allusions but after all history
is defined as 'the essence of innumerable biographies.'

"It is a goodly land--a fit abode for a superior race of people, a race
to match its mountains, worthy of its magnificent surroundings.

"Along in the early '60s, stockmen from the Willamette Valley,
attracted by the bunch grass that grew in wild luxuriance over all
the hills and valleys of this inter-mountain region, brought horses
and cattle and established stock ranches along the streams. Later it
was discovered that grain would grow on the foothills, and that the
yield was surprisingly large. The wheat area was gradually widened and
land supposed worthless grew enormous crops. Now wheat has everywhere
supplanted the bunch grass and the Inland Empire sends annually about
sixty-five million bushels to feed a hungry world.

"Walla Walla in the early '60s was a town of about two thousand
inhabitants and the only town between The Dalles and Lewiston. Now
this region is filled with cities and towns and villages, dotted all
over with the happy homes of a brave, enterprising, peace-loving,
law-abiding people.

"Many of us have seen the country in its making, have helped to lay
the foundations of the commonwealth, have seen the territory 'put on
the robes of state sovereignty,' have seen it become an important unit
in the great federation of states, have recently seen its young men
pour forth by thousands to engage in a war not of our making but in
the language of President Wilson, 'that the world may be made safe for
democracy.'

"These pioneer meetings are significant events; they afford opportunity
for meeting old friends. They are occasions for retrospection and
reminiscence. We live over again in memory 'the brave days of old.' We
recount the courage, the lofty purpose, the sacrifices of the early
settlers not only of those still living, but of those who have crossed
the Great Divide.

"They were a sturdy race; they braved the perils of pioneer life,
and 'pushed back the frontiers in the teeth of savage foes.' We are
old enough now to begin to have a history. In fact, this Walla Walla
country is rich in historic interest, and inspiring history it is.
Lewis and Clark passed through it on their way to and from the coast.
Whitman established his mission here in 1836 and eleven years later
gave up his life as the last full measure of his devotion to the cause
he loved so well. Other missionaries and explorers saw it and were
impressed with its fertility and the mildness of its climate. Indian
wars raged here, and it was here, almost on this spot, that Governor
Stevens held the council and made treaties with 5,500 Indians.

"No other part of the northwest has such a historic background. All
this will continue to be an inspiration to the people who are to reside
here.

"Wherever the early settler built his cabin, or took his claim, he
left the impress of his personality. These personal experiences
should be woven into history and it is hoped that Professor Lyman in
his forthcoming history of old Walla Walla County will include many of
these personal memorials.

"The restless impulse, the wanderlust implanted in the race, the
impulse that carried the first wave of emigration over Cumberland
Gap in the Alleghenies and down the Ohio to Kentucky, 'the dark and
bloody ground,' swept over the prairies of Illinois and Iowa, across
the Mississippi and Missouri. Here it halted on the edge of the Great
American Desert, until the gold discovery in California in '49 gave
it new impetus and it swept on again. These indefatigable Americans
crossed the Great Plains, they climbed the Rocky Mountains, they opened
mines, they felled forests, tilled the land, developed water powers,
built mills and manufactories, filling all the wide domain with 'the
shining towers of civilization.'

"The liberal land laws of the Government--giving a homestead to each
man brave enough and enterprising enough to go out and occupy it, the
mines it offered to the prospectors were the powerful factors that gave
us population and led to the development of the country.

      'All honor to the pioneers--
  'They have made this beautiful land of ours
  To blossom in grain and fruit and flowers.'

"Many of them have passed to a well earned rest. May the living long
remain to enjoy the fruit of their labors.

"Walla Walla has been pleased to have you here today and hopes to see
you all again at future Pow-wows. Her good wishes go with you wherever
you may be."

There have been various interesting and valuable exhibitions in Walla
Walla in recent years which are entitled to extended mention, but
the limits of our space compel us to forego details. One of the most
conspicuous of these has been the "corn-show," maintained by the O.-W.
R. R. management. "Farmer" Smith has been conspicuous in these shows,
other experts in corn production, as well as in the allied arts of the
use of corn in cookery and otherwise, have been in attendance, banquets
have been held attended by some of the chief officials of the railroad
company, and a public interest has been created already bearing fruit,
and sure to be a great factor in agriculture in the future. A hearty
tribute is due the O.-W. R. R. for the broad and intelligent policy
which has led to this contribution to the productive energies of this
region.


WALLA WALLA PAGEANT

To those who were in Walla Walla at the "Pageant of May" in 1914,
that spectacle must ever remain as incomparably the most beautiful
and poetical exhibition ever given in Walla Walla. Indeed it may well
claim precedence over any spectacle ever presented in the Inland
Empire. It was in all respects in a class by itself. It was conducted
under the auspices of the Woman's Park Club. The Pageant consisted of
two movements, diverse in their origin and nature and yet interwoven
with such artistic skill as to demonstrate rare poetical ability and
inventive genius on the part of the author, Mr. Porter Garnett of
Berkeley, Cal.

[Illustration: GATHERING TOKAY GRAPES, CLARKSTON]

[Illustration: PICKING PEACHES, ADAMS' PLACE, CLARKSTON]

This event was of such entirely exceptional character and so well set a
pattern for possible future occasions and created such interest in the
minds of all who witnessed its beautiful scenes in the park, that the
author feels confident that the readers of this volume will be glad to
read the Foreword and the Introduction as given in the book prepared by
Mr. Garnett and inscribed by him with this graceful dedication:

  TO THE WOMEN OF
  THE WOMAN'S PARK CLUB
  WHOSE
  CIVIC PRIDE
  AND
  CONSTRUCTIVE IDEALISM
  HAVE ENABLED THEM
  TO DARE AND TO ACHIEVE

The foreword is as follows:


 FOREWORD

 The history of "A Pageant of May" is briefly told.

 In November, 1913, the Woman's Park Club, which, in 1911, inaugurated
 an annual May Festival, conceived the idea of holding a pageant in
 our city.

 Correspondence with the American Pageant Association led to the
 inviting of Mr. Porter Garnett of Berkeley, California (one of
 the directors of the association), to come to Walla Walla for a
 conference. Mr. Garnett arrived on March 26th. On the 30th, having
 in the meantime selected City Park as the most suitable site, he
 submitted the outline of "A Pageant of May." It was officially
 approved on March 31st, and the work of preparation was begun.

 Since the construction of a pageant is usually a matter of many
 months it seems proper, in this case, to call attention to the fact
 that within a period of seven weeks Mr. Garnett has written the text
 of "A Pageant of May," designed the costumes and properties, invented
 the dances, selected the music and rehearsed a cast of over three
 hundred.

 Grateful acknowledgment is made of the assistance of the Commercial
 Club and of the many citizens of Walla Walla who have given so
 generously of their time and talent, insuring the success of the
 "introduction of pageantry in the Northwest."

      GRACE G. ISAACS,
      MABEL BAKER ANDERSON,
      LYDIA P. SUTHERLAND,
      MARY SHIPMAN PENROSE,
      MARIE A. CATRON,
  _Executive Committee for the Pageant_,
      _Woman's Park Club_.

Mr. Garnett's Introduction, interpreting the Pageant, is presented in
these words:


 INTRODUCTION

 Although May festivals are held in almost every community, it is in
 the agricultural community, such as this of Walla Walla with its
 vicinage of fertile acres, that the celebration of spring--the season
 of renewal--is most appropriate.

 A Pageant of May is a May festival and something more. In it, instead
 of restricting the ceremonies of the more or less hackneyed forms,
 an effort has been made to utilize the traditional material and to
 import into it certain elements of freshness and fancy.

 The intention has been not so much to give an exhibition as to afford
 the community an opportunity for self-expression. The real purpose of
 the pageant is to remind the people of Walla Walla that since they
 owe their existence to the soil, spring should be for them a season
 of sincere and spontaneous rejoicing. It should not be necessary to
 cajole them into celebrating this season which brings in bud and
 blossom an earnest of the harvest to come. They should not only be
 willing but eager to make merry on the Green and to dance around
 the May-poles. They should remember that the earth which gives them
 sustenance is not their servant but their mistress and that without
 her generous gifts they would be poor indeed. A pageant of May offers
 them an opportunity to pay their homage to Earth the Giver whom the
 Greeks personified and worshipped as the goddess Demeter (Ceres).

 In the Masque of Proserpine, which forms the first part of the
 pageant, the return of spring is treated symbolically. The myth
 upon which the masque is built has, on account of its peculiar
 appropriateness, been used at various times and in various ways to
 celebrate the season of rebirth, but the present adaptation with its
 free use of comedy is entirely original. It has been necessary, of
 course, to take many liberties with the accepted versions, notably
 the excision of that part of the myth which deals with Ceres'
 wanderings in search of Proserpine. Those who may be desirous of
 reading the myth in its most charming form are referred to the
 translation of an Homeric hymn which Walter Pater incorporated in his
 essay, Demeter and Persephone, contained in his volume "The Greek
 Spirit."

 The second part of the pageant is based upon the traditional English
 May Day celebrations. The traditions, however, are by no means
 strictly followed for there seems to be no justification for a rigid
 adherence in America to customs which are essentially English. I have
 used Robin Hood and his Merrie Men because, through literature, they
 have been made the heritage of all English-speaking people; I have,
 however, omitted the Morris-dance because, in America, it has no
 significance whatever.

 Since it is hoped that the pageant will be interpreted throughout
 in a spirit of gaiety; since the participants will be expected to
 forget (as far as possible) that there are any spectators, the
 spontaneity which is difficult to attain rather than the expertness
 which is comparatively easy, will be looked for in the May-pole and
 other dances. To Mrs. E. R. Ormsbee's able direction is due whatever
 measure of success may be achieved in this regard. The Dance of the
 Seeds and the Dance of the Fruits and Flowers owe the charm of their
 form and detail to the inventive fancy and skill of Miss Rachel Drum.

 In both the Masque and the Revels realism has been scrupulously
 avoided because in the author's opinion realism on the stage is
 inartistic and futile. There is no reason why a pageant--whether of
 the historical or festival type--should not be consistently expressed
 in terms of beauty.

 To this end the masque feature has been employed as affording the
 best possible means by which the note of beauty may be introduced. I
 believe that the introduction of the masque feature in all pageants,
 by increasing the gap which already exists between formal and
 creative pageantry and the familiar tawdriness of the street-fair and
 carnival, would do more to raise the standard of pageantry than any
 other single thing.

 The text of A Pageant of May has been reduced to the simplest
 possible terms. It contains no were lines than were necessary to
 unfold the plot and deliver the message. The lines, moreover, have
 been uniformly written with the fact in view that they were to be
 delivered and delivered in the open air. Syllables that open the
 mouth have been more important therefore than poetic embellishments.
 As far as possible pantomime has been used to reveal the story. A
 Pageant of May is not intended for closet reading, and if the reader
 who did not see its realizement in action on the four-acre stage in
 Walla Walla's city park finds it somewhat jejune he is asked to bear
 that fact in mind.

 I cannot leave unexpressed my grateful acknowledgments to the members
 of the Costume Committee who have worked most efficiently under the
 direction of Mrs. A. J. Gillis, the designing of the children's
 costumes being admirably done by Miss Helen Burr and Mrs. W. E.
 Most. To the chairman and members of the other committees, and to
 the organizers and chaperones of the various groups I am indebted
 for the invaluable assistance which they have rendered. Finally, I
 would take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the women of
 the Executive Committee who, putting aside every consideration of
 personal convenience, have labored indefatigably for the success of
 the pageant and the benefit of the community.

  P. G.

 Walla Walla, Washington. May 14, 1914.




CHAPTER VI

INTELLECTUAL AND RELIGIOUS FORCES OF WALLA WALLA COUNTY; EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS OF WALLA WALLA


While the eastern parts of the United States and pre-eminently New
England, above all the State of Massachusetts, have assumed, and to
considerable degree justly, that they hold priority in education,
yet the people of the Far-West may rightfully claim that within the
past dozen or twenty years they have made such gains in educational
processes and results as to place them in the front rank. The report
of the Russell Sage Foundation a few years ago that for all 'round
efficiency the schools of Washington State were entitled to first place
in the United States, was not surprising, though gratifying to those
familiar with the extraordinary growth in equipment and teaching force
during the last decade. As is well known, several western and Pacific
Coast states outrun all others in freedom from illiteracy, having
practically no permanent residents of proper age and normal faculties
unable to read and write. It is one of the glories of American
democracy, and in fact the logical consequence of self-government in
this or in any country, that the craving for knowledge and power and
advancement exists in the masses. Thus and thus only can democracy
justify its existence. In the West, and perhaps even most intensely
in the Pacific Coast states, the ambition to succeed, the spirit of
personal initiative, the feelings of independence and equality, were
the legitimate product of the pioneer era.

[Illustration:
  Jefferson School
  Green Park School
  Washington School
  Lincoln School
  Sharpstein School
SCHOOLS OF WALLA WALLA]

The state builders, the offspring of the immigrant train, the
homesteaders of the Walla Walla country, were, like other westerners,
anxious to bequeath to their children better opportunities for
education than they in their primitive surroundings could command.
Hence they had hardly more than satisfied the fundamental necessities
of location, shelter, and some means of income than they began to raise
the question of schools. In the earliest numbers of the _Washington
Statesman_ the pioneer newspaper of the Inland Empire, beginning in
1861, we find the question of suitable school buildings raised. But
that was not the beginning. It is interesting to recall that Doctor
and Mrs. Whitman were constantly active in maintaining a school at
Waiilatpu, not only as a missionary enterprise for the Indians, but, as
time went on, for the children of the immigrants, who gradually formed
a little group around the mission. Then after the long period of Indian
wars and the establishment of the United States garrison in its present
location, there was provision made in 1857 for teaching the children of
the garrison together with a few stray children in the community. The
teacher of that little group was Harry Freeman of the first dragoons,
Troup E. The building used was on the garrison grounds. Among the
children were several well known later in Walla Walla and the state, as
James and Hugh McCool and their sister Maggie, afterwards Mrs. James
Monaghan, mother of the gallant Lieutenant Monaghan, who lost his life
heroically in the Samoan Islands and for whom a commemorative monument
stands at the southern end of the Monroe Street bridge in Spokane. In
that first little company of school children were Robert Smith, Mrs.
Michael Kenny, and the Sickler girls, one of whom is now Mrs. Kyger.
The first school within the limits of Walla Walla was conducted in
1861-2 by Mrs. A. J. Miner in a private house at about what would now
be Alder and Palouse streets. Another pioneer teacher was J. H. Blewett.


PUBLIC SCHOOLS

Prior to 1862 there had been no public school organization. The
scholastic needs of the children had been recognized, however, in
the first permanent organization of the county on March 26, 1859,
by the appointment of Wm. B. Kelly as superintendent of schools. At
the election of July 14, 1862, J. F. Wood was chosen superintendent,
and District Number 1 was organized, a room rented, and a teacher
appointed. Progress seems to have lagged, however, until the fall of
1864, in which year the census showed a school population of 203,
though of that number only ninety-three were enrolled. A meeting on
December 12th of that year voted to levy a tax of 2-1/2 mills for the
erection of a building. Dr. D. S. Baker donated the land now occupied
by the Baker School and a building was erected at a cost of $2,000, the
first public school building in the Inland Empire. In 1868 a second
district numbered 34 was organized in the southwestern part of town
at the corner of Willow and Eighth streets. That building with some
additions served its purpose till 1879, and in that year the Park
Street building, in use for a number of years, was put up at a cost of
$2,000. Districts number 1 and 34 were consolidated by the Legislature
in 1881 and the board of directors consisted of the directors of the
two districts. As a matter of record it is worth while to preserve the
names of that board: H. E. Johnson, D. M. Jessee, B. L. Sharpstein, N.
T. Caton, Wm. O'Donnell, and F. W. Paine. E. B. Whitman was clerk.

By vote of the district on April 29, 1882, a much more ambitious plan
of building was adopted, one commensurate with the progress of the
intervening years, and a tax of $17,000 was levied for the purpose
of erecting a brick building. That building accordingly was realized
on the Baker School ground, in which many of the present "grave and
reverend seigniors" of Walla Walla had their first schooling. Not until
1889 was there any high school work in Walla Walla. In that year Prof.
R. C. Kerr, who was city superintendent, met the few pupils of high
school grade in the Baker School building. In the following year those
pupils were transferred to the Paine School, now known as the Lincoln
School, which had been erected in 1888.


FIRST HIGH SCHOOL CLASS

The first high school class was graduated in 1893. Up to 1900 there
was a total number of high school graduates of eighty. New buildings
have been added from time to time and new courses established, with
suitable equipment and teaching force. Perhaps we can in no way better
indicate the growth of the schools of Walla Walla County and city, than
by incorporating here a report prepared by County Supt. G. S. Bond
in 1900 for a history of Walla Walla by the author of this work, and
contrast with it the last report of City Supt. W. M. Kern. While Walla
Walla and adjoining communities have not been considered as of rapid
growth, compared with some other parts of the state, a perusal of these
reports, seventeen years apart, will give the present citizen some
conception of the changes in that short period.

Professor Bond's report follows: "It is the primary object of the
writer, in preparing this statement, to present to the public a brief
recital of the present condition of the educational facilities of Walla
Walla County, rather than attempt to give any account of the history
and growth of those facilities. Were it even desirable to do so, it
would, for two reasons, prove a somewhat difficult undertaking. The
records compiled by the earlier school officers are quite incomplete,
if compared with present requirements, and the subdivision of the
original county into the present counties of Columbia, Garfield,
Asotin and Walla Walla occasioned many changes in the various school
districts, and led to a complete re-districting and re-numbering.
This, the records in the county superintendent's office show, was done
between the years 1879 and 1886.

"In 1891, the county superintendent, by order of the county
commissioners, brought together in one book the plats and boundaries of
the various districts, numbered consecutively from one to fifty-three.
Since that date, to meet the requirements of the constant increase in
population, many changes in boundaries have been made and thirteen new
districts have been formed, making a total of sixty-six. Six of these
are joint with Columbia County.

"The subdivision of the county into sixty-six school districts brings
nearly every section within easy range of school facilities. Especially
is this true of the eastern and southern portions where the county is
most densely populated. With but few exceptions these districts have
good, comfortable schoolhouses, furnished with modern patent desks, and
fairly well supplied with apparatus. Six new schoolhouses were built,
and a considerable amount of furniture was purchased last year.

"A movement which is receiving considerable attention and which is
proving of great service to the county is the establishment by private
enterprise, entertainment or subscription of district libraries. About
twenty have received their books which are eagerly read by both pupils
and parents. Others are preparing entertainments to raise a library
fund. It is greatly to be hoped that our Legislature may pass some law
at this session to encourage the district library. It is one of the
measures most needed to improve our rural schools.

"Another feature that is proving of benefit to the country schools
is common school graduation. An opportunity to take an examination
for graduation is given at various time, to eighth grade pupils in
any of the schools. The diplomas admit to high school without further
examination. Many take pride in having finished the common school
course, and are inducted to remain in school much longer than they
otherwise would.

"Eight districts are at present maintaining graded schools. There
seems to be a growing sentiment in some of the more densely populated
sections to gather together their pupils for the superior advantages
of the graded schools. Walla Walla (No. 1) provides an excellent
four-year high school course. No. 3 (Waitsburg), also has a high school
department.

"Were all the schools in session at the same time there would be
required a force of 116 teachers. The districts employing more than one
teacher are: Walla Walla--30, Waitsburg--7, Prescott--3, Seeber--3 and
Dixie, Wallula, Harrer and Touchet--2 each. Of those employed at this
time, 7 hold life diplomas or state certificates, 18 normal diplomas,
25 first grade certificates, 21 second grade, and 15 third grade.
Twenty applicants failed last year. If the present crowded condition
of the Walla Walla and Waitsburg schools continues next year it will
necessitate an increase in the teaching force of five or six at the
former place and of one at the latter.

"The Teachers' Reading Circle was reorganized in January, and meetings
have been arranged for the more central points throughout the county.
The sessions are well attended, the exercises carefully prepared. About
fifty teachers have purchased one or more of the books and enrolled
as members. All teachers have free access to a library of about
seventy-five volumes, treating principally on theory and practice, or
the history and philosophy of education.

"Our school districts never began a year on a more solid financial
basis than they did the present one. Fifty-one of the sixty-six had a
good balance to their credit in the hands of the county treasurer. A
comparison of the last financial statement with that of previous years
is given to mark the increase.

        Receipts                             1897       1898        1900
  Balance in hands of county treasurer     $9,521.43  $9,279.24  $25,838.81
  Amount apportioned to districts by county
    supt.                                  32,104.54  56,210.31   58,574.66
  Amount received from special tax         11,761.62  26,346.81   26,503.99
  Amount from sale of school bonds            500.00   1,410.00      500.00
  Amount transferred from other districts   ........   ........    ........
  Amounts from other sources                  131.54      82.69    2,212.15
                                          ---------- ----------  ----------
      Total                               $54,019.13 $93,347.05 $113,629.61

        Expenditures                         1897       1898        1900
  Amount paid for teachers' wages          ........  $47,278.95  $38,691.71
  Amount paid for rents, fuel, etc.       $38,027.39  10,697.78   13,653.06
  Amount paid for interest on bonds         2,578.00   2,645.55    4,301.00
  Amount paid for sites, buildings, etc.   ........    2,902.68   32,152.61
  Amount paid for interest on warrants      4,113.75   5,649.78    1,650.94
  Amount reverting to general school fund       2.75   ........    ........
  Amount for other districts                ........   ........       12.86
                                          ---------- ----------  ----------
      Total                               $44,721.89 $69,173.94  $90,962.18
      Balance on hand                       9,297.24  24,173.11   22,667.43

"The hard times experienced two or three years ago materially affected
teachers' wages in this county. The average amount paid male teachers,
according to the annual report of the county superintendent in 1898,
was $56.57; for female teachers, $39.54. For 1900, male teachers,
$62.50; female teachers, $52.40. There seems however, to be dawning a
brighter future for the conscientious teacher. Rigid examinations for
two years have lessened the competition from those who entered the work
only because they had no other employment; the districts are able to
hold longer terms and pay larger salaries now. The minimum salary this
year is $40, other rural districts pay $45 and $50. Salaries in the
graded schools are from fifty-five to one hundred dollars per month.
The average length of term in 1898 was 6-1/2 months; the average from
1900 is 7-3/4 months.

"The estimate in the county superintendent's annual report for 1898
places the total value of schoolhouses and grounds at $162,080; of
school furniture; $15,317; of apparatus, etc., $3,871; of libraries,
$1,690. Amount of insurance on school property, $79,605; of bonds
outstanding, $45,300; warrants outstanding, $41,274. The last
enumeration of children of school age shows 4,275 resided in the county
on June 1st; of these 3,621 were enrolled in the public schools, and
made an average daily attendance of 2,076.

"For 1900, schoolhouses and grounds, $194,060; furniture, $16,350;
apparatus, $4,000; libraries, $2,450; insurance, $100,650; bonds
outstanding, $75,300; warrants outstanding, $82,721.16; children of
school age, 4,767; children enrolled, 4,102; average daily attendance,
2,322. Such was the report of the county superintendent in 1900. Now we
present the report of city superintendent, W. M. Kern, for year ending
in 1917:

    Enrollment                             Boys   Girls  Total
  Elementary schools                       1,280  1,234  2,514
  High school                                428    393    821
  Night school                                46     81    127
                                          ------ ------ ------
      Total                                1,754  1,708  3,462
  Transfers to high school                    17     26     43
                                          ------ ------ ------
    Total actual enrollment                1,737  1,682  3,419
  Deduct night school                         46     81    127
                                          ------ ------ ------
  Actual enrollment, grade and high school 1,691  1,601  3,292

Teachers in city schools, 101; valuation of property of city schools,
grounds and buildings, $790,000; equipment, $72,000.

"Over seven thousand children of school age reside in Walla Walla
County, according to the 1917 school census, completed yesterday. The
census shows a total population of school children of 7,331. Of this
number 3,928 live in the city school districts and the rest in the
other districts of the county.

[Illustration: HIGH SCHOOL, WALLA WALLA]

"The number of children in the county this year is almost identical
with that of last year, 1917 showing a decline of two. Last year's
figures showed 7,333, as against 7,331 this year. In the city there was
a decline in the number of children, the census this year being 3,982
as against 4,000 last year. The county districts, however, showed a
gain of sixteen.

"The city school census of 1917 shows the following:

Number of pupils receiving diplomas--

                  Boys  Girls Total
  Green Park       21    12    33
  Baker            12    11    23
  Sharpstein       17    40    57
  Jefferson        17    17    34
  Washington        8     6    14
                   --    --   ---
    Total, grades  75    86   161
    High school    44    55    99
    Per cent of attendance--
  Grades                      98.17
  High school                 98.10"

As will have been seen, Professor Kern's report gives a view of the
buildings and other successive additions to the facilities of the
public schools of Walla Walla City. Similar development has taken place
in Waitsburg, Prescott and Touchet, as will be seen from the following.
It may be added that the smaller places, and the country districts
also, have experienced a like improvement.


WAITSBURG

Waitsburg has maintained excellent schools for many years. We have
presented some facts in regard to the earlier schools of the place, and
are giving here a view of present organization and equipment.

At this date the board of education consists of Messrs. N. B. Atkinson,
J. A. Danielson, and W. J. Taylor. Miss Mary Dixon is clerk. The
faculty consists of the following: Superintendent, James H. Adams; high
school, principal and instructor in science and athletics, B. B. Brown;
instructor in English, Edna McCroskey; instructor in Latin and German,
Freda Paulson; instructor in mathematics, Ione Fenton; instructor in
history, Elizabeth Nelson; instructor in domestic science and art,
Gladys Persels; instructor in manual training and mechanical drawing,
Earl Frazier.

The Central School contains the grades, eight in number, Anna Goff
being principal.

Waitsburg is provided with three excellent buildings valued as follows:
high school, $20,000; Central School, $25,000; Preston Hall, $35,000.
The last named is the pride of the Waitsburg School system. It is, in
fact, a structure and an instrumentality of unique interest. It was
the gift of W. G. Preston, one of the most conspicuous of the pioneers
of Walla Walla County. It was the result of the philanthropic impulse
as well as the practical good judgment of its donor, for Mr. Preston
had formed the impression during his busy and successful career that
a knowledge of the manual arts was vital to the average boy and girl.
The building was completed in 1913 and was provided with the most
perfect equipment for manual instruction which the space would allow.
During the past year there were enrolled in the manual training course,
thirty-four boys, in the sewing course thirty-five girls, and in the
cooking course, thirteen girls. There is also a well-equipped gymnasium
in the building. The campus on which the high school and Preston Hall
stand contains five acres of land, about half of which is covered with
a grove, while the athletic field occupies the remainder of the open
space.

Some other valuable data we derive from the information kindly supplied
by Superintendent Adams. We find, as an interesting point worthy of
preservation for future comparison, that the average salary during the
past year paid the male teachers was $1,308.75, and that of the female
teachers was $746.25. Included in these averages are the superintendent
and principals. The total enrollment during 1916-17 was: boys, 216,
girls, 208. Percentage of daily attendance was 95.1 for the boys and
95.3 for the girls. The number in the high school was: First year, 48;
second year, 30; third year, 28; fourth year, 18; a total of 124. The
school library contains the following number of volumes: high school,
700; grades, 400.


PRESCOTT

Prescott, while not a large town, is an ideal home town in the midst
of a magnificent and extensive farming country, and conducts an amount
of business quite beyond the ordinary volume for its population. The
county tributary to Prescott produces about seven hundred thousand
bushels of grain annually, and here is grown the famous blue-stem
wheat, the highest grade milling wheat produced in the Northwest. The
land here yields from twenty-five to forty bushels of wheat per acre.
Crop failures are quite unknown. The laudable pride and ambition of the
people has led them to the construction of so fine a school building
as to be a source of wonder and admiration to all visitors. In this
elegant building there is sustained a high school department of four
years curriculum, with four teachers and, during the past year, forty
pupils. Part of the building is occupied by the grades. The value of
the school property is estimated at fifty-four thousand dollars, the
most of which is included in the high school building. Situated upon a
slight eminence overlooking the fertile and beautiful Touchet Valley,
with the vast sweep of the wheat covered hills closing it in, this
Prescott school building presents an appearance which many large towns
might envy. During a number of years past a succession of peculiarly
well qualified teachers have devoted themselves to the progress of the
Prescott schools, and as a result have lifted them to a status which
has been indicated in the high grades which the pupils have attained
in higher institutions and the efficiency which they have shown in
business engagements upon which they may have entered. Prescott obtains
its water supply from the snow-capped Blue Mountains, lying twenty
miles to the east. Thus being assured of a perpetual supply of pure
water. Prescott is noted for its healthfulness.

[Illustration: MAIN STREET, PRESCOTT]

[Illustration: KNIGHTS OF PYTHIAS BUILDING, PRESCOTT]

Descending the Touchet about twenty miles we reach its junction with
the Walla Walla, and there we find another of the fine little towns
which border that beautiful and historic stream.


TOUCHET

The Town of Touchet is at a lower level, only 450 feet above sea level,
and by reason of that and of its more westerly situation it has higher
temperature and less rainfall than any other of the Touchet towns. It
is consequently an irrigated fruit and alfalfa section. The splendid
Gardena District on the south and the productive lands in the Touchet
and Walla Walla bottoms north and east and at their junction, give
the town a commanding location. It is accordingly an active business
center, with several well stocked stores, a bank, an attractive church
of the Congregational order, and a number of pleasant homes.

The pride of the place, however, like that of Prescott is the school
building. This is a singularly attractive building, built for the
future, though well utilized in the present. The valuation of
school property in the Touchet District is $27,500, practically all
represented in the high school building with its equipment. There is
a total enrollment of 203 pupils with eight teachers. There are forty
pupils in the high school, and a four year course is provided.


GENERAL SCHOOL STATISTICS

The following statistics from the report of the state superintendent
for 1917 will indicate the general condition of the schools of Walla
Walla County. These figures are for the school year 1915-16.

                                                  Male    Female     Total
  Number of census children, June 1, 1916         3,646    3,706     7,352
  Number of pupils enrolled in public schools     3,122    2,838     5,960
  Average daily attendance                        2,466    2,237     4,703

  Total number of teachers employed                                    218
  Average salary paid high school teachers                        $ 990.10
  Average salary paid grade teachers                                788.45
  Average salary of superintendents, principals, and supervisors  1,328.00
  Number of children over six years of age not attending school        600
  Number of children between the ages of five and fifteen years
     not attending school                                               32

From every point of view it may be said that the schools of Walla Walla
County (as will be seen in later chapters the same is true of Columbia,
Garfield, and Asotin counties) have kept pace with the general progress
of the regions in which they are located.


PRIVATE INSTITUTIONS

From the public schools we turn to the various private institutions.
Foremost of these, and indeed in many respects the most unique and
distinctive feature of Southeastern Washington, both from a historical
and existing viewpoint, is Whitman College. This institution grew out
of the mission at Waiilatpu, with its brave and patriotic life and
tragic end. After the period of Indian wars, beginning with the Whitman
Massacre in 1847 and continuing, with some interruptions, till 1858,
there occurred a return to Waiilatpu, one of the constructive events in
our history. In 1859 Father Cushing Eells came from Forest Grove, Ore.,
where he had spent some years as a teacher, to the Walla Walla country,
with a view to a new enterprise of a very different sort from that
which had led Whitman, Spalding, and Gray in 1836, and Eells, Walker,
Smith, and Rogers in 1838 to come to Oregon. The first aim was purely
missionary. The twenty and more following years had demonstrated the
fact that this country was to be a home missionary field, instead of
foreign. It was clear to Father Eells that the educational needs of the
boys and girls of the new era must be regarded as of first importance.
Standing on the little hill at Waiilatpu and viewing the seemingly
forsaken grave where Whitman and his associates had been hurriedly
interred twelve years before, Father Eells made a vow to himself and
his God, feeling as he afterwards said, "The spirit of the Lord upon
him," to found a school of higher learning for both sexes, a memorial
which he was sure the martyrs of Waiilatpu, if they could speak, would
prefer to any other. That vow was the germination of Whitman Seminary,
which grew into Whitman College.

In pursuance of his plans, Father Eells acquired from the foreign
missionary board the square mile of land at Waiilatpu allowed them
as a donation claim and there he made his home for several years. It
was his first intention to locate the seminary at the mission ground,
but as it became obvious that the "city" would grow up near the fort
six miles east, he decided that there was the proper place for his
cherished enterprise. The years that followed were years of heroic
self-denial and unflagging labor by Father and Mrs. Eells and their two
sons, Edwin and Myron. They cut wood, raised chickens, made butter,
sold vegetables, exercised the most rigid economy, and by thus raking
and scraping and turning every energy and resource to the one aim, they
slowly accumulated about four thousand dollars for their unselfish
purpose. On October 13, 1866, the first building was dedicated. It
was on the location of the present Whitman Conservatory of Music. The
building was removed to make way for the conservatory and now composes
part of Prentiss Hall, a dormitory for young men. The land on which
Whitman Seminary and subsequently the college was located was the gift
of Dr. D. S. Baker.

Space does not allow us to enter into the history of the seminary, but
the names of those longest and most efficient in its service should
be recorded here. Aside from Father Eells and his family, Rev. P. B.
Chamberlain, first pastor of the Congregational Church, with Mrs.
Chamberlain and Miss Mary A. Hodgden, were the chief teachers during
the time of beginning. Later Prof. Wm. Marriner and Capt. W. K. Grim
were the chief principals. Associated with the latter was Mr. Samuel
Sweeney, still well known as a business man and farmer, and the only
one of the seminary teachers still living in Walla Walla, aside from
the author of this work, who was for a short time in charge of it in
1878-9. In 1883 the second great step was taken by the coming of Dr.
A. J. Anderson, who had been for several years president of the State
University at Seattle. The history of Doctor Anderson's connection
with Whitman College and the general educational interests of Walla
Walla and surrounding country constitutes a history by itself worthy
of extended notice. He was ably assisted by his wife, one of the
finest spirits of early days in Walla Walla, and by his sons Louis
and George, the former of whom became later one of the foremost
teachers in the expanded college and is now its vice president. With
the coming of Doctor Anderson the seminary was raised to college rank
with new courses and added teaching force. In the same year of 1883
a new building was erected which served as the main building for
nearly twenty years. For the purpose of raising money for further
development Father Eells made a journey to the East at that time.
Although he was becoming advanced in years and the work was trying and
laborious, he succeeded nobly in his aims, securing $16,000 and laying
the foundations of friendships which resulted later in largely added
amounts. During the eight years of Doctor Anderson's presidency Whitman
College, though cramped for funds and inadequately provided with needed
equipment, performed a noble service for the region, laying broad and
deep the foundations upon which the enlarged structure of later years
was reared. Some of the men and women now holding foremost places in
every branch of life in the Northwest, as well as in distant regions,
were students at the Whitman College of that period.

After the resignation of Doctor Anderson in 1891 there was a period of
loss and uncertainty which was happily ended in 1894 by what might be
considered the third great step in the history of the college. This was
the election to the presidency of Rev. S. B. L. Penrose, a member of
the "Yale Band" of 1890 and during the three years after his arrival
the pastor of the Congregational Church at Dayton. Of the monumental
work accomplished by Doctor Penrose during the twenty-three years of
his presidency, we cannot here speak adequately. Suffice it to say that
while Whitman is still a small college in comparison with the state
institutions of the Northwest, the increase in buildings, endowment,
equipment, courses and instructors has been such as to constitute a
chapter of achievements hard to match among the privately endowed
colleges of the United States. We have spoken of three great events
in the history of the college, the founding of the seminary by Father
Eells, the establishment of the college by Doctor Anderson, and the
assumption of the presidency by Doctor Penrose. It remains to add a
fourth of the great events. This was the raising by Walla Walla and
vicinity of the accumulated debts of a series of years caused by the
heroic efforts to keep pace with necessary improvements while resources
were still scanty. Due to those conditions the college was heavily
encumbered and much handicapped as a result. In 1911 an offer of large
additions to the endowment was made by the General Education Society
of New York, on condition that all debts be raised. This led to a
campaign in 1912 for the funds needed for that purpose. This may truly
be called a monumental event, both for the permanent establishment
of the college upon a secure foundation, as well as a remarkable
achievement for Walla Walla. For though the city and county are
wealthy and productive, yet to lay right down on the counter the sum
of $213,140.30 was notable and the gift was rendered more remarkable
in view of the fact that about eighty thousand dollars had just been
raised for the Young Men's Christian Association, that churches were
raising contributions for expensive buildings, that costly school
buildings had just been erected, and that the need of a new high school
and a new courthouse building was becoming agitated. It may be added
that within a year the burning of St. Mary's Hospital precipitated a
call for large contributions to replace it. This was duly accomplished
in the erection of one of the best hospitals in the Northwest. It
is probably safe to say that the amount put into public buildings,
together with contributions to the Young Men's Christian Association,
the college, and the hospital, during a period of about three years,
exceeded a million dollars--a noteworthy achievement even for a wealthy
community, and one demonstrating both the liberality and resources of
Walla Walla. From the standpoint of Whitman College it may be said
that aside from the indispensable aid which this large contribution
afforded, there was another result of the campaign equally valuable.
This was the commensurate interest felt by the community in the college
and all its works. Up to that debt-raising campaign there had been
an indifference and in some quarters even a certain prejudice which
crippled the efforts of the college management. With the raising of the
debt there was a new sense of harmony and community interest which will
bring immeasurable advantage to the future both of the college and the
community.

As a matter of permanent historic interest it is well to incorporate
here the names of trustees and faculty, as given in the catalog for
1917.


THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES

The president of the college, ex-officio, William Hutchinson Cowles, A.
B., Spokane, 1919; Allen Holbrook Reynolds, A. M., Walla Walla, 1919;
Louis Francis Anderson, A. M., Walla Walla, 1918; Park Weed Willis, M.
D., Seattle, 1920; John Warren Langdon, Walla Walla, 1917; Miles Conway
Moore, LL. D., Walla Walla, 1918; Oscar Drumheller, B. S., Walla Walla,
1917; Edwin Alonzo Reser, Walla Walla, 1920.

Numbers indicate the years in which terms of trustees expire. The
election takes place at the annual meeting in June.


OFFICERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES

President, Miles Conway Moore, LL. D.; treasurer, Allen Holbrook
Reynolds, A. M.; secretary, Dorsey Marion Hill, Ph. B.


FACULTY

Stephen Beasley Linnard Penrose, D. D., president and Cushing Eells
professor of philosophy; Louis Francis Anderson, A. M., vice president
and professor of Greek; William Denison Lyman, A. M., Nelson Gales
Blalock professor of history; Helen Abby Pepoon, A. B., professor of
Latin; Benjamin Harrison Brown, A. M., Nathaniel Shipman professor of
physics; Walter Andrew Bratton, A. B., dean of the science group and
Alexander Jay Anderson professor of mathematics; James Walton Cooper,
A. M., professor of Romance languages; Howard Stidham Brode, Ph. D.,
Spencer F. Baird professor of biology; Edward Ernest Ruby, A. M., dean
of the language group and Clement Biddle Penrose professor of Latin;
Helen Louise Burr, A. B., dean of women; Elias Blum, professor of the
theory of music; William Hudson Bleakney, Ph. D., professor of Greek;
William Rees Davis, A. M., Mary A. Denny professor of English; Walter
Crosby Eells, A. M., professor of applied mathematics and drawing;
Raymond Vincent Borleske, A. B., director of physical education;
Charles Gourlay Goodrich, M. S., professor of German; Frank Loyal
Haigh, Ph. D., professor of chemistry; Arthur Chester Millspaugh,
Ph. D., professor of political science; Thomas Franklin Day, Ph. D.,
acting dean of the philosophy group and acting professor of philosophy;
Frances Rebecca Gardner, A. B., acting dean of women; William Ezekiel
Leonard, A. M., acting professor of economics and business; Walter
Cooke Lee, A. B., associate librarian; Milton Simpson, A. M., acting
associate professor of English; Harriet Lulu Carstensen, A. M.,
assistant librarian; Alice Popper, instructor in French and German;
Margaret Lucille Leyda, A. B., instructor in English and physical
training for women.

[Illustration: Billings Hall, Department of Science

The Gymnasium

Whitman Memorial Building

Reynold's Hall, Young Ladies Dormitory

McDowell Hall, Conservatory of Music

GROUP OF WHITMAN COLLEGE BUILDINGS, WALLA WALLA]

The catalog shows also that at the present date the college owns
equipment, buildings, and grounds to the value of $466,091.40 and
endowment funds to the amount of $684,247. The expenses for the session
of 1915-16 were $88,892.92. The enrollment of students in the literary
departments for 1916-17 was 312, and in the conservatory of music 289.

The graduates of the college who have received bachelor's degrees
during the years 1886-1917 aggregate about four hundred and
twenty-five. The large majority of these have received their degrees
during the seven years ending with the latter date. Classes were very
small up to about 1910. Since that time the number of seniors has been
from twenty-five to forty. Besides those who have graduated with the
regular college literary and scientific degrees, a large number have
graduated from academic, normal and conservatory courses.

We are indebted to Mr. W. L. Stirling of the board of trustees of St.
Paul's School for Girls for the sketch here subjoined.


HISTORY OF SAINT PAUL'S SCHOOL, WALLA WALLA

Saint Paul's School was opened in September, 1872, as a day school
for girls by the Rev. Lemuel H. Wells, a missionary of the Protestant
Episcopal Church, who had come to Walla Walla the previous year and
organized Saint Paul's Church.

Seeing the need of a girls' school, a board of trustees was selected
consisting of the Rev. Lemuel H. Wells, John S. Boyer, Philip Ritz, B.
L. Sharpstein, A. B. Elmer, Judge J. D. Mix and John Abbott. Funds were
obtained in the East and a frame building was erected near the corner
of Third and Poplar streets.

The school prospered, and it was decided to make it a boarding school.
More money was raised in the East and in Walla Walla, more land was
purchased and a dormitory was built.

In September, 1873, it was opened as Saint Paul's Boarding and Day
School for Girls, with Mrs. George Browne as principal. Mrs. Browne was
succeeded by Miss Henrietta B. Garretson (who later became Mrs. Lemuel
H. Wells) and the Rev. J. D. Lathrop, D. D.

In the earlier days of the school, pupils from Idaho, Montana and
Eastern Oregon frequently paid their tuitions in gold dust, and there
were a few cases where payment was even made in produce, such as flour,
and potatoes. One parent paid in cattle, which remained on the ranch
and multiplied until they paid for an addition to one of the school
buildings.

The school was successfully maintained until the year 1885, when it was
closed. It was reopened in 1897 under Miss Imogen Boyer, as principal.
It was incorporated September 14, 1897, by E. B. Whitman, Rev. Francis
L. Palmer, B. L. Sharpstein, W. H. Upton, and J. H. Marshall, Rev. F.
L. Palmer being chosen its first president.

In 1899 a new site was purchased on Catherine Street, and a new three
story building erected named "Appleton Hall." The trustees at that
time were Bishop Wells, The Rev. Andreas Bard, B. L. Sharpstein, Levi
Ankeny, R. F. Smitten and W. H. Upton. Miss Imogen Boyer was principal,
and so continued until her resignation in 1903. Under Miss Boyer's
administration the school increased substantially in prestige and in
the number of pupils in attendance.

In 1903 Miss Caroline F. Buck was elected principal, and by formal
agreement between Bishop Wells and the board of trustees the school
was thenceforth to be conducted as a diocesan school of the Protestant
Episcopal Church.

In 1904 Miss Buck was succeeded by Rev. Andreas Bard, as principal.

In 1906 funds were secured by Bishop Wells for the erection of a new
three story brick dormitory named "Ewing Hall" which greatly increased
the accommodations for boarders and materially assisted in the growth
of the school.

In 1907 Rev. Andreas Bard resigned and was succeeded by Miss Anna E.
Plympton, who remained until 1910. Miss Nettie M. Galbraith was then
elected principal, and under her able administration, assisted by Miss
Mary E. Atkinson, as vice principal, the school has grown rapidly year
by year until it is now the largest, as well as the oldest school for
girls in the State of Washington, and probably in the entire Northwest.

In 1911 Bishop Wells secured additional funds for the purchase of the
Sharpstein property adjoining the school grounds to allow for expansion
in the near future. The acquisition of this fine property 200 feet by
200 feet gave the school a frontage of 543 feet on Catherine Street,
one of the finest pieces of property in the city.

In 1916, Bishop Herman Page, of Spokane, succeeded Bishop Wells as
president of the board of trustees; the other members of the board at
that time being Rev. C. E. Tuke, George A. Evans, W. A. Ritz, Dr. F.
W. Rees, H. G. Thompson, Dr. H. R. Keylor, J. W. Langdon and W. L.
Stirling.

The need of increased accommodation for boarders being imperative,
Bishop Page undertook to raise the sum of $10,000 to $12,000 for a new
building provided $5,000 additional should be subscribed by the people
of Walla Walla. This was done and a new fire proof brick building was
erected in 1917, containing assembly hall, gymnasium and dormitories,
and named "Wells Hall" in honor of Bishop Wells, who had founded the
school in 1872 and had ever since been its most constant and devoted
supporter. Even with its new equipment the school at once became
crowded to its capacity, there being fifty boarders, as well as a large
number of day scholars, and plans are being considered for another new
building.

Although the school now has an annual budget of nearly twenty thousand
dollars, it has never been entirely self-supporting, being without
endowment, and always having given the greatest possible service at
a very moderate charge. The raising of an adequate endowment fund is
contemplated as soon as circumstances will permit.

The school offers a systematic and liberal course of study, maintaining
kindergarten, primary, intermediate, grammar, grade, academic and
music departments, also special post graduate, business, and finishing
courses. The course includes eight years in the elementary school,
completed in six or seven years when possible, and four years in the
academic department. There is also an advanced course offered for
irregular students and for those graduated from the high schools and
academies.

The instructors are Christian women, and it is the aim of the school
to administer to the individual needs of girls; to aid in their moral,
intellectual and physical development by offering them the advantages
of a well ordered school and the wholesome influence of a refined
home. The scholarship of Saint Paul's is attested by the fact that
Eastern and Western examiners of leading educational institutions
have expressed their willingness to accept its graduates without
examination. Saint Paul's covers a wide field, having had among its
boarders in recent years scholars from Washington, Oregon, Idaho,
Montana, Wyoming, Panama and Alaska.

The location of the school is exceptionally fine, the grounds
extensive, well laid out and shaded, and the buildings, four in number,
are spacious, well constructed and conveniently arranged and equipped.


THE CATHOLIC ACADEMIES

The Catholic Church has maintained two academies, one for boys and
one for girls, for a number of years. These were founded early in the
history of Walla Walla. In 1864 the Sisters of Providence opened the
doors of a school for girls on the location where St. Mary's Hospital
now stands. Rev. J. B. A. Brouillet was at that time at the head of
the local church and the school was officially under his oversight. In
1865 St. Patrick's Academy for boys was opened. This was on the site of
the present Catholic Church, and the first teacher was H. H. Lamarche.
He acted as principal for fifteen years. In 1899 notable changes
occurred in the academy. In that year fine and noteworthy exercises
in its dedication occurred under charge of Rev. Father M. Flohr. The
presence of Bishop E. J. O'Dea added to the interest of the occasion.
In August following three brothers from San Francisco arrived to take
charge of the academy. In honor of St. J. B. De La Salle, founder of
the congregation to which those brothers belonged, the name of the
academy was changed to De La Salle Institute. It opened in September,
1899, with 100 pupils. The numbers and influence of this institute have
steadily increased. The teachers at the present are: Brother Luke,
director; Brothers Damien and Daniel, teachers. The number of boys
enrolled is eighty.

The school for girls, founded in 1864, as stated, developed into St.
Vincent Academy, and as such it has occupied a position of great
influence and usefulness ever since its foundation. Every facility for
academic study, with special attention to the varied accomplishments
of music, drawing, painting, and decorative work, as well as the
practical branches in needle work, in stenography, and in typewriting,
is afforded by St. Vincent's Academy. Extracts from the current reports
indicate the present conditions.

The Sister Superior in charge of the academy is Sister Mary Mount
Carmel. There are six teachers employed at the present time. The
enrollment consists of 164 girls and fourteen small boys.


WALLA WALLA COLLEGE

Walla Walla has become known as an educational center, and in addition
to the public schools, and private institutions within the city, there
is still another outside the city limits entitled to interest. This is
Walla Walla College at College Place, a flourishing suburb of the city.
The college is under the direction of the Seventh Day Adventists. It
was founded by that denomination in 1892 upon land donated by Dr. N. G.
Blalock and has been maintained by contributions from the membership of
the church and tuitions from the students. In connection with it there
is a well conducted hospital. There is a beautiful and commodious main
building, besides the other buildings needful to provide for the large
number of students who come from elsewhere and make their home at the
college. From the current catalog we derive the following exhibit of
the managers and faculty.


PRESIDENTS OF WALLA WALLA COLLEGE

William W. Prescott, 1892-94; Edward A. Sutherland, 1894-97; Emmett
J. Hibbard,1897-98; Walter B. Sutherland, 1898-1900; E. L. Stewart
1900-02; Charles C. Lewis, 1902-04; Joseph L. Kay, 1904-05; M. E. Cady,
1905-11; Ernest C. Kellogg, 1911-17; Walter I. Smith, 1917-.


BOARD OF TRUSTEES

C. W. Flaiz, College Place, Wash.; H. W. Decker, College Place, Wash.;
F. S. Bunch, College Place, Wash.; H. W. Cottrell, Portland, Ore.; J.
J. Nethery, College Place, Wash.; J. F. Piper, Seattle, Wash.; G. F.
Watson, Bozeman Mont.; F. W. Peterson, College Place, Wash.; E. C.
Kellogg, College Place, Wash.


OFFICERS OF THE BOARD

C. W. Flaiz, chairman; E. C. Kellogg, secretary; F. W. Peterson,
treasurer.

[Illustration: PRESTON HALL, WAITSBURG]

[Illustration: PUBLIC SCHOOL, WAITSBURG]


FACULTY

Walter Irvine Smith, president, mathematics and astronomy; Elder O.
A. Johnson, Bible and ecclesiastical history; Elder F. S. Bunch,
Bible and pastoral training; George W. Rine, history and public
speaking; Winifred Lucile Holmden, ancient and modern languages;
J. Alvin Renninger, English and Biblical literature; Clara Edna
Rogers, rhetoric; Bert Bryan Davis, normal director, psychology and
education; William Miller Heidenreich, German; Arthur C. Christensen,
chemistry and biology; George Kretschmar, physics and mathematics; A.
Wilmar Oakes, director of music, violin, orchestra and chorus; Grace
Wood-Reith, pianoforte and voice; Estella Winona Kiehnhoff, pianoforte,
voice and harmony; ----, stenography and typewriting; William Carey
Raley, bookkeeping and accountancy; Win S. Osborne, art.


NORMAL CRITIC TEACHERS

Charles Oscar Smith, grades seven and eight; Grace Robison-Rine, grades
five and six, intermediate methods; Rosella A. Snyder-Davis, grades
three and four, manual arts; Anna Aurelia Pierce, grades one and two,
primary methods.


INDUSTRIAL DEPARTMENTS

Frank W. Peterson, superintendent; Glen R. Holden, printing; Wm. B.
Ammundsen, carpentry; Philip A. Bothwell, baking; Mrs. R. D. Bolter,
dressmaking; Mrs. F. W. Vesey, cooking.

The catalog shows an enrollment of 293 pupils.

From a historical and educational standpoint there is no more
interesting institution under private control than the

FORMER WAITSBURG ACADEMY

That community of beautiful homes and intelligent citizens, of which
much more will be said in other parts of this work, has always
recognized the value of education, and it is not surprising to find
a demand in the early days for a more advanced type of education
than that afforded by the common schools. During the first part of
the decade of the '80s that demand eventuated in the appointment by
the United Presbyterian Church of Rev. Joseph Alter in 1884 to go
to Eastern Washington as a general organizer of home missionary and
educational work. The church founded by Mr. Alter secured Rev. W. G. M.
Hays as its pastor in 1886. Being filled with the spirit of the need of
higher education and encouraged by ample evidence of probable support
of a first-class academy, Doctor Hays became a steadfast advocate of
such an undertaking and on September 14, 1886, the church building was
opened for the meeting of the first classes, Prof. J. G. Thompson being
placed in charge of the work. At that time the academy had no corporate
existence and no board of trustees. But in 1887 the infant institution
was adopted by the synod of Columbia of the United Presbyterian Church
of North America and became regularly incorporated with its first board
of trustees consisting of the Revs. Hugh F. Wallace, W. G. Irvine,
W. A. Spalding, W. G. M. Hays, and J. H. Niblock, and Messrs. A. W.
Philips, David Roberts, E. F. Cox, T. J. Hollowell, and J. E. Vans.
In May, 1887, in pursuance of the plans of the board, a joint stock
company was organized to conduct the academy. Six thousand dollars was
raised, of which $4,000 was devoted to a building and the remainder
to supplementing tuition as a means of maintenance. During the ten
years following the founding, Doctor Hays, Rev. W. R. Stevenson, and
Miss Ina F. Robertson made journeys east for the purpose of securing
funds for building and endowment. As a result of the last campaign of
Miss Robertson, funds were secured for an excellent building which was
erected in 1896. During the entire term of its existence Waitsburg
Academy received the respect and support of the community, and its
teachers were men and women of the highest type.

The principals with their terms of service were these: J. G. Thompson,
1886-9; T. M. McKinney, 1889-90; W. G. M. Hays, 1890-1; Ina F.
Robertson, 1891-4; and Rev. J. A. Keener, 1894, to the termination
of the life of the institution. For rather sad to relate Waitsburg
Academy, in spite of all its excellent work and a growing body of
alumni enthusiastic in its support, found itself in the situation which
has confronted practically all such educational institutions in the
West. When high school instruction was undertaken at Waitsburg it was
found that the interest and desire to support that public system was so
general that the support of the academy fell off, and though the people
of the community had no sentiment other than of commendation, yet
their first interest was in the public school system. As an inevitable
sequence the academy found it wise to disband. Its building was sold
to the district and there the public school work of part of the city
is conducted. The academy, though disbanded, had performed a great
mission, and the present excellent high school, as well as the general
culture and intelligence apparent in the beautiful little City of
Waitsburg, may be attributed in large degree to the noble work of the
academy.

We have elsewhere given a general view of the public school systems of
the county, and in that the schools of Waitsburg appear. But there is
one feature of the schools of Waitsburg already named so unique and
interesting as to call for further special mention. This is Preston
Hall, connected with the high school. This beautiful and well-equipped
building was the gift of one of the noblest and most philanthropic
citizens of the Inland Empire, a man of whom old Walla Walla County,
and particularly Waitsburg, may well be proud. This was W. G. Preston.
This big-souled and big-brained builder of the large affairs of his
community, had a deep sense of the value of practical industrial
training for the growing youth of the land. Carrying out his favorite
idea he gave about twenty-six thousand dollars for the creation of
a building, with suitable equipment for the best type of industrial
education, as well as gymnastic training. While this was but one of
the many contributions to the advancement of the community in which
the Preston family lived so long and so well, it is perhaps the one
which will be most wide-reaching in influence and the one which will
perpetuate most effectively the influence of its donor.

Before leaving the subject of the schools it may be suitable to note
the fact that the schools in what was old Walla Walla County, as well
as the narrower limits which now retain the name, have during the past
ten or fifteen years shown a great tendency to build more beautiful
and better equipped houses. This has been due partly to the increase
in wealth and culture and to the general recognition that the old
bare unlovely and forsaken-looking schoolhouses of the earlier times
are an affront to the progressive spirit of a time which is demanding
the best for the boys and girls, but much of the motive power of this
great improvement must be attributed, in Walla Walla County, to the
last two superintendents of schools, Mrs. Josephine Preston and Paul
Johnson. During the eight years of service of these two efficient
public officials the idea of the rural school as a community center and
a focus of social life has gained a hold on public interest and support
truly wonderful. A debt of gratitude is due these and other incumbents
of the same office in the other counties covered by this work in
inaugurating a new era in school architecture and beautification of
grounds. The influence of this on coming generations for character,
patriotism, and efficiency, as well as artistic taste and general
culture, will be incalculable. It is fitting that special note be made
here of the fact that in the smaller towns of Walla Walla County,
Prescott, Touchet, Dixie and Attalia, the school buildings represent
large outlay and contain the best modern features. If there is one
thing more than another in which the people of this section may take
satisfaction, it is the school system, both town and rural.

There is another institution in Walla Walla of rare interest, which
while not educational is allied with that branch of social progress.
We refer to the Stubblefield Home. From Mr. C. M. Rader, one of the
trustees, we derive the following account of this noble institution.


STUBBLEFIELD HOME

To Joseph Loney Stubblefield and his good wife Anna, are indebted the
children and widows who in the past have been, or in the future may
become members of this home. In early life Mr. and Mrs. Stubblefield
experienced the hardships incident to poverty. They emigrated from
Missouri in the early '60s and settled about seven miles southeast
of Walla Walla, where by most frugal habits and great industry they
accumulated, for the early days, a considerable fortune. The wife died
in 1874 without issue. She and her husband often talked of the great
need of a home for caring for aged widows and orphan children and the
wife said she wanted her money to be used for such purpose. She left no
will, except as it was impressed in the heart of her husband.

On November 16, 1902, six months after making his will, Joseph
L. Stubblefield died at the age of seventy-eight years. By the
thirty-first clause of this will he left about one hundred and thirty
thousand dollars, the bulk of his accumulations, for the purpose of
establishing and maintaining a home for "fatherless or motherless and
indigent children, and worthy elderly indigent widows, residents of
Washington and Oregon." This fund was willed to R. M. Dorothy, E. A.
Reser and Cary M. Rader, who were named as trustees to manage the fund
and the home to be established. These trustees were appointed to serve
for life, unless any should resign or be removed. The successors of
these trustees under the terms of the will are to be appointed by
the county commissioners of Walla Walla and Umatilla counties, acting
jointly but by and with the consent of the two trustees remaining on
the board. A second wife, whom Mr. Stubblefield had amply provided for,
attempted to break the will by proceedings in court, but the will was
fully sustained both in the Superior and Supreme courts of Washington.

Numerous citizens interested themselves in an attempt to secure
the location of the home near Walla Walla and raised a donation of
something more than ten thousand dollars to assist in purchasing a
suitable site. The trustees purchased the present grounds consisting
of forty acres about one mile southeast of the City of Walla Walla and
there on November 16, 1904, exactly two years after the death of Mr.
Stubblefield, with appropriate ceremonies, the home was formally opened
with Alphonso R. Olds as superintendent and his wife Etta C. Olds as
matron.

The home remained under the very efficient management of these good
people for eight years. On their resignation, occasioned by ill
health, Luther J. Campbell and wife Maggie were appointed respectively
as superintendent and matron, and have since been in charge of the
institution. R. M. Dorothy, in 1912, resigned as trustee and was
succeeded on the board by Francis M. Stubblefield, a nephew of Joseph
L. Stubblefield. These are the only changes of officials connected with
the institution.

The home rapidly filled after the opening and there has since rarely
been a vacancy for any considerable time. The number of members in the
home is usually close to twenty-five and of these most are children.
There have never been more than three widows in the home at one time.
The children are taught to work and soon become quite expert for
children--the boys as gardeners and the girls at household duties. In
1915 a team of three girls from the home won a prize at the Walla Walla
County Fair and also at the State Fair as experts in canning fruits and
vegetables. The children attend school at the Berney Graded School.

The fund left by Mr. Stubblefield, by judicious handling, has about
doubled and is at present mostly invested in wheat lands, which furnish
sufficient income to defray all expenses.


THE CHURCHES OF WALLA WALLA COUNTY

As elsewhere in this work we speak first of the institutions located
in Walla Walla City itself. By reason of priority of settlement the
institutions of all sorts growing around that point were representative
of the entire region and hence belong as truly to the parts which
subsequently were set aside for other counties. We shall elsewhere
endeavor to give similar brief views of the churches of the other parts
of the region covered by our story. As will be obvious to the reader,
the limitations of space compel us to consider the churches as a whole,
important as they are in the life of the community, without dwelling
upon details, significant and inspiring as they often are. Practically
all the leading Christian denominations have been represented in Old
Walla Walla. The Methodist seems to have been the pioneer among the
Protestant denominations, though the Catholic was first to provide
a place of worship. It was in 1859 that a structure of piles driven
into the ground and covered with shakes was prepared for worship by
the Catholics of the little community on Mill Creek. The location
was near the present lumber yard on Third Street and Poplar. In 1860
the Methodists built the first regular building on the corner of the
present Fifth and Alder. That church had various vicissitudes, for it
subsequently moved to Second and Alder and was used for a time as a
house for the hosecart of the fire department. Later on it received
a second story and became the "Blue Front," still later burned.

[Illustration:
  Congregational Church
  White Temple Baptist Church
  Central Christian Church
  Presbyterian Church
CHURCHES OF WALLA WALLA]

We give here a sketch of the early history of the Methodist Church,
not with the desire to overemphasize that denomination at the expense
of others, but that by reason of its pioneer nature it was peculiarly
typical of the first days. We take this from a historical report
prepared by J. M. Hill and E. Smith and presented at the conference
at Walla Walla on February 7, 1900. This report contains so much
interlocking matter of different kinds as to give it a permanent value:

"On page seventy-four of Rev. H. K. Hines' Missionary History of the
Pacific Northwest, we find that the first sermon preached west of
the Rocky Mountains was delivered by Rev. Jason Lee at Fort Hall, on
Sunday, July 27, 1834. And in a book entitled Wild Life in Oregon, on
pages 176-7, we will find that the first Methodist sermon preached at
or near Walla Walla was by the Rev. Gustavus Hines, on May 21, 1843, at
Doctor Whitman's mission, six miles west of this city. Rev. Gustavus
Hines also preached at Rev. H. H. Spalding's Lapwai mission, on Sunday,
May 14, 1843.

We find that the first Methodist Episcopal Church organization that
was perfected in Walla Walla, or in that part of the country known as
Eastern Oregon or Eastern Washington, was in 1859, and at that time
the Walla Walla Valley was just commencing to be settled up with stock
raisers and traders. The Town of Walla Walla was the principal or most
important point, the United States military post being located here,
and this place having become the wintering place for miners, packers
and freighters from the mines north and east of this country.

The Oregon conference of the Methodist Episcopal Church, having
jurisdiction over the church work in this section, took up the matter
of supplying it with the gospel, and at the annual conference held at
Albany in August, 1859, appointed Rev. J. H. Wilber as presiding elder
of this field, calling it the Walla Walla circuit, which took in most
of that part of the country east of The Dalles, Oregon, comprising
the Grande Ronde, Walla Walla, Snake River and Columbia River valleys
as far north as the British line and east to the Rocky Mountains, and
appointed Rev. G. M. Berry as pastor for Walla Walla circuit.

Brother Wilber and Brother Berry at once started for their field of
labor. They came to Walla Walla and commenced the work by holding
meetings at different places, at the homes of some of the people and
at times in the old log courthouse at the corner of Main and Fifth
streets. Soon after taking up the work Brother Wilber and Brother Berry
decided to organize a class at Walla Walla, and on Monday, October
11, 1859, met and organized the first class in the district; also
held their first quarterly conference. The quarterly conference was
called to order by the presiding elder, Rev. J. H. Wilber, and opened
with singing and prayer. The pastor, Rev. G. M. Berry, was appointed
secretary of the meeting. The following named brothers were elected
as the first board of stewards: S. M. Titus, William B. Kelly, John
Moar, A. B. Roberts and T. P. Denney. A. B. Roberts was elected as the
recording steward.

In January, 1860, the class decided to build a church in the Town of
Walla Walla, and appointed a building committee to undertake the work,
consisting of the pastor, Rev. G. M. Berry, Brother Thomas Martin and
Brother John Moar. At a meeting held in April, 1860, the committee
reported that they had selected for a church site lots 6 and 7, block
10, at the corner of Alder and Fifth streets, and that Rev. G. M. Berry
had made application to the Board of County Commissioners asking them
to donate the lots to the church. At a meeting held on May 21, 1860,
the first board of trustees of the church of Walla Walla was appointed,
being Brothers T. P. Denney, S. M. Titus, John Moar, Thomas Martin and
William B. Kelly, and on May 22, 1860, lots 6 and 7 of block 10 of
the original Town of Walla Walla were transferred to the above named
trustees for the church by the Board of County Commissioners of Walla
Walla County.

The building committee--the pastor, Rev. G. M. Berry, as its
chairman--with the few members, at once took up the work of building
the church, which was completed in the fall of 1860. It was the first
church of any denomination built in Walla Walla, and was built at a
cost of $1,046.52, with unpaid bills to the amount of $131.02. These
items are taken from the report of the auditor of accounts of the
building committee as reported at the third quarterly conference, held
at Walla Walla on June 24, 1861, by Andrew Keys, auditor. The pastor,
Rev. G. M. Berry, had practically been Sunday-school superintendent
as well as pastor ever since the organisation of the class until the
church was completed. We fail to find any record of the dedication of
this church.

The Oregon annual conference of 1861 created the Walla Walla district
and appointed Rev. John Flinn as presiding elder and pastor of Walla
Walla. At the Oregon annual conference, held in 1867, the Walla Walla
district was divided into one station and four circuits, viz.: Walla
Walla Station, Walla Walla, Waitsburg, Grande Ronde and Umatilla
circuits.

In 1868, the class having become strong, and desiring a new location
for their church building, the board of trustees procured lots on the
corner of Poplar and Second streets, bought on May 30, 1868, from W.
J. and Abell Arner for $250.00, and deeded to the following named
trustees: H. Parker, T. P. Denney, J. L. Reser, Joseph Paul and John
W. McGhee. The old church was moved to the new location, repaired and
enlarged, and a parsonage was fitted up just east of the church, facing
on Popular Street.

At the Oregon annual conference, held at Eugene, August 5 to 9, 1869,
all of the membership and appointments formally denominated Walla
Walla Station, Walla Walla Circuit and Dry Creek were formed as one
charge and called Walla Walla Circuit, to which Rev. John T. Wolfe was
appointed as pastor and Rev. Charles H. Hoxie as assistant pastor.

Rev. James B. Calloway was presiding elder of the district, and
on September 18, 1869, called together at Walla Walla all of the
official members of the new circuit and organised the first quarterly
conference, electing the following board of trustees: Charles Moore, T.
P. Denney, D. M. Jessee, M. Emerick, Benjamin Hayward, A. H. Simmons,
M. McEverly, William Holbrook and Oliver Gallaher. At the Oregon annual
conference, held at Vancouver, on August 25, 1870, Walla Walla City
was again made a station, separating it from the Walla Walla Circuit,
and Rev. H. C. Jenkins was appointed as pastor.

Early in the spring of 1878, under the leadership of the pastor,
Rev. D. G. Strong, the class undertook the erection of a new church
building. The old church was sold to Mr. J. F. Abbott for $250.00 and
moved off the lots, and through the efforts of the pastor and his board
of trustees, consisting of B. F. Burch, J. E. Berryman, M. Middaugh,
John Berry and O. P. Lacy, together with the faithful members and
friends, the new church was completed at a cost of about $10,000,
receiving from the church extension society of the church a donation of
$1,000 and a loan of $500. The loan in due time was paid back. After
the completion of the new church, Rev. W. G. Simpson was the first
pastor and Brother E. Smith was the first Sunday-school superintendent.
For some reason not on record the church was not dedicated until
August, 1879. The collection and services at the dedication were in
charge of Bishop Haven, he being the bishop of the annual conference
held at Walla Walla August 7 to 12, 1879.

It having been discovered in 1883 that the board of trustees had never
been incorporated under the laws of the Territory of Washington, the
quarterly conference directed that articles of incorporation should
be prepared. B. L. and J. L. Sharpstein, attorneys, were employed to
prepare incorporation papers, and on February 9, 1883, they were signed
and acknowledged by the following board of trustees: Donald Ross, C.
P. Headley, S. F. Henderson, J. M. Hill, H. C. Sniff, H. C. Chew, E.
Smith and G. H. Randall, and filed with the territorial auditor and the
auditor of Walla Walla County. At the first meeting of this board of
trustees they elected the following officers: J. M. Hill, president;
Donald Ross, secretary; C. P. Headley, treasurer.

During the summer of 1887, the class, under the leadership of the
pastor, Rev. Henry Brown, with the ladies of the church and the
trustees, consisting of J. H. Parker, C. P. Headley, S. F. Henderson,
J. M. Hill, H. C. Sniff, H. C. Chew, G. H. Randall and E. Smith,
undertook the building of a new parsonage, and with the bequest of $500
from the estate of our departed brother, E. Sherman, designated by him
to be used for a new parsonage, and $596.47 raised principally by the
efforts of the ladies' parsonage committee, a two-story, seven-room
parsonage was erected on the grounds of the old parsonage, facing
Poplar Street, and this was turned over to the board of trustees free
of debt and fairly well furnished.

During 1887, through the efforts of Rev. J. H. Wilber, a small church
was built in the eastern part of the city and called Wilber Chapel.
Brother W. J. White donated a lot for that purpose, $300 being
received from the Church Extension Society, part of the balance being
subscriptions from friends, but the greater part being given by Rev.
J. H. Wilber himself. The church cost $1,500 and was deeded to the
trustees of the First Methodist Episcopal Church of Walla Walla, viz.:
J. H. Parker, J. M. Hill, C. P. Headley, S. F. Henderson, H. C. Sniff,
H. C. Chew, G. H. Randall and E. Smith. The church was sold to the
German Lutheran Society for the sum of $1,600 on September 5, 1892,
returning to the board of the church extension about $400 due them in
principal and interest. The dedication of Wilber Chapel was by Rev. N.
E. Parsons, presiding elder, assisted by Rev. J. H. Wilber and Rev.
Henry Brown. During 1894 the church, under the leadership of Rev. V. C.
Evers, the pastor, with the trustees, enlarged the present church by
extending it to the north line of the property, increasing the seating
capacity of the church with lecture room to 525 persons.

Our church property at this time is free from debt and consists of:

One church building and lot, value $11,500.00; one parsonage and
fraction of lot, value $2,000.00; total $13,500.00.

The following are the names of the pastors of Walla Walla and time
of service: 1859 to 1861, Rev. George M. Berry; 1861 to 1863, Rev.
John Flinn; 1863 to 1865, Rev. William Franklin; 1865 to 1866, Rev.
James Deardoff; 1866 to 1867, Rev. John L. Reser; 1867 to 1869, Rev.
John T. Wolfe; 1869 to 1870, Rev. C. H. Hoxie; 1870 to 1872, Rev. H.
C. Jenkins; 1872 to 1873, Rev. J. W. Miller; 1873 to 1874, Rev. S.
G. Havermale; 1874 to 1875, Rev. G. W. Grannis; 1875 to 1876, Rev.
S. B. Burrell; 1876 to 1878, Rev. D. G. Strong; 1878 to 1880, Rev.
W. G. Simpson; 1880 to 1882, Rev. G. M. Irwin; 1882 to 1883, Rev. A.
J. Joslyn; 1883 to 1884, Rev. W. C. Gray; 1884 to 1885, Rev. J. D.
Flenner; 1885 to 1886, Rev. D. G. Strong; 1886 to 1889, Rev. Henry
Brown; 1889 to 1892, Rev. W. W. Van Dusen; 1892 to 1896, Rev. V. C.
Evers; 1896 to 1899, Rev. W. C. Reuter; 1899 to 1900, Rev. Lee A.
Johnson.

The following are the names of the presiding elders of Walla Walla
district and time of service: 1859 to 1861, Rev. J. H. Wilber; 1861 to
1864, Rev. John Flinn; 1864 to 1866, Rev. Isaac Dillon; 1866 to 1869,
Rev. J. B. Calloway; 1860 to 1870, Rev. W. H. Lewis; 1870 to 1874,
Rev. H. K. Hines; 1874 to 1878, Rev. S. G. Havermale; 1878 to 1882,
Rev. D. G. Strong; 1882 to 1885, Rev. W. S. Turner; 1885 to 1886, Rev.
Levi L. Tarr; 1886 to 1888, Rev. N. E. Parsons; 1888 to 1892, Rev. D.
G. Strong; 1892 to 1898, Rev. T. A. Towner; 1898 to 1900, Rev. M. H.
Marvin."[5]

[5] In article quoted the name Wilber appears a number of
times but it should be noted that the correct spelling is Wilbur.


CATHOLIC CHURCH

In 1861 the Catholics built their first permanent house near the
present site of St. Vincent's Academy. Bishop Blanchet was present
during that period and Father Yunger became pastor. He was succeeded by
Rev. J. B. Brouillet, who first came to the Walla Walla country as a
missionary to the Indians in 1847.

Connected with the Catholic Church are St. Vincent's Academy and De
La Salle Institute, described elsewhere, besides St. Mary's Hospital,
founded in 1870 and now established in one of the most perfect
buildings in the Northwest.

While our limits do not permit details in regard to each of the
churches of Walla Walla, we wish to incorporate a sketch of the early
Episcopal Church, for the reason that it casts such as vivid light upon
the early days as to give it a special historic value. This sketch was
prepared by Edgar Johnson, one of the Whitman College class of 1917,
as a research study in his history course and in the judgment of the
author is worthy of a place in this volume.


THE EARLY HISTORY OF ST. PAUL'S EPISCOPAL CHURCH

According to the old adage, "Well begun is half done," this church
completed half its work in its earliest period. The history of all
churches when finally established in a civilized community is much the
same. But what was the history of this church before Walla Walla became
civilized?

[Illustration: PIONEER METHODIST CHURCH, WALLA WALLA
Completed January 1, 1918.]

This is the atmosphere I have to picture; the condition of the times
as it reflected on the growth of the church, and the condition of the
church as it reflected on the growth of civilization in this city.

From the historical data accompanying this review, it will seem that
St. Paul's Church was first begun by services held by a traveling
missionary, Bishop Morris. The church did not take on definite unity,
however, until 1871, when it was placed under the care of Rev. L. H.
Wells, a comparatively young missionary from the East. In September,
1871, the first services were held in the building (now gone) on Third
Street, between Poplar and Alder streets. This building served as a
combined courthouse, hall, church; and the basement housed Stahl's
Brewery.

At the time of Bishop Wells' arrival in Walla Walla, this city boasted
of one thousand inhabitants, while Eastern Washington had seven
thousand settlers. At this date, it would strike us that the little
city of one thousand would band itself together to protect themselves
from the Indians. But fifteen years or more had passed since the last
of the Indian wars, and the wealth of the mines of Idaho and Washington
found its way into the city and aided in the carousals of its
"short-time" owners. For the uninitiated, the center of the street, or
open doorways were the safest stops in the city. The Vigilantes ruled
as a secret power behind the throne. Suspicion was fixed upon every
law-abiding citizen by those who lived to break the law, as a member of
this band.

The wives of several saloon-keepers were members of the church; and
one wife succeeded in converting her husband. But inability or lack of
desire to learn a new trade, always drove the new convert back into
his old business. After efficiently illustrating back-sliding methods
thrice over, this particular saloon man never appeared upon the church
rolls again. He furnished, however, the material for a story which
emphasizes the uncouthness of the times. He maintained a flourishing
saloon on the corner of Third and Main streets, and one evening a
miner from the Florence District showed up with his nuggets and gold
dust. After treating the house several times, he began searching for
more amusement. Finally, thinking that the mirror behind the bar might
prove a worthy object at which to pelt gold nuggets, he began firing.
Needless to say, he smashed it into bits and then careening up to the
bar, he simply asked: "How much do I owe?" The saloon-keeper recovered
several hundred dollars' worth of nuggets from the floor and after
removing the board floor from the saloon succeeded in washing out $200
more from the gold dust which had been lost throughout the previous
period. This became an annual event and never failed in bringing a
hundred dollars or so.

In 1872 the bishop started his day school, following this in 1873
with a boarding school for girls. In this year a fire burned them out
entirely and a larger building was constructed. The life of the bishop
was not an easy one. He lived in his little cabin next to the church
and whenever a new girl came to the boarding school, he would be forced
to give up some of his furniture for the new girl. He was finally
reduced to sleeping on a cot, with his overcoat for a coverlet. It was
very difficult to keep the coat from falling away during the night;
and when another girl came and the couch was needed for her room, the
bishop having received no new furniture, built himself a box and filled
it with straw, in which he slept and in which he had no difficulty in
retaining his overcoat as a comforter.

Gold dust and nuggets were the medium of exchange and the church and
school both had gold-weighing scales. Many people carried little scales
with them in morocco cases. Gold dust was generally carried in buckskin
sacks about a foot in depth and about three inches wide, and many
people left them lying about the front porch in disguised covering, as
the safest place to keep them from thieves and renegade Indians. Three
grades of gold found its way into Walla Walla. These were the Eldorado,
Florence and Eagle Creek, so named from the district in which they were
mined. Merchants kept on hand small round stones with streaks of all
three grades in them, by which to measure the dust, as the three grades
were worth different amounts of money.

It was in this atmosphere that the church began, truly, in a missionary
district. Yet it grew, and mainly through the spirit of co-operation
of the other churches in the territory. At this time there were also
the Methodist, Congregational, Presbyterian and the United Brethren
churches. Bishop Wells recently told me of the kindness of the United
Brethren minister. One day while walking down the street, he was
hailed by this minister who was on horseback. The old minister opened
the conversation: "Young man, I've been watching you, and so have my
congregation. It strikes us that you've seen city life and I'm only a
country preacher. If you will take care of my congregation, you may
have the church and I'll go into the country, where I can do some
good." Naturally, the offer was accepted.

In 1877 the new church was erected, and it still stands. This was
built on the corner of Third and Poplar streets. The lumber for it was
hauled from Touchet, where there was a mill. One difficulty presented
itself, however, and that was that the lumber obtainable from there was
very short. But the long haul from Wallula made better lumber almost
prohibitive, and the church was built from lumber cut in this vicinity
and planed at Touchet.

Even at this date, forty years ago, Walla Walla was little more than a
frontier town. The Joseph wars broke out as result of the white man's
raid on their land. A few years previous to this the Government had
sent out men to see what could be done for the Indians. The white men
were open in their statements that they intended to get the Indians'
lands. The Joseph war was followed by the Bannock war. In the latter,
Walla Walla was seriously threatened, the Indians coming up through
Pendleton and striking near the foothills of this city. A very pretty
tale is told regarding a Pendleton sheep man and his dog Bob. The
Indians murdered the herders, killed many of the sheep and went on
their way. The owner stayed in Pendleton fearing to go to his flocks,
and did not go near them until a week or two had elapsed. When he did
find them, he discovered that the dog Bob had not only gathered all his
own sheep into the flock, but had collected more stray sheep from other
flocks that had become lost, than the Indians themselves had killed.
Furthermore, he had only killed two small lambs for his own sustenance.

Recitation of early events, and incidents could go on forever. And also
it is hard to shape a series of stories, and a few simple historical
facts, into an interesting history. But the foregoing gives the reader
an idea of the times into which the missionary was forced to introduce
the Christian teachings. A glance at Walla Walla today, called often
the City of Churches, and then the retrospective glance into the '70s,
shows the results of the influence which began work at that early
date and by its everwidening influence succeeded in civilizing this
Northwest.


WORTHY AND POWERFUL PREACHERS

Of the many worthy and powerful preachers of early Walla Walla it may
be said that four seem to stand out beyond all others in the minds
of pioneers. These are Cushing Eells, missionary, educator, school
builder, and all-round saint; John Flinn, a man of somewhat similar
type, patient, tireless in good deeds, saintly and unselfish; J. H.
Wilbur, one of the big figures of early days; and P. B. Chamberlain,
first pastor of the Congregational Church and first principal of
Whitman Seminary. Each of these men had his peculiarities, some
amusing, some pathetic, all interesting and inspiring. Old-timers,
even those not at all given to walking the straight and narrow way,
had profound regard for those militant exponents of the gospel.
Father Wilbur had worked at the blacksmith's trade before entering
the ministry and had muscles of iron and a heart as tender and
gentle as ever beat. He was of giant strength and not at all times
a non-resistent. It is related that once in Oregon before he came
to Walla Walla, some rowdies persisted in disturbing a camp meeting
which he was conducting. After warning them a time or two in vain he
suddenly descended from the platform, keeping right on with the hymn in
stentorian voice, swooped down on the two rowdies, seized them in his
brawny hands, knocked their heads together a few times and almost shook
the breath out of them, singing all the time, until it was plain that
they would interrupt no more services, then returned to the pulpit,
going right on as though nothing had happened.

Mr. Chamberlain was a man of very different appearance, small,
delicate, refined in tone and speech. At first meeting one had little
conception of his tremendous energy and iron will. He was a man of
electric oratory and swayed pioneer audiences in his little church
or in the groves at public gatherings as few men in Walla Walla
ever have. He was, however, a genuine Calvinist in his theology, an
intense Sabbatarian, and felt called on to attack secret societies
and supposedly unorthodox churches with conscientious severity. Thus,
though he was admired and respected by all, he could not maintain a
working church. As showing something of the character of the man, we
include brief extracts from entries made by him in the records of
his church, pertaining to his first church building. The building
was completed in 1866 at a cost of $3,500, most of which was Mr.
Chamberlain's own money. Of it he says: "So it now stands consecrated
to God, as all property should be. I leave it with Him, to be refunded
or not as He may, at some future time, move the hearts of the children
of men to desire to do." On July 13, 1868, two days after the fire,
he writes: "God has put His own final construction upon the last part
of the foregoing record. Last Saturday, between twelve and two, our
pleasant church was entirely destroyed by fire, the fire originating in
a neighbor's barn, situated within a few feet of the church. Thy will,
not mine, be done." It is gratifying to record that the Methodists
at once offered to share their house with their stricken neighbors
and that within a few months the generous contributions of the people
of Walla Walla enabled Mr. Chamberlain to gather his congregation
again on the same place, corner of Second and Rose, and there the
Congregationalists continued to worship under several pastorates until
during that of Rev. Austin Rice in 1900 the present building on Palouse
and Alder streets was erected.

During the past few years a number of fine church buildings have been
erected, of which the Christian, the Presbyterian, the Baptist, the
Marvin Methodist, and the First Methodist, may be especially named.

A distinguishing feature of present church life may be said to be the
degree to which it has taken hold of municipal and political questions,
reforms, and problems of practical life. In that respect the present
churches of Walla Walla are essentially modern. Besides the churches
named above, the United Brethren, Lutheran, German Methodist, German
Congregational and Christian Science Churches, maintain influential
organizations, and the Salvation Army is active and useful.


FRATERNAL ORDERS

Somewhat similar to the churches in philanthropic aims and to
considerable degree composed of the same type of members are the
fraternal orders.

If Walla Walla and its kindred communities may be regarded as the homes
of schools and churches, they may in equal degree be regarded as the
homes of lodges. Almost all the fraternal orders usual in American
cities are found here. As in case of the churches we find ourselves
compelled by the limitations of space to accord too brief attention to
these important and popular organizations.

The Masonic order has been for many years represented by an active
membership, having two lodges, one chapter, a commandery, and a chapter
of the Order of the Eastern Star. The first lodge was Walla Walla No.
7, which came into being October 19, 1859. At that date a dispensation
was granted to C. R. Allen, Braziel Grounds, A. B. Roberts, H. N.
Bruning, T. P. Page, Jonas Whitney, Charles Silverman, J. Freedman, and
R. H. Reigert. Not till September 3, 1860, was the lodge organized.
A. B. Roberts was the first Worshipful Master; J. M. Kennedy, senior
warden; B. Scheideman, junior warden; T. P. Page, treasurer; W. B.
Kelly, secretary; C. A. Brooks, senior deacon; J. Caughran, junior
deacon; W. H. Babcock, tyler. In the summer of 1864 the lodge built
a home at the corner of Third and Alder streets. But this building
was destroyed by fire in 1866, and for many years following the lodge
held its sessions in the Knights Templar hall in the Dooley Block. For
several years past the upper story of the Motett Building on Alder
Street has been used as a Masonic lodge room.

The Odd Fellows have been represented in Walla Walla since 1863, and it
is a matter of historic interest to record that the first dispensation
to organize a lodge of Odd Fellows in Walla Walla was granted in that
year to A. H. Purdy, James McAuliff, W. B. Kelly, L. A. Burthy, and
Meyer Lazarus. With additions from time to time there have come into
existence three lodges, one encampment, one canton, and two lodges
of the Daughters of Rebekah. One of the notable institutions of the
Odd Fellows is the Home on Boyer Avenue. This is an institution
covering the state and now is housed in two commodious and attractive
buildings with accommodations for a large number of old people and
orphan children. The home is located upon five acres of fertile and
wholesome land secured from H. P. Isaacs. The first building of wood
was constructed in 1897 and opened for use in December of that year.
The second building of brick was constructed in 1914. There are many
shade and fruit trees upon the grounds of the home, and it is truly
an attractive and beneficent place. The order has also a fine hall on
Alder Street.

[Illustration: REV. CUSHING EELLS
The "St. Paul of the Northwest." Missionary to the Indians, 1838-47.
Afterward teacher and preacher, and founder of Whitman College.]

Perhaps most rapid in growth of all the orders in Walla Walla has been
the Elks. The Walla Walla lodge of Elks No. 287 was organized August
10, 1894, with fifteen members. The first member to fill the place of
Exalted Ruler was Judge W. H. Upton, known for many years as one of the
most scholarly, intellectual and capable of the lawyers and jurists of
the Inland Empire. His death in 1906 was a great loss, deeply deplored
by many circles, not alone in fraternity organizations, in which he
was conspicuous, but in all lines of social and professional life.
After a slow growth of a number of years the fraternity took on swift
development and at the date of this publication the membership exceeds
six hundred. The lodge possesses one of the most beautiful buildings
in the city, dedicated with a series of appropriate ceremonies and
entertainments on May 23, 24, and 25, 1913. The Elks have led many
movements for public betterment, as the municipal Christmas trees,
park benefits and other benefits, Red Cross campaigns, and other
endeavors of philanthropic and patriotic service. One of the recent
enterprises of the lodge was the establishment in 1916 of Kooskooskie
Park on Mill Creek, fourteen miles above Walla Walla. There in the
beautiful shade along the flashing crystal waters of our creek
(Pashki the stream ought to be called), the Elks and their friends
are wont to disport themselves at intervals in the hot season, as
their four-footed prototypes their "totem" of prehistoric times, were
accustomed to do. The present Exalted Ruler is C. S. Walters. There is
regular publication called _The Lariat_, issued every new moon by the
secretary, Fred S. Hull.

Of what may be called the great standard fraternities the next to be
noted is the Knights of Pythias. It is an interesting historical fact
that Walla Walla was the first location of a lodge of that order on
the Pacific Coast north of San Francisco. That pioneer lodge was known
as Ivanhoe Lodge No. 1. Its early records are not available, but it
continued in existence till 1882, in which year it surrendered its
charter and went out of existence, to be succeeded by Columbia Lodge
No. 8, instituted on October 23d of that year. Of the new lodge the
first Past Chancellor was S. A. Deckard, and Chancellor Commander W. N.
Gedders. The lodge has been maintained with vigor and success to the
present date.

Of what may be considered the more specialized and limited
organizations there have been and are a number: The Young Men's
Institute and Knights of Columbus, Catholic organizations; Woodmen
of the World, Modern Woodmen of America, Royal Arcanum, Women of
Woodcraft, and National Union, insurance fraternities; and of more
miscellaneous character the United Artisans, the Pioneers of the
Pacific, the Degree of Honor, Ancient Order of Hibernians, American
Yeomen, the Foresters of America, the Rathbone Sisters, Ladies of the
Maccabees, Ancient Order United Workmen, Loyal Order of Moose, Improved
Order of Red Men, Degree of Pocahontas, Good Templars, Sons of Hermann,
Fraternal Order of Eagles, and Order of Washington.

Here as elsewhere throughout our country, and worthy here as everywhere
of profound respect, is a post of the Grand Army of the Republic. This
was chartered March 12, 1881, and the names appearing upon the charter
are these: John H. Smith, J. F. McLean, P. B. Johnson, J. M. Coolidge,
R. P. Reynolds, Abram Ellis, James Howe, J. A. Neill, O. F. Wilson,
H. O. Simonds, Samuel Nulph, Charles Heim, Isaac Chilberg, A. D.
Rockafellow, William Leislie, F. F. Adams, F. B. Morse, R. M. Comstock,
and Ambrose Oldaker. The first commander of the post, known as Abraham
Lincoln Post, No. 4, G. A. R., was John H. Smith. In April, 1886, the
A. Lincoln Relief Corps, No. 5, was established, with twenty-five
charter members, Mrs. Jane Erickson being president. Fittingly included
with the two previously named posts are the United Spanish War Veterans
and the Sons of Veterans.

There are found in Walla Walla also, of more recent date, the Park
Association, one of the most important and influential of all in the
beautification and sanitation of the city, the Gun Club, Isaac Walton
Club, Golf Club, Anti-Tuberculosis League, and several Reading and
Art clubs which have played important parts in ministering to the
recreation, the health, the intellectual life, and the artistic taste
of the people of Walla Walla and the region adjoining. It is to be
regretted that the limitations of space forbid including here the many
interesting details of these various organizations.

The Walla Walla Commercial Club occupies so commanding a place in the
business life of this entire region and has such connections with
similar organizations throughout the entire Northwest and even in the
nation at large as to be worthy of a history of its own.


COMMERCIAL CLUB

The Commercial Club came into existence in 1885. It was represented
in that year by delegates to an Open River meeting in The Dalles. For
a number of years it was suggestive and mutually stimulating to its
small membership, rather than possessing any regular organization.
It met irregularly both in time and place. In 1904 John H. McDonald
became secretary, but the organization was not such as to provide for
a secretary who could devote his entire time to it, and hence there
was not then a real commercial club in the modern sense. But a new era
began with the appointment in 1906 of A. C. Moore as the first regular
and exclusive secretary. Mr. Moore had come to Walla Walla in 1888 and
had been up to 1906 engaged in the O. R. & N. R. R. office. With his
entrance into the secretaryship of the club new and broader plans for
publicity and expansion by new memberships were begun. In 1908 the
first of a series of regular publicity campaigns was begun. That was
a time signalized by the seaboard cities of California, Oregon, and
Washington--Los Angeles, San Diego, San Francisco, Portland, Seattle,
Tacoma, Astoria, Everett and Bellingham--with special efforts to
attract immigration and new enterprise. It was the publicity era _par
excellence_.

Tom Richardson and C. C. Chapman of Portland accomplished wonderful
things in that city and in Oregon. Both became well known in Walla
Walla, where they were greatly admired and where their enthusiasm
imparted such an impulse to the Commercial Club as to lead to a
new organization with the special aim of advertisement and general
publicity. It may be said that the real history of the club as a
definite organization begins at that time, 1908.

The articles of incorporation are as follows:


 ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION


 ARTICLE I

 The name of this corporation, and by which it shall be known, is
 "Walla Walla Commercial Club."


 ARTICLE II

 The time of existence of this corporation shall be fifty years from
 the date hereof.


 ARTICLE III

 The purposes for which this corporation is formed shall be to
 establish, equip, acquire, keep and maintain club rooms with the
 usual and convenient appliances of a social club; to engage in
 literary, educational and social pursuits and to provide ways
 and means therefor, and for the development of the physical and
 mental capacities of its members, and others, and for their social
 advantage, improvement and enjoyment in connection therewith; to
 advance the prosperity and growth of the City of Walla Walla and
 of the State of Washington, to encourage the establishment of
 manufactories and other industries; to seek remunerative markets
 for home products, and to foster capital and protect labor mutually
 interested in each others welfare; to collect and disseminate
 valuable agricultural, manufacturing and commercial information; to
 extend and develop trade agriculture, merchandise, banking and other
 lawful business pursuits, and to do any and all things necessary for
 the accomplishment of these purposes.


 ARTICLE IV

 The principal place of business of said corporation shall be at Walla
 Walla, Walla Walla County, State of Washington.


 ARTICLE V

 The members of this corporation may be individuals, co-partnerships
 or corporations. It shall have no capital stock, and shares therein
 shall not be issued. The interest of each member shall be equal to
 that of any other, and no member can acquire any interest which
 will entitle him to any greater voice, vote, authority or interest
 in the corporation than any other member. The corporation may issue
 membership certificates, which certificates shall be assignable under
 such provisions, rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the
 by-laws of the corporation. Memberships in the corporation may be
 terminated by voluntary withdrawal, by expulsion and by death, and
 the loss of membership through any such causes and the incidents
 thereto shall be governed by the by-laws of the corporation.


 ARTICLE VI

 The number of trustees of this corporation shall be nine, and the
 names of the trustees who shall manage the affairs of the corporation
 until the second Thursday in April, 1909, are F. W. Kaser, H. H.
 Turner, F. S. Dement, W. H. Kirkman, J. M. Crawford, B. C. Holt, J.
 C. Scott, C. F. Nosler and J. P. Kent, all of whom reside at Walla
 Walla, Washington.

The first election provided for in the foregoing articles occurred on
the second Thursday of April, 1909, and resulted in the election of the
following officers and trustees: J. C. Scott, president; J. H. Morrow,
vice president; George E. Kellough, treasurer; A. C. Moore, secretary;
L. M. Brown, assistant secretary (publicity). Trustees: J. C. Scott,
J. H. Morrow, George E. Kellough, O. Drumheller, J. M. Crawford, F. S.
Dement, R. H. Johnson, F. W. Kaser and E. C. Burlingame.

Standing Committees: Freight and Transportation--B. C Holt, H. B.
Strong, Oscar Drumheller, Fred Glafke and John Smith.

House Committee: T. M. McKinney. Geo. Struthers, H. A. Gardner, F. S.
Dement and J. P. Kent.

Membership: W. H. Meyer, A. C. Van Dewater, J. M. Crawford, W. H.
Paxton and O. M. Beatty.

Reception and Entertainment: T. M. Hanger, P. M. Winans, H. H. Turner,
R. E. Allen and W. A. Ritz.

Auditing: C. S. Buffum, J. G. Anderson, R. H. Johnson, E. C. Mills.

Library and Property: J. W. Langdon, J. J. Kaufman, J. H. Morrow, J. G.
Frankland and C. M. Rader.

Manufactories and New Industries: F. W. Kaser, H. H. Turner, J. M.
Crawford, W. B. Foshay and L. M. Brown.

The membership given in the handbook of 1910-11 includes 377
individuals and firms. The club had been, up to 1908 housed in
the Ransom Building, now the Grand Hotel, but in that year of
reorganization, made arrangements with the city for the present
quarters in the City Hall. Large sums of money were raised during the
"Publicity Era," about $20,000 each year. Mr. A. C. Moore continued to
act as secretary until 1912, but in 1908 L. E. Meacham became publicity
manager, which post he retained until 1910, when he was succeeded by L.
M. Brown. Mr. Brown became secretary in 1912, upon the resignation of
Mr. Moore, and he in turn was, succeeded in 1914 by Mr. O. C. Soots,
the present secretary.

The next epoch of the history of the Commercial Club may be said to
have begun with the adoption of the bureau system at a special election
in April 8, 1915. The essential provisions of the new system may be
found in excerpts which follow from the amended by-laws of the club:


 BUREAU ORGANIZATION

 Section 1. The membership of this organization shall be also formed
 into three main divisions, according to the expressed preference of
 each member, for the purpose of dividing the work of the organization
 into departments or bureaus, these bureaus to be designated as
 follows:

  1. Civic and Publicity.
  2. Commercial and Industrial.
  3. Horticultural and Agricultural.

 All members who fail or neglect, within a reasonable time, to express
 their preference as to bureau affiliation, shall be assigned to the
 several bureaus by the President in such proportion as may most
 nearly equalize the total membership of the several bureaus.

 Section 2. After a member of the Club shall have expressed his
 preference as to bureau affiliation, or shall have been assigned
 to bureau affiliation by the President, his affiliation shall be
 conditional upon his election to such bureaus by an affirmative vote
 of a majority of those present at any meeting of the Bureau Committee.

 Section 3. Subject to these By-Laws, each bureau shall have general
 charge of all matters relating to the general lines of work included
 in such bureau.

 Section 4. The work of each bureau shall be under the immediate
 direction of a Bureau Committee of not less than five, consisting of
 the Chairman, who shall have been designated Vice-President in charge
 of the Board of Trustees, and not less than four others selected from
 the membership represented in that bureau by him in conjunction with
 the President and from nominees of double the required number made by
 the membership of the bureau.

 Section 5. The standing and special committees of the Club shall be
 classified under the several bureaus according to the nature of their
 duties by the Board of Trustees upon the advice of the President and
 Secretary. Until other assignments are made by the Board of Trustees,
 the committees shall be classified under the several bureaus as
 follows:

[Illustration: WAITSBURG'S FIFTH ANNUAL HORSE SHOW, MAY 1, 1909]

 Civic and Publicity Bureau--Municipal and County Affairs; Publicity;
 Conventions; Expositions.

 Commercial and Industrial Bureau--Entertainment; Good Roads;
 Investigation and Endorsement; Manufacturers; Frontier Days; Freight
 and Transportation.

 Horticultural and Agricultural Bureau--Horticulture; Agriculture;
 Live Stock; By-Products; General Farming; Fruit Growers.

 Section 6. The President, with the advice of the Vice-Presidents
 of the respective bureaus, shall appoint annually the standing
 committees of the Club included within the several bureaus. He shall
 appoint standing committees on Membership, Finance, House, and such
 special committees as may be found necessary. Each bureau shall have
 at least one member on the Finance Committee.


 ARTICLE VI

 BOARD OF TRUSTEES

 Section 1. The authority of this organization shall be vested in a
 Board of Trustees numbering nine (9).

 Section 2. There shall be elected in every year of even numbers four
 Trustees, one from each bureau and one from the Membership Council.
 There shall be elected in every year of odd numbers five Trustees,
 one from each Bureau, and two from the Membership Council, these
 Trustees to serve for two years each. Provided, that at the first
 election there shall be elected nine Trustees, two from each Bureau
 and three from the Membership Council, of whom five, three from the
 Bureaus and two from the Membership Council receiving the highest
 votes shall serve until the election in 1917 and four, one from
 each bureau and one from the Membership Council receiving the next
 highest vote shall serve until the annual meeting of 1916. All of the
 provisions of Article VI shall apply to the special election held on
 the 8th day of April, 1915, to be known as the first annual meeting
 under these By-Laws.

The first president under the bureau system was a man whom all people
of the city delight to honor and whose appointment as commander, with
rank of Major of the First Battalion of Field Artillery, N. G. W., is
recognized by hosts of friends throughout the state as an eminently fit
employment of ability, patriotism and energy. This first president was
Maj. Paul H. Weyrauch. Mr. O. C. Soots has continued to fulfill his
functions as secretary with conspicuous ability.

The present personnel of officers and trustees is thus: E. L. Smalley,
president; K. Falkenberg, vice president, Civic and Publicity Bureau;
O. M. Beatty, vice president, Commercial and Industrial Bureau; John W.
Langdon, vice president, Agricultural and Horticultural Bureau; F. S.
Dement, treasurer; O. C. Soots, managing secretary. Directors: E. L.
Smalley, F. S. Dement, J. A. McLean, J. W. Langdon, O. M. Beatty, K.
Falkenberg, Fred Glafke, Louis Sutherland, O. T. Cornwell.


WALLA WALLA LABOR UNION

This is one of the largest and most influential organizations in the
city. As compared with its brother organizations in the seaboard cities
or in Spokane, it was late in formation. A community like Walla Walla,
a rich agricultural region, does not seem to be the natural home for
labor unions. The commercial and manufacturing and mining cities are
the natural locations for these organizations. But in process of time
the skilled laborers of Walla Walla were drawn by natural evolution
into the great circle of organized labor.

The Cigar-makers', the Carpenters' and the Painters' unions were the
first in the field. They came into existence in 1900.

Other groups rapidly followed and at the present time there are
seventeen unions. The meeting places and times and the officers of each
union are indicated by their published directory:


LABOR UNION DIRECTORY

Trades and Labor Council--Meets every Friday evening in Labor Temple.
S. S. Stovall, president; L. F. Clarke, secretary.

Carpenters & Joiners. Local 1214--Meets in Labor Temple every Wednesday
night. A. V. Murphy, president; O. D. Keen, financial secretary; C. R.
Nelson, recording secretary; C. A. Tompkins, treasurer.

Printing Pressmen, Local 217--Meets second Wednesday of each month in
Labor Temple. William Potgether, president; A. L. Anger, secretary.

Journeymen Plumbers--Meets in Labor Temple every second and fourth
Thursday of each month. Harry Harter, president; W. G. Collins,
recording secretary; Fred Bowman, financial secretary.

Painters, Paperhangers and Decorators--Meets first and third Monday
evening of each month at Labor Temple. H. R. McCoy, president; O. K.
Sweeney, recording secretary; H. J. Burke, financial secretary; Charles
Hazlewood, treasurer.

Bricklayers' Union--Meets in Labor Temple first and third Tuesdays
of each month. Louis Hermish, president; Wm. F. Taylor, financial
secretary; Russell Taylor, corresponding secretary; George Root,
treasurer.

Meat Cutters' Local--Meets first Monday of month in Labor Temple. H.
N. Kettleson, vice president; A. McLeod, financial secretary; Theodore
Maskeyleny, treasurer.

Musicians' Protective Union--Meets in Germania Hall second Sunday of
each month. M. A. Power, president; H. S. Buffum, secretary.

Teamsters--Meets at Labor Temple second and fourth Mondays. Walter
Elliott, president; Frank Dunnigan, financial secretary; Frank Lansing,
corresponding secretary.

Building Trades Council--Meets every Friday night at Labor Temple. F.
J. Myers, president; James Grindle, secretary.

Allied Printing Trades Council--Meets in Labor Temple second Wednesday
of each month. R. C. McCracken, president; Charles Francke, secretary.

Typographical Union No. 388--Meets last Sunday of each month in Labor
Temple. H. F. Heimenz, president; J. M. Baldwin, financial secretary;
Al Berg, recording secretary.

Electrical Workers--Meets first and third Wednesdays at Labor Temple.
E. M. Cruzen, president; Mitchell Anderson, secretary-treasurer.

Journeymen Barbers--Meets first Thursday of every month in Labor
Temple. N. J. Nicholson, president; H. S. Graves, secretary.

Woman's Union Card and Label League--Meets in Labor Temple the first
Tuesday of each month, at 2.30 P. M. Mrs. L. F. Clarke, president; Mrs.
J. A. Lyons, secretary, Mrs. O. K. Sweeney, treasurer.

Culinary Alliance, Local 626--Meet first and third Wednesdays in Labor
Temple. Will Williams, president; Charles Miller, financial secretary;
Fred Kenworthy, recording secretary; William Bowden, treasurer.

Theatrical Stage Employes and Moving Picture Operators--Meets at Labor
Temple first and third Sundays. J. A. Duggar, president; Frank Wright,
vice president; Carl Crews, secretary; Blain Geer, treasurer.

Sheet Metal Workers--Meets at Labor Temple second and fourth Mondays
each month. O. L. Demory, president; C. C. Shafer, secretary.

Hod Carriers, Building Laborers--Meets at Labor Temple every Thursday.
Conrad Knopp, president; Fred Breit, financial secretary.

Cigar-makers' Union--C. M. Golden, president; George Surbeck, secretary.

The general management of these unions is delegated to the Trades
and Labor council, in which each union is entitled to three
representatives. The comparatively quiet and comfortable conditions in
Walla Walla have not induced radical action by the unions and they have
been a regularizing and balancing force of efficacy in their own lines
and usually an influence for harmony in industrial life.

The organ of the unions is the _Garden City Monitor_, published by L.
F. Clarke and Jesse Ferney. A special number of the _Monitor_ appears
annually on each Labor Day. It is worthy of all praise, both from the
editorial and the typographical standpoints.

The membership of the Walla Walla unions now is about five hundred.


FARMERS' UNION

The largest and in many respects most important organization in the
four counties is the Farmers' Union. This great organization is
national in its aims and membership. Washington and Northern Idaho
constitute one unit of the National, and in turn it is divided into
county units, either single counties, as the large ones of the state
like Yakima or Whitman, or by grouping, as in the smaller. Our counties
belong in the latter category, and we find the Tri-County Union of
Walla Walla, Columbia, and Garfield. Of this union G. M. Thompson of
Dayton is at this date president, and A. C. Moore of Walla Walla is
secretary. In the Tri-County Union there are eight local unions. They
appear, with the secretary of each in this enumeration: Waitsburg No.
1, W. D. Wallace; Prescott, No. 2, O. V. Crow; Dayton, No. 3, Roy Ream;
Mayview, No. 4, C. W. Cotton; Pomeroy, No. 10, W. J. Schmidt; Walla
Walla, No. 27, W. J. McLean; Starbuck, No. 119, E. W. Powers; Central,
No. 145, J. E. Tueth. As will be seen, Waitsburg has the distinction
of being the premier union in point of time. It was organized in
May, 1907, the first president being N. B. Atkinson, and the first
secretary. J. A. Enochs.

The total membership of the Tri-Sate Union is about six hundred. That
of the Walla Walla Local is about one hundred and fifty.

Intimately related to the Farmers' Union is the Farmers' Agency. While
the officers are entirely distinct, the membership is practically
identical, since the provisions of membership require any who own
stock in the agency to belong to the union. Any farmer, however, may
market his grain with the agency. At the present day Hon. Oliver
Cornwell is president of the Agency, and the secretary is Eugene
Kelly. As first organized and conducted for several years under the
presidency of Hector McLean, the Agency was an information bureau
only. But when Mr. Cornwell became president he entered upon the
large task of creating out of it a genuine co-operative grain buying
organization. After some years of experiment and adjusting, at times
with very strenuous conditions, the effort was wholly successful and
the Agency became a coherent organization, backed by the united force
of the Farmers' Union and by the main weight of the farming community
of Walla Walla. The primary object of the Agency is to co-operate to
advantage in the marketing of crops. The local Walla Walla Agency has
come to be a tremendous factor in the wheat market. Its existence has
been abundantly justified by its success during these recent years in
maintaining steady markets and in securing to its members all possible
advantages.

Aside from the immediate business aim of marketing crops through the
Agency, the Farmer' Unions, both in their local capacity and in the
Tri-County organization, have come to be one of the great forces
in the political and social life of the region. Questions of roads
and bridges, taxes, public buildings, state educational and penal
institutions, problems affecting transportation and the labor market
and labor union questions, have been subjects of discussion and
recommendation at the regular weekly meetings. Lectures from time to
time by recognized experts in the various problems involved have been
presented and public men in state and county positions have been glad
to consider with the unions the subjects relating to their functions.

[Illustration: PUBLIC SCHOOL, PRESCOTT]

[Illustration: FRONTIER DAY IN WALLA WALLA--SCENE ON MAIN STREET]

It is safe to say that any measures agreed upon by the Farmers' Unions
are pretty certain to become the action of the body politic in the
different counties. Once each quarter, and sometimes oftener, there are
meetings of the Tri-County Union, at which the larger problems of farm
life are considered, and in connection with which appetizing banquets
prepared by the skillful hands and fine artistic taste of the wives and
daughters bring joy and gayety and good fellowship to all concerned.

       *       *       *       *       *

To many of the readers of this volume, and in years to come to their
children and grandchildren, the most significant of all the organized
associations of their home country is the


INLAND EMPIRE PIONEER ASSOCIATION

This association was formed in 1900, largely under the initiative of
Dr. N. G. Blalock. While there has been little machinery or formality
about it, its yearly meetings for renewing the old ties have been among
the most anticipated and cherished of all in the minds of many of the
builders, the fathers and mothers of the Inland Empire. While the main
membership has been in Walla Walla County or her daughter counties,
it is not confined to that county, and a number of members live in
Umatilla County, Oregon, and in Whitman, Adams and Franklin counties on
the north side of Snake River.

The officers of the association chosen at the first meeting were: Dr.
N. G. Blalock, president; W. P. Winans, A. G. Lloyd and Ben Burgunder,
vice presidents; Marvin Evans, secretary; Levi Ankeny, treasurer; W.
D. Lyman, historian. These officers were almost constantly re-elected,
until the lamented deaths of Doctor Blalock, Mr. Winans, and Mr. Lloyd.
Ben Burgunder was chosen president to succeed Doctor Blalock, and at
the present time F. M. Lowden, Joseph Harbert and W. D. Wallace are
vice presidents.

With the feeling that the members of the association and many others
will be glad to read some of the proceedings and to see the list of
members as a matter of permanent reference, we close this chapter with
the excellent accounts given in the _Walla Walla Union_ of October 15,
1904, and June 2, 1911, of the annual meetings of those years.


ANNUAL PIONEER MEETING OF 1904

About one hundred and fifty of the pioneers of Southeastern Washington
and Northeastern Oregon, sturdy men and women, who have seen the
country grow from a desolate looking waste of sagebrush and sand to
one of the beauty spots of the Northwest--men and women who had not
only seen this take place, but had helped, and are still, many of them,
helping in this wonderful evolution--people who thirty or forty years
ago were neighbors, though living many miles apart, met yesterday and
sat down to the festive board loaded with the good cheer provided by
the devoted pioneer women of this city in honor of the occasion.


OLD NEIGHBORS MEET

The crowd assembled in the Goodman Building and there registered and
received their badges, after which they marched to the banqueting
rooms. There were many hearty handshakes as these old neighbors met,
and the scene was one of glad reunion. There were the more elderly who
had come here in the prime of life and whose gray hairs and wrinkled
cheeks recalled the energy and vitality that had been spent in building
up a new country. There were the younger men. those whose memories of
older lands are but indistinct visions, and who have grown up with the
country. But all had the common bond of acquaintance dating far back, a
friendship tried and found worthy in the strife of many years.


A FESTAL BOARD

Flowers in profusion in the banquet hall told of the interest and
devoted preparation of the pioneer ladies for this great annual event.
The long tables in the room were laden with an abundance of every
delicacy of the season. Before beginning the feast all stood with bowed
heads while Rev. J. W. McGhee returned thanks, after which the edibles
were enjoyed by the happy throng, reminiscences adding much pleasure to
the occasion.

Dr. N. G. Blalock, as toastmaster, at the close of the banquet, made a
short address of welcome to the pioneers and spoke with much feeling
in commemoration of people who had blazed the way to the present
civilization and offered a tribute to their noble heroism and the deeds
of courage and self-sacrifice.


HARDSHIPS OF INDIAN WARS

The toastmaster introduced as the "Pioneer Indian War Veteran" of
the association, Hon. A. G. Lloyd of Waitsburg. Mr. Lloyd gave a
brief account of campaigning in 1855 in the Yakima Indian war. In one
instance the volunteers were caught in a snowstorm and were cut off
from supplies at The Dalles and were reduced to a small amount of flour
and some tobacco. They furnished their own clothes and horses and could
not draw on the Government supplies as there were none to draw on. Mr.
Lloyd closed with the patriotic remark, "But we only did our duty and
no more."


FIRST NEWSPAPER

Capt. P. B. Johnson responded to "The Pioneer Newspaper Business." He
related the anecdote of the adopted child which replied to the boasts
of other children that it had no papa and mamma, that "Your papa and
mamma are yours because they have to be, mine are mine because they
want to be." He referred to the younger pioneers being pioneers because
they had to be.

Captain Johnson said that when he had an opportunity to come here from
Arizona he looked up the location on the map and expected to find
fruits and fields similar to those in the same latitude east, but
when in 1864 he arrived at Wallula, by steamer, he saw a vast extent
of sagebrush and nothing more. He then read from Bancroft's history
some interesting items showing the contrast of forty years. A weekly
mail had been established between Walla Walla and Portland. The town
contained 800 inhabitants. The only reference to the agricultural
possibilities of this valley was the fact that some man had succeeded
in raising a fine quality of sorghum which produced an excellent
quality of syrup.

Of the county officers that year the following are still alive and
citizens of this city: Councilman, Daniel Stewart; sheriff, W. S.
Gilliam; treasurer, James McAuliffe.


A COMPARISON WITH THE PRESENT

Captain Johnson compared the advanced conditions of the present
civilization, with the start of the country newspaper and the paper of
today. "The news item at the early stage was the local news, births,
marriages, deaths and the few other happenings; the editorials were
devoted to national and territorial affairs and to my contemporary, the
_Statesman_, across the street. I am out of the business, but I believe
that the little four-page paper of those days had more influence than
the large papers of today. My happiest days were when I was running a
little country newspaper."


PIONEERS IN BUSINESS

"The Pioneer Business Man," was responded to by Benjamin Burgunder, a
retired merchant of Colfax. "The work of the pioneer merchant was not
all glory. Our patrons all claimed that we sold our goods too high. In
the early days we had to go to San Francisco to buy our goods, then
they came by water to Portland, by steamer from Portland to the lower
Cascades, thence to the upper Cascades by rail, then again by steamer
to The Dalles, from The Dalles to Celilo by rail and again by steamer
to Wallula. From there they were brought by ox teams and pack horses
to the interior. In some instances in the mines goods were carried on
the backs of men. In one case it cost me just 60 cents per pound to
deliver my goods at their destination. But those were times when we got
dollar prices. I lost $25,000 once in developing the interests of the
Northwest by trusting mining men."

Mr. Burgunder paid a high tribute to Rev. H. H. Spalding, pioneer
missionary, as one who had done more than any other for the development
of the Northwest.


PIONEER FARMING

J. F. Brewer responded to "Pioneer Farming." "Farming in the Willamette
Valley was first done by the crudest methods. I remember raking the
grain that my father cradled. Later the mowers and reapers came and the
header evolved from these. I came to Walla Walla in 1862. All south of
the place was a barren sagebrush plain, and only one house, a stage
station, in this region as far as I knew. In other parts of the valley
there were a few farmers, all on the creeks. I remember the remark of
Mr. Swezea, a prominent pioneer farmer, 'Your sons and mine may see
railroads here but we never shall.'"

Miss Nettie Galbreath recited "The Pioneers," a poem, which was
received with hearty applause.


PIONEER RELIGION

Rev. Henry Brown responded to the "Pioneer Minister." "I came to Walla
Walla in 1886, by way of Pasco. There had been a fire and about all
there was left was safe which I was told belonged to the county, Pasco
being a county seat. Several men with loaded guns were guarding the
safe. At night I rented a wood shed, put my family in it and loaded two
guns that I had and prepared to guard my family, thinking I had reached
a land of ruffians and toughs. Father Wilbur, the pioneer missionary of
the Methodist Episcopal Church, happened to be there; he asked what I
was doing with my guns."


IN THE COLVILLE VALLEY

"Colville Reminiscences," was responded to by W. P. Winans. "One of
the interesting features of that time was the social courtesies. A
dance was given at the cantonment, to which every person in the valley,
at least 400, was invited. The large hall was decorated with flags,
banners and sabers. Immense chandeliers were formed of sabers, a candle
being placed on the point of each saber. The effect was very unique.
The guests were refreshed with all they could eat and drink. On New
Year's Day we Americans drove to Angus McDonald's to make a call. He
insisted on us staying to dinner. He entertained at that time in all
130 persons. We had no salads, but we had a good dinner."

"In 1870 I heard the first Protestant sermon; it was preached by
Rev. Cushing Eells. I took up the first collection in the Colville
Valley, with which Father Eells bought a Bible, which is now in the
Congregational Church at Chewelah."


WOMEN OF EARLY DAYS

Harry Reynolds responded to the "Pioneer Women." "The sublime sacrifice
on the part of woman made by the pioneer women is unique in history.
Those women were not fleeing from persecution or punishment, but were
sacrificing the comforts of civilization for their devotion to duty
and home. They represent the purest home life of America; the best
womanhood. The pioneer women are the builders of the Inland Empire."


PIONEERS BECAUSE THEY HAD TO BE

"If we are not pioneers because we wanted to be and wear different
colored ribbons, we have one advantage, we came at a tender age," said
W. H. Kirkman, responding to "Pioneer Sons." "I came when I was two
years old and brought my father and mother along with me. This valley
was a barren waste of land then; now it is the finest valley the sun
shines on; all honor to the pioneers."

"I remember when the Village of Seattle boasted of being as large as
Walla Walla; now, Seattle is the third city of the coast. Again all
honor to the pioneers who have wrought such changes."


EARLY SCHOOL WORK

"Pioneer Education" was responded to by Professor Lyman. "I could draw
contrasting pictures of the privations, rude homes and dangers on one
side and the triumph of civilization on the other side of the line of
pioneers, the log schoolhouse with the puncheon floor of the early
days, with the well-equipped buildings of today. But is there more
heart, soul and energy now than then?"

[Illustration: BIRD'S-EYE VIEW OF WALLA WALLA]

[Illustration: THE CITY HALL, WALLA WALLA]

TWENTY-SEVEN OFFICERS RE-ELECTED

The old officers were re-elected to serve for 1904-05: President, Dr.
N. G. Blalock; first vice president, James McAuliffe; second vice
president, Milton Evans; third vice president, A. G. Lloyd; secretary,
Marvin Evans; treasurer, Senator Levi Ankeny; historian, Prof. W. D.
Lyman.

A committee on necrology was appointed, consisting of Professor Lyman
and Marvin Evans.

The third Thursday of September was appointed as the permanent day for
holding the annual meeting of the Inland Empire Pioneer Association.
The limit of eligibility was extended from 1875 to 1880.

The following were among those present:

Pioneers of 1843--Daniel Stewart.

1845--Mrs. N. A. Jacobs, George Delaney, A. C. Lloyd, W. W. Walker.

1846--Charles Clark.

1847--Mrs. W. C. Painter, Elizabeth J. Scholl.

1849--J. Pettyjohn, F. M. Lowden, J. M. Gose.

1850--Samuel Kees, Lizzie Kees, Mark A. Evans, John McGhee.

1851--E. T. McNall.

1852--Eva Coston, Charles Lampman, Mrs. Jackson Nelson, C. C. Cram,
Solomon Cummings, Hollon Parker, Peter Meads, Rebecca J. Meads, Nat
Webb, John F. Kirby, Jennie Lasater, A. Wooton, Mrs. A. J. Colvin, Mrs.
S. M. Cram.

1853--J. N. McCaw, Angeline Merchant, W. D. Lyman, Mrs. Catherine Ritz,
J. F. Brewer, A. McAlister, Catherine McAlister, Evaly Fleetch, Jacob
Kibler, Mrs. M. H. Kirby, C. R. Frazier and wife.

1854--Nellie Gilliam Day, James McEvoy, Mrs. Nat Webb, D. Wooton.

1855--Alice E. Chamberlain, L. L. Hunt, John Rohn.

1857--William Clark, Clare E. Cantonwine.

1858--George W. Brown, E. H. Massam, William Coston.

1859--W. P. Winans.

1860--Philip Yenney, H. C. Chew, Thomas Gilkerson, C. F. Buck.

1861--Charles H. Gregory, Mrs. N. E. Rice, A. J. Evans, Mrs. Araminta
J. Evans, M. Evans, J. L. Hawley, Mrs. Mary Ernest.

1862--Mrs. E. E. Kellogg, Christine Winans, William Glasford, Ben
Burgunder.

1863--H. A. Reynolds, Isabella Kirkman, W. J. Cantonwine.

1864--Anna Stanfield, P. B. Johnson, William Stanfield, Sallie
Stanfield, Hettie Malone, W. D. Paul, M. A. Caris and wife, George
Dehaven, Caroline Ferrel.

1865--Daniel Garrecht, James McInroe, S. F. Bucholz, J. A. Beard, Mrs.
George Dehaven, John Sanders.

1867--Louis Scholl.

1868--Maggie Clark, W. H. Kirkman, J. W. Frazier, Marvin Evans.

1869--Charles Painter, Mrs. W. C. Prather, D. C. Ingraham, Mina Evans.

1870--Joseph Merchant, F. A. Garrecht, Z. K. Straight and wife.

1871--Alice McEvans, George H. Starrett, Mrs. S. J. Pettyjohn, B. A.
Herrold.

1872--N. G. Blalock.

1873--F. S. Gowan, Mrs. F. S. Gowan.

1874--Julia Brown, Mrs. N. W. Dunnington.

1875--D. D. Earp, Chris Seibert, Victor Schaffer.

1876--J. F. Bucholz, George Whitehouse.

1880--M. G. Parr.

Unknown date--Mr. and Mrs. W. P. Nuttall, G. W. Loundagin and wife,
Theodore Wolf and wife, Joseph Braden.


PIONEER MEETING OF 1911

(From _Walla Walla Union_ of June 2, 1911).

Though Father Time's blade has cut with remorseless sweep, and though
the pioneers of the Walla Walla Valley have fallen before its swing,
the attendance at the annual reunion of the pioneers yesterday was
greater than has ever been known.

More than two hundred people who came to the Northwest before railroads
were built attended the annual meeting of the Inland Empire Pioneer
Association at Whitman College yesterday.

Honoring for the twelfth time Dr. N. G. Blalock, the Pioneer
Association yesterday re-elected him its president. Marvin Evans was
also chosen to fill the office of secretary for the twelfth successive
time. Doctor Blalock and Mr. Evans both sought to refuse, but the
overwhelming sentiment forced them to accept the positions.

"I feel that I shall not be with you again," said Doctor Blalock,
"but if I can do any good while I am living, I am willing to do so.
My health is such that I can do but little; but while life lasts I am
ready to serve you, if you desire it. I had hoped to retire, but being
an American, I must sacrifice my personal desires to the will of the
majority."

Hotly scoring the features of the meeting a year ago, Solomon Rader
made the first address of the day.

"Political whitewash, the seeking of coal mines and the passing of
two-gallon demijohns are out of place at a pioneers' reunion. Last year
we had all three, this year I trust we will have none. I believed last
year, when I made my farewell address, that I would not live to be
present at this meeting, but I am here, and I feel twenty years younger
than a year ago."

Mr. Rader carried his remarks into a prohibition talk, and reviewed
the focal situation, stating he believed that the votes of women might
change affairs. Doctor Blalock then stated that he believed it the duty
of all women to vote and that the pioneer woman should be first of all
to cast her ballot. He introduced Mrs. Lulu Crandall of The Dalles, who
spoke on "How We Preserve History at The Dalles."

She told of the acquisition of the old surgeons' quarters of the old
Fort Dalles, how they had been furnished, and how the relics of pioneer
days were preserved there. An historical society has been organized,
which is supported by three classes of members: Active, who are
members of the state historical society; associate, who are not members
of the state organization; and honorary, those who made history in
early days. The first two classes of members pay annual dues of $2. The
plan, stated Mrs. Crandall, is working nicely.

C. R. Frazier of Dixie was called upon, and his address, read by the
secretary, follows:

"Fellow members and friends of the Walla Walla County Pioneer
Association:

"As a member of the Walla Walla Pioneer Association I appreciate very
much the fact that I again have the privilege to attend another one
of this society's annual meetings and to meet with fellow members and
friends of our association. To meet old pioneer friends and to talk
over old times with them is something that affords me genuine pleasure.
Certainly as long as I am able to get about you'll always find me in
attendance at the annual meetings of this association.

"The few brief things I wish to say at this gathering I have had
written out for when I attempt to talk at such gatherings as this one I
find that my memory is not as good as it used to be and it is hard for
me to say anything in a connected way.

"For forty-seven years I have been a resident of the Walla Walla
Valley. As I have expressed myself many times before I think our
valley, its climate and resources considered, is one of the greatest
countries in the world. For years on my farm at Dixie I have been a
producer of a varied line of farm products, not the least of which
was much choice fruit and also several varieties of nuts. My orchards
were not purchased ready made and I might say that I was the original
planter of every tree on my place. During late years a picture of
one of my apple trees has appeared in many newspapers and magazines
throughout the world because it is a tree that holds a record for
producing in one season as much as 126 boxes of fine apples. I will
admit that I am proud of that old apple tree.

"While I have always been a hard worker I feel that the Walla Walla
Valley has been kind to me and mine. I first made the trip across the
plains from the east in 1853. This time, as a boy driving cattle, I
made California. After spending a short time in California I returned
east to my old home in Sullivan County, Mo. In 1863, with my earthly
possessions consisting of my young wife and two children, a team of
oxen and a somewhat delapidated vehicle that might be called a wagon I
left Nebraska for the old Oregon country. Travelling over the old well
known trails it was a long journey before we reached the Walla Walla
Valley. On the trip across one of my children was born; other mishaps,
more or less the result of fording streams and hitting the rough spots
on the trail, also fell to our lot, but with us all such accidents were
accepted as a matter of course and we didn't waste much time grieving
about them. Our little caravan on its journey west was headed for
Vancouver, but when it hit Meacham Mountains one fine fall day in the
year 1864 and we had an opportunity to see the beautiful Walla Walla
Valley I decided right there and then that I would travel no farther
and that the Walla Walla Valley would be quite good enough for me.

"Reaching Walla Walla we found a town of some eight hundred people;
I moved on up to the Dayton country and soon had located a claim near
Dixie. I'll never forget such families as Longs, Lambs and Locks whom
we came up with in our new home. Right from the start they were kind
to us and helped us to get started in a country that was new to us.
After we once got a start with a cow and some chickens the rest was
comparatively easy. In the old pioneer days in this valley neighbors
were very kind to one another.

"But perhaps I have said enough. I do not wish to tire you. In
concluding I will say that this gathering is one that I esteem a great
occasion; as it affords me an opportunity to meet many of my old
friends and a chance to talk over old times with them it is a gathering
I would not miss for anything. Thanking you very kindly for listening
to my few brief remarks, I remain,

  "Yours truly,

  "C. R. FRAZIER."


LYMAN MAKES TALK

In an interesting and instructive talk, Prof. W. D. Lyman told of the
introduction of apples and cattle into the Northwest. He stated that
the first apple trees known to have been planted in the Northwest were
grown from the seeds planted by Doctor Whitman and Reverend Spalding
at Waiilatpu and Alpowa. "The first trees of any consequence, however,
were planted in the Willamette Valley in 1847 by Henderson Llewellan,
who brought 700 small trees from Ohio in a crude wagon that had been
fitted out to carry the trees. The wagon in which the trees were
packed, in boxes, was heavy and time and again Llewellan was urged
by his comrades to abandon the wagon, but he had an idea that fruit
would grow well in the new Northwest country and he would not give up
his travelling nursery. The trees, which were apple, pear, peach and
cherry, were planted and it is recorded that most of them grew, and
from this first small orchard grew the great fruit industry of the
Northwest.

"The introduction of cattle into the Inland Empire, while as important
in the results created, is more picturesque historically. The Hudson's
Bay Company had a few cattle here as early as 1830, but they were very
scarce, so scarce that Doctor McLoughlin made a rule against killing
them. Marcus Whitman brought sixteen head of cattle with him when he
first came to this country, while in 1838 Doctor Eells brought in
fourteen head. These were only the small beginnings and were confined
mostly to this immediate vicinity.

"The general cattle business of the Northwest was developed largely by
the efforts of W. A. Slacum, who was sent to this country in 1836 by
the United States Government to ascertain some of its resources and
size it up generally. While in this country Mr. Slacum talked with
the different American settlers and came to the conclusion that the
introduction of cattle would do more toward securing a foothold for the
United States than anything else. The hard part of it was to secure
cattle. The Hudson's Bay Company would not sell their stock, even to
their own people, but rented it out. In 1843 Ewing Young came to the
Northwest from California, where he was known as a cattle rustler, and
finding that his reputation had come along with him, settled in the
Chehalem Valley, where it was his intention to make liquor and sell it
to the Indians and wandering white men. He was, however, persuaded by
Slacum and Doctor McLoughlin, who also saw the importance of securing
cattle for this country, to go to California and bring a drove of
cattle to Oregon. This drive took place in the years of 1837 and 1838.
Young started from California with 700 head of cattle and arrived in
the Willamette Valley with 800 head.

[Illustration: THE BAKER-BOYER NATIONAL BANK IN 1910]

[Illustration: THE BAKER-BOYER NATIONAL BANK, WALLA WALLA, IN 1890]

"The second great cattle drive started in 1839 with a group of
Americans, eager to develop their own interests and the interests of
the United States in this section of the country. Under the leadership
of John Gale they built a small schooner called "The Star of Oregon,"
in which after many difficulties, they arrived where San Francisco
is now located and after trading their schooner for 300 cows, took
what money they had and purchased 1,200 cattle, 3,000 sheep and 600
horses. The sheep were purchased by the dozen, while the horses brought
from three to six dollars a head. Consider the hardship these few men
went through, bringing these animals that long distance under those
conditions.

"The introduction of fruit and cattle into the Inland Empire meant
much to the early settlers and meant vastly much more to the present
generation."


BURGUNDER SPEAKS

Following this address, Vice President Ben Burgunder called attention
to the fact that Kettle Falls, on June 23d, would celebrate the
anniversary of its discovery by David Thompson. Delegates from the
association were asked; and Pres. N. G. Blalock was authorized to
appoint whoever he saw fit. Ben Burgunder volunteered to act as a
delegate, and any others who can go, will be made delegates.

Election of officers was then taken up, and despite his protests,
Doctor Blalock was re-elected. The other officers elected are: first
vice president, Ben Burgunder of Colfax; second vice president, A. G.
Lloyd of Waitsburg; third vice president, Natt Webb; secretary, Marvin
Evans; treasurer, Levi Ankeny; historian, W. D. Lyman.

The association then adjourned to Reynolds Hall, where a dinner was
served by Miss Burr, and the tables were presided over by young ladies
of the dormitory. The banquet was most successful, about two hundred
sitting down to the repast.

A number of short talks then followed, President Blalock calling upon
the members of the association for brief addresses.

"I came here thirty-two years ago," said Rev. John LeCornu, "and at
that time I knew nearly everyone. Now I know hardly anyone. I used to
go where I pleased across corners, but it's all fenced now. Where there
were formerly stables on Main and Alder streets, are now big buildings;
and where we then drove through dust or mud, we now have pavements.
Schoolhouses, everything, have grown in numbers. We have grown, and we
will continue to grow."

A. G. Lloyd of Waitsburg, second vice president of the association,
expressed his pleasure of being present. He had been in the valley for
more than fifty years.

W. P. Winans, who has been in the northwest for fifty-two years, made
a brief talk, stating that fifty-two years ago yesterday he was on the
Arkansas River, headed for this country.

"These reunions are the pleasantest times in life. Not only for the
present, but the future reminiscences of them, bring us pleasure, and I
trust they will continue as long as we have pioneers."


ACCEPT INVITATION

Pres. S. B. L. Penrose of Whitman College, was then called upon for an
address, and extended an invitation for the association to make its
permanent meeting place at Whitman College. By rising vote, this was
accepted.

"The college is a pioneer, it was founded by pioneers, and its
existence will be fresh a thousand years hence, when we are all
forgotten. The association cannot, I think, do better than to link
its existence with this institution, whose life will be endless; and
I extend to you an invitation to hold your future meetings at the
college."

Cal Lloyd was the next speaker, and he expressed his pleasure at being
present, and his hope that he would see every member at the next
meeting.

H. A. Reynolds expressed a desire to have the word pioneer defined, and
to have an organization, separate from the present one, for the sons
and the daughters of pioneers.

"You cannot make a man a pioneer by legislation, any more than you can
make a Grand Army of the Republic man. I was born here, but do not
claim to be a true pioneer."

"I am not that kind of a pioneer," stated W. H. Kirkman, "for when I
was two years old, without a quaver or misgiving, I took my father by
one hand and my mother by the other, and faced boldly to the west,
leading them to Walla Walla.

"The pioneers have laid here the foundation for the greatest
civilization the world has ever known; and it is for them to enjoy, as
fully as possible, the fruits of their labors."

"I too, used to know the country and every man in it," said William
Rinehart, formerly of Union, Oregon, but now of Walla Walla. "At Union
I was secretary of the Pioneers' Association; and we had enjoyable
reunions, much like this one. I enjoy them, and trust I will be able to
attend many yet."

Following the reading of the resolutions, which were unanimously
adopted, members of the association were given an hour's ride about the
city in automobiles.

The attendance was more than two hundred, the largest in the history
of the organization, according to old timers who have been in constant
attendance.


RESOLUTIONS

Following is the report of the resolutions committee, composed of Prof.
W. D. Lyman, A. G. Lloyd and W. S. Clarke:

"Resolutions of the Inland Empire Pioneer Association, June 1, 1911.

"Resolved: That we recognize with deep gratitude to Providence
this opportunity which our gathering gives us for renewing the old
friendships and making new ones.

"Resolved: That the hearty thanks of the association be extended to
President Penrose and to the officers of Whitman College for the use
of Memorial Hall; and to Miss Burr, manager of Reynolds Hall, for the
delicious banquet provided; and to the young ladies for their service
upon the tables.

"Resolved: That we heartily thank the members of the Whitman College
Glee Club for the beautiful vocal selections which added so pleasant a
feature to the occasion.

"We also thank the staff of the local newspapers for their presence
and interest in this meeting; and we recognize in their reports an
indispensable means of bringing the aims and work of the society before
the public.

"We thank the president, other officers and committee of arrangements
for the preparations and completion of this meeting, which will occupy
so attractive a place in our memories.

"Resolved, in conclusion: That we would urge upon the members of this
association the desirability of preparing and giving to the historian
biographical data to the end of fulfilling one of the great aims of the
association, the preservation of matter otherwise liable to be lost.

"We incorporate herewith our heartfelt recognition of those of our
members who have passed on since our last meeting."

Death has been active in the list of pioneers during this brief period.

The association recognizes the loss of these valued friends and members
of the ranks the inevitable movement of time and the fulfillment of
lives nobly spent and of influences which have done much to make this
country what it is.

The association extends its condolence to the members of the families
bereaved through these deaths, and joins with them in the sentiments
of joy and pride which their good deeds most impart to all whom their
lives have reached.

The following is a list of those included in the number: Mrs. Kate
L. Butz, Amos Cummings, William Coston, Mrs. M. E. Ernst, Mrs. Chas.
Lampman, Mrs. E. H. Massam, L. P. Mulkey, Mrs. Lydia Olds, Mrs. Martha
A. Payne, Dale Preston, William Stanfield, James J. Gallaher, Mrs.
Hollon Parker, Joseph McCoy, Mrs. Martha Lovell, Jesse Cummings.

Members of the Inland Empire Pioneer Association are: Mr. and Mrs. A.
L. Ring, Dollie Auker, Harry Gilbert, John A. Taylor, William Glasford,
G. A. Evans, C. H. Kaseberg, A. G. Murphy, Thomas Gilkerson, Henry
Chew, America DeWitt, Oliver DeWitt, J. J. Rohn, Mrs. Chris Sturm,
Henry Ingalls, D. Wertheimer, D. H. Irvin, Mrs. Mary Irwin, John
McCausland, Mr. and Mrs. H. H. Hungate, Mr. and Mrs. R. C. Dunlap,
Ben Burgunder, John Tempany, G. W. Bowers, Mrs. Isabella Kirkman,
Levi Malone, Robert Kennedy, Mrs. J. C. Smith, Mrs. C. W. Reser, Miss
Reser, Mrs. R. R. Rees, Fannie Hall, Mrs. J. W. Foster, N. G. Blalock,
Mrs. E. A. Edwards, T. J. Hickman, Mr. and Mrs. Joe Harbert, Mrs.
Alexander Johnson, Mrs. E. Lewis, Mrs. Mary Jett, S. W. Smith, Mrs.
Esther Smith, Mr. and Mrs. W. Thomas, Mrs. J. L. Robinson, Mrs. J. J.
Morrison, George Dehaven, Mrs. Mehala Dehaven, Joseph McEvoy, Mrs. J.
W. Cookerly, Mrs. Kate Henderson, John Braden, Joe Braden, Mrs. J. F.
Brewer, Mrs. S. A. Stanfield, Mrs. Lucy Buff, Mrs. Dora Walker, Mrs. D.
H. Coffin, Mrs. Mary McCoy, Natt Webb, Eliza Jane Webb, Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Harbert, Mrs. A. T. Bedell, Mr. and Mrs. Oliver Cornwell, Mr.
and Mrs. Ernest Cantonwine, C. R. Frazier, P. Lightle, Mr. and Mrs.
R. J. Weidick, Mrs. Jessie Jones, Mrs. B. L. Sharpstein, Mrs. Frank
Sharpstein, Mrs. Addie Upton, Mrs. Charles Painter, J. C. Painter, Mr.
and Mrs. L. L. Hunt, L. F. Anderson, Mrs. D. S. Baker, Charles McEvoy,
Mr. and Mrs. H. S. Hart, Mr. and Mrs. A. J. Evans, Mrs. Margaret
Dovell, Mr. and Mrs. Woodson Cummings, Agnes L. LeVine, Mrs. Kominsky,
Peter Meads, John Hodges, Mr. and Mrs. James Cummins, Hampton Huff,
Mr. and Mrs. W. S. Malloy, Mr. and Mrs. H. L. Cauvel, Robert Cummings,
J. A. Ross, F. A. Ross, Mrs. Rose Winans, Lulu Crandall, Mr. and Mrs.
William Hardese, Mr. and Mrs. R. C. McCaw, Doctor and Mrs. Probst, Mr.
and Mrs. W. S. Clark, William Preston, D. G. Ingraham, Mr. and Mrs. A.
G. Lloyd, W. Manning, S. E. Manning, J. A. Beard, Agnes Beard, Mrs. J.
P. Denn, J. C. Lloyd, J. H. Pettyjohn, Mrs. Kate Pettyjohn, Mr. and
Mrs. Henry Rinehart, Caroline Ferrel, W. D. Lyman, A. M. McAllister,
Dorsey Hill, Marvin Evans, Mr. and Mrs. B. F. Halter, W. P. Winans, Mr.
and Mrs. C. L. Whitney, Thomas Mosgrove, Perry J. Lyons, W. S. Offner,
Sidney Coyle, Mrs. Sarah Coyle, C. B. Lane, Frances E. Lane, Mr. and
Mrs. John LeCornu, Mr. and Mrs. A. M. McLellan, H. V. Grubb, Mr. and
Mrs. A. H. Reynolds, W. H. Kirkman.




CHAPTER VII

THE PRESS OF WALLA WALLA COUNTY


The newspapers of any region must always be given prominence in any
history of it as being one of the great constructive forces as well
as constituting the indispensable record of events. Besides these
fundamental functions, there is usually found in connection with
the press of a new region a group of men alive to the needs and
opportunities and hence concerned in those varied interests which
always take shape in new places. Add to this the fact that generally
there are found among newspaper men odd, unique, and entertaining
characters, and we evidently have all the material for one of the most
interesting sections of any history. Walla Walla has had, even more
than most places, several unique and marked personalities among her
"knights of the quill." In dealing with them, as with other parts of
this work, we feel regretfully the pressure of the inexorable limits of
space and are compelled thereby to omit the portrayal of some of those
amusing, odd, and racy characters and events which might enliven the
sober pages of history.

We have had occasion to refer many times to the _Statesman_ as
authority for early events and have also said something of its
first appearance and early management. Appearing under the names of
_Washington Statesman_ and _Walla Walla Statesman_, it continued for
many years to fulfill its mission in the Walla Walla country and more
than any other may be considered as the historic paper of this section.
The _Statesman_ had a kind of a double origin. For in September, 1861,
two brothers, W. N. and R. B. Smith, set on foot an enterprise through
the acquisition of an old press from the _Oregon Statesman_ and sent it
to Walla Walla. Rather curiously, apparently without knowledge of the
other design, N. Northrop and R. R. Rees started a similar enterprise
only two days later. They had obtained a press of the _Oregonian_,
and it was doubtless the first press in the Inland Empire, after that
used by Rev. H. M. Spalding at Lapwai. Discovering each other's plans
the two parties speedily coalesced and began the publication of the
_Washington Statesman_. The first issue appeared on November 29, 1861.
The editors and proprietors are announced as N. Northrop, R. B. Smith
and R. R. Rees. We have given in an earlier chapter copious extracts
from the first number. Several numbers in April, 1862, were on brown
and yellow paper, for which profuse apologies are offered. On May 10,
the editor has the following quaint "kick": "Our patrons, in sending us
gold dust on subscriptions, or otherwise, will confer an especial favor
by making a proper allowance for the weight of the sand. We can't make
those who buy the dust of us believe that the sand is as valuable as
the gold; nor do we believe it, either. Besides, in disposing of the
dust, we are compelled to see it 'blowed' and 'magnetized' until it is
properly cleaned, and the result is that that which we receive for $5
sometimes dwindles down to $2.50."

By the retirement of Mr. Smith in January, 1862, and by the death of
Mr. Northrop in February, 1863, the _Statesman_ became the property of
R. R. Rees, but in association with his brother, S. G. Rees, whose name
appeared for the first time in the issue of October 11, 1862. In the
number of May 9, 1863, the firm name appears as R. R. and S. G. Rees.
In the number of September 2, 1864, the name _Walla Walla Statesman_
was substituted for _Washington Statesman_, but without comment.

The firm name of R. R. and S. G. Rees was continued till November 10,
1865, when a notable change occurred. Wm. H. Newell became proprietor.
In the paper of that date he makes his debut in an editorial which
indicates his strong personality and his fine command of good English.
It is a just tribute to Major Rees to say that his management of
the _Statesman_, like that of the many other enterprises which made
him one of the conspicuous figures in early Walla Walla, was broad,
intelligent, and patriotic.

Mr. Newell was a character, bold, energetic, caustic, and as a writer,
incisive and forceful. It is related that once having a joint debate
with Judge Caton, he began by saying: "Fellow citizens, it is a
disagreeable task to skin a skunk, but sometimes it has to be done. I
am going to skin N. J. Caton." Judge Caton reached for his hip-pocket
and the meeting broke up in a general row, though it does not appear
that any one was seriously hurt. The _Statesman_ under Mr. Newell was
democratic in politics and during the embroglio between President
Johnson and Congress it was an active supporter of the former. It
is said by some that its attainment of the place of United States
official paper in the territory was due to that support. In 1878, the
_Statesman_ became a daily, the first in the Inland Empire. But on
November 13th, the active, scheming mind of the editor was stilled
by death. After a month's interval, Frank J. Parker, a son-in-law of
Newell, and himself as unique a character as the former editor, began
his long career as a journalist. The daily was somewhat in advance of
the times and was discontinued within a short period but in February,
1880, was again undertaken, not to be discontinued so long as the
_Statesman_ was a separate paper. Colonel Parker owned the _Statesman_
till June, 1900, in which year it went into the hands of the Statesman
Publishing Co., Dr. E. E. Fall being the leading member of the company.

During a large part of that portion of the career of the _Statesman_
Walter Lingenfelder was editor in chief. He was a man of much
journalistic ability, and later entered upon a brilliant literary
career in New York.

The _Walla Walla Union_ was the next newspaper to attain a permanent
standing in Walla Walla. This was the uncompromising radical republican
organ and was the natural counterpart of the _Statesman_. It was
founded in 1868 by a group of strong supporters of Congress in the
great reconstruction struggle then in progress.

The first number appeared on April 17, 1869. H. M. Judson was the
editor, but the policy of the paper was under the control of a
committee consisting of P. B. Johnson, E. C. Ross, and J. D. Cook.
Within a short time R. M. Smith and E. L. Heriff became the owners of
the paper and E. C. Ross became editor. In 1878 Capt. P. B. Johnson
succeeded Mr. Ross as editor, and with his entrance into the field of
journalism there began one of the most forceful and influential careers
in the journalism of Walla Walla. Captain Johnson was a man of intense
and dominating personality and possessed much ability with the pen. His
politics were those of the stalwart republicans. He had been a soldier
and officer of the Civil war, and the great conflict had so burned its
traces upon his mind that it was difficult for him to think in terms of
patience of any other policies than those which had saved the Union and
freed the slave. He acquired the property control of the _Union_ and
until 1890 was sole owner and proprietor. In that year he disposed of
his interest to Charles Besserer, who had for some time been publishing
the _Walla Walla Journal_. And as soon as we name Charles Besserer
old-timers will at once recognize the fact that we have arrived at
the uniquest of the uniques. Nature broke her mold at that point and
never made another of the same kind. German by birth, though as he once
told the author, of Spanish origin, well educated in his home land, a
soldier in the Crimea, in the Civil war in this country, and in various
Indian wars, fulfilling at various times the functions of manager of
a bakery, a distillery, and a hotel, a postmaster, a justice of the
peace, a sheep man, a farmer, and finally an editor, Mr. Besserer
maintained under all circumstances his characteristic self. He wielded
a trenchant pen and though his obituaries were sometimes of a type to
add pangs to the thought of approaching death on the part of citizens
of old Walla Walla, he had a high conception of the responsibilities of
journalism and of the requisites of a well managed newspaper. In 1896
the ownership of the _Union_ passed from Mr. Besserer to Herbert Gregg
and Harry Kelso. It was conducted by them as a bed-rock republican
paper and disposed of three years later to J. G. Frankland, Lloyd
Armstrong and Bert La Due. After conducting the paper with success for
a year the firm disposed of it to a group of leading republicans, among
whom was D. B. Crocker. J. Howard Watson, well known over the state
as a brilliant writer, for some time a correspondent of the _Seattle
Post-Intelligencer_, was installed as editor in 1900 and held his place
with conspicuous editorial ability until failing health compelled him
to retire. He made his home for a time on a beautiful place on Lake
Chelan, but finally succumbed to an untimely death from tuberculosis.
Mr. Watson was succeeded in 1902 by A. F. Statter, a man of many
accomplishments, who conducted the _Union_ with great ability for
several years and then became private secretary to Sen. Levi Ankeny,
from which post he attained a national position, becoming assistant
secretary of the treasury in 1907. Eugene Lorton followed Mr. Statter
as managing editor in September, 1903. In 1907 a marked change occurred
in the status of Walla Walla newspapers, for in that year the _Union_
and _Statesman_ were brought under the one control and ownership of the
Washington Printing and Book Publishing Co., with Percy C. Holland,
who had been for some time connected with the _Union_, as manager. For
sometime after the merger, Carl Roe acted as editor of the _Union_,
which continued as a morning paper, while the _Statesman_, still
an evening paper, was edited by Seth Maxwell. During several years
following Dr. E. E. Fall became one of the chief owners and the manager
of the _Union_, and there were a number of editorial writers and city
editors of variable and some of them of transient careers. Among them
was Walter Lingenfelder already mentioned in connection with the
_Statesman_, who has become prominent in the East; Scott Henderson,
who subsequently became assistant attorney-general of the state; Wm.
Guion, who was known as a capable editor and brilliant writer, and
Harold Ellis, now city editor of the _Bulletin_. While those changes
were in progress, a new afternoon daily, destined to be a great factor
in subsequent journalistic history, had been launched by Eugene Lorton.
This was the _Walla Walla Bulletin_, and its first number appeared on
February 12, 1906. Another stage of importance occurred in 1910. In
that year the publication of the _Statesman_ was discontinued. That
pioneer paper, a monument to the enterprise and capacity of Major Rees,
and later of W. H. Newell and Colonel Parker, having had many ups and
downs, but entitled to the leading place among the journals of the
Inland Empire, thus closed its career after forty-nine years of active
participation in the foundation period of Walla Walla.

Dr. E. E. Fall still continued as manager of the _Union_, but in
December, 1912, he disposed of his interests to Berton La Due and D,
W. Ift, while John H. McDonald acquired the ownership of Mr. Ankeny's
share of the paper. In 1916 Mr. McDonald disposed of his share in the
company to E. G. Robb. At the date of this publication the _Union_
is therefore the property of Messrs. La Due, Ift, and Robb. Of the
many who have been connected with the _Union_ it may be said that
Mr. La Due is the dean in service, having been connected with it
for eighteen years. Most of the others have had brief tenures. The
Washington Printing and Book Publishing Company are not only providing
a first-class newspaper in the _Union_, but do an immense printing
business of the best grade.

The _Walla Walla Bulletin_, founded, as we have seen, by Eugene Lorton
in 1906, was acquired by John G. Kelly, formerly of Omaha, Neb., on
February 1, 1910. Under his management the _Bulletin_ has become one of
the successful and influential daily newspapers of the Northwest. It is
an independent newspaper. It has always stood for definite purposes and
for the advancement of the general good as against special interests.
It has been the leader in many movements for public betterment, notably
the commission form of city government for Walla Walla, adopted in
1911, and for state-wide prohibition, which attained a sweeping triumph
in both 1914 and 1916. The _Bulletin_ appears every afternoon except
Sunday and has the full leased wire reports of the Associated Press.
The Sunday morning edition has the full leased wire report of the
United Press Association. The independent policy of the _Bulletin_
backed up by its superior news including telegraph, local news and
correspondence from nearby towns, together with a splendid distribution
service, has brought to it the largest circulation of any publication
in Southeastern Washington and Northeastern Oregon. The _Bulletin_ has
a strictly modern mechanical plant. A site for a permanent home has
been secured at the northwest corner of First and Poplar streets and
there a first class modern newspaper building will soon be erected.

The _Statesman_, the _Union_, and the _Bulletin_ may be regarded as the
leading general newspapers of Walla Walla. But a number of others have
been founded with more specialized aims which have played important
parts for comparatively limited time, yet are well worthy of a place in
a historical record. A brief item about each of these is due to history.

The _Spirit of the West_ was founded by J. M. Ragsdale in 1872. Charles
Humphries assisted as editorial writer. He was succeeded in turn by
L. K. Grimm and Charles Besserer. Mr. Besserer becoming owner in 1877
changed the name. to _Walla Walla Watchman_, to be changed in turn
to _Walla Walla Journal_. The _Journal_ in time, as already noted,
became merged with the _Union_, and for a time the paper, known as the
_Union-Journal_, was under the ownership of Mr. Besserer.

Mr. M. C. Harris was for a time concerned in newspaper ventures,
publishing the _Morning Journal_ in 1881 and the _Daily Events_ in
1882. In the latter year also appeared the _Washingtonian_, published
by W. L. Black, an accomplished writer, who also conducted _Town Talk_.

In April, 1894, W. F. Brock started the _Garden City Gazette_ and
in the next year J. J. Schick brought out the _Watchman_. In the
_Garden City Gazette_ Mr. Brock undertook the establishment of a
distinctively local and social department, which Mr. Schick carried
on into the _Watchman_. In 1900 the owners of the _Union_, Messrs. La
Due, Frankland, and Armstrong, acquired the plant of the _Gazette_ and
the _Watchman_ and continued the publication under the name of the
_Saturday Record_.

In 1898 Walter Lingenfelder and C. H. Goddard started the _Argus_. This
paper had the avowed aim of exposing abuses and humbugs and grafts, and
fulfilled its mission by causing cold chills on the part of many who
were conscious of belonging in those categories. It became ultimately
the sole property of Mr. Lingenfelder, but he left it to become
associated with Doctor Fall in the _Union_.

In 1900 A. H. Harris brought out an excellent monthly, maintained for
several years, known as the _Inland Empire_.

In 1916 there was founded at Walla Walla, as a democratic campaign
advocate for the re-election of President Wilson and Governor Lister,
the _Walla Walla Democrat_. The managers were Charles Hill and Ernest
W. Lanier. Russell Blankenship and W. D. Lyman were regular editorial
contributors during the campaign. The triumph of the cause in the
election of both the democratic President and democratic governor was a
sufficient encouragement to Mr. Lanier to maintain the publication, and
it is accordingly continued with vigor and success. At the present date
Mr. Fred H. Butcher is associated with Mr. Lanier in the ownership and
management of the _Democrat_. They maintain a well equipped printing
establishment, in which they make a specialty of embossed printing.

The first issue of the _Garden City Monitor_ (weekly) was dated October
10, 1908. This paper was established by Jesse Ferney to represent the
interests of union labor in Walla Walla and Southeastern Washington. It
has been the official organ of the Walla Walla Trades and Labor Council
since its inception. In 1910 L. F. Clarke purchased a half interest
in the paper. Ferney & Clarke, the publishers, have endeavored to
make the paper progressive yet represent the conservative rather than
the radical forces of union labor. A feature of the publication is an
illustrated annual edition appearing on Friday before Labor Day each
year.

One of the notable publications of Walla Walla, filling a field not
occupied by any other, is the monthly _Up-To-The Times Magazine_. This
valuable publication was founded in November, 1906, by R. C. MacLeod,
and he has been editor and manager to the present date. Mr. MacLeod
is entitled to great credit for his faith in the appreciation of a
community which ordinarily would hardly be regarded as possessing
sufficient population to justify a monthly magazine.

The aim of the magazine is to secure greater efficiency in education,
agriculture, commercial, and industrial life. It also maintains a
department devoted to historical and pioneer subjects. Today, the
magazine, independent of any subsidy from any source, is the only
publication of its kind in the interior Northwest. Its success has been
due to the steady maintainance of high literary as well as business
ideals.

The importance of _Up-To-The-Times_ as a publication may be inferred
from the fact that it has paid for printing to one firm of Walla
Walla printers the sum of $40,000, and that its half tone cuts of
local scenes and industrial and agricultural life have called for
an expenditure with a Spokane engraving house of $5,000. The cuts
accumulated during the years of its existence constitute by far the
most extensive and valuable collection of pictorial matter in this
section of the state.

The field of _Up-To-The Times_ is some eight counties of Washington and
Oregon, but it may be noted that it has subscribers and readers in many
other parts of the United States and Europe. The staff of the magazine
at the present date consists of Mr. MacLeod as editor and manager, and
A. F. Alexander, as secretary and circulation manager. There are a
number of regular correspondents and contributors in Walla Walla and
elsewhere.

In addition to the publications in Walla Walla City, this is the proper
place to name the pioneer papers of the other towns of the old county.
We turn first of all to Waitsburg in respect to its leading paper.


WAITSBURG TIMES

This has been the leading paper and most of the time the only paper
of Waitsburg for a period of thirty-nine years. This paper originated
in a joint-stock company formed in 1878, a number of local business
men feeling that the little community should have a weekly spokesman.
The first editor was B. L. Land and the first issue appeared in March,
1878. A few months later the plant was leased to D. G. Edwards, and
later to J. C. Swash. The following year C. W. Wheeler was induced
to lease the plant and he liked the work so well that the next
year--1880--he purchased the property from the stockholders. Under
the influence of C. W. Wheeler the _Times_ became an influence in the
community and in Walla Walla and Columbia counties. The paper continued
under the management of Mr. Wheeler until 1900 when he leased the plant
to two of his sons--E. L. and Guy Wheeler--so that he might enjoy a
well-earned rest from the grind of newspaper work and take up the work
of traveling lecturer for the Woodmen of the World fraternity, that he
might be able to fulfill his desire to travel in the West extensively.
These two sons having been practically raised in a printing office,
were able to take entire charge of the paper. A couple of years later
E. L. Wheeler, the older son, purchased the paper and plant from his
father, and has been sole editor and proprietor since.

The _Times_ boasts of one of the finest country plants in the state at
the present time, owning its brick building and being equipped with
modern presses, two magazine intertype type-casting machines, electric
and water power and all other conveniences of present day journalism.

Not since the day that C. W. Wheeler took charge of the paper has the
_Times_ missed an issue.

In politics the _Times_ is republican.

There was published for a short time in Waitsburg a democratic
weekly, the _Gazette_. Its first issue appeared on June 29, 1899. R.
V. Hutchins was proprietor and editor. In the next year C. W. McCoy
acquired the _Gazette_, but in less than a year he in turn sold out to
J. E. Houtchins, by whom the paper was conducted for some years, to be
discontinued in 1905.

The pioneer newspaper of Dayton, while it was still in Walla Walla
County, was the _Dayton News_, founded in September, 1874, by A. J.
Cain. In April, 1878, county division having come in the meantime, E.
R. Burk began publication of the _Chronicle_, still one of the leading
papers of Columbia County. H. H. Gale was first editor. In 1879 O. C.
White became owner of the _Chronicle_. In 1882 T. O. Abbott started
the publication of the _Democratic State Journal_. It was designed to
maintain the banner of democracy in Columbia County which had been lost
when the _Dayton News_ plant was destroyed by fire in 1882.

The first newspaper in what is now Garfield County was established at
Pomeroy on April 12, 1880, by F. W. D. Mays, and named the _Washington
Independent_. The _Pomeroy Republican_ came into existence March 4,
1882, founded by Eugene T. Wilson, who admitted F. M. McCully to an
equal partnership two months later. The ambitious little Town of Pataha
became also the home of a newspaper, the _Pataha Spirit_. Its founder
was G. C. W. Hammond and its first issue was in January, 1881. The next
year it came into the hands of Dr. J. S. Denison and Charles Wilkins.
Both the _Pomeroy Republican_ and the _Pataha Spirit_ were republican
in politics, the _Independent_ being generally true to its name, though
inclining to democratic and populistic views.

The publications named may be regarded as the pioneers in the parts
of the old county now comprising the three counties outside of Walla
Walla. During the years following county division a number of others
came into existence and now represent the press of their respective
towns, and of them we shall make mention under the different counties.

       *       *       *       *       *

The quest for journalistic history in the present Walla Walla County
outside of Walla Walla City and Waitsburg leads us to the editorial
sanctum of the _Walla Walla Spectator_ of Prescott, presided over
by Charles H. O'Neil, a native son of the "Valley of Waters," and
a leading spirit among the pioneers and "Boosters" as well as the
newspapermen of this section. The _Spectator_ was established November
22, 1902. Mr. O'Neil has followed the occupation of printer during
almost his entire business life, having spent a number of years in
the printing establishments of Walla Walla before entering upon his
independent venture. The _Spectator_ has performed a service of
conspicuous importance for the rich farming region in which it is
located by helping organize public sentiment in the direction of
community enterprise and civic advancement. As a result of these
enlarged ideals through the schools, church, business men, and homes
of the town, as well as the part borne in the same direction by the
_Spectator_, Prescott has become somewhat remarkable, for a town of its
population, for its high community spirit.

The veteran journalist of the west end of Walla Walla County is R.
C. Julian of Attalia. Mr. Julian has been connected with several
newspaper enterprises and at the present time is the owner and manager
of the _Wallula Gateway_, the _Attalia News-Tribune_, and the _Helix
Advocate_, at Helix, Ore. The _Wallula Gateway_ was launched on
December 25, 1905, by Harter and Julian. After a few months Mr. Julian
bought out his partner and has since conducted the paper alone. On
May 11, 1907, he started the _Touchet Pioneer_, selling it after a
year to A. M. Cummins. After sundry ownerships, the _Pioneer_ became
the _Touchet-Gardena Empire_, and is at the present time published by
Ferney and Clarke of Walla Walla. The _Attalia News-Tribune_ was the
successor of the short-lived _Two Rivers Tribune_, which was started
in 1908 by A. B. Frame to "boom" the land project at Two Rivers. The
plant of the latter paper was secured by D. D. Swanson, formerly of
Minneapolis, and in May, 1909, he entered upon the publication of the
_News-Tribune_ at Attalia. After three months Mr. Swanson retired,
disposing of his establishment to Messrs. Cummins and Julian. Within
another short period Mr. Julian became the sole owner and has so
continued to this day. Looking still further, Mr. Julian started yet
another weekly journal at Helix, Ore., the _Helix Advocate_. Having
disposed of it in 1915 to J. J. Lewis, Mr. Julian reacquired possession
in August, 1917, and thus is now the sole proprietor of the three
weeklies.




CHAPTER VIII

WITH THE LAWYERS, JUDGES AND DOCTORS


A special interest always attaches to the legal, judicial and medical
representatives of any country, and especially a new country. The
lawyers and judges necessarily play so large a part in the creation of
laws and the founding of institutions that their history is well nigh
co-extensive with the development of their country. The physicians are
so vital an element in the home life and the general conditions of
their communities, that their history also comes near being a history
of these communities.

We are presenting here several special contributions from
representatives of these classes of citizens. We have had occasion
at many points in the progress of this history to name prominent
representatives of the bench and bar, and of the medical profession.

We present first a sketch of the early Walla Walla bench and bar by one
of the foremost lawyers of the city, who is himself also a member of a
family which has, perhaps, been more closely identified with the bench
and bar of this section of the state than any other. We refer to the
Sharpstein family, and we have the privilege of here presenting this
article by John L. Sharpstein:

 The intention is not to make this matter relating to the first
 judicial district of the Territory of Washington such a complete
 history as would be demanded if it were written more exclusively
 for the use and information of attorneys. The judicial system which
 existed in the Territory of Washington prior to its admission as
 state possessed some characteristics which in the present time would
 be regarded as peculiar. There were originally three district courts
 established under the acts of the Congress of the United States, and
 which were known as territorial district courts. These courts had
 jurisdiction of all matters, both civil and criminal, other than
 probate causes and each county in the territory had its own probate
 judge who was not necessarily a lawyer. The peculiarity referred to
 above was the fact that the Supreme Court was composed of the judges
 who were the district judges, so that the same judge who presided in
 the trial of a case in the lower court also participated in its final
 decision in the territorial Supreme Court.

 As originally constituted there were three judicial districts in the
 Territory of Washington. The first judicial district consisted of all
 of Eastern Washington. Subsequently Eastern Washington was divided
 and a new district was created which was known as the Fourth Judicial
 District, with its presiding judge resident at the City of Spokane.
 The District Court in the First Judicial District was organized at
 Walla Walla on June 4, 1860. Judge William Strong, who afterwards
 became a practicing attorney at Portland, Ore., was the presiding
 judge. The first attorneys admitted to practice in this court were
 Edward S. Bridges and Otis S. Bridges. They were admitted on June 4,
 1860. John G. Sparks was the next attorney admitted to practice, and
 the date of his admission was June 5, 1860. W. A. George was admitted
 on April 15, 1861, and his practice at the bar in Eastern Washington
 probably covered more years than that of any other attorney who has
 ever practiced in this jurisdiction.

 At the organization of the court a grand jury was impanelled and
 included in the members of that grand jury were W. S. Gilliam and
 Milton Aldrich, both of whom afterwards became prominent in both
 business and political affairs in Walla Walla County, and were among
 the most useful and respected citizens of that community.

 As originally constituted the territorial District Court comprised
 all of Eastern Washington, but by division the territorial
 jurisdiction was gradually reduced so that the southern half of
 Eastern Washington practically constituted the first district at the
 time of the admission of the territory as a state. After the first
 organization of the court and the appointment of Judge Strong, among
 the presiding judges were E. P. Oliphant, James A. Wyche, James K.
 Kennedy, J. R. Lewis, S. C. Wingard and William G. Langford. William
 G. Langford was the last judge prior to the admission of the state.
 Judge Wyche, Judge Kennedy and Judge Wingard after their retirement
 from the bench made their homes in Walla Walla City, and were useful
 and respected members of that community until the dates of their
 respective deaths.

 While the systems prevailing prior to the admission of the state
 in the territorial courts permitting the judge who tried the case
 to be a member of the Supreme Court on the hearing of the case on
 appeal would seem to be peculiar, it was not so unsatisfactory in its
 results as one would be inclined to think it might have been.

  J. L. SHARPSTEIN.

We next present a contribution from Judge Chester F. Miller, of Dayton,
long and intimately identified with the legal practice and with the
court decisions of this section. We have had occasion to refer to
Judge Miller many times in the course of this history, and we have had
the privilege of enrolling him among the advisory board for the work.
Anything from his pen is of exceptional value. His contribution follows
here:


LAWYERS AND JUDGES OF COLUMBIA AND GARFIELD COUNTIES

The district court of Walla Walla County, with jurisdiction over all of
the eastern part of the territory, was created by the Legislature in
1860, and made a part of the First Judicial District of the territory.
Judge William Strong of Vancouver then presided over this court, and
held his first term at Walla Walla on June 4, 1860. In 1861, James
E. Wyche was appointed judge of the district, took up his residence
in Walla Walla and thereafter held regular terms in that place. The
territorial judges succeeding him were James K. Kennedy in 1870, J. R.
Lewis in 1873, Samuel C. Wingard in 1875, and William G. Langford in
1886.

[Illustration: COUNTY COURTHOUSE, WALLA WALLA]

The only resident attorneys appearing of record at the first term of
court held in Walla Walla were Andrew J. Cain and Col. Wyatt A. George.
There may have been other mining camp lawyers in Walla Walla at that
time, but they did not remain long enough to become identified with
the courts or the early history of this section. William G. Langford,
James H. Lasater and James D. Mix came in 1863, Benjamin L. Sharpstein
in 1865, Nathan T. Caton in 1867, Thomas H. Brents in 1870, Thomas J.
Anders in 1871, John B. Allen and Charles B. Upton in 1878 and Daniel
J. Crowley in 1880. Although these lawyers resided in Walla Walla, and
were more closely identified with the history of that county, yet they
should be mentioned here, for the reason that they followed the judge
around the circuit of the old first judicial district, and practiced in
the district courts of Eastern Washington, as fast as they were created
by the Legislature. The court practice in those days was very different
from what it is now. When Judge Wingard was appointed in 1875, he
held court in Walla Walla, Yakima and Colville. Afterwards Dayton,
Colfax and Pomeroy were added to the court towns. Court was held two
or three times each year in each town, and usually lasted for two or
three weeks. The judge was followed around the circuit by the members
of the bar above mentioned. They took their chances of picking up some
business at each term, and on account of their experience and ability
were usually associated with local counsel on one side or the other
of each case. There was no preliminary law day, and the attorneys had
to be ready on a moment's notice to argue the motions and demurrers,
and get their cases ready for immediate trial. Stenographers and
typewriters were unknown, and the lawyer prepared his amended pleadings
at night with pen and ink, and in the morning proceeded with the trial
of his case. Law books were few and far between; a good working library
consisted of the session laws, "Bancroft's Forms," "Estee's Pleadings,"
and a few good text books. Supreme Court reports were unknown in this
section of the country, and the case lawyer had not yet come into
existence. In the argument of legal questions, decisions of the courts
were seldom mentioned, but the lawyers depended upon their knowledge of
the principles of the law, and their ability to apply those principles
to the facts of the case on trial. There were no specialists in
different branches of the law in those days and the successful lawyer
was able to take up in rapid succession, with only one night for
preparation, first an important criminal case, then a complicated civil
jury case, and then an intricate equity case. There may be at this time
abler lawyers in some one branch of their profession, than were this
pioneer bar, but for a general knowledge of all the branches of the
law, and readiness in applying the fundamental principles of the law to
their particular case, without having reference to the court reports,
the pioneer lawyer was far in the lead of the modern practitioner. This
method of practice made big, broad and ready men; the little lawyer
drifted in and soon drifted out; only the big ones remained, and they
made their mark both in law and in politics. In those days, when there
were no railroads, no daily newspapers, no moving picture shows, or
other places of amusement, the people from far and near came to town
during court week and regularly attended its session, enjoying the
funny incidents coming up during the trials, and listening attentively
to the eloquent speeches of the able lawyers.

The District Court for Columbia County was created in 1878, and in June
of that year, Judge Wingard held his first term in Dayton. In addition
to the Walla Walla lawyers above mentioned, the following members of
the local bar were in attendance at that time: Andrew J. Cain, Robert
F. Sturdevant, Wyatt A. George, Morgan A. Baker, Mathew W. Mitchell,
Thomas H. Crawford, John T. Ford, William Ewing and John D. McCabe, of
Dayton and William C. Potter and Joseph H. Lister of Pomeroy.

Judge Wingard was red headed, a little dyspeptic, somewhat irritable at
times and usually wore a shawl around his shoulders, while occupying
the bench. He was much given to imposing fines on lawyers, jurors and
witnesses who came in late, but generally remitted them after he had
cooled off. He was always kind to the young, inexperienced lawyer,
giving him good advice, and extending a helping hand when the young
fellow was lost in his case and grasping for a straw. He was more
exacting with the older lawyer and quickly became impatient when one of
them tried to mislead him as to the law. However, he was a good judge,
honored and respected by all, and administered the law as it appeared
to him, without fear of being recalled.

Andrew J. Cain was probably the pioneer lawyer of Southeastern
Washington, and made his first appearance as a clerk in the
quartermaster's department, at the time the treaty was concluded by
General Wright with the Indians, at Walla Walla in 1858, and assisted
in preparing the terms of this treaty. He practiced in Walla Walla from
1860 until 1873, when he came to Dayton and soon afterwards founded the
_Dayton News_, Dayton's pioneer newspaper. He had full charge in the
Legislature of the bills creating the present County of Columbia, is
frequently mentioned as the father of that county, and was its first
county auditor. He was always considered an able and well equipped
lawyer, not particularly eloquent, but very forcible in his speech, and
was quite successful while engaged in the practice. He died in 1879.

Col. Wyatt A. George was born in Indiana in 1819, and after serving
in the Mexican war, came to the coast during the gold excitement of
1849. He followed the mining camps until 1860, when he settled in Walla
Walla, practicing there until the District Court was established in
Dayton in 1878, when he removed to that town. He practiced in Dayton
for ten years and then went to Pomeroy for a short time, then to
Colfax, and afterwards returned to Walla Walla, where he died without
means, his last wants being administered by the members of the bar,
with whom he had practiced for so many years. His knowledge of the law
was wonderful, and he was often referred to as a walking law library,
and by many as "Old Equity." He seldom referred to a law book, yet his
knowledge of the principles and reasons of the law, and his familiarity
with the technical system of pleadings then in vogue, was such that he
seldom entered a case, without interposing a demurrer or motion against
the pleading of his adversary, and always demanded and collected terms
before allowing them to plead over. He was perhaps the ablest common
lawyer in the territory, and was very successful in his practice. The
old colonel with his tall, slender form, his white beard, his stove
pipe hat and cane, was noticeable in any gathering, and he always
believed in maintaining the dignity of his profession in the manner of
his dress and his bearing on the street. The colonel wasn't much of a
joker, but had a sense of dry humor about him, which sometimes cropped
out, and was much appreciated by his associates. There was a drayman in
Dayton in those days, known as "Old Jake," who drove a pair of mules
to his dray. His mules were attached and he employed Colonel George
to claim them as exempt. The previous Legislature in describing the
property exempt to a teamster, had unintentionally omitted the word
"mules," and Judge Wingard held against the colonel. After studying
the statute for a moment, the colonel remarked to the judge that the
members of the late lamented Legislature had evidently overlooked
mules, but that it was the first time in the history of the world that
a mule had been overlooked by a set of jackasses.

Judge Sturdevant came to Dayton in 1874, and was soon elected
prosecuting attorney of the first judicial district. He was the first
probate judge of Columbia County and its prosecuting attorney for
many years. He was a member of the constitutional convention, and the
first judge of this judicial district after we became a state. He
practiced law in Columbia County until a few years ago, when he removed
to Olympia, but occasionally comes back for the trial of some case
and recalls old memories. The judge was of a very genial disposition,
always ready to lay aside his work and tell a good story, yet withal
he was a splendid lawyer, trying his cases closely and generally with
success, and even yet in his old age, he retains his knowledge of the
law, his cunning and his ready wit, and bids fair to practice law for
many years to come.

Morgan A. Baker was a young man when he came to Dayton from Albany,
Ore., in 1877. He was a good office lawyer and a safe adviser. He was
somewhat diffident in court, but usually tried his cases well. As a
politician and manager of the old democratic party in this county, he
was in a class by himself. He practiced here for thirteen years and was
very successful in his profession and in a financial way. He removed
from here to Seattle and afterwards returned to his first home at
McMinville, Ore., where he died a few years ago.

The other local lawyers who were present at the first term of court,
did not remain here long. M. W. Mitchell is still living at Weiser,
Idaho. Tom Crawford located at Union, Ore., and attained considerable
political prominence in that state.

In 1879, David Higgins and James Knox Rutherford came to Dayton.
Higgins was an elderly man, and somewhat hard of hearing; he never had
to amend his pleadings, because no one could read his writing; he had
a very good knowledge of the law, and is principally remembered as the
man who broke the first city charter. He afterwards located at Sprague
where he died many years ago.

Rutherford was prosecuting attorney for several years and assisted John
B. Allen in the prosecution of Owenby, McPherson and Snodderly, the
most celebrated murder trials of this part of the state. Rutherford
went from here to Whatcom, and when last heard from was working at his
old trade as a paper maker at Lowell, Wash.

In 1880, Melvin M. Godman and John Y. Ostrander located in Dayton.
Judge Godman was then a young lawyer, from Santa Clara, Cal., but was
very successful from the start, and soon attained prominence in his
profession. He was acknowledged by all, as one of the greatest trial
lawyers in Eastern Washington. He was an eloquent advocate, with a
good knowledge of the law, forcibly presenting the strong points of
his own case, and quick to discover the weak points in his opponent's
case, and turn them to his own advantage. He was twice a member of the
Legislature, a member of the constitutional convention, the second
superior judge of this district, an unsuccessful candidate for supreme
judge, congressman and governor of the state, and at the time of his
death was chairman of the Public Service Commission. He was one of the
great men of the state. John Y. Ostrander was the son of Dr. Ostrander,
and born in Cowlitz County, but came to Dayton from Olympia. He was
a good lawyer for a young man; was red headed and a natural fighter,
and even when he lost his case, he gave his opponent good reason to
remember that he had been in a lawsuit.

In 1881, Elmon Scott was admitted to practice in the courts of this
district, at Dayton, and located at Pomeroy, where he became prominent
in his profession, and when we became a state, he was elected to the
Supreme Court, doing honorable service for twelve years. He then
retired from practice and is now living quietly at Bellingham, enjoying
a well earned competency. In 1883, Mack F. Gose took his examination
at Dayton and also located at Pomeroy, where he developed into one of
the most successful lawyers in Eastern Washington. He served for six
years on our supreme bench, where he justly earned the reputation of
being one of the greatest judges our state has yet produced. Judge
Gose delved deeply into the law and his thorough knowledge of its
fundamental principles was responsible for his great success upon the
bench. The judge is admired by his acquaintances and worshiped by his
friends in Garfield County, where he spends his summers on his ranch at
Mayview.

In 1884, Samuel G. Cosgrove located at Dayton and was admitted to
practice in the courts of the territory, but soon removed to Pomeroy.
He was a veteran of the Civil war, an orator and an excellent trial
lawyer. His predominant characteristics were ambition and perseverance,
never losing sight of his goal until by persistent efforts he had
reached it. He was a member of the constitutional convention and
finally achieved his life long ambition to be governor of Washington.
It is to be regretted that he did not live to enjoy the fruits of his
life long work.

Much might be said of these three men, but their history is a part of
the history of the state; they put Pomeroy on the map, and gave it the
reputation of having produced more prominent men than any small town in
our state.

During the year 1886, Charles R. Dorr and James Ewen Edmiston, both of
whom had read law in Dayton, took the examination and were admitted to
practice. Charlie Dorr was an orator and a student and quickly took
his place among the leading lawyers, and it was often said that he was
the most brilliant young lawyer in this part of the state. With him
ambition reigned supreme, and this coupled with natural industry and
backed by that drive power which causes men to do things worth while,
would have made him a power in this state, had he lived a few years
longer. He was prosecuting attorney for two years, and took his place
among the campaign orators of the state. His death in 1892, after six
years of practice, was the cause of much regret.

James E. Edmiston in private life was a quiet unassuming gentleman,
loved and respected by everyone. As a lawyer he was successful from the
start, and soon built up a large practice. His knowledge of men and
his ability to judge them as they are, gained from his experience as
a teacher, a minister and a business man, prior to his taking up the
law, made him a dangerous opponent in the trial of cases in court. He
was well founded in the principles of the law, was a convincing speaker
and had great weight with a jury. He filled the office of prosecuting
attorney for two years, with credit to himself. His death in 1900,
while yet in the prime of life and the midst of his usefulness, was
a great loss to the community. It can be truly said, that a better,
kinderhearted man than J. E. Edmiston, never lived.

[Illustration: WINTER NELLIS PEARS, CLARKSTON]

[Illustration: APPLES GROWN IN CLARKSTON]

The history of this state cannot be written without referring many
times to the lawyers mentioned in this paper. A senator, a congressman,
a governor, many judges of the Supreme and Superior courts, and all
have made good in the positions to which they were called. Southeastern
Washington has been the training ground for many great men.

The present bar of Columbia, Garfield and Asotin counties are mostly
home products, but they are good lawyers, upholding the honor of their
profession, and full of promise, and will undoubtedly follow in the
footsteps of their predecessors, and help write the future history of
our great state.

       *       *       *       *       *

The representative of bench and bar in old Walla Walla County who has
attained the most distinguished rank in office, having been a member
of the State Supreme Court of Washington, as well as possessing high
rank in the regard of multitudes of his fellow-citizens, is Judge Mack
F. Gose of Pomeroy. He also, like the other contributors, belongs to a
prominent pioneer family, and also a family of lawyers. He too is on
our advisory board.

We have the pleasure of presenting here a special sketch by Judge
Gose, including a narration by him of a case of peculiar interest and
importance, the case of old Timothy, the Nez Perce hero of the Alpowa:


TIMOTHY OF ALPOWA AND HIS LAND CASE

On a broad fertile plain on the Snake River near the mouth of the
Alpowa Creek, about 1800, there were born two Nez Perce children of
the full blood, a boy and a girl, named Timothy and Tima, who, upon
attaining the age of manhood and womanhood, became husband and wife
and remained such until the death of the wife which occurred in 1889.
Timothy, the subject of this sketch, passed on about a year later. He
was a chief of the Nez Perce tribe and, from the time of his birth
until his decease, dwelt at the place where he was born.

He was converted to Christianity by the Reverend Spalding, and became a
licensed preacher. There was born to Timothy and Tima as issue of their
marriage four children, three sons and a daughter: He-yune-ilp-ilp,
or Edward Timothy, Jane Timoochin, Estip-ee-nim-tse-lot, or Young
Timothy, and Amos Timothy who died during childhood. Edward was twice
married. There was born to his first wife a daughter Pah-pah-tin, who
married Wat-tse-tse-kowwen. To them was born a daughter Pitts-teen.
The issue of his second marriage was daughter Nancy Tse-wit-too-e,
who was married to Rev. George Waters, an Indian of the Yakima tribe.
The issue of this marriage was two daughters, Ellen and Nora. Jane
Timoochin was twice married. To her was born a son, William, the issue
of her first marriage. To William was born a daughter named Cora. To
Young Timothy was born a daughter Amelia, who had a son named Abraham.
The living issue of Timothy and Tima at the time of the death of the
latter was Jane Timoochin, Pitts-teen, Ellen, Nora, Cora and Abraham.
The second husband of Jane Timoochin was John Silcott, a prominent and
much respected citizen of the State of Idaho, with whom she lived until
her death in 1895. In 1877 Timothy filed his declaration of intention
to become a citizen of the United States. A year later he filed a
homestead entry on the tract of land upon which he was born, and had
continued to reside. In 1883 he made final proof as a naturalized
citizen of the United States, and a year later received his letters
patent. No record evidence of his naturalization has been found, but
there is abundant evidence that he voted at least once and that he was
a taxpayer.

A reference to the dates given will show that Timothy was a lad four or
five, perhaps six, years of age when the Lewis and Clark party made its
memorable voyage down the Snake River in 1805 and stopped at the Indian
village where he resided. The writer has heard it stated by a friend
of Timothy that he claimed to remember seeing these white men. There
can be but little doubt that he was old enough to have an occurrence so
strange to him indelibly stamped upon his memory. From early manhood
until his death Timothy was a good man, whether measured by the white
skin or the red skin standard. He early adopted the habits of civilized
life, and was a friend of the white race. History records that he was
instrumental in saving the lives of General Steptoe and his command.
Gen. Hazard Stevens in the life of his father, the eminent Gen. Isaac
J. Stevens, relates that Timothy attended the great Indian council held
at Walla Walla between Governor Stevens and many Indian tribes in 1853,
at which time and place a treaty was concluded, and that "the morning
after the council, being Sunday, he (Timothy) preached a sermon for
the times and held up to indignation of the tribe and the retribution
of the Almighty those who would coalesce with the Cayuses and break
the faith of the Nez Perces." Like Lawyer, the head chief of the Nez
Perce tribe at the time this council was held and the treaty was made,
Timothy loved to dwell in peace. They alone among all the chiefs there
assembled saw the folly of fighting the white man.

The remains of Timothy rest in an unmarked grave on the banks of Snake
River--the spot of his birth, his life and his death. Efforts have been
made to secure Congressional recognition of his worth to the white man
when he was struggling to make a settlement in the Northwest in the
heart of a country peopled by thousands of Indians, many of whom were
hostile to our race. So far the effort has been unavailing. It is said
that there were but two pictures in Timothy's simple cabin home--one of
George Washington, the other of himself. This may excite the derision
of those who know nothing of the simple, honest, Christian, loyal
character of Timothy; but to those who know his history it seems not
an improper linking of two names: one great and loyal to all that was
right and just; the other, obscure as measured by white skin standards,
but also loyal to right and justice as he understood the Christian
teaching.

With this sketch of Timothy and a proper understanding of the prominent
part that he played in several of the momentous events of history in
this section, the reader will see the interest which gathers around a
noted law case connected with the land upon which he filed near the
junction of Alpowa Creek with Snake River.

A summary of the case is as follows:

The patent through which Timothy acquired the legal title to his
homestead recites that the land shall not be sold or incumbered for
a period of twenty years. Despite this limitation, Timothy and Tima,
in June, 1884, about two months after the patent had been issued,
executed an unacknowledged lease of the land to John M. Silcott for a
term of ninety-nine years. The expressed consideration for the lease
was a nominal sum, payable yearly. In April, 1890, Silcott assigned an
undivided one-half interest in the lease to L. A. Porter. In March,
1892, he assigned the remainder of the lease to Richard Ireland. In
March, 1902, Silcott conveyed his interest in the land to Ireland by a
deed of quitclaim. In October, 1903, Ireland and wife conveyed their
interest in both the land and lease to William A. White and Edward A.
White. In March, 1904, Porter assigned his interest in the lease to W.
J. Houser and Ross R. Brattain, and at the same time conveyed to them
certain fee interests in the land which he had purchased from certain
of the heirs of Timothy and Tima.

In May, 1904, Houser and Brattain entered into a contract with White
Brothers, above mentioned, whereby they agreed to convey to them the
Porter interests, both fee and leasehold.

About 1903 or 1904 Charles L. McDonald, a lawyer residing and
practicing his profession at Lewiston, in the State of Idaho, purchased
the inheritances of Cora, the granddaughter of Jane, and Abraham, the
grandson of young Timothy, and of Noah, the father of Abraham. The
other interests were claimed by White Brothers. They also claimed the
one-sixth interest inherited by Cora.

As an outgrowth of the facts stated, intricate and prolonged litigation
followed. Mr. McDonald commenced a suit against White Brothers,
alleging that the lease was invalid on two grounds: First, because the
lease was unacknowledged, and second, because the patent to Timothy
should have contained a five-year non-alienation clause in accordance
with the act of Congress of March 3, 1875. He also asserted title to
the entire fee in the land acquired as he claimed through conveyances
from all the heirs of Timothy and Tima. He did not claim to have
acquired the inheritances of Silcott or of the heirs of Edward, but his
contention was that Silcott and Jane had not been legally married and
that Edward had not married.

At the trial it was established that in early times living together in
the manner usual between husband and wife constituted a legal marriage,
according to the Nez Perce tribal custom. It was also established that,
according to the same custom, either spouse was at liberty to separate
from the other and at once take a new mate; thus giving legality to
both the divorce and second marriage. From the evidence offered the
court found that Edward was twice married; that there was living issue
of both marriages, and that Silcott and Jane were legally married. It
was shown that Rev. James Hines, an Indian preacher, licensed but not
ordained, performed the marriage ceremony between Silcott and Jane
about the year 1882, at some place on the Alpowai Creek, in the then
Territory of Washington. Mr. McDonald's contention that only ordained
ministers could perform the marriage ceremony and that a ceremonial
marriage without proof that a marriage license had been procured was
invalid, was held to be without merit.

The evidence showed that the actual consideration for the lease was
that Silcott should support Timothy and Tima during their natural
lives; that he did so, and that he gave them a decent burial was amply
proven. Under the laws of Washington an unacknowledged lease of real
property for more than a year is not valid. The Whites relied upon
permanent and valuable improvements and the long continued possession
of their predecessors under the lease as constituting both laches and
estoppel against the right to assert the invalidity of the lease.
Touching this aspect of the case it was shown that the land was
unfenced and covered with sage brush, except about one acre which had
been used as an Indian garden when the lease was made; that the land
then had a value of five dollars per acre; that in the fall of 1890
Silcott and Porter plowed, cleared and leveled about sixty acres and
planted it to fruit trees; that the next spring they planted about
twenty acres to alfalfa; that in the fall of 1903 White Brothers
planted about twenty acres additional to orchard; that water had been
carried to the land for irrigation by those claiming under the lease,
and that at the time of the trial (about 1906) the orchard was in good
condition and the land of the value of $20,000.

Both the trial court and the supreme court took the view that the
heirs were guilty of laches, which precluded setting aside the lease,
they having permitted those claiming under it to have the undisturbed
possession of the land for more than twenty years. It was also held
that, in view of the valuable improvements placed on the land by those
who in good faith believed the lease to be valid, it would be doing
violence to the plainest rules of equity to permit those who have
remained passive when it was their duty to speak, to be rewarded for
their inattention to their legal rights. Upon these principles the
lease was sustained. Mr. McDonald was adjudged to be the owner of
the one-sixth interest inherited by Cora and the one-third interest
inherited by Abraham and his father, Noah, making an undivided
one-half of the fee simple title. White Brothers were adjudged to be
the owners of the remaining fee interest composed of the inheritances
through Edward and of John Silcott, all, however, subject to the
ninety-nine-year lease. The marriages and heirships were proven by the
testimony of Indian witnesses.

The case was tried at Asotin. One old Indian testified that he was born
there and that he owned the town and adjoining land. In testifying to
the first marriage of Edward, he caused some merriment by saying that
he was busy as usual when it happened and gave little attention to an
incident so trivial in his busy life. Edward Reboin, whose father was
a Frenchman and whose mother was a Nez Perce Indian, was used as an
interpreter. He testified to the customs of marriage and divorce among
the Nez Perce Indians. He said in early times two marriage customs were
recognized and followed. The simplest one has been stated. The other
was to have a wedding feast, attended by the relatives and friends of
the young couple; following which the happy pair betook themselves to
the tepee of the husband and they twain became husband and wife.

The trial of the case consumed several days. The court permitted wide
latitude in the presentation of the evidence. Several white men and
many Indians gave testimony on the various phases of the case. Among
others, Mr. R. P. Reynolds, now a resident of the City of Walla Walla,
made oath that he was well acquainted with Timothy; that he explained
the lease to him before he signed; that the actual consideration for
the lease was that Silcott should support Timothy and Tima during the
natural life of each thereof; that he did so and that he gave each of
them a decent burial. The examination of an Indian witness through
an interpreter is an interesting experience. The Indian carries his
traditional stoicism to the witness stand. There he is as impassive as
a piece of marble. Neither by sign nor act does he give any indication
of the working of his mind to the examiner. His answer to one question
rarely suggests another question. The examiner works his way in
the dark as best he may. This experience is particularly true of
cross-examination. It has been said that cross-examination is an art.
Some artist may have seen the light in cross-examining an Indian, but
to the writer the Indian has been a man of mystery.


THE PHYSICIANS

From the bench and bar we turn to the medical profession. It is hard to
express the debt of gratitude which these pioneer communities owe to
their physicians. Among those who have completed their work and passed
on, the minds of all people of old Walla Walla would turn with profound
respect and veneration to Dr. N. G. Blalock as justly entitled to be
called the foremost citizen of this section, and among the foremost of
the State of Washington. Conspicuous among the great physicians who
have passed away, Dr. John E. Bingham would be called up by all the
old-timers as a man of extraordinary ability, great attainments in
general knowledge, and a skillful and successful practitioner. Many
others, gone and still living, have made noble contributions to the
upbuilding of the region covered by our story, but limits of space
forbid special mention.

Among the living representatives of the medical profession undoubtedly
the man whose name would come at once to the minds of all in his
section of our field is Dr. G. B. Kuykendall of Pomeroy. We have had
occasion frequently in these pages to refer to this foremost of the
physicians of his section of the state. Prominent both by reason of his
medical ability and his peculiarly genial and attractive personality,
Dr. Kuykendall has also been one of the leading historical students,
and one of the especially gifted writers in this section of our
field. In this chapter we give a contribution by this well-known and
well-loved physician of Garfield County:


REMINISCENCES OF MEDICAL PRACTICE IN GARFIELD COUNTY, WASHINGTON, IN
PIONEER TIMES

Forty years as a measure of the earth's geological changes, or of the
history of the world, are as but a moment--as the lightning's flash
or the fall of a meteor. The same lapse of time in the life of a
physician, during the early settlement of the Inland Empire, seems long
when viewed in retrospection. A sketch of those forty years would be a
vitagraph of the most active period of his life and also the panorama
of the building of an empire.

Four decades ago, the larger part of all this country was a
wilderness--a typical western frontier.

In those days, when the physician started out in the country to visit
his patients, he rode over a region covered with tall grass, swept into
wavy undulations by the western winds. As far as the eye could see
there were but few human habitations; and seldom a fence to mar the
landscape or obstruct the way.

The doctor's mode of travel then, on medical trips, was usually on the
"hurricane deck of a cayuse horse," and his armamentarium was carried
in the old-time saddle or pill bags. Often the jolting and jostling of
the bottles therein caused the effluvium of ether, valerian and other
odoriferous medicaments to exude and make the air redolent with their
perfume. We had to carry our medicines with us, and a pretty good
supply of them, too; for we never knew what we should find or how many
sick we might meet before our return.

In the pioneer days of this country, the "settlers" had small houses
and but few conveniences as we now know them. Mostly they lived in
domiciles of one room, and there were few indeed that had more. When
sickness came it always found them unprepared.

Dust, flies and impure water were the curse of the sick, and made it
impossible to give then proper sanitary environments. Dust in those
days was much worse than now, as roads were then in the making by the
easiest and quickest route. They passed up and down the bunch-grass
hills and across the sage plains, the soft, ashy soil being ground
into dust of prodigious depth by "single-track" summer travel. Freight
wagons, incoming settlers and caravan trains kept the roads so dusty
that the traveler was greatly inconvenienced.

Homesteaders at first procured water from the little gulches near their
homes or from shallow wells of seepage water. In either case, it was
nearly always impregnated more or less with alkali and loaded with
organic matter. The result was that every year, after the country had a
considerable population, typhoid (then called mountain fever) appeared,
and every summer and fall there were numerous cases. People, then, had
not been educated to the necessity of proper care of the body and knew
scarcely anything of disease germs, antiseptics or sanitation. Bath
rooms, hot and cold water in the home, existed only in memories of the
past or dreams of the future.

Many times when I was called to a country home to see a patient, to
dress a wound or reduce and dress a fracture, I frequently went out to
a hole in the ground dignified by the name of well, to wash the dust
from my face and hands. We got along almost "any old way" those days,
and did not seem to mind so very much the inconveniences either.

In those days we did not have telephone lines running everywhere over
the country and to nearly every home, as now. When a member of a
pioneer family suddenly became sick, or when someone had been "bucked"
from a horse and got a leg or arm broken, or the baby had a collection
of wind crosswise in its stomach and was howling "loud enough to raise
the rafters," then there was a sudden demand for someone to go, from
three to twenty-five miles, for the doctor. They could not step to a
phone and call him up and ask advice, or request him to start at once.
The program was to rout out the hired man or one of the boys, or send
to a neighbor, and have him saddle a horse and start to town for the
physician.

It is remarkable how much worse green plums and cucumbers affect the
internal apparatus of a "kid" in bad weather, and what a predilection
colic has for attacking the "in'ards" of a baby on dark, stormy
nights. It always seemed to me that the children of the early settlers
passed by the "moonshiny" nights and selected the very worst possible
weather for their birthdays. This seems to be one of the inscrutable
arrangements of providence, and bears indisputable testimony to the
early age at which human perversity begins.

In those days the time required to get word to the doctor and secure
his attendance was so great that the patient sometimes died or
recovered before the physician could possibly reach him. During all
this time the patient and friends were kept in an agony of uncertainty
and suspense.

In retrospection, some of my long, hard night drives through darkness,
freezing cold, snowdrifts, rain, slush or mud, are still like memories
of a horrible nightmare.

There have been several epidemics that swept over the country since
the beginning of its settlement. The first was smallpox. It is
a remarkable fact that many physicians diagnosed the disease as
chickenpox, until it began to slay many of its victims. There was at
that time quite a controversy among the physicians and a part of the
people in regard to the nature of the disease.

In the spring of 1888, epidemic cerebro-spinal meningitis appeared in
Garfield County and the surrounding country. It came suddenly and the
symptoms were so violent, and the results in many cases were so rapidly
fatal that it created consternation among the people. The physicians
over the country generally had not previously met the disease nor had
any experience with it, and were puzzled both as to diagnosis and
treatment. The writer had, during the epidemic, an experience that was
enough for a lifetime. The disease prevailed more or less for about two
years. In Garfield County there were a large number of cases on the
upper and lower Deadman Creek, Meadow Gulch, Mayview, Ping, along the
Snake River and in Pomeroy and Pataha. It is probable that Garfield
County, in proportion to its population, had more cases than any county
in the state.

The attacks of the malady were of all shades of severity and the
symptoms of the greatest diversity. It attacked, for the most part,
young persons from the age of three to twenty years, but there were
numerous cases older and younger. In some instances the person was
taken instantly, while apparently in ordinary health, with agonizing
pains in the head and spine, with or without vomiting, and in a
few minutes he became wildly delirious, with convulsions, muscular
contractions, rigidity of the neck, head drawn far back, and was soon
unconscious; and in some cases, died within a few hours. In other
cases, the patient lingered on for many weeks or even months, halting
between life and death, with excruciating agony, only at last to die,
worn out and reduced to a skeleton. Others slowly emerged from their
desperate condition to regain complete health, while others were left
partially paralyzed, with distorted and shrivelled limbs or impaired
mental powers.

I witnessed many harrowing scenes among my meningitis cases, and when
the epidemic was past, I fervently thanked God and wished I might never
again have to pass through a similar experience.

Following up the meningitis scourge, there came along soon afterwards
a notable epidemic of influenza or la grippe. The symptoms it produced
were very characteristic of and came near to answering the description
of epidemic "Russian influenza," graphically pictured in old medical
works. Whole communities were prostrated in a few hours. It seemed
to spread through the medium of the atmosphere, and was also very
contagious, passing from person to person. Many were stricken and
overpowered almost or quite as suddenly as the meningitis cases, while
some exhibited meningeal tendencies that made the diagnosis doubtful at
first.

I remember of going to Ilia to see a patient with the disease, and
before getting back home I had been called to prescribe for seventeen
persons; and a few days later I took the disease myself.

The effects of this epidemic were manifest for years, there being left
in its wake a multitude of cases of enlarged and suppurating cervical
glands, otitis media (suppuration of the middle ear), weakened lungs,
bronchitis, and a number of cases of tuberculosis.

Before the country was fenced up, when the roads were few and
settlements sparse, the doctor's trips were occasionally very lonely.
When going out into remote parts after nightfall, traveling an
unfamiliar road and uncertain as to where it led, without a house,
fence or sign of human habitation in sight, I have been startled by the
weird, doleful howlings of the coyote or the melancholy hootings of the
prairie owl. At such times there came over me an undefined feeling of
loneliness, not real fear, but perhaps it was that instinctive dread of
darkness and danger at night that has come down to us from savage and
superstitious ancestors of past ages. Be that as it may, the sight of a
candle or lamp gleaming across the prairie, from some settler's window,
had a most welcome and cheering effect. Even the barking of a dog or
the noise of domestic fowls, or any sound indicating the proximity of
human beings tended to enliven the gloom and make home seem nearer.

Thirty or forty years ago we never dreamed that we should ever drive
over the country in an automobile. We considered ourselves pretty "well
fixed" when we had a good top buggy and a nimble team with which we
could make eight or nine miles an hour. In the fine weather of spring
and early summer, if there happened to be no need of special haste, it
was often a real pleasure to drive out through the country. When the
air was redolent with the perfume of flowers and growing vegetation, or
sweet with the perfume of new mown hay, the blue sky above, the distant
pine-covered mountains, the rolling, grass-covered hills and prairies,
all formed a combination well calculated to exhilarate and give delight.

But night visits in the winter time, during cold, stormy weather, were
altogether different, when, with darkness there was snow and mud, or
strong wind and hard freezing, and the physician had to plod his way
slowly along, sitting chilled through and through, feet almost frozen,
hands and fingers so benumbed they could hardly clasp the lines--no
play of the imagination could make it seem a pleasure trip. It was far
worse, however, when there were added to these conditions the feelings
and emotions caused by the consciousness that off in a little pioneer
cabin on the prairie, or in some gulch, or up in the mountains, there
was a patient that was lying at the point of death, with wild delirium
or low muttering and stupid mental wandering, or some woman shrieking
in agony and praying to God to send her relief from the suffering
she was enduring to give life to another, while friends distracted
were waiting and wishing the doctor would come. Spurred by these
reflections I have often plied the whip and automatically pushed on
the lines, to help my horses, my mind running ahead to my destination.
As disagreeable as were the outward circumstances, often the state of
mental torture and suspense were worse than the physical discomfort.

In those days, the physician had ample time to think while on his long
trips in the country, particularly when patients presented no serious
symptoms, or when returning home. Often on such occasions, I have
looked up at the starlit sky and the myriads of scintillating worlds
therein, and thought of the vastness of the universe, and of the aeons
of ages since all these blazing worlds were set floating in space. Then
came the thought of the immensity of the distance to even the nearest
fixed star, and of the vast stretches of the illimitable universe
beyond; and of the worlds in the outer confines of space beyond the
Milky Way or the Pleiades, whose light took thousands of years to
reach the earth. Then would come the thought, "Why all this stupendous
illimitable, incomprehensible aggregation of worlds?" "Are any of
the planets of these glowing orbs inhabited by intelligent beings?"
"If not, why do they exist at all?" Thus my thoughts have run on and
on, until cold, darkness, discomfort and almost everything else have
been forgotten and lost in my contemplations, and time passed almost
unperceived as I traversed the miles in solitude. At other times my
thoughts would run upon the problems of human existence, the connection
between mind and matter, the mystery of life and death.

Traveling on a moonlit night along the breaks of Snake River, Tucanon
or Alpowa, watching the silvery lights and dark shadow along the
escarpments and basaltic walls that border these streams and make
such grand and beautiful scenery, I pictured to my mind this country
when fresh from the hands of the fire gods, a seething, sizzling mass
of molten basalt. Then I thought of the long years of its cooling,
the gradual crumbling of the rock and the formation of the soil,
the appearance of plant and animal life, and of the tropical and
semi-tropical climate that must have existed; and of the wonderful
extinct animals that once inhabited our hills and valleys; of the hairy
mammoth, the three-toed horse and the other strange beings that roamed
through the forests that one time were here.

As I looked far down into the wonderful gorge through which Snake River
flows, and contemplated the many centuries it must have taken to cut
the great channel, it gave me a more comprehensive conception of how
the author of the universe operated in creation.

Back in the days when we drove buggies or rode horseback, we had
time on the road to do a lot of thinking, as well as of freezing and
scorching, or plodding through snow, mud or dust.

A physician trained in thought is sure to thresh out in his mind while
on the road, during the day or night, many knotty problems in the isms,
ologies and pathies of medical practice; and when serious sickness
claims his attention, and is pressing for his best endeavors, he will
search all the treasure houses of his memory for everything that he has
ever read or heard of in relation to similar cases. Often the time was
wearisome, roads were long, and waiting for pay for services was long,
and all this longness tended to make a shortness of the pocket-book.

When in the midst of weary night vigils, or when nearly worn out and
exhausted by loss of sleep, or when chilled to the bone by cold and
exposure, I have thought that if ever any one was justified in taking a
stimulant to "brace up," it is the overworked physician. While I never
took any kind of stimulant or narcotic, I have felt like making some
allowance for the hard driven doctor who occasionally took something to
brace him up and deaden his sensibility to cold and fatigue.

One of the worst combinations a doctor had to meet was a deep snow,
dense fog and unbroken roads. If added to this there was intense cold,
the trip was to be dreaded. One would be about as well off in the
middle of the Pacific Ocean, without a compass, as in such a snow and
fog. Whether one looked up, down or any other direction, the appearance
was all the same--it was one blank, impenetrable, misty-white. If a
man turned around and once missed his bearings, he was lost indeed.
There were instances, those days, where persons were caught out in the
darkness and wandered around all night on a forty-acre tract, utterly
bewildered. One who has been lost in one of those foggy snows will
never forget his sensations and feelings.

Time has wrought many changes since the days of the early settlement of
the country. Places that were reached only with the greatest difficulty
and sometimes with peril, we now drive up to on smooth roads of easy
grades. Where we could scarcely get to a cabin on horseback, one now
drives up with ease in an automobile to a beautiful modern home.

Where it used to take many hours or a whole day to make a visit, the
same distance can now be made in an hour or even in minutes. The
telephone, good roads, automobiles and new discoveries and advances
in medical science, surgery and pharmacy, have revolutionized medical
practice.

Riding out today, over on Snake River, out in the Deadman country, up
on the Pataha Prairie, up to Peola or the Blue Mountains, over on the
Tucanon or toward Lewiston or Dayton, one still sees here and there the
reminders of "old times" and "old timers." Here are the relics of old
cabins, where the pioneers first had their homes.

Memory goes back to a desperate case of typhoid fever here, or of
pneumonia or other disease over there. There come up memory pictures
of scenes of anxiety, suffering and suspense and then of recovery, or
possibly death.

Over yonder stood the home of an early pioneer. In that house was born
a son or daughter that today is leading in business and society; the
father and mother are sleeping in one of the cemeteries of the county.
A few are still lingering, old and feeble, waiting for the final
summons. Back in the mountains, where today we go gliding along in
automobiles on summer outings, there are still seen the fading sites of
the sawmills, pole and shingle mills that were operated there in early
days. These remind me of broken legs and arms, of wounds and accidents,
and of serious sickness that happened between thirty and forty years
ago. The places where the old mills stood are marked by little
clearings now overgrown with weeds and brush, with here and there a few
slabs, dim in piles of sawdust, and scattering stumps. The old mills
are gone and the people who owned and ran them have died or left the
country.

As I write these hasty reminiscences, I wonder if thirty-five or forty
years from now will bring as many changes to this country as the same
length of time in the past.

What wonderful improvements the science of medicine the past forty
years have brought! What additions to our knowledge of the cause of
disease, of disease germs and how to combat them, of serums, opsonins,
vaccines and of physiological chemistry! What advances have been made
in the knowledge of antiseptics and preventative medicine, and what
great strides in surgery and the treatment of wounds! What a vast field
has been opened up in the study of internal secretions of the ductless
glands and their relation to the well-being of the human physical
system.

What will be the state of medical science forty or fifty years from
now? Will physicians make their country calls in airplanes, soaring
over hills and plains high in air? In pioneer days anxious ears
strained for the sound of the gallop of the doctor's horse; later
the patter of horses' feet and the rattle of the buggy denoted the
approach of medical aid; now the gleam of the motor car lights announce
that relief is near. A few years hence, mayhap, anxious ones awaiting
awaiting the doctor will be made aware of his coming by the whir of
the airplane motor and anxiously view his approach through powerful
binoculars. Even now the most rosy dreams of our trail-making fathers
have been far surpassed. That vast expanse of sage and sand that formed
a large part of the Columbia River Valley will have become the garden
and granary of Northwestern America.

But the beautiful homes, fertile fields, green expanses of alfalfa,
the fruit-laden orchards, the cities and towns, schools, churches,
factories, mills and marts of industry, will, to those who never saw
the country in its original wildness, have little to tell of the toils,
struggles, waiting and weariness that were the cost of this marvelous
transformation.




PART III

PERIOD OF COUNTY DIVISIONS




CHAPTER I

POLITICAL HISTORY OF WALLA WALLA COUNTY SINCE COUNTY DIVISION


Beginning in 1876 with reduced area, but with rapid growth and with
encouraging outlook in all lines, Walla Walla County entered upon what
might be described as the third stage of her growth, that from county
division to statehood in 1889.

It is of interest to note a few statistics of the period of transition.
In 1870 the population of the Old County was 5,102. In 1877, the
reduced county showed a population, according to the assessor, of
5,056, while Columbia County had, by the assessor's report of the same
year, 3,618. By the report of 1875, still the Old County, the assessed
valuation was $2,792,065. In 1876, the valuation of the reduced county
was $2,296,870. There were reported at the same time 5,281 horses, 239
mules, 11,147 cattle, 13,233 sheep, 4,000 hogs, 1,774 acres of timothy,
700 acres of corn, 2,600 acres of oats, 6,000 acres of barley, 21,000
acres of wheat and 700 acres of fruit trees.


STATEHOOD AND CONSTITUTION

The political subject of greatest general interest was Statehood and a
Constitutional Convention leading thereto. The project of annexation to
Oregon was by no means dead. Senator Mitchell of Oregon continued the
efforts made by Senator Kelly. A considerable local interest, supported
by the _Walla Walla Union_, and its able editor, P. B. Johnson, still
urged annexation. One favorite idea, which has taken shape from time to
time since, was to join Eastern Oregon with Northern Idaho into a new
state. In the Congressional session of 1877-8, Delegate Orange Jacobs
requested a bill for introducing Washington to statehood with the three
counties of Northern Idaho added. But no action was taken by Congress.
In spite of that the Territorial Legislature in November, 1877, passed
a law providing for an election to be held April 9, 1878, to choose
delegates to a convention to meet at Walla Walla on June 11, 1878. Up
to that time, as we have seen, repeated attempts to secure a vote for
a convention had failed in Walla Walla. The act of the Legislature
provided that the convention should consist of fifteen members from
Washington, with one, having no vote, from Idaho.

In pursuance of the announcement the election was duly held, though
with the scanty vote of 4,223, not half the number of voters in the
territory. The convention duly met at Science Hall in Walla Walla, and
W. A. George of that city, one of the leading lawyers as well as one
of the most unique characters of the Inland Empire, acted as temporary
chairman.

The permanent organization consisted of A. S. Abernethy of Cowlitz
County as president, W. B. Daniels and William Clark as secretaries,
and H. D. Cook as sergeant-at-arms. After a lengthy session the
convention submitted a constitution which was voted upon at the next
general election in November. Though a considerable majority was
secured, exactly two-thirds, the total vote of 9,693 fell considerably
short of the vote cast for delegate, and it seems to have been
generally interpreted in Congress as evidence that the people of the
territory did not consider the time ripe for statehood. The whole
matter was, therefore, indefinitely postponed.

That same election of 1878 was notable for Walla Walla in several
respects. Two citizens of the city were rival nominees for the position
of congressional delegate, Thomas H. Brents for the republicans and
Nathan T. Caton for the democrats. It was the first election in which
the republicans won in Walla Walla County. Mr. Brents had a majority of
146 in the county and 1,301 in the territory. The political tide had
turned and from that time to the present the republicans have been,
on any ordinary issue, overwhelmingly in the majority. In 1880 Mr.
Brents was again chosen delegate, this time against Thomas Burke, the
democratic candidate, and by a majority of 1,797. During the first term
Mr. Brent endeavored to induce Congress to confer statehood upon the
territory but unavailingly. Still again in 1882 Mr. Brents was honored,
and with him also Walla Walla, and in fact the territory honored itself
in the re-election of one of its most useful and popular citizens,
by another term as delegate. During the six years of Mr. Brents'
incumbency the territory was making tremendous strides. The projection
of the Northern Pacific and Oregon Short Line Railroads, the sale of
Doctor Baker's railroad in 1879 to the O. R. & N. R. R., the Villard
coup d'etat in 1883 made the decade of the '80s the great building
period for the territory and for Walla Walla. It was evident that
there was abundant justification for the creation of a new state. Mr.
Brents kept the subject alive in Congress up to and through 1885, when
his term expired, and he was succeeded by one of the most brilliant
and popular politicians and lawyers ever in the territory, C. S.
Voorhees. Mr. Voorhees, son of the "Tall Sycamore of the Wabash," was,
of course, a democrat, and though at that time quite young, exercised
a large influence both at home and at the capital. He was twice chosen
Delegate, in 1884 and 1886. In 1888 the office returned to Walla Walla
and to the republican party. In that year John B. Allen began his
distinguished career at the national capital. He had held the position
of United States attorney, succeeding Judge Wingard, from 1875 to 1886.
In the latter year he removed to Walla Walla, and his career from that
time on was a part of the history of his home city and of the territory
and state.

As we have seen, E. P. Ferry was governor at the time of county
division in 1875. He held the office until 1880. W. A. Newell was
the next governor holding the position for four years, when Watson
C. Squire received the appointment, retaining the place till 1887.
Following came Eugene Semple for two years. The period of statehood was
now near at hand, and it may well be a matter of pride and interest
to Walla Walla that by appointment of President Harrison the last
territorial governor was a citizen of this place, Miles C. Moore.
Governor Moore had left his home in Ohio in 1860 hardly more than a
boy, and after some adventures in Montana, had reached Walla Walla in
1862, to become from that time onward one of the most eminent citizens
as well as one of the foremost business men of the community and of
the Northwest. It was recognized throughout the territory that the
appointment was exceedingly fitting from the standpoint of capacity to
fulfill the duties of the office, and was also a suitable compliment to
the historic city and mother county of Walla Walla. Although Governor
Moore's term was short, it possessed the unique interest of covering
the transition from territoryhood to statehood of what in general
judgment is destined to become one of the most important commonwealths
of the Union, and hence it cannot in the nature of the case be
duplicated by any other term.

[Illustration: HOMES ON PALOUSE STREET, WALLA WALLA]

[Illustration: VIEW OF WALLA WALLA HOMES ON BIRCH STREET]


ENABLING ACT

The Enabling Act of Congress, approved by President Harrison on
February 22, 1889, had the unique distinction of being the only
one providing for the erection of four states at once. These were
Washington, South Dakota, North Dakota, and Montana. As indicating the
fundamental basis on which the four states rest, the reader will be
interested in the following provisions of the Enabling Act:

"And said conventions shall provide by ordinances irrevocable without
the consent of the United States and the people of said states:

_First._ That perfect toleration of religious sentiment shall be
secured, and that no inhabitant of said states shall ever be molested
in person or property on account of his or her mode of religious
worship.

_Second._ That the people inhabiting said proposed states do agree
and declare that they forever disclaim all right and title to the
unappropriated public lands lying within the boundaries thereof, and
to all lands lying within said limits owned or held by any Indian
or Indian tribes; and that until the title thereto shall have been
extinguished by the United States, the same shall be and remain subject
to the disposition of the United States, and said Indian lands shall
remain under the absolute jurisdiction and control of the congress of
the United States; that the lands belonging to citizens of the United
States residing without the said state shall never be taxed at a higher
rate than the lands belonging to residents thereof; that no taxes shall
be imposed by the states on lands or property therein belonging to
or which may hereafter be purchased by the United States or reserved
for its use. But nothing herein, or in the ordinances herein provided
for, shall preclude the said states from taxing as other lands are
taxed, any lands owned or held by any Indian who has severed his tribal
relations, and has obtained from the United States or from any person a
title thereto by patent or other grant, save and except such lands as
have been or may be granted to any Indian or Indians under any act of
Congress containing a provision exempting the lands thus granted from
taxation; but said ordinances shall provide that all such lands shall
be exempt from taxation by said states so long and to such extent as
such act of Congress may prescribe.

_Third._ That the debts and liabilities of said territories shall be
assumed and paid by said states respectively.

_Fourth._ That provision shall be made for the establishment and
maintenance of systems of public schools, which shall be open to all
the children of said states and free from sectarian control."

In accordance with the Enabling Act, the Constitutional Convention of
Washington Territory met at Olympia, July 4, 1889. The constitution
prepared during the fifty-day session was ratified at the polls on
October 1, 1889. Of the seventy-five members of the convention three
represented Walla Walla, two were from Dayton, and one from Pomeroy.
It may be safely said that every one was a man in whose knowledge
and judgment his fellow citizens could repose confidence, while the
personal character of each was such as to secure the hearty affection
of his community. The entire convention, in fact, was a body of whom
the state has always been proud, and being to a peculiar degree the
result of popular choice the election of such men is a convincing
evidence of the worth and capacity of democratic institutions. Not the
least of the counties to be congratulated on their choices were those
composing Old Walla Walla.

The members of the convention from Walla Walla included two of the
foremost lawyers of the territory, Judge B. L. Sharpstein, whose long
life left a legacy of good deeds to his city and state and whose
foremost position at the bar has been maintained by his sons, and
D. J. Crowley, one of the most brilliant lawyers ever known in the
state, whose residence in Walla Walla was short, though his influence
was great. His early death was a great loss to the state. Dr. N. G.
Blalock, the "Good Doctor," honored and loved perhaps beyond any other
man in the history of Walla Walla, was the other representative of his
county. It was a source of just pride to Doctor Blalock that he was the
author of the provision forbidding the sale of school land at less than
ten dollars per acre. By this and other allied provisions the school
lands have been handled in such a way as to provide a great sum for
the actual use of the children of the commonwealth, instead of being
shamefully squandered by culpable officials, as has been the experience
in some states, notably our sister state of Oregon. Judge Sharpstein
and Doctor Blalock were democrats in political faith, but neither was a
partisan. Mr. Crowley was a republican.

S. G. Cosgrove of Pomeroy was the representative of Garfield and
Asotin counties, one of the best of men and one of the ablest lawyers
of his section, later elected governor of the state, but dying almost
immediately after his inauguration, to the profound regret of men of
all parties. He was an independent republican in politics. He had been
a college classmate and intimate friend of Vice President Fairbanks.
The delegates from Columbia County were M. M. Godman, a democrat,
one of the leading lawyers and foremost politicians of the state,
subsequently a member of the Public Service Commission of the State,
and R. F. Sturdevant, a republican, also a lawyer of high ability and
well proven integrity, afterwards the superior judge of this district.

By the twenty-second article of the Constitution the legislature was
so apportioned that Asotin and Garfield counties constituted the Sixth
Senatorial District entitled to one senator and each was entitled
to one representative in the House; Columbia became the Seventh
District, having one senator and two representatives; and Walla Walla
composed the Eighth District with two senators, and in the House three
representatives.

The first legislature of 1889-90 had in its senate, from our four
counties, C. G. Austin of Pomeroy for Garfield and Asotin; H. H.
Wolfe of Dayton for Columbia; Platt Preston of Waitsburg and George
T. Thompson of Walla Walla for Walla Walla. The representatives were:
William Farrish of Asotin City for Asotin and Garfield; H. B. Day of
Dayton and A. H. Weatherford of Dayton for Columbia; and J. M. Cornwell
of Dixie, J. C. Painter of Estes, and Z. K. Straight of Walla Walla for
Walla Walla County.

That first legislature enacted that the senate should henceforth
consist of thirty-four members, and the house of seventy-eight; that
the counties of Garfield, Asotin, and Columbia should constitute the
Eighth Senatorial District, entitled to one senator; that the counties
of Franklin and Adams, and the Third and Fourth wards of the City of
Walla Walla, and the precincts of Wallula, Frenchtown, Lower Touchet,
Prescott, Hadley, Eureka, Hill and Baker, of Walla Walla County, should
constitute the Ninth Senatorial District, entitled to one senator;
that the First and Second wards of the City of Walla Walla, and the
precincts of Waitsburg, Coppei, Dry Creek, Russell Creek, Mill Creek,
Washington, and Small, should compose the Tenth Senatorial District,
entitled to one senator; that Asotin should constitute the Eighth
Representative District with one representative; Garfield, the Ninth
with one representative; Columbia, the Tenth with one; the First and
Second wards of Walla Walla City, with the precincts of Waitsburg,
Coppei, Dry Creek, Russell Creek, Mill Creek, Washington, and Small,
the Eleventh District with one representative; and the Third and Fourth
wards of Walla Walla City, with the precincts of Wallula, Frenchtown,
Lower Touchet, Prescott, Hadley, Eureka, Hill, and Baker, the Twelfth
District with one representative.

Such was the induction of the State of Washington into the Union, and
the representation of our four counties in the first Legislature. We
shall give later the delegations to subsequent legislatures, with the
lists of county officers.

Politics in the new state bubbled vigorously at once and during the
twenty-seven years of statehood Walla Walla, Columbia, Garfield, and
Asotin have played their full parts in state affairs. To enter into an
extended account of state politics is beyond the scope of this work. We
can speak of it only at its points of contact with our county history.

In the first election of United States senators November, 1889, John
B. Allen of Walla Walla, and Watson C. Squire were chosen, the former
drawing the four-year term, which entitled him to the place until
March 4, 1893. The senatorial election of 1893 was one of the most
extraordinary in the history of such elections and involved a number
of distinguished men in this section of the state. The fundamental
struggle was between the adherents of John B. Allen of Walla Walla
and George Turner of Spokane, both republicans. It became a factional
fight of the bitterest type. One hundred and one ballots were taken
unavailingly and then the Legislature adjourned sine die, with no
choice. The last ballot records the names of two citizens of Walla
Walla, one of Dayton, and one now, although not then, a citizen of
Walla Walla. The Walla Walla candidates were John B. Allen with fifty
votes, lacking seven of a majority, and Judge B. L. Sharpstein. The
Dayton name was that of J. C. Van Patten, and the name of the present
citizen of Walla Walla was Henry Drum, now warden of the penitentiary.

Upon the failure of the Legislature to elect, Governor McGraw appointed
John B. Allen to fill the vacancy. Proceeding to Washington Mr. Allen
presented his case to the Senate, but in that case, as in others, that
body decided and very properly, that the state must go unrepresented
until the Legislature could perform its constitutional duties. It
is safe to say that that experience, with similar ones in other
states, was one of the great influences in causing the amendment to
the Constitution providing for direct election by the people. The
spectacle of the Legislature neglecting its law-making functions to
wrangle over the opposing ambitions of senatorial aspirants, fatally
impaired the confidence of the people in the wisdom of the old method
of choice. That amendment may be regarded also as one of the striking
manifestations of American political evolution, in which there has
come a recognition of the danger of legislative bodies, chosen by
popular suffrage, becoming the tools of personal or corporate interests
instead of the servants of the people who chose them, and by which,
in consequence, the evils of popular government are being remedied by
being made more popular.

Two other citizens of Walla Walla have represented the state in the
National Congress, and several others have been willing to. These are
Levi Ankeny and Miles Poindexter, the latter having begun his political
career at Walla Walla, but having removed to Spokane and become
superior judge there before entering upon his term as congressman in
1909 and senator in 1911, to be re-elected in 1916. Senator Ankeny,
one of the most prominent of the permanent citizens of Walla Walla,
and one of the greatest bankers in the Northwest, being president of
eleven banks in Oregon, Washington, and Idaho, was elected senator in
1903 and served until 1909. He was deservedly popular throughout the
section in which he lived, for his broad and generous business methods
as well as for his general character. During the hard times of the
'90s, in which many of the farmers of Walla Walla and Columbia counties
were next door to ruin, it is remembered that Mr. Ankeny could have
acquired by foreclosure of his immense loans lands whose value is now
tenfold the amount of the mortgages of those hard times. But by aiding
and encouraging the struggling farmers of that time and neglecting
the advantage which he himself might have gained he kept them upon
their feet and thus conferred an immeasurable benefit not only upon
individuals, but upon the country as a whole. During Mr. Ankeny's term
in the Senate extensive improvements were made in the buildings at Fort
Walla Walla.


THE PENITENTIARY

Another of the leading political connections of Walla Walla County
with the state was the penitentiary. This institution was removed from
Seatco to Walla Walla in 1887. The county commissioners at that time
were F. W. Paine, Francis Lowden, and Platt Preston. These men, and
particularly Mr. Paine, felt that not only from the standpoint of the
state, for desirability of location and economy of subsistence, but
from the fact that constructive works might be operated which could be
of benefit to the farmers of the region, this change of place would
be wise. The most distinctive features of labor have been the brick
yards, which did a very large and profitable work for many years and
were discontinued in 1900 to allow the management to put the main
force upon the jute mills, for the making of grain bags and rugs and
other fabrics. This system of constructive labor by the inmates of the
penitentiary is to be attributed largely to the intelligent business
conceptions as well as philanthropic interest in the men by Mr. F.
W. Paine and Mr. W. K. Kirkman. They had formed the impression that
for the sake of health of mind and body in the prisoners systematic
labor was a necessity, and also that the products of that labor might
go for to lighten the burdens of tax payers. Their theory has been
triumphantly vindicated by the history of the penitentiary. Not at all
times in the thirty years of its existence has the institution been
conducted in the interest either of reclamation of criminals or of
saving expense to the state. As in all such cases there have been times
when the main aims were political rather than penal or economic, and
there have been still more times when the other party said they were,
even when governors, boards, and wardens were doing their best in the
public interest.

[Illustration:

  Warden's Residence
  Work Shops
  Administration Building
  The Hospital
  The Jute Mill

BUILDINGS OF THE WASHINGTON STATE PENITENTIARY]

The wardens in order of service, several of them being citizens of
Walla Walla, and about an equal number coming from other parts of the
state, have been John Justice, F. L. Edmiston, John McClees, J. H.
Coblentz, Thomas Mosgrove, J. B. Catron, Frank Kees, F. A. Dryden,
Charles Reed and Henry Drum.

There have been a number of tragic events in the history of the
penitentiary of which perhaps the most thrilling was the attempted
escape of a large number of prisoners during the wardenship of Mr.
McClees in 1891. At that time it was the practice to run a train of
flat cars to Dixie to get clay for the brick yards. Two desperadoes
conceived the idea of capturing a train as it went through the gate,
loading a number of prisoners on it, running to Dixie, there turning
loose on the farms, getting horses and provisions, and striking out
for the mountains. It was a bold, well-conceived project and came
near execution. A number of prisoners were "in" on the scheme, and at
the given signal, several who were experienced engineers and firemen
performed their part of the plot by seizing the locomotive. At the same
instant the two ringleaders by a bold dash seized Warden McClees and
walked him toward the gate, commanding him on pain of instant death to
order the opening of the gates and the clearing of the track for the
passage of the train. The warden preserved most extraordinary nerve,
even while the two ruffians were holding over his head knives which
they had snatched up from the kitchen. In the instant he called out to
Phil Berry, one of the guards on the wall, whom he knew to be a dead
shot, "Be cool, Phil, take your time!" Even while the two knives were
in the very act to strike, Berry's rifle cracked twice in succession,
and the leaders fell on either side of the warden, each with a bullet
in his heart. About the quickest work of the kind ever known here or
elsewhere. The fall of the leaders disconcerted the whole program, and
after a few moments of intense excitement the guards got control of the
situation, and the affair was all over.

Another of the desperate events was the case of Warden J. H. Coblentz.
He was an appointee of Governor McGraw and was the most conspicuous
example of a purely political appointment. After a slashing career in
which he endeavored to dictate the politics of the county purely in
the interest of himself and his clique he found himself on the verge
of exposure for irregularities in his accounts. Governor McGraw with
other state officers came to Walla Walla to investigate, and while they
were in the penitentiary office conducting the investigation, Coblentz,
seeing that conviction was inevitable and knowing that if he himself
became an innate of the penitentiary along with the prisoners whom he
had abused, his life was not worth a nickel, anticipated the verdict,
and snatching up a pistol, put it to his head and fell dead in the
presence of the governor.

It is no disparagement to the earlier wardens--for the conditions
probably did not make earlier action feasible--to say that Mr. Reed
and Mr. Drum have represented a new order in the history of the
penitentiary. Both have been students of criminology, are thinkers
and philanthropists, and have inaugurated advanced methods which have
placed the Washington penitentiary in the front rank of well conducted
institutions of its class.


LOCAL POLITICAL HISTORY

Turning now from state connections to matters local to Walla Walla
County it may be said that there was during the period of 1875-89
a marked tendency to that political conservatism which is apt to
characterize a growing agricultural community. Walla Walla, like
Portland, has been since its first era more of the Eastern type
than of the characteristically Western. The general tendency has
been, in politics as in business, to play safe and not make reckless
experiments. This attitude is denominated wisdom or moss-backism
by different parties very much according to their viewpoint, and
especially whether they are "in" or "out." The great "isms" which swept
the country in the '80s and '90s, populistic movements as represented
by Bryan and other great leaders, in general received the cold shoulder
from Walla Walla. That statement should be qualified to considerable
degree, however, by the fact that the combination of democrats,
populists, and silver republicans, carried several elections, and that
even the republican leaders very largely accepted the doctrine of "16
to 1."

There were also, even in conservative Walla Walla, many enthusiastic
followers of Governor John R. Rogers, "Wheat Chart" Jones, Judge
Ronald, and that most brilliant and spectacular of all the politicians
of the period, the "pink-whiskered" James Hamilton Lewis, whose
great abilities, even under the outward guise of certain "airs" and
"fopperies," have been conceded by his critics and detractors down
to the present date of his distinguished service as senator from
Illinois. It is remembered, however, by men of both parties that at
a certain historic joint debate in Walla Walla on October 22, 1898,
even the brilliant "Dude Lewis" was somewhat seriously "beaten up,"
metaphorically speaking, by Wesley L. Jones, and that the former
somewhat lost prestige as a result, and that the latter was launched by
that event upon what has proved to be a continuous service in Congress
as representative and senator from 1899 to the present date.

A few figures of elections during that period will be found of
interest. In 1889, Ferry, republican candidate for governor, the first
under statehood, received in Walla Walla County 1,433 votes to 1,186
for Semple, the democratic candidate. In 1892 McGraw, republican, had
1,211 to 1,322 for Snively, democrat. There were a few votes for Greene
and Young in the latter election, so that the total vote in 1892 was
2,897, as against 2,619 in 1889.

The presidential vote of 1892 shows that Walla Walla County cast
for the highest republican elector 1,362 ballots and for the
highest democratic 1,313, with a few for the people's party and
prohibitionists, a total of 2,889. In the presidential election of
1896, the republican vote was 1,596, the people's party (fusion of
democrats, populists and silver republicans) had a vote of 1,652, while
there were a few prohibitionists and gold democrats, a total of 3,349.
Comparing these figures with those of 1908 and 1916, the following
interesting results appear: in 1908. Bryan, 1,660; Taft, 2,843; a few
for others, so that the total was 4,676; for governor, Pattison,
democrat, 1,881; Cosgrove, republican, 2,670--total vote, 4,551. In
1916, results were: Wilson, 4,421; Hughes, 4,403; total, 8,824; for
senator, Turner, democrat, 3,328; Poindexter, progressive republican,
5,454; for governor, Lister, democrat, 4,991; McBride, republican,
4,040. The great increase in the last election is due to woman suffrage.

Analysis of the above and of other election returns plainly signifies
that while Walla Walla County may in general terms be considered
conservative, there is a healthy balance of parties, and that no
particular group of politicians can count with any certainty on
"delivering the goods." The result of the last election in these
counties of Old Walla Walla, as well as the state at large and indeed
the West as a whole, may be considered as a demonstration of the
progressive and independent spirit of this new country, which resents
"bossism" and "back-room" politics and moves ever steadily toward
genuine democratic government. While on general views of historic
questions, particularly those concerned with slavery and secession and
those bearing upon nationalism as against state rights, these sections
are overwhelmingly republican, after the historic views of Clay,
Webster, Lincoln, Seward, Blaine, and other national leaders, yet upon
the newer issues of economics, government control of railroads and
other public utilities, and foreign relations, they may be counted on
to do their own thinking and to make decisions very disconcerting to
the old-time bosses.

In connection with the figures which we gave it is interesting as a
side light on population and the shiftings of growth to give here
certain figures of comparison between Old Walla Walla and other parts
of the state in early days and now. In 1880 the largest urban center
was Walla Walla, with 3,588 people, Seattle was next with 3,533.
Spokane had 350. In 1890, Walla Walla had 4,709; Seattle 42,837;
Spokane, 19,922. In 1910, Walla Walla, 19,364; Seattle, 237,194;
Spokane, 104,402. In 1917, estimated: Walla Walla, 25,000; Seattle,
330,843; Spokane, 125,000. The enormous increase in population upon
the Sound as commercial center, and at Spokane as a prospective
manufacturing and an actual railroad center, is simply an indication
of the natural tendencies of trade and industry characteristic of the
world's growth. A purely agricultural region cannot expect to keep pace
with those marked out by nature for commerce and manufacturing.

It is, however, an interesting point in the history of Walla Walla
whether, if it had "taken the tide at the flood," it might not have
maintained its leadership as an inland city. It is a favorite idea
with some of the best observers among the old-timers that Walla
Walla, instead of Spokane, might have been the manufacturing and
transportation center for the Inland Empire, if certain conditions
had been fulfilled. The first of those was location. The true spot
for the large city in the Walla Walla Valley was where Touchet is now
located. While Walla Walla is an admirable location for a large town,
the Touchet region is better. The great point, however, is elevation.
Walla Walla is 920 feet above sea level, Touchet is 447. Walla Walla is
thirty-two miles from the Columbia River, Touchet is sixteen. It would
have been quite feasible to make a canal from Touchet to the Columbia.
That question was agitated and if the town had been there instead of on
Mill Creek, it would no doubt have been made. If that had been done, or
even if not, the railroad and wagon haul to Touchet was so much easier
and shorter, as to represent a great saving in cost of transportation.
If that condition of location had been realized, and if inducements
had been offered to the Northern Pacific Railroad builders, it is
asserted by those who know that that railroad would have preferred
Walla Walla (or Touchet) as its chief point in interior Washington.
The difference between 920 and 447 feet would have been determinative
of grades. The Northern Pacific officials were really desirous--so
it is claimed--to take a more southern route, following the Mullan
Road through the Bitter Roots, then down the Clearwater and the Snake
to a point on the Lower Walla Walla. Finding no local encouragement
or inducements, they finally undertook the more northern route, and
Spokane is the result. However, all that is matter of conjecture,
rather than demonstration.


WOMAN SUFFRAGE AND PROHIBITION

One of the questions of Walla Webs politics, as of the rest of the
state and indeed of the country, was woman suffrage. As the logical
evolution of democracy that view of suffrage appealed to the Western
man, and the conventional objections had little weight with him.
Pressure was brought from all sides upon the legislative delegations to
submit the proposition to a popular election--and when that occurred in
1908, it carried in the county and the state by a heavy vote. It has
seemed to the voters of both sexes so natural a condition that they can
now hardly conceive of any other. The woman suffrage amendment came
with a remarkable quietude and almost as a matter of course.

Far more vigorously contested was the question of prohibition. For many
years Waitsburg and almost all the farming country had been strongly
in favor of prohibition. Waitsburg had under the local option law
excluded saloons. But the saloon influences were strong in Walla Walla
City, and underground agencies of sundry kinds had maintained a tight
grip on municipal politics. At various times somewhat spasmodic waves
of moral reform swept over the city, as in the organization of the
Municipal League in 1896 and in other similar movements at later times.
But in general both city and county politics, as in most parts of the
United States, were seemingly dominated by the liquor interests. Yet
all through those years there was in progress one of those elemental
popular movements going down to the very foundations of society which
when finally directed toward a definite end become irresistible. Moral,
economic, sanitary, educational, religious, domestic influences,
were for a generation moulding the opinions of an army of voters and
the combined effect began to be manifest from about 1900 onward to a
degree that even the blindest could not fail to see. In 1908, 1910
and 1912, a determined and growing effort by the farmers who had seen
the economic loss through laborers and even their own sons going to
town and carousing and so losing a day or more every week, started a
corresponding movement in town. At first not successful, the campaign
kept gaining. Councilmen in the city and commissioners in the county
were chosen more and more in the direction of reform. The churches,
Young Men's Christian Association, schools, women's organizations,
Salvation Army, Good Templars, and especially the Anti-Saloon League,
each contributed its push. A city election under the local option law
occurred in 1912. The conservative business interests opposed the
proposition and even imported distinguished speakers from the East,
particularly from the beer center, Milwaukee, and on election day the
liquor traffic (styled "Personal Liberty") was still in the saddle.
But it was clear that the vote of the city, combined with that of the
county, would come back with greater strength in another election, and
some of the more far-seeing liquor dealers began arrangements to enter
other business. In the great historical election of 1914, the State of
Washington secured a definite prohibition law by referendum, though
with the "permit" system of personal importation of limited amounts of
liquor. Walla Walla County was one of the strong counties in support
of the law, being surpassed only by Yakima and Whitman in majority for
the measure. It was to a degree an "East Side" victory, for the East
Side gave over 25,000 affirmative while the West Side, due to the heavy
negative vote of Seattle, gave 10,000 negative. None who was in Walla
Walla during the strenuous campaign in October of 1914 will forget the
powerful addresses in favor of the law by H. S. Blandford, one of the
most eloquent speakers known in this section. His thrilling appeals
and incontrovertible arguments brought many voters to the standard of
prohibition. His lamented death in 1915 robbed the Walla Walla bar of
one of its brightest ornaments.

[Illustration: HOME OF B. P. O. ELKS NO. 287, WALLA WALLA]

Old John Barleycorn died hard, and in the election of 1916 the battle
was fought over again by a vote on several initiative and referendum
measures, as a result of which the "permit" system was replaced by a
"bone-dry" law, and the liquor propositions were buried so deep that no
resurrection now seems possible. In Walla Walla the gloomy predictions
as to unused buildings and ruined business and overwhelming taxation
have failed of fulfillment to a degree to make them absurd.

The most prominent questions of local improvement during recent years
in Walla Walla County have been the new courthouse and the paving
and other improvement of roads. Several elections of commissioners
turned upon the first question. There were three propositions ardently
advocated from 1910 to 1914. One was to repair the old building,
though it had been condemned by experts; another was to make a costly
structure at a maximum outlay of $300,000; the third proposal was for
a substantial, but plain and modest building, of approximately a cost
of $150,000. The latter proposition commended itself to the general
judgment, and the commissioners of 1912 and 1914, H. A. Reynolds, E. D.
Eldridge, and J. L. Reavis, interpreted their election as a commission
to proceed with such a plan. The result has been realized in one of the
most fitting and dignified and altogether attractive, though not showy,
courthouses in the state, a just pride to the county and an object of
admiration to visitors.

Of the road question it may only be said that it is in a formative
state. Much money has been wasted in both city and country by
ill-constructed pavements, and it can only be hoped that the next
decade will see more definite progress than has characterized the
experimental stage of the last.

We have given in a preceding chapter the tabulation of county officials
to the time of county division in 1875. We now present the legislative
delegations and the chief county officials from that date to the
present:


LEGISLATIVE DELEGATIONS AND THE CHIEF COUNTY OFFICIALS

In 1876, Walla Walla County was represented in the Legislature by
Daniel Stewart, councilman, and W. T. Barnes, William Martin, A. J.
Gregory, and H. A. Vansycle, representatives. The county officers
were: T. J. Anders, attorney; G. F. Thomas, sheriff; T. P. Page,
auditor; W. O'Donnell, treasurer; Samuel Jacobs, assessor; P. Zahner,
surveyor; A. W. Sweeney, superintendent of schools; L. H. Goodwin,
coroner; D. J. Storms, James Braden, and Dion Keefe, commissioners.

The election in 1878 resulted thus: J. H. Day, councilman; J. A.
Taylor, D. J. Storms, J. M. Dewar, and M. F. Colt, representatives; R.
F. Sturdevant, attorney; R. Guichard, probate judge; J. B. Thompson,
sheriff; W. C. Painter, auditor; J. F. Boyer, treasurer; S. Jacobs,
assessor; P. Zahner, surveyor; C. W. Wheeler, superintendent of
schools; J. M. Boyd, coroner; M. B. Ward, Amos Cummings and S. H.
Erwin, commissioners.

In 1880, election results were these: B. L. Sharpstein, councilman;
Jacob Hoover, joint councilman; R. R. Rees and W. G. Preston,
representatives; J. M. Cornwell, joint representative; R. Guichard,
probate judge; G. T. Thompson, attorney; W. C. Painter, auditor; J.
B. Thompson, sheriff; J. F. Boyer, treasurer; S. Jacobs, assessor;
F. H. Loehr, surveyor; C. W. Wheeler, superintendent of schools;
H. G. Mauzey, coroner; M. B. Ward, Amos Cummings and S. H. Erwin,
commissioners; A. S. LeGrow, sheep commissioner. As may be seen from
the above, nearly all the incumbents of 1878 were re-elected for
another term. That policy became common in subsequent elections.

In 1882 we find the following choices: H. H. Hungate, A. G. Lloyd,
and Milton Evans, representatives; G. T. Thompson, attorney; W. C.
Painter, auditor; J. B. Thompson, sheriff; J. F. Boyer, treasurer;
William Harkness, assessor; F. H. Loehr, surveyor; J. W. Brock, school
superintendent; R. Guichard, probate judge; M. B. Ward, Amos Cummings,
and S. H. Erwin, commissioners; W. B. Wells, coroner; A. S. LeGrow,
sheep commissioner.

The choices in 1884 were these: J. F. Brewer, William Fudge, and J. M.
Dewar, representatives; E. K. Hanna, attorney; W. C. Painter, auditor;
A. S. Bowles, sheriff; J. F. Boyer, treasurer; L. H. Bowman, assessor;
J. B. Wilson, surveyor; J. W. Morgan, superintendent of schools;
R. Guichard, probate judge; H. R. Keylor, coroner; Amos Cummings,
W. P. Reser, and W. G. Babcock, commissioners; A. S. LeGrow, sheep
commissioner.

In 1886, results were as follows: Platt Preston and W. M. Clark,
representatives; L. R. Hawley, auditor; A. S. Bowles, sheriff; J. F.
Boyer, treasurer; M. H. Paxton, assessor; J. M. Allen, surveyor; Ellen
Gilliam, superintendent of schools; T. C. Taylor, Joseph Paul, and
Edwin Weary, commissioners; H. R. Keylor, coroner; Timothy Barry, sheep
commissioner.

The election of 1888 brought these results: J. M. Dewar, councilman;
E. L. Powell, W. H. Upton, and L. T. Parker, representatives; T. J.
Anders, attorney; L. R. Hawley, auditor; J. M. McFarland, sheriff; M.
McManamon, Edwin Weary, and J. W. Morgan, commissioners; H. W. Eagan,
probate judge; J. F. Boyer, treasurer; M. H. Paxton, assessor; J. B.
Gehr, school superintendent; L. W. Loehr, surveyor; Y. C. Blalock,
coroner.

In 1889 came entrance to statehood, and of that we have already spoken.
The election of October 1st, of that year provided for the choice of
congressmen, state officers, legislators, judge of Superior Court, and
county clerk. Of the first two we have given the ranks earlier.

The following were chosen members of that first State Legislature:
George T. Thompson and Platt Preston, senators; J. C. Painter, J. M.
Cornwell and Z. K. Straight, representatives.

All the above were republicans.

William H. Upton became superior judge for the district, including
Walla Walla and Franklin counties. E. B. Whitman was chosen county
clerk. Both were republicans. One strange thing was that Walla Walla,
like the other counties of the group, voted against the Constitution.

The year 1890 saw the following members of the Legislature and local
officers chosen: J. L. Sharpstein, dem., and J. C. Painter, rep.,
representatives; H. S. Blandford, dem., attorney; H. W. Eagan, dem.,
clerk; W. B. Hawley, rep., auditor; J. M. McFarland, rep., sheriff; R.
Guichard, dem., treasurer; J. M. Hill, rep., Milton Aldrich, rep., and
Francis Lowden, dem., commissioners; J. B. Gehr, rep., superintendent
of schools; M. H. Paxton, rep., assessor; Y. C. Blalock, rep., coroner;
L. W. Loehr, rep., surveyor.

Of the interesting national and state choices of 1892, we have
already given the figures. The legislative and local results were
these: A. Cameron, rep., Joseph Merchant, rep., and David Miller,
dem., representatives; J. L. Roberts, rep., senator; W. H. Upton,
rep., superior judge; H. W. Eagan, dem., clerk; Miles Poindexter,
dem., attorney; W. B. Hawley, rep., and J. J. Huffman, dem., had a
tie for auditor, and by mutual agreement the office was divided, each
serving as principal one year and as deputy one year; C. C. Gose,
dem., sheriff; H. H. Hungate, dem., treasurer; Edward McDonnell, J.
B. Caldwell, and F. M. Lowden, all democrats, commissioners; E. L.
Brunton, rep., superintendent of schools; T. H. Jessup, dem., assessor;
J. B. Wilson, rep., surveyor; C. B. Stewart, dem., coroner.

As will be seen, that was a democratic year, eleven to seven.

The election of 1894, the "calamity year," reversed conditions, two
democrats, Ellingsworth for sheriff and Nalder for commissioner, being
the only successful democratic candidates. The outcome was thus:
Joseph Merchant and J. W. Morgan, representatives; Mr. Morgan having
but two the lead of Francis Garracht, his democratic competitor; R.
H. Ormsbee, attorney; Le F. A. Shaw, clerk; A. H. Crocker, auditor;
Wm. Ellingsworth, sheriff; M. H. Paxton, treasurer; E. L. Brunton,
superintendent of schools; J. B. Wilson, assessor; E. S. Clark,
surveyor; S. M. White, coroner; Frank Nalder and Amos Cummings,
commissioners.

The year 1896 brings us to the great "16 to 1" campaign, Bryan and
the "cross of gold," populists, and general upset of all political
programs. In local, as in the national votes, the "Pp." appears with
somewhat startling frequency.

Results appear as follows: John I. Yeend, Pp., state senator, ninth
district; David Miller, Pp., state senator, tenth district; A.
Matthoit, Pp., representative, eleventh district; J. H. Marshall, rep.,
representative, twelfth district; T. H. Brents, rep., judge Superior
Court; Frank Sharpstein, Pp., attorney; A. H. Crocker, rep., auditor;
J. E. Mullinix; Pp., clerk; Wm. Ellingsworth, Pp., sheriff; M. H.
Paxton, rep., treasurer; E. S. Clark, rep., surveyor; Wm. Gholson,
Pp., assessor; G. S. Bond, rep., superintendent of schools; W. D.
Smith, rep., coroner; Milton Evans, Pp., and Oscar Drumheller, Pp.,
commissioners. Nine "Pps." and seven "Repubs."

In 1898 the normal dominance of the republicans was re-established.
The democrats succeeded in electing the treasurer only, of all their
candidates. Results were as follows: C. C. Gose, representative,
twelfth district; Grant Copeland, representative, eleventh district;
Frank Kees, sheriff; Schuyler Arnold, clerk; C. N. McLean, auditor; J.
W. McGhee, Jr., treasurer, the solitary democrat; Oscar Cain, attorney;
Walter Cadman, assessor; G. S. Bond, school superintendent; W. G.
Sayles, surveyor; Y. C. Blalock, coroner; Delos Coffin and D. C. Eaton,
commissioners.

Beginning with 1900 the results of elections placed the following in
their respective positions:

1900--Superior judge, Thos. H. Brents; county auditor, Clark N.
McLean; county sheriff, A. Frank Kees; county clerk, Schuyler Arnold;
county treasurer, Wm. B. Hawley; county attorney, Oscar Cain; county
surveyor, Willis G. Sayles; superintendent of schools, E. Elmer Myers;
county coroner, Samuel A. Owens; commissioner first district, Delos
Coffin (hold over); commissioner second district, Edward Cornwell;
commissioner third district, Amos Cummings; justice of peace, Wm.
Glasford; constable, J. C. Hillman.

1902--County sheriff, Charles S. Painter; county clerk, Arthur A.
Hauerbach; county auditor, James Z. Smith; county treasurer, William B.
Hawley; county prosecuting attorney, Lester S. Wilson; county assessor,
Richard J. Berryman; superintendent of schools, J. Elmer Myers; county
surveyor, Lewis W. Loehr; county coroner, Winfield D. Smith; county
commissioner first district, Frank E. Smith; commissioner third
district, J. N. McCaw; commissioner second district, Edward Cornwell
(hold over); justice of peace, James J. Huffman; county constable, L.
C. Goodwin.

1904--Superior judge, Thos. H. Brents; county sheriff, Charles S.
Painter; county clerk, Dorsey M. Hill; county auditor, W. J. Honeycutt;
county treasurer, Philip B. Hawley; county prosecuting attorney, Lester
S. Wilson; county assessor, Richard J. Berryman; county superintendent
of schools, Grant S. Bond; county surveyor, Lewis W. Loehr; county
coroner, Winfield D. Smith; commissioner first district, Geo.
Struthers; commissioner second district, John H. Morrow; commissioner
third district, J. N. McCaw (hold over); justice of peace, James J.
Huffman; constable, Nels O. Peterson.

1906--County sheriff, James S. Haviland; county clerk, Dorsey M. Hill;
county auditor, J. N. McCaw; county treasurer, Wm. J. Honeycutt; county
prosecuting attorney, Otto B. Rupp; county assessor, Michael Toner;
county superintendent of schools, Grant S. Bond; county surveyor,
Geo. Winkle; county coroner, Geo. MacMartin; commissioner second
district, J. L. Harper; commissioner third district, Wm. G. Cordiner;
commissioner first district, Geo. Struthers (hold over); justice of
peace, J. J. Huffman; constable, N. O. Peterson.

1908--Superior judge, Thos. H. Brents; county sheriff, J. S. Haviland;
county clerk, James Williams; county auditor, J. N. McCaw; county
treasurer, J. Carter Smith; county prosecuting attorney, Everett J.
Smith; county assessor, Mike Toner; county superintendent of schools,
Josephine Preston; county engineer, G. W. Winkle; county coroner, Geo.
MacMartin; commissioner first district, Fred Greenville; commissioner
third district, Chas. F. Cummings; commissioner second district, J. L.
Harper (hold over); justice of peace, T. M. McKinney; constable, N. O.
Peterson.

1910--County sheriff, Michael Toner; county clerk, E. L. Casey; county
auditor, Jack W. Sweazy; county treasurer, J. Carter Smith; county
assessor, L. R. Hawley; county superintendent of schools, Josephine
Preston; county prosecuting attorney, E. J. Smith; county engineer,
L. W. Loehr; county coroner, Emmett Hennessey; commissioner first
district, J. N. McCaw; commissioner second district, Marcus Zuger, Jr.;
commissioner third district, Chas. F. Cummings (hold over).

1912--Superior judge, Thos. H. Brents; county sheriff, M. Toner;
county clerk, E. L. Casey; county auditor, J. W. Sweazy; county
treasurer, Alex Mackay; county prosecuting attorney, M. A. Stafford;
county assessor, L. R. Hawley; commissioner second district, H. D.
Eldridge; commissioner third district, Jim L. Reavis; commissioner
first district, J. N. McCaw (hold over); justice of peace, T. M.
McKinney; constable, N. O. Peterson; county superintendent of schools,
Paul Johnson; county engineer, E. B. Shifley; county coroner, Emmett
Hennessey.

1914--County sheriff, Lee Barnes; county auditor, C. F. Dement; county
engineer, G. C. Cookerly; county assessor, Rolla Proudfoot; county
prosecuting attorney, Earl W. Benson (J. W. Cookerly was chosen
coroner, but on account of irregularity of law, the attorney performed
duties of office); county clerk, Ed Buffum; county treasurer, Guy Allen
Turner; county superintendent of schools, Paul Johnson; county justice
of peace, T. M. McKinney; county constable, N. O. Peterson; superior
judge, Ed C. Mills; commissioners, H. D. Eldridge, H. A. Reynolds and
J. L. Reavis.

1916--County sheriff, Lee Barnes; county auditor, Chas. F. Dement;
county clerk, Ed F. Buffum; county assessor, H. S. Buffum; county
engineer, Grova C. Cookerly; county treasurer, Guy Allen Turner; county
superintendent of schools, Paul Johnson; county prosecuting attorney,
M. A. Stafford; county coroner, Geo. MacMartin; justice of peace, J. M.
Douglass; county constable, Jack McKinzie; superior judge, Ed C. Mills;
commissioners, A. C. Moore, J. L. Reavis and D. C. Eaton.


POLITICAL HISTORY OF THE CITY

Municipal politics demand our attention in the remainder of this
chapter. Containing over two-thirds of the population of the county,
as Walla Walla City does, it would be expected that it would control
county affairs to a great degree. But it has usually happened, very
fortunately, that the smaller towns, with the country precincts, have
held the balance of power between contending factions in the city.
Hence, there has been general harmony of action in the political
development of the two units. The city has had its life and the county
has had its life.

We have already considered or will consider so many of the important
phases of the life of the city under topical subjects, schools,
churches, newspapers, lodges and industries, that relatively little
remains under the more distinctive heading of municipal politics. After
the initial organization already described in earlier chapters we may
perhaps say that the next marked state was the new charter granted by
the Legislature in 1883. That was a special charter, the only one of
the kind in the state. Under its provisions the council on February 22,
1884, passed an ordinance, No. 185, which divided the city into wards
and provided for a number of councilmen. As a matter of historical
reference, we deem it worth while to incorporate that ordinance here:

Ordinance No. 185 passed the council of the City of Walla Walla
February 22, 1884, receiving the approval of the mayor on the same day,
and being entitled as follows: "An ordinance to divide the City of
Walla Walla into wards, and apportionment of councilmen." The text of
the ordinance is as follows:

Section 1. The City of Walla Walla shall be and is hereby divided into
four wards, to be known as the first, second, third, and fourth wards.

Sec. 2. The first ward shall be bounded as follows: Commencing at a
point where the center of Main Street intersects the center of Third
Street, thence southerly along the center of Third Street to the center
of Birch Street, thence easterly along the center of Birch Street to
the center of Second Street, thence southerly along the center of
Second Street to the south boundary of the city; thence along the south
boundary of the city easterly to the southeast corner of the city;
thence northerly along the east boundary of the city to the center of
Mill Creek; thence down Mill Creek to the center of East Main Street;
thence along the center of East Main and Main streets in a westerly
direction to the place of beginning.

Sec. 3. The second ward shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the
intersection of Main and Third streets; thence southwesterly along the
center of Main Street to the west boundary line of the city; thence
south along the west boundary line of the city to the southwest corner
of the city; thence easterly along the south boundary of the city to
the center of Second Street; thence northerly along the center of
Second Street to the center of Birch Street; thence west along the
center of Birch Street to the center of Third Street; thence northerly
along Third Street to the place of beginning.

Sec. 4. The third ward shall be bounded as follows: Beginning at the
center of Main and North Third streets where they intersect, thence
running northerly on the center line of North Third Street to the
center of Elm Street; thence northeasterly on the center line of Elm
Street to the center line of North Second Street; thence northerly on
the center line of North Second Street to the northern boundary line of
the city; thence east along said northern boundary line of said city to
the northeast corner of the northwest quarter of the northeast quarter
of section twenty (20), in township seven (7) north, range thirty-six
(36) east; thence south to the northeast corner of the southwest
quarter of the northeast quarter of said section twenty (20); thence
east to the northeast corner of the city; thence south to the center of
Mill Creek; thence down the center of Mill Creek to the center of East
Main Street; thence westerly along the center of East Main and Main
streets to the place of beginning.

Sec. 5. The fourth ward shall be bounded as follows: Commencing at the
center of Main and North Third streets where they intersect, thence
running northerly on the center line of said North Third Street to the
center of Elm Street, thence northeasterly on the center line of Elm
Street to the center of North Second Street; thence northerly on the
center line of North Second Street to the northern boundary line of
the city; thence west on said northern boundary line to the northwest
corner of said city; thence south along said west boundary line to the
United States Military Reservation; thence easterly and then southerly
on the line of said military reservation to the center of Main Street;
thence easterly on the center line of Main Street to the place of
beginning.

[Illustration: ARTESIAN WELL, WALLA WALLA COUNTY]

Sec. 6. The number of councilmen to which each ward is entitled shall
be as follows: First ward, two councilmen; second ward, two councilmen;
third ward, two councilmen; fourth ward, one councilman. And they shall
be elected as is provided in section 7 of this ordinance.

Sec. 7. There shall be elected from the first, second and third wards
each at the next general election and at every general election
thereafter, one councilman, and in the fourth ward at the next general
election and thereafter biennially, one councilman.

Sec. 8. All ordinances and parts of ordinances, so far as they conflict
herewith, are hereby repealed.


ELECTION PRECINCTS

The city is divided into eight election precincts, designated as
follows: Lewis, Clarke, Whitman, Steptoe, Mullan, Fremont, Stevens and
Sims.


COMMISSION GOVERNMENT

Yet another change of great importance occurred by which in a special
election of July 10, 1911, the commission form of government was
adopted, 1,943 for and 1,049 against. This went into effect September
11, 1911, with A. J. Gillis as mayor. This step was one of the
manifestations of that interesting evolution of political ideas common
over the United States, perhaps especially in the West consisting
of two working propositions which seem antagonistic and yet are not
really so, but are rather parts of one movement under two different
phases. The first has been the initiative and referendum and recall,
by which in legislative matters a larger exercise of popular knowledge
and oversight of laws is sought. That idea has a permanent place in
Washington and most western states. The other idea is that of the
commission form of city government, apparently just the reverse,
by which executive authority is centralized and responsibility is
localized in the hands of experts. If these two working forces may be
harmonized in practical action, we may justly claim to have solved the
fundamental questions of democracy and efficiency.


MUNICIPAL OWNERSHIP OF WATER WORKS

Municipal ownership of water works and the creation of a system of
sewerage have been two of the most important of all questions in the
city. We have already described the water system inaugurated by J. D.
Cook, J. P. Isaacs and H. P. Isaacs and subsequently acquired by the
Baker-Boyer Bank. On July 11, 1881, the first election on municipal
ownership occurred, and the proposal was defeated by an adverse
majority of sixty-five. But the natural evolution of a city calls for
the public ownership of the water system, and the agitation continued.
In 1887 the Walla Walla Water Company had made a contract with the
council by which, upon the fulfillment of certain improvements, they
were to have exclusive right to furnish water for twenty-five years.
But in spite of the contract, an ordinance providing for a public
system was presented to the voters in 1893 under the mayoralty of John
L. Roberts. By an overwhelming vote the ordinance carried. The water
company brought suit to restrain the city from installing its system,
pleading its contract. After a tedious course of litigation the suit
at last reached the Supreme Court of the United States. There it was
decided in favor of the Water Company. The city was thus left in a
hole, after much expense. But popular opinion had become thoroughly
committed to the policy of public ownership and by a special election
on June 20, 1899, an ordinance was passed for the purchase of the
entire property of the Water Company for the sum of $250,000. With
the purchase of the water system went also the adoption of a sewerage
system. Many improvements and extensions have been made of both. In
April, 1907, the headworks and intake on Mill Creek were installed.
Extracts from the last report of Water Supt. R. F. McLean are here
inserted and from them can be derived a view of the present condition
of the water and sewerage systems:

The present mileage of the pipes in the water system is approximately
seventy miles, of which something more than twelve is in the conduits
extending from the intake to the city, and something more than
fifty-seven is in the distribution pipes. The number of fire hydrants
is 300. There are 524 gate valves for isolating different districts as
desired. On December 31, 1916, the date of the report, there were 3,961
water services, and of these about eighteen per cent, or 789 are on
meters. The meter rate runs on a sliding scale from twenty cents per
1,000 gallons to eight cents per 1,000 above 100,000 gallons. The flat
rate is $1 monthly for each kitchen, with 25 cents for each bath and
toilet, and $1 for each lot irrigated.

The financial exhibit is in the highest degree encouraging to believers
in the municipally owned system. The earnings of the system for the
year 1916 were $87,852.26.

The mileage in the sewerage system in the last report is thirty-eight
miles and 4,632 feet.

The report of the city clerk for the water department assets and
liabilities is as follows:

    Assets:
  Water system property and plant      $635,762.85
  Sewerage system                       210,411.91
  Water system sinking fund              42,091.18
                                      ------------
    Total                              $888,265.94

    Liabilities:
  Bonds due November, 1919             $133,000.00
  Warrants outstanding                    1,257.72
                                      ------------
    Total                              $134,257.72

During the past ten years street paving has been steadily continued,
until at the present time there are twenty-three miles of paved
streets. While some of this work was very poorly done and the city
has been compelled to repair the work of incompetent or dishonest
contractors at a large expense, the paving system in general has been
satisfactory, and is one of the great improvements of recent years.

One of the most important of all the features of municipal life is the
parks. This topic will find place in the last chapter in a special
article by Miss Grace Isaacs, who has been intimately connected with
the establishment of a park system from the beginning.


CITY LIBRARY

Another valuable instrumentality of municipal life, which while not
political in the common use of the term is under municipal control, is
the city library. The last report of the librarian, Miss Ellen Smith,
will give a view of present conditions.

Walla Walla Public Library, Walla Walla, Wash.: Annual report--January,
1917.

The Board of Trustees--Dr. E. E. Shaw, president; T. C. Elliott,
secretary; Rev. C. E. Tuke, Rowland Smith and H. W. Jones.

The Library Staff--Ellen Garfield Smith, librarian; Dorothy Drum, first
assistant; Nell M. Thompson, assistant; Ethel Jamieson, assistant.

Library Hours--Week days, 9 A. M. to 9 P. M.; Sundays and holidays, 2
to 6 P. M.

There are 4,962 active readers enrolled, or about one-fourth of the
population of Walla Walla. Of this number 1,082 adults and 498 children
were added the last year, making a total of 1,580 new registrations.

The readers took home 59,580 books, periodicals and pamphlets. Fiction
reading is not so important a part of the circulation as many people
think, as 55 per cent of the books read were of an instructive and
informing character, an increase of 3 per cent over last year. The most
popular classes of books of non-fiction in order of circulation are
literature, useful arts, travel and sociology.

We have added 1,305 new books at a cost of $742.64.

Gifts have numbered 253.

There were 206 volumes worn out and withdrawn and fifty-six missing at
inventory so the number in the library is 12,060.

Whoever you are, you must need to ask questions sometimes. There must
be some things you do not know that you want to know. Librarians are
paid to find the answers to your questions. These are a few samples of
the questions that we have answered during the last year:

The number of grain bags used in the United States.

The design of the Christian flag for Sunday schools.

Directions for glazing of pottery.

Statistics of water-power plants.

Where is Matzos?

What is the high jump record of a horse?

How to pickle olives?

You have more than twelve hundred reference books, and hundreds of
pamphlets which we are taking care of for you, waiting for you to
come and ask your question. There are 106 current periodicals and
five newspapers in the reading room, the back numbers of which may
be borrowed for home reading. The current numbers of _Atlantic_,
_Century_, _Delineator_, _Good Housekeeping_, _Harper's Monthly_,
_Ladies' Home Journal_ and _Literary Digest_ may be borrowed because
the library subscribes for an extra copy.

The story hour is conducted during the winter months on Wednesday
afternoons at 4 o'clock. The average attendance is twenty.

The children borrowed 18,345 books during the year.

The children's room contains more than two thousand books including the
best books written for children. The greatest care has been used in the
selection.

Help is given to schools in selecting books for purchase. The smaller
the sum to spend, the more important the selection.

One hundred and nineteen teachers have special teachers' cards for
school use, including forty county teachers. City teachers may have ten
books at a time; county teachers may have five.

The Art Club, Women's Reading Club, Educational Club and Sketch Club
meet regularly in the club room at the public library. In addition to
this the Good Government League, debating teams and clubs of college
and high school, committees of the Woman's Park Club and Young Women's
Club have appreciated the use of the room.

The day of largest circulation was February 12th, when 388 books and
periodicals were loaned for home reading.

Twelve hours every week day your public library is "at your service."
Sunday afternoon the library is open for reading only--often every
chair is taken.

Useful arts, next to literature, was the most popular class of
non-fiction circulated last year. Are you one of those who has profited
by the helpful books on salesmanship, bees, advertising, poultry, etc.?

When you go on your vacation next summer take ten library books with
you--loaned for three months. Three hundred and ten volumes circulated
on vacation cards last year.

You own more than twelve thousand volumes. The one you've been looking
for, the one that will tell you something new about your business or a
new way of advertising it, is among them.

Six hundred and seventy-four books were washed with ammonia and water
and then shellacked.


WHAT WE HAVE DONE WITH YOUR MONEY

MAINTENANCE FUND--RECEIPTS

  Balance on hand January 1, 1916                 $ 102.97
  City warrants                                   4,900.00
  Refunds on lights and books                        39.11   $5,042.08
                                                  --------

[Illustration: THE I. O. O. F. HOME, WALLA WALLA]

MAINTENANCE FUND--DISBURSEMENTS

  Salaries                                 $3,038.40
  Books                                       665.61
  Binding                                     166.91
  Periodicals                                 228.00
  Printing and stationery                      21.00
  Furniture and fixtures                      175.15
  Freight and drayage                          41.68
  Light                                       185.95
  Fuel                                        226.25
  Repairs                                      98.59
  Incidentals                                  37.45
  Balance on hand December 31, 1916           157.09  $5,042.08
                                            --------


LIBRARIAN'S FUND--RECEIPTS

  Balance from 1915, fine collections          $9.07
  Balance from 1915, 5c pay collections         7.80
  Fines collected in 1916                     472.73
  Circulation of pay books at 5c each          23.65
  Donation from art club                       14.80
  Miscellaneous sources                         3.00    $531.05
                                            --------


LIBRARIAN'S FUND--DISBURSEMENTS

  Books purchased from fines                  $57.88
  Books purchased from 5c pay collections      29.15
  Periodicals                                  31.12
  Book binding                                  6.28
  Extra help, librarians                      141.40
  Extra janitor service                         4.75
  Supplies and incidentals                    254.70
  Balance on hand, fines              $3.47
  Balance on hand, 5c pay collections  2.30     5.77    $531.05
                                       ----   ------   --------

There are many other features of the life of the city under political
authority which would be worthy of mention, did space allow.

In one of the early chapters dealing with the founding of the city and
its first incorporation, 1862, we gave the officers chosen in the first
election of April 1st of that year. We now incorporate here the list
of city officers from 1877 to the present. This is subdivided by the
different forms of government under which the city has operated.


MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS

1877

  Mayor--M. C. Moore.
  Marshal--John G. Justice.
  Recorder--J. D. Laman.
  Treasurer--H. E. Holmes.
  Assessor--S. Jacobs.
  Council--W. P. Winans, W. P. Adams, Wm. Kohlhauff, A. H. Reynolds
    and J. G. Justice.


1878

  Mayor--James McAuliffe.
  Justice--J. D. Laman.
  Marshal--J. G. Justice.
  Treasurer--H. E. Holmes.
  Health Officer--J. M. Boyd.
  Assessor--S. Jacobs.
  Council--W. P. Winans, Wm. Kohlhauff, Z. K. Straight, M. F. Colt,
    F. W. Paine and J. A. Taylor.


1879

  Mayor--James McAuliffe.
  Marshal--J. A. McNeil.
  Treasurer--H. E. Holmes.
  Assessor--S. Jacobs.
  Health Officer--J. M. Boyd.
  Justice--J. D. Laman.
  Council--A. S. Legrow, H. M. Chase, J. M. Welsh, R. Jacobs,
    Wm. Harkness, Wm. Kohlhauff, Geo. F. Thomas.


1880

  Mayor--James McAuliffe.
  Marshal--J. G. Justice.
  City Attorney--J. T. Anders.
  Treasurer--H. E. Holmes.
  Assessor--
  Council--S. Jacobs, H. M. Chase, W. T. Dovell, Wm. Kohlhauff, Geo.
    F. Thomas, J. M. Welsh.


1881

  Mayor--James McAuliffe.
  City Attorney--J. T. Anders.
  Marshal--J. G. Justice.
  Treasurer--H. E. Holmes.
  Assessor--S. Jacobs.
  Health Officer--Dr. A. N. Marion.
  Council--Wm. Glasford, Ed Baumeister, A. H. Reynolds, S. Jacobs,
    W. T. Dovell, Levi Ankeny and Wm. Kohlhauff.


1882

  Mayor--James McAuliffe.
  City Attorney--W. G. Glasford.
  Clerk--Le F. A. Shaw.
  Treasurer--Richard Jacobs.
  Health Officer--Dr. T. W. Sloan.
  City Surveyor--J. B. Wilson.
  City Assessor--Samuel Jacobs.
  Council--W. P. Winans, T. J. Fletcher, John Dovell, N. T. Caton,
    A. H. Reynolds and Ed Baumeister.


1883

  Mayor--T. R. Tannatt.
  City Clerk--Le F. A. Shaw.
  Treasurer--F. W. Paine.
  Attorney--W. G. Langford.
  Health Officer--Dr. A. N. Marion.
  Surveyor--J. B. Wilson,
  Council--W. P. Winans, Wm. Glasford, T. J. Fletcher, H. Wintler,
    John Dovell, N. T. Caton, A. G. Bowles.


1884

  Mayor--T. R. Tannatt, resigned and F. W. Paine elected.
  Marshal--T. J. Robinson.
  City Clerk--Le F. A. Shaw.
  Attorney--W. G. Langford.
  Treasurer--O. P. Lacy.
  Health Officer--Dr. W. G. Alban.
  Surveyor--J. B. Wilson.
  Council--H. M. Porter, W. O'Donnell, John Dovell, J. P. Kent,
    Thos. Quinn.


1885

  Mayor--J. M. Boyd.
  Marshal--T. J. Robinson.
  Justice--J. D. Laman.
  Treasurer--J. Chitwood.
  Health Officer--Dr. W. G. Alban.
  City Attorney--W. W. Newlin.
  Clerk--Le F. A. Shaw.
  Assessor--J. B. Wilson.
  Council--J. W. Esteb, J. Picard, L. H. Bowman, H. M. Porter,
    W. O'Donnell, W. H. Kent and John Dovell.


1886

  Mayor--J. M. Boyd.
  Marshal--T. J. Robinson.
  City Clerk--Henry Kelling.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Attorney--J. L. Sharpstein.
  Surveyor--L. A. Wilson.
  Justice--J. D. Laman.
  Health Officer--Dr. H. R. Keylor.
  Assessor--Wm. Harkness.
  Council--Wm. Stine, John Marion, John M. Hill, W. G. Tobin,
    J. Picard, L. H. Bowman, J. W. Esteb.


1887

  Mayor--Jas. McAuliffe.
  Marshal--T. J. Robinson.
  Clerk--Henry Kelling.
  Attorney--J. L. Sharpstein.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Justice--A. J. Gregory.
  Health Officer--Dr. H. R. Keylor.
  Assessor--M. H. Paxton.
  Surveyor--J. B. Wilson.
  Council--D. W. Small, John Picard, Geo. Dacres, John M. Hill,
    John Marion, W. G. Tobin and Wm. Stine.


1888

  Mayor--Geo. T. Thompson.
  Marshal--T. J. Robinson.
  Attorney--J. L. Sharpstein.
  Clerk--Henry Kelling.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Justice--A. G. Gregory.
  Health Officer--Dr. Y. C. Blalock.
  Assessor--M. H. Paxton.
  Surveyor--A. J. Anderson.
  Council--W. H. Upton, John Marion, J. M. Hill, R. M. McCalley,
    D. W. Small, John Picard and Geo. Dacres.


1889

  Mayor--Dr. N. G. Blalock.
  Marshal--T. J. Robinson.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Clerk--Henry Kelling.
  Attorney--J. L. Sharpstein.
  Health Officer--Dr. Y. C Blalock.
  Justice--John A. Taylor.
  Surveyor--W. G. Sayles.
  Assessor--M. H. Paxton.
  Council--D. W. Small, Z. K. Straight, J. L. Roberts, J. F. Brewer,
    John H. Stockwell, John Marion and R. M. McCalley.

[Illustration: CARD AND BILLIARD ROOMS. ELKS' CLUB, WALLA WALLA]


1890

  Mayor--N. G. Blalock.
  Marshal--T. J. Robinson.
  Attorney--J. L. Sharpstein.
  Clerk--Henry Kelling.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Justice--V. D. Lambert.
  Health Officer--Dr. Y. C. Blalock.
  Assessor--M. H. Paxton.
  Surveyor--L. A. Wilson.
  Council--J. H. Stockwell, John Picard, H. A. Reynolds, R. M. McCalley,
    T. J. Robinson, Z. K. Straight and D. W. Small.


1891

  Mayor--J. L. Roberts.
  Clerk--Henry Kelling.
  Marshal--T. J. Robinson.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Attorney--W. T. Dovell.
  Justice--John A. Taylor.
  Health Officer--Dr. Y. C. Blalock.
  Assessor--M. H. Paxton.
  Surveyor--Lew W. Loehr.
  Council--H. S. Young, Jacob Betz, A. J. Evans, J. H. Stockwell,
    John Picard, H. A. Reynolds and J. L. Jones.


1892

  Mayor--John L. Roberts.
  Clerk--Henry Kelling.
  Attorney--W. T. Dovell.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Marshal--T. J. Robinson.
  Justice--Timothy T. Burgess.
  Health Officer--W. G. Alban.
  Assessor--M. H. Paxton.
  Surveyor--Lew W. Loehr.
  Council--B. D. Crocker, John G. Muntinga, E. H. Massam, J. L. Jones,
    H. S. Young, Jacob Betz and A. J. Evans.


1893

  Mayor--J. L. Roberts.
  Clerk--Henry Kelling.
  Attorney--W. T. Dovell.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Marshal--F. J. Robinson.
  Justice--W. T. Arberry.
  Health Officer--Wm. G. Alban.
  Assessor--J. B. Wilson.
  Surveyor--Edwin S. Clark.
  Council--Daniel Stewart, Jacob Betz, Norman F. Butler. B. D. Crocker,
    John G. Muntinga, E. H. Massam and J. L. Jones.


1894

  Mayor--John L. Roberts.
  Clerk--Henry Kelling.
  Attorney--Wm. T. Dovell.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Marshal--Winfield S. Halley.
  Justice--W. T. Arberry.
  Health Officer--W. G. Alban.
  Assessor--T. H. Jessup.
  Surveyor--Edward Clark.
  Council--Milton Evans, Marshall Martin, E. H. Massam, Stephen
    Ringhoffer, Daniel Stewart, Jacob Betz, and Norman F. Butler.


1895

  Mayor--John L. Roberts.
  City Clerk--Alexander McKay.
  Attorney--R. G. Parks.
  Marshal--M. Ames.
  Justice--Harrison W. Eagan.
  Health Officer--Wm. G. Alban.
  Surveyor--E. S. Clark.
  Council--A. K. Dice, Jacob Betz, John D. Lamb, Milton Evans,
    Marshall Martin, E. H. Massam, Daniel Stewart and V. D. Lambert.


1896

  Mayor--Jacob Betz.
  Clerk--John E. Williams.
  Attorney--C. M. Rader.
  Treasurer--John W. McGhee.
  Marshal--M. Ames.
  Justice--E. H. Nixon.
  Health Officer--Wm. G. Alban.
  Surveyor--E. S. Clark.
  Council--M. Evans, J. P. Kent, E. H. Massam, John Lamb and A. K. Dice.


1897

  Mayor--Jacob Betz.
  Clerk--Clark N. McLean.
  Attorney--H. S. Blandford.
  Treasurer--John McGee.
  Marshal--J. J. Kauffman.
  Health Officer--W. G. Alban.
  Surveyor--E. S. Clark.
  Council--continued.


1898

  Mayor--Jacob Betz.
  Clerk--C. N. McLean.
  Attorney--H. S. Blandford.
  Treasurer--J. W. McGhee.
  Justice of the Peace--J. J. Huffman.
  Marshal--J. J. Kauffman.
  Assessor--Fred A. Colt.
  Health Officer--W. G. Alban.
  Surveyor--E. S. Clark.
  Street Commissioner--D. A. McLeod.
  Council--E. H. Nixon, Marshall Martin, J. F. Brewer, Albert Niebergall.


1899

  Mayor--Jacob Betz.
  Clerk--R. P. Reynolds.
  Marshal--J. J. Kauffman.
  Attorney--H. S. Blandford.
  Treasurer--Le F. A. Shaw.
  Justice of the Peace--Wm. Glasford.
  Assessor--W. L. Cadman.
  Street Commissioner--W. H. Brown.
  Surveyor--E. S. Clark.
  Health Officer--W. G. Alban.
  Council--G. W. Babcock, F. M. Pauly, E. S. Isaacs.


1900

  Mayor--Jacob Betz.
  Marshal--J. J. Kauffman.
  Clerk--R. P. Reynolds.
  Treasurer--Le F. A. Shaw.
  Attorney--H. S. Blandford.
  Justice of the Peace--Wm. Glasford.
  Assessor--W. L. Cadman.
  Surveyor--E. S. Clark.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  Health Officer--W. E. Russell.
  Council--J. F. McLean, Marshall Martin, J. F. Brewer, Albert Niebergall.


1901

  Mayor--G. W. Babcock.
  Clerk--R. P. Reynolds.
  Attorney--H. S. Blandford.
  Treasurer--Le F. A. Shaw.
  Marshal--J. J. Kauffman.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  Justice of the Peace--Wm. Glasford.
  Health Officer--W. G. Alban.
  Surveyor--E. S. Clark.
  Council--J. F. McLean, W. A. Williams, Marshall Martin, J. Z. Smith,
    J. F. Brewer, John Kirkman and Albert Niebergall.


1902

  Mayor--Gilbert Hunt.
  Clerk--R. P. Reynolds.
  Attorney--H. S. Blandford.
  Treasurer--Le F. A. Shaw.
  Marshal--J. J. Kauffman.
  Justice of the Peace--Wm. Glasford.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  Health Officer--W. G. Alban.
  Surveyor--E. S. Clark.
  Council--J. F. McLean, J. Z. Smith, W. P. McKean, J. F. Brewer,
    John Kirkman, F. W. Martin.


1903

  Mayor--Gilbert Hunt.
  Treasurer--Le F. A. Shaw.
  Justice--J. J. Huffman.
  Marshal--Alvah Brown.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  City Attorney--H. S. Blandford.
  Surveyor--E. S. Clark.
  Assessor--W. F. Merchant.
  Clerk--R. P. Reynolds
  Health Officer--C. P. Gammon.
  Council--Henry Osterman, Wm. Glasford, J. Z. Smith, J. C. Scott,
    A. J. Gillis, Eugene Boyer, W. P. McKean.


1904

  Mayor--Gilbert Hunt.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Justice--J. J. Huffman.
  Marshal--Alvah Brown.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  City Attorney--H. S. Blandford.
  City Surveyor--W. G. Sayles.
  Assessor--R. J. Berryman.
  Health Officer--J. W. Ingram.
  Council--J. G. Bridges, W. P. McKean, J. B. Brewer, Fred W. Martin,
    Wm. Glasford.


1905

  Mayor--Gilbert Hunt.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Justice--J. J. Huffman.
  Marshal--Alvah Brown.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  Surveyor--J. B. Wilson.
  Clerk--R. P. Reynolds.
  Assessor--R. J. Berryman.
  Health Officer--J. W. Ingram.
  Council--Wm. Glasford, W. P. McLean, W. H. Kirkman, J. Z. Smith,
    Fred W. Martin, J. P. Bridges.


1906

  Mayor--Geo. E. Kellough.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Marshal--Alvah Brown.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  Surveyor--J. B. Wilson.
  Assessor--W. S. Cadman.
  Clerk--T. D. S. Hart.
  Health Officer--Dr. A. E. Braden.
  Council--J. P. Kent, R. H. Johnson, Eugene Tausick, Wm. Glasford,
    John Bachtold, W. P. McKean.


1907

  Mayor--Geo. E. Kellough.
  Clerk--T. D. S. Hart.
  Marshal--Mike Davis.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Attorney--Oscar Cain.
  Health Officer--A. E. Braden.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  Council--J. P. Bridges, W. P. McKean, C. H. Whiteman, John Bachtold,
    Eugene Tausick, J. F. Stack, J. A. Dunham.


1908

  Mayor--Eugene Tausick.
  Clerk--T. D. S. Hart.
  Treasurer--R. G. Parks.
  Attorney--Oscar Cain.
  Marshal--M. Davis.
  Surveyor--Lew Loehr.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  Health Officer--A. E. Braden.
  Assessor--M. Toner.
  Council--Fred Hull, Fritz Lehn, C. H. Cummings, Albert Niebergall,
    J. B. Stack, C. H. Whiteman, Alfred Bachtold.


1909

  Mayor--Eugene Tausick.
  Clerk--T. D. S. Hart.
  Attorney--Oscar Cain.
  Marshal--Michael Davis.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  Assessor--M. Toner.
  Health Officer--E. E. Shaw.
  Surveyor--Lew Loehr.
  Council--C. H. Whiteman, Alfred Bachtold, Fred Hull, Albert
    Niebergall, J. F. Stack, Fritz Lehn.


1910

  Mayor--Eugene Tausick.
  Clerk--T. D. S. Hart.
  Attorney--J. W. Brooks.
  Treasurer--Perry Lyons.
  Marshal--Michael Davis.
  Chief of Fire Department--Wm. Metz.
  Street Commissioner--H. H. Crampton.
  Assessor--A. R. Dorwin.
  Surveyor--W. R. Rehorn.
  Council--C. H. Whiteman, Harvey McDonald, Alfred Bachtold, J. F.
    Stack, Robert Breeze, C. H. Cummings, Albert Niebergall.


COMMISSION FORM OF GOVERNMENT

1911, 1912, 1913

  Mayor--A. J. Gillis.
  Commissioner--A. K. Dice, Geo. Struthers.
  Attorney--J. F. Watson.
  Building Inspector--Wm. Metz.
  Clerk--C. Arthur Jones.
  Engineer--W. R. Rehorn.
  Fire Chief--Wm. Metz.
  Health Officer--C. E. Montgomery.
  Justice--T. M. McKinney.
  Librarian--Ellen Garfield Smith.
  Marshal and Chief of Police--Michael Davis.
  Registrar Water Works--R. C. Stack.
  Street Commissioner--R. A. Stockdale.
  Superintendent of Schools--O. S. Jones.
  Superintendent of Water Works--R. F. McLean.
  Treasurer--John McGhee.


1914, 1915, 1916

  Mayor--M. Toner.
  Commissioners--A. K. Dice, H. H. Crampton.
  Clerk--1914, 1915, M. A. Powers--1916, Fred G. Wills.
  Treasurer--John McGhee.
  Attorney--J. P. Neal.
  Water Superintendent--R. F. McLean.
  Police Judge--T. M. McKinney.
  Water Registrar--E. T. Churchman.
  Fire Chief--Geo. Guthridge.
  Chief of Police--James Martin.
  City Engineer--W. R. Rehorn.
  Health Officer--C. E. Montgomery.

As the last glance at the political history of the City of Walla Walla
we insert here the report of the financial condition of the City of
Walla Walla June 30, 1917, as compiled by the Commissioner of Finance
and Accounting, A. K. Dice:

Assessed valuation of the City of Walla Walla this year is $9,411,099,
according to the report of the county assessor's office, filed this
morning with the city commission. The assessment of the city this year
shows an increase in valuation of approximately $100,000, last year's
assessment having been $9,310,655. The report of the county assessor is
as follows:


Assessed valuation of the City of Walla Walla, 1917:

  Old city limits                                     $8,738,839
  First addition                                         254,366
  Second addition                                         94,460
  Third addition                                           3,890
  Fourth addition                                        250,260
  Fifth addition                                          19,200
  Sixth addition                                          46,084
                                                      ----------
  Total                                               $9,411,099

The total includes valuation of public service corporation properties
within the city limits, taken from the 1916 tax rolls.

The semi-annual report of the city clerk was also filed by Clerk Fred
Wills this morning, the report showing the city's financial condition
on July 1, 1917, and showing the receipts and disbursements from
January 1, 1917, to June 30, 1917, inclusive. A summary of the report
is as follows:


Receipts, January 1 to June 30, 1917:

  Licenses                               $  3,108.00
  Fees, fines, etc.                         5,574.70
  Water department receipts                38,985.85
  Cemetery department                       2,761.72
  Cemetery perpetual care                   4,343.69
  Cemetery trust                            8,421.64
  Interest on cemetery trust                  211.40
  General taxes                           110,979.81
  Road and bridge tax                       2,578.48
  Water works sinking fund                 28,228.33
  Interest on above                           483.69
  Firemen's relief and pension                201.41
  Transfers                                   549.19
  Local improvement district taxes         85,913.76
                                         -----------
      Total                              $292,341.67

Disbursements, January 1 to June 30, 1917, by the various city
departments:

  Administration                         $  3,272.60
  Streets                                  18,218.73
  Water                                    29,180.86
  Fire                                     15,316.26
  Police                                    6,722.74
  Treasury                                    797.79
  Clerical                                    836.87
  Bridge and creek                          1,047.20
  Engineering                               1,578.18
  Library                                   2,000.00
  Park                                      5,901.06
  Mounted police                              399.70
  Cemetery                                  1,790.11
  Health                                    3,294.82
  General expenses                            970.63
  Public buildings                            859.93
  Legal department                            763.70
  Firemen's relief and pension                278.75
  Judicial                                    252.00
  Electrical                                  302.80
  General bond interest and redemption      3,403.40
  Cemetery trust                           12,067.46
  Special assessments on city property        515.05
  Water sinking fund                       38,491.03
                                         -----------
      Total                              $148,311.57

[Illustration: THE DENNY BUILDING, WALLA WALLA]

[Illustration: THE DRUMHELLER BUILDING, WALLA WALLA]

The operation of the municipal warrants and the local improvement
district bonds and warrants during that period was as follows:


Municipal warrants:

  Outstanding January 1                              $73,356.69
  Issued                                             148,311.57
                                                    -----------
  Total                                             $221,668.26

  Redeemed                                           187,472.45
  Outstanding June 30                                 34,195.81
                                                    -----------
  Total                                             $221,668.26
  L. I. D. bonds and warrants outstanding January 1  317,523.49
  Issued                                              48,186.80
                                                    -----------
  Total                                             $365,710.29
  Redeemed                                            85,732.37
                                                    -----------
  Outstanding June 30                               $279,977.92

The cash balance is given as follows:

  Total cash on hand January 1                       $24,961.57
  Total receipts  292,341.67
  Municipal warrants outstanding June 30              34,195.81
  L. I. D. bonds and warrants outstanding June 30    279,977.92
                                                    -----------
  Total                                             $631,476.97

  Cash on hand June 30                                34,516.31
  Disbursements                                      206,080.48
  Municipal warrants outstanding January 1            73,356.69
  L. I. D. bonds and warrants outstanding January 1  317,523.49
                                                    -----------
  Total                                             $631,476.97


ELECTIONS IN WAITSBURG

A summary of the municipal elections in the history of the second city
in size in the county may properly appear at this point.

The town at the junction of the Touchet and the Coppei, first known
as Delta, became Waitsburg in 1868 by vote of the inhabitants. On
February 23, 1869, W. P. Bruce plotted the first townsite. On February
8, 1881, the town was incorporated. An election on February 28 resulted
in the choice of G. W. Kellicut, William Fudge, Alfred Brouillet, M.
J. Harkness and E. L. Powell as trustees, with the first named as
chairman. Later in that year a decision by Judge Wingard invalidated
the incorporation of all the cities in the territory, except Seattle
and Walla Walla. By reason of this Waitsburg was reincorporated by
charter from the Legislature. Under this new charter an election took
place on May 1, 1882, in which the city officials chosen were these:
G. W. Kellicut, mayor; William Fudge, A. L. Kinnear, P. A. Preston, D.
W. Kaup and M. J. Harkness, councilmen.

The mayors of the city in order, beginning in 1883 and extending
annually to 1905, were as follows: W. N. Smith, W. S. Mineer, E. L.
Powell, P. A. Preston, re-elected in 1887 and 1888, C. N. Babcock
in 1889, S. W. Smith in 1890 and 1891, Frank Parton in 1892, J. H.
Morrow in 1893 (and during this year the important step in municipal
development was taken of a city water system), J. W. Morgan in 1894 and
1895, T. L. Hollowell in 1896, D. V. Wood in 1897, E. W. McCann in 1898
and 1899, J. H. Morrow in 1900, T. M. McKinney in 1901 and 1902, E. L.
Wheeler in 1903, C. W. Preston in 1904.

Beginning with 1905 and extending to 1917 the mayors and councilmen
have been these:

1905--Mayor, D. V. Wood. Councilmen--E. M. Denton, W. J. Earnest, T. J.
Hollowell, M. H. Keiser, Frank McCown.

1906--Mayor, J. B. Caldwell. Councilmen--E. M. Denton, H. D. Conover,
W. S. Guntle, J. B. Loundagin, P. C. Perkins.

1907--Mayor, Geo. M. Lloyd. Councilmen--Dr. R. E. Butler, L. H.
Macomber, H. D. Conover, J. B. Loundagin, W. F. Pool.

1908--Mayor, R. M. Breeze. Councilmen--L. H. Macomber, H. D. Conover,
J. B. Loundagin, H. E. Boynton, George Kruchek.

1909--Mayor, R. M. Breeze. Councilmen--J. W. Taylor, L. H. Macomber, J.
C. McAninch, H. E. Boynton, E. M. Denton.

1910--Mayor, M. O. Pickett. Councilmen--H. P. Petersen, Dr. R. E.
Butler, W. J. Earnest, W. G. Shuham, Geo. M. Lloyd.

1911--Mayor, E. L. Wheeler. Councilmen--H. P. Petersen, W. G. Shuham,
D. P. Hayes, R. G. Eichelberger, L. R. Perrine.

1912--Mayor, E. L. Wheeler. Councilmen--L. R. Perrine, D. P. Hayes, R.
G. Eichelberger, Geo. M. Lloyd, A. G. Loundagin.

1913--Mayor, E. L. Wheeler. Councilmen--W. D. Wallace, A. J. Woodworth,
Roland Allen, Forrest Carpenter, D. P. Bailey.

1914--Mayor, W. D. Wallace. Councilmen--D. P. Bailey, A. J. Woodworth,
W. S. Guntle, D. B. Stimmel, J. W. Taylor.

1915--Mayor, E. L. Wheeler. Councilmen--W. D. Wallace, A. J. Woodworth,
J. W. Taylor, O. B. Smith, E. J. Call.

1916--Mayor, E. L. Wheeler. Councilmen--E. J. Call, W. D. Wallace, A.
C. Macomber, A. C. Spafford, A. J. Woodworth.

1917--Mayor, E. L. Wheeler. Councilmen--W. D. Wallace, E. J. Call, A.
J. Woodworth, A. C. Macomber, A. C. Spafford.




CHAPTER II

DISTINCTIVE FEATURES IN HISTORY OF COLUMBIA COUNTY


We have already given a general view of the first settlement on the
Touchet, in what is now Columbia County. But a valuable paper by Judge
Chester F. Miller of Dayton, prepared for a club at that city and
published in the _Chronicle_ of April 8, 1916, offers some material so
fitting for an introduction that we avail ourselves of it here. Judge
Miller discusses the meaning of the names of the local streams as
follows:

"It is rather unfortunate that the original Indian name Kinnooenim was
not retained instead of the rather harsh sounding name of Tucanon. Many
people have the idea that Tucanon derived its name from the tradition
that some early expedition buried two cannon on its banks when pressed
by the Indians, but the early expeditions, both explorers and Indian
fighters, did not carry cannon, they did well if they got over the
country with their muskets. The first cannon in this section that we
read about were at Fort Taylor, at the mouth of the Tucanon, built
by Colonel Wright in 1858, which was some time after the creek had
received its present name. I am inclined to adopt the theory that the
name is derived from 'tukanin,' the Nez Perce name for cowse or Indian
bread root, which was generally used by the Indians in making bread. I
have some early recollections of trying to eat some Indian bread made
from crushed cowse, flavored with grasshopper legs.

"The name Patit, called by the Indians Pat-ti-ta, is somewhat in doubt,
one Indian having told me that it was a Nez Perce word meaning small
creek. The word Touchet has never been properly identified, but Ed
Raboin thought it was from the French, and came from the exclamation
'touche' used in fencing with foils, when one of the fencers touched
the other over a vital spot."

The second extract deals with the expulsion of the settlers in the
Indian war of 1855:

"Nathan Olney, the Indian agent at The Dalles, made a trip to the
Walla Walla country seeking to pacify Peupeumoxmox, but this chief
refused the presents offered and repudiated the treaty. Mr. Olney at
once ordered all settlers to leave the country. At this time Chase,
LaFontain and Brooke left their cabins on the Touchet in Columbia
County on their way to The Dalles for supplies; on arriving at the
mouth of the Umatilla, they were informed of the Indian uprising,
and returned to Whitman mission, where a conference was had, and all
the whites agreed to convert the house of Mr. Brooke, just below the
present Huntsville, into a fort and stay with the country. Chase and
LaFontain returned to their ranches at Dayton and on the day agreed on
for the meeting at the Brooke cabin, LaFontain went down to confer with
them, and learned that all the others, who had agreed to stay and fight
it out, had concluded to abandon their places and leave the country.
Chase and LaFontain concluded to stay, and commenced to fortify
the Chase house, which was located in the vicinity of the present
Pietrzycki residence. They had three transient hired men, who at first
agreed to stay, but on the following day the hired men concluded that
they had not lost any Indians, and took their departure. Chase and
LaFontain completed their stockade, ran a bucketful of bullets, stocked
the cabin with provisions, and dug a tunnel to the banks of the Touchet
for water in case of siege, and waited for the Indians.

"They remained for ten days longer, when the constant standing guard
and waiting for the Indians, who had not appeared, began to wear on
their nerves, and they started for the country of the friendly Nez
Perces, picking up Louis Raboin on the Tucanon, and at that time not a
white man remained in Southeastern Washington. On the next day after
they had left the Indians came and burned the Brooke and Chase houses."

Still another interesting extract tells of the controverted point as to
the rights and wrongs of the tragic death of Peupeumoxmox, of which we
have spoken in the chapter on Indian wars:

"During this Indian war no fighting was done in Columbia County and
I will not mention it further than to say that on December 9, 1855,
the battle of the Walla Walla was fought, in which Peupeumoxmox was
killed by the guards while held as a hostage. Some 1,500 Indians were
engaged in this battle against 350 volunteers. The results were twenty
volunteers killed and wounded and 100 dead Indians.

"Some writers, particularly Colonel Gilbert, claim that this chief was
murdered, and his body mutilated by the guards, but I don't believe
it. My father was one of the guards, and he has told me that when the
battle commenced this chief began waving his hands and shouting to his
warriors, giving them directions in regard to the battle, and that
Colonel Kelley rode up and said, 'Tie them or kill them, I don't give a
damn which,' and that when the guards proceeded to tie them the Indians
began to struggle, and one by the name of Wolfskin broke away and
stabbed Sergt. Maj. Isaac Miller in the arm, and that the guards then
began to see red, and the whole thing was off."

In Judge Miller's paper there is also a most valuable view of the
permanent settlements on the Touchet following the close of the wars:

"In 1859 the Indian troubles having ended, the Touchet country was
declared safe for settlers. The first to arrive were Indian traders,
usually squaw-men, who settled at the different crossings of the old
Indian trails and engaged in the business of trading bad whiskey to
the Indians for their cayuse ponies. Some of these probably slipped in
during the fall of '58, as they were here in the spring of '59 when the
first homesteaders arrived looking for locations. Bill Bunton, George
Ives and Clubfoot George were at the crossing of Whiskey Creek; Freelon
Schnebley, known as 'Stubbs,' and Richard Learn, known as 'Big Red,'
at the crossing of the Touchet, where Dayton is located; Bill Rexford
was at the crossing of the Patit, and John Turner at Pataha City;
these were all bad citizens and all squaw-men except Rexford, and it
was generally said among the Indians that he was too mean for a squaw
to live with. In addition to these, the following squaw-men, who were
much better citizens, were here at that time: Louis Raboin, who lived
where the trails crossed the Tucanon, having returned to his old place
after the Indian troubles; William and Martin Bailey, who lived with
their squaws on what is known as the Rainwater place at the upper end
of town, and Joe Ruark, known as 'Kentuck,' who lived with his squaw
near the Star schoolhouse. The first real settlers to arrive came in
the spring of 1859, most of them from the Willamette Valley, many of
them having seen the country while serving as volunteers in the Indian
wars. They located claims along the Touchet, laid a foundation of four
logs, and posted notices that they had taken the claims, and gone to
the valley for their stock, and would return in three months.

[Illustration: THE COURTHOUSE, DAYTON]

"As near as I can learn, the only one who remained at that time was
Israel Davis, usually known as 'Hogeye' Davis, who settled where the
trails left the Hogeye Creek, and raised a small crop that year. This
is conceded to be the first crop raised and harvested in the county.
Davis was a bachelor, and two years later was killed by the jealous
husband of a woman who was cooking for him. The next who came to stay
were Sam Gilbreath and his young wife, and John Wells and Tom Davis,
both bachelors, who came in August, 1859. Gilbreath took up a homestead
and built his first cabin where the trails entered the valley. This
would be where the Smith orchard is now located. Tom Davis bought
a location from 'Stubbs' and built a cabin in the vicinity of the
Railroad Primary; Wells also bought a location from 'Stubbs' and built
across the Touchet from the mouth of the Patit. Lambert Hearn and wife
came in October, first locating where the Columbia schoolhouse now
stands, but afterwards selling out to the Paynes and moving to the
Hearn homestead across the Touchet from Dayton.

"Jesse N. Day was among those who located their claims and returned
to the valley for their families; he did not return until the fall of
1860. His claim was where the Chandler slaughter house is now located.
He looked over the present site of Dayton, but was afraid Chase and
LaFontain might return and make him trouble, and located farther
down. Many of those who made their locations in the spring came back
in the fall and built cabins. The settlers of 1859, traveling from
the crossing down the Touchet were as follows: Wells, Davis, Hearn,
Gilbreath, John Forsythe at the Angell place, James Dill at Pomona,
James Bennett at the Bateman place, Joe Starr at the Starr bridge, Dave
Fudge at the Blize place, George Pollard at his present place, John
Fudge at Huntsville, and the Whittaker brothers just below, James Fudge
on Whiskey Creek below Bunton's, and Israel Davis on the Hogeye.

"They were all bachelors except Gilbreath and Hearn, so that we had
two white women in Columbia County at that time, although Dill was a
widower and had one boy with him. Those arriving in 1860 were Elisha
Ping and family, G. W. Miller and family, my mother and I being the
family, Jesse N. Day and family, and three bachelors, Henry B. Day and
Jack and Newt Forrest; the Forrests were brothers of Mrs. Day. Miller
and Ping settled on their previously located homesteads on the Patit,
and Jesse Day on the Touchet; the Forrests had located the Richardson
place the year before and settled there, selling out to R. G. Newland
in 1861; Henry Day having 320 acres in the valley, was not eligible for
a homestead, but engaged in the cattle business.

"The immigration of 1861 was as follows: William Sherry settled on the
Patit above Miller; Alexander Montgomery, Albert Woodward and Cyrus
Armstrong on the Patit above Rexford; Jonathan Buzzard on the old
Cross place in Johnson Hollow, near Dayton; Ambrose Johnson where the
trails crossed Johnson Hollow; Tom Whetstone where the trails entered
Whetstone Hollow; Amasa West between Stubbs and the Baileys; Uncle
Zeke Hobbs between the Baileys and 'Kentuck;' John Winnett and Henry
Owsley farther up the Touchet, and Uncle Tom Winnett and his sons,
Bill, Dock, Bob and Lew, on Whiskey Creek and the Hogeye. There were
three young fellows with the Winnetts, who do not seem to have taken
up land at that time; they were Simon Critchfield, Cy Mathew and Fred
Yenney. This year the Paynes bought out Hearn at Columbia schoolhouse,
and the Forrests sold to R. G. Newland. During this year my father
rented the Stubbs place, broke out a portion of the land and fenced it
with cottonwood rails made where the Main Street Bridge now crosses the
stream.

"The settlers up to this time were stock men, settling along the stream
and grazing their stock on the hills in every direction; they raised a
little hay and some oats on the fertile bottom lands; the hills were
considered of no value except for grazing; wheat was not raised because
there was no available market; surplus oats were hauled to Fort Lapwai,
but on account of the distance and crude roads this was not very
profitable. When the valleys were taken up the growth of the country
stopped and the increase in population was very slow."


ESTABLISHMENT OF COLUMBIA COUNTY

We have given in the last chapter of Part II the story of County
division. By act of the Territorial Legislature on November 11, 1875,
a line was drawn from Snake River south to a point on the Touchet two
miles above Waitsburg; thence south six miles, then east six miles,
then south to the state line. All west of that line continued to be
Walla Walla County, and that east to the Snake River was included in
the new County of Columbia.

By the act, Dayton was the county seat until the next general election,
when the seat was to be permanently located by popular vote.

Eliel Oliver, Frank G. Frary, and George T. Pollard were named first
commissioners to organize the county. In pursuance of their functions,
they met on November 25th and became duly qualified to act. Mr. Frary
became chairman of the board and D. C. Guernsey was appointed clerk.
Precincts were established as follows: Independent, with polls at
Dayton; Patit with polls at schoolhouse near A. Walker's residence;
Tucanon, at Platter schoolhouse; Calloway, at Central schoolhouse;
Pataha, J. M. Pomeroy's residence; Asotin, usual voting place; Touchet,
Washington schoolhouse.

The election occurred on December 21, 1875, and as a result the first
officers in Columbia County were duly elected as follows: County
commissioners, E. McDonnell, Joseph Harris, H. B. Bateman; Sheriff, S.
L. Gilbreath; auditor, A. J. Cain; treasurer, D. C. Guernsey; assessor,
R. F. Walker; probate judge, William Ayers and R. F. Sturdevant had a
tie of 283 votes each; school superintendent, T. S. Leonard; surveyor,
William Ewing; coroner, W. W. Day. The Board of Commissioners met
on January 1, 1876, and organized by the election of Mr. Harris as
chairman.

Taking up the tie in the office of probate judge, the position
was declared vacant, and at the next meeting R. F. Sturdevant was
appointed.

Mr. Ewing not qualifying for surveyor, the vacancy was filled by
appointment of Charles Truax.

Thus Columbia County was launched upon its career. The chief
settlements at that time were on the Touchet, and Dayton was not far
from the center of that region. But the county included a great area to
the north and east, and though as yet sparsely settled, it was obvious
that upon the Tucanon, Pataha, Alpowa and Asotin, and upon the vast
plateau between the Blue Mountains and Snake River there would ere long
be a large population which would be so remote from Dayton as to make
it an inconvenient seat of government.

In fact, hardly had the new officers become installed before there
arose the inevitable county-seat fight. It would seem as though the
contest would have assumed, even then, the form of a demand for a new
county rather than for the location of the seat. Such, however, was
not the case, and Marengo on the Tucanon, the historic spot of the
home of our active old friend, Louis Raboin (Maringouin, "mosquito,"
in the French) became a rival of the Touchet metropolis for official
headquarters. In the election which took place on November 7, 1876,
Dayton received 418 votes and Marengo 300. The latter vote pretty
nearly represented at that time the population in the eastern
two-thirds of the county, and the result of the election laid the
foundation of the speedy demand for another county division.

The officers of Columbia County for the period up to the setting off
from it of Garfield County in 1881, may properly be inserted at this
point.

Those of the first election in 1875 have already been given. The
results of the election of 1876 were: County commissioners, John
Sanders, N. C. Williams and W. E. Ayers; probate judge, C. M. McLeran;
sheriff, R. P. Steen; auditor, Oliver C. White; treasurer, D. C.
Guernsey; assessor, Alonzo L. Sanford; surveyor, Charles E. Truax;
coroner, J. H. Kennedy; superintendent of schools, J. E. Edmiston.
Surveyor Truax and Probate Judge McLeran resigned, and the vacancies
were filled by Alfred T. Beall and Thomas H. Crawford, respectively.

The election of 1878 resulted in the choice of the following: For the
Legislature, Councilman L. M. Ringer (joint with Whitman and Stevens
counties), and for representatives, T. C. Frary and D. C. Guernsey;
county commissioners, E. Oliver, W. W. Sherry and D. B. Pettyjohn;
sheriff, R. P. Steen; auditor, Oliver C. White; probate judge, J. A.
Starner; treasurer, H. H. Wolfe; assessor, T. J. Mewhinney; surveyor,
E. D. Miner; coroner, W. W. Day; superintendent of schools, F. M.
McCully. For Constitution, 426; against Constitution, 513.

The officers chosen in 1880 were: Joint councilman, A. H. Butler;
councilman for Columbia County, George Hunter; representatives,
William Clark, R. P. Steen, W. L. Freeman; county commissioners, W. W.
Sherry, Casper Plummer, Allen Embree; probate judge, tie again on J.
A. Starner and Walter F. Jones, with 357 votes each, decided by lot
in favor of the former; sheriff, John Mustard; auditor, J. W. Jessee;
attorney, J. K. Rutherford; treasurer, F. C. Miller; assessor, T. J.
Mewhinney; surveyor, E. D. Miner; superintendent of schools, F. M.
McCully; coroner, J. Clark; sheep commissioner (a new office created by
the preceding Legislature), Charles McCable. There seems to have been
in the four elections in Columbia County prior to the subtraction of
Garfield, a remarkably even distribution of the two parties. In 1880
there were ten republicans and nine democrats.

A slight change in the county line was made by the Legislature in 1879,
by which township 8 north, range 38 east, was subtracted from Columbia
and added to Walla Walla.

Most of the events concerned with the industries, newspapers and
politics of the Columbia County region, while it was still part of
Walla Walla, have been treated of in preceding chapters. We did not,
however, trace the organization of the pioneer schools or pioneer
churches or give any data in respect to those now existing in Columbia
County.


THE FIRST SCHOOL IN THE COUNTY

was organized in 1865 in what was called District No. 15 of Walla Walla
County. The house was located on the old Lewiston Road, a mile and a
half east of Dayton, near the subsequent residence of John Rowe, lately
destroyed by fire. Like most of the pioneer schoolhouses, it was built
of logs, with oiled paper windows, big rock fireplace, puncheons for
seats and desks with pegs for legs. W. H. Elliott was the teacher in
that initial school. At the time of county organization in 1875 there
were but few schools, but the number rapidly increased, and a report
of January, 1879, gives statistics from thirty-eight districts. A
report of November, 1881, shows sixty-two districts. That number was,
however, nearly cut in half by the erection of Garfield County, for
only thirty-four districts were left in the diminished Columbia.

A report of the superintendent for the year closing August 31, 1882,
shows some interesting figures for comparison with others that are to
follow:

  Number of teachers in county, Males                                22
                                Females                              28

  Amount expended for teachers' wages                         $7,800.00

  Amount for buildings, exclusive of voluntary contributions   2,500.00

  Value of school property                                    19,488.00

  Census of school children                                         481

Movements looking to graded schools for Dayton were in progress soon
after county establishment. After various rebuffs the advocates of
progress were gratified by the fulfillment of their aspirations. An
excellent building was erected and furnished in 1880, at a cost of
$8,000.00. The women of the town bestirred themselves and, as is usual
in such cases, they made things go by the formation of an Educational
Aid Society. By means of festivals, "feeds" and other allurements such
as ordinarily play havoc with the hearts, stomachs and purses of the
masculine citizens, this society raised sufficient funds for equipping
the rooms and improving the grounds.

When the tasty building was opened to the children of Dayton in
October, 1880, it provided for the first graded school in Eastern
Washington. The schools of Walla Walla were, of course, larger, but up
to that time had not been graded. Supt. C. W. Wheeler of Walla Walla
County called attention to that rather discreditable fact in 1881, and
within a year the mother county followed the daughter. The teachers
in that first graded school in Columbia County were: Principal, F. M.
McCully; assistants, J. S. Windell, Sina Coleson, Stella Bowen. During
the summer of 1881 two additional buildings were erected and a high
school department was added, in charge of S. G. Burdick and Lizzie
Geary and Emma Kinnear.

[Illustration: SCENE ON MAIN STREET, DAYTON]

[Illustration: CENTRAL SCHOOL, DAYTON]

In 1882 the principalship was conferred upon a teacher destined
to become a prominent educator, Prof. J. H. Morgan, subsequently
superintendent of public instruction for the state, and for many years
afterwards connected with the Normal School at Ellensburg.

For the sake of topical clearness we will take a long step in time and
present here the essential features in the report of the superintendent
of schools for the county, and that for the superintendent of the
Dayton schools for 1917.

We learn from the report of County Superintendent W. W. Hendron for
1916-17 the following:

  Total number of districts in Columbia County       43
  Number of teachers                                 83
  Number of pupils enrolled                       1,721
  Value of school property                     $146,500

In this estimation of value of school property, the Pietrzycki bequest,
spoken of later in connection with the Dayton schools, is not included.
It may be observed that while there has been a large gain since 1882,
there has been relatively a slow increase compared with the industrial
and commercial parts of the state. This region has had the phenomenon
usual in purely agricultural sections, the absorption of many of the
lesser grain farmers by the greater. It is very observable, however,
that the schools have made very great gains in organization and
equipment.

The present faculty of the Dayton school system is as follows:

C. A. Livengood, superintendent.

S. F. Atwood, principal of high school and instructor in chemistry and
algebra.

C. G. Greenslade, instructor in algebra and United States history.

Fred Irvine, instructor in general science and physics.

Laura Wheat, instructor in English and botany.

Jeannette Twyman, instructor in English history, geometry and English.

Jane Olive Jones, instructor in Latin and German.

Waite Matzger, instructor in manual training.

Martha Lyons, instructor in domestic science.

The grade teachers are as follows, in order from the eighth grade to
the first, there being subdivisions of each:

W. W. Hendron, principal.

May Meade, Bernice Osborn, Katherine Sharp, Cora Gollihur, Alice
Gentry, Cora Gerkon, May Foreman, Nona Richardson, Winnifred Jellum,
Anna M. Earhart, Helen Fogg, Pansy Gregg, Olive Peck, Mary George,
Elsie Gough, C. Blanchard Smith, music.

From Superintendent Livengood we learn that the value of the Central
Building, in which the high school and higher grade students meet,
together with the three primary buildings, is assessed, with grounds
and equipment, at $76,673. There is, however, a much larger property
in possession of the district, and that is found in the properties
bequeathed by Dr. Marcel Pietrzycki. This property, consisting of the
home in Dayton, with outlying buildings, now employed by the district
for school purposes, together with endowment funds, is reckoned at
$110,000.

The history of the Pietrzycki bequest to Dayton makes up the most
interesting and unique chapter in the history of the town.

Doctor Pietrzycki was born of Polish parents on April 25, 1843, in
Galicia, Austria. He established himself in medical practice in Dayton
in 1880. He became a successful practitioner, but his mind turned in
many directions outside of his profession. Through fortunate land
investments in the region between Dayton and Starbuck, he finally
acquired an estate, which he called the Lubla Ranch, containing 5,500
acres. He also became president and manager of the Lubla Cattle
Company, which owned about 3,500 acres adjoining the ranch. In caring
for the products of his ranches the doctor also became owner of the
Lubla mills and warehouses at Starbuck.

Doctor Pietrzycki was a man of profound thought along political and
sociological lines, and possessed also of a philanthropic nature. He
decided to turn his great ranch property into a colonizing enterprise
along co-operative lines. His plans were a curious composition of
socialistic and feudalistic features. Brought up in Austria with its
feudalistic society, he had, nevertheless, by his experiences in
America and by his own mental development, become very liberal in his
views. He built a veritable castle on the Lubla Ranch, containing
twenty-six rooms, doubtless the most expensive farm dwelling in the
state. He was endeavoring to execute his plans of bringing colonists
from Austria when failing health, together with obstacles in the way
of his first plan, induced him to make a change in the disposition of
the property. Doctor and Mrs. Pietrzycki--who was a daughter of Rev. J.
H. Warren of California, one of the great pioneer church builders of
that state, and a woman of great culture and noble character--had been
bereaved in the loss of their children and felt that their property
might well go to benefactions which would reach the children of the
region where their most active years had been spent. Accordingly,
after making ample provision for his wife, the doctor left half of his
ranch as a legacy to Dayton District for the purpose of maintaining an
industrial department in the schools. Upon the death of Mrs. Pietrzycki
the home property in Dayton went also for the use of the district, and
part of the school units meet there.

Doctor Pietrzycki died in 1910. In the message of Mayor J. A. Muirhead
on January 3, 1911, we find the following reference to the bequest:

* * * "Pietrzycki Park, donated to the city by our late esteemed
townsman, Dr. Marcel Pietrzycki, and the no less magnificent bequest in
his last will and testament, by which the City of Dayton is named as
the beneficiary of the greater part of his estate to be used for the
establishment of an industrial school in our midst. It is estimated
that the amount which will be available for this purpose when the
estate is settled up and all bequests paid, will exceed $100,000."

By the terms of the will the judge of the superior court, the mayor of
the city, and the clerk of the school board were to be the trustees.
But as the doctor, among his other peculiarities, insisted on drawing
his will and other papers, without any lawyer's assistance, it was
found that the language was such as to compel personal names instead
of ex officio appointments, and as a result, Judge C. F. Miller, Dr.
C. H. Day and Attorney E. W. Clark became permanent trustees for the
management of this unique and valuable bequest.

The practical measures for full realization of the Pietrzycki
Foundation are as yet largely tentative, but the fund is in process of
application, and within a few years Dayton will have, without question,
one of the best equipped industrial schools in the country.


CHURCHES OF COLUMBIA COUNTY

The history of the early churches of the Touchet country is similar to
that of Walla Walla. The preachers of that early day had to do pretty
much everything of secular as well as spiritual nature. Like other
pioneers, those preachers were wholesouled, hearty, often robustious,
and representative of the Church Militant and Triumphant as well as
the Church Spiritual. They were usually men of eloquence and power,
stronger on revivals and "hell-fire" than most of the pastors of
this cooler and more scientific age, but playing a noble part in the
foundation building of early days.

The Methodists seem to have been the pioneers on the Touchet, and
of them Presiding Elder W. Calloway was the first to hold regular
services. That was in 1866, and the meetings were held in the
schoolhouse on the Touchet. The first regularly organized church dates
its beginning on March 20, 1875. Among the pastors of that early church
was Rev. S. G. Havermale, who became one of the early settlers in
Spokane, filing a homestead claim on the Island, new in the heart of
that city, a claim of enormous value, but the profits of which inured
more to others than to the pioneer preacher.

The old camp-meetings at Shiloh, just above Huntsville, witnessed many
a scene in those days, religious and otherwise.

There was a famous camp ground also on Mill Creek, about six miles
above Walla Walla, in the Dudley grove. One of the preachers and
authors of national reputation, L. A. Banks, now of Boston, author
of that charming book, "An Oregon Boyhood," and other books of wide
celebrity, started his career at those old camp grounds of Shiloh and
Walla Walla.

One of the some group, who started as a "boy-preacher" in the early
'70s was G. W. Kennedy. In recent years he has written a very
interesting book called "The Pioneer Campfire." From it we make these
extracts, not all of which belong to the Touchet, but to the wider area:

"The Oregon country had no better people than had settled about Rock
Creek and the Molalla. I love to remember the annual meeting with
these. There were the Boyntons, Morelands, Sanders, Owens, McGowans,
Mores, Dimmicks, and others, whose religious zeal was of the pioneer
type.

"'Father' Jesse Moreland was a leader, had a deep spiritual life, and
often preached an able sermon from the pulpit.

"Those hard-working, intelligent, gospel-inspired, soul-loving
preachers and pastors of those early days did a work with which no
part of Christian evangelism can show a brighter record, if indeed a
parallel. No wonder the people revere those Christian heroes, who laid
the foundations in godliness for a stalwart commonwealth.


PASTORAL WORK

"I will speak of a characteristic case of pastoral visiting. It was
given me by a man, who at one time was a wild cowboy on our borders;
afterwards was converted, and became an 'evangelist.' This is the way
he told it:

"'God in His goodness sent a little preacher down to that country. One
day we saw a man come riding across the prairie, singing:

  "'Jesus, lover of my soul,
  Let me to thy bosom fly.'

       *       *       *       *       *

"He came to the ranch, got down and said: 'Boys, I want you to put my
pony up and feed him. I am a Methodist circuit rider, and have come out
here to stay with you.' We had not asked him, and he did not wait for
an invitation. I looked at him and loved him, but I was afraid to get
close to him. My heart would not beat right. I was afraid to ride his
horse to water for fear it would fall down and kill me. Brother, his
horse was religious. His saddle bags would put you under conviction.
When we sat down to eat and went to help ourselves as usual, he said,
'Wait, men, I am going to ask a blessing.' Everything was as still
as death, and he turned loose, and at once my mind went back to my
boyhood, when I had heard the old father ask a blessing in the mountain
home. The boys began to eat, and before they were through he said:
'Now, men, don't leave here until we have prayers. After supper we
want to have prayers.' I was afraid to go. After supper he took his
Bible, and sat down and read a chapter with a good deal of about hell
in it. He read as long as he wanted to. He was boss of the devil. He
got down on his knees and prayed just as loud as a man could, and just
as long as he wanted to pray. He shook us over the very pit. I saw
billows of hell. My heart went awful fast, then it would seem to stop
dead; it seemed like I was going to die. He told God about everything
we had ever done--all the stealing, lying, fighting and cursing. He
had the thing in hand. He never consulted us as to how long or how
loud he should pray. He did it up exactly right. When prayers were
over we were just barely able to walk out, but we got out as quickly
as possible. The next morning the preacher asked the blessing again,
and said, 'Don't you boys go out until we have had prayers, then I
will have to leave you (he talked as though it would nearly break our
hearts), but I will be back in about a month.' After breakfast he
prayed until it nearly broke our hearts, then he got on his pony and
rode away. About a month rolled around, and we got sort of anxious to
see the man again. As mean as we were, when we saw a fellow that was
straight, we respected him, and we just knew he was. He came again and
acted about as he had the other time, but some of us didn't do just
as we did before. When he was through the evening prayer, I went out
with the boys; told them that prayer had been down on my nerves for a
month, I couldn't bear it any longer, that I would quit then and there
the blasphemous life I was living. Then went into the bushes and told
it all to God. I tell you, before the next day dawned, I was a changed
man.' Many a faithful pastor found the stars for his crown, out there
among the roughest of men.


PERSONAL CONTACT

"In 1870-71 I was teaching school in Walla Walla. The Methodist Church
held its quarterly conference. Rev. H. K. Hines was presiding elder,
and Rev. H. C. Jenkins, preacher in charge. They called me into the
council and said: 'Brother Kennedy, we think you ought to preach the
gospel. Will you accept license and go to work?' Of course I had done
the thinking about it before. I replied immediately: 'Yes, if you will
bear the responsibility, and stand for the damages that may follow.'

[Illustration: PUBLIC SCHOOL BUILDING, HUNTSVILLE]

"Soon after that a protracted meeting began in the old mission church
at that place. The pastor told me, one evening, at the close of the
meeting, that I must preach the next night. 'No, you must excuse me,
Brother Jenkins, I have never preached a sermon in my life, your
meeting is growing, and now needs the best preaching.' 'I am older in
the work than you are,' he replied, 'and know the meeting better, and
I know the expectations of the church in you; you must preach.' That
settled the matter. I went home to think and pray and study.


FIRST SERMON

"Before breakfast next morning, the Lord had given the text, Rom. 1-16.
'For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ. It is the power of God,
unto salvation, to every one that believeth.' Into the grove I went,
with my Bible, formed my outlines, and went at the preparation in dead
earnest. On my knees with the Bible, before God, I had the struggle of
my life. Every temptation came before me. 'What if this was not God's
plan?' 'What if I should miserably fail?' 'What if the meeting should
fail on my hands?' No one but the young preacher approaching the pulpit
for the first time can feel such a burden.

"Father and mother were with me, and we had to walk a mile to church
that night. I had told them what was on my mind. We got in late. The
church was crowded. Scarce standing room in the aisles. I crowded
through, walked onto the platform and went down on my knees behind
the pulpit. I had promised the Lord all day that if he would give me
liberty and help me to preach that sermon, I would always after preach
his word. In a moment, kneeling there, that cloud of burden was lifted,
and I had the victory. O, how the Holy Spirit did take that poor sermon
of mine, and put His inspiration into it, and His power under it, and
make it a power of God, to souls that night! The little that I had put
into it was so augmented by the divine. I seemed like a Gideon, shorn
of his army, yet working out a great victory. There was victory in my
soul and my purpose, and victory in all that meeting that night.


CAMP MEETING

"Our camp meeting that summer (1871) came in June, and was held at the
old grounds on Mill Creek, five miles above Walla Walla. There was a
very large attendance of people. The old veterans of the pulpit were
there, and we 'raw recruits' joined them, making the pulpit force very
large. Quite a number of the young men had been put into the work that
year. There I heard Dr. L. A. Banks preach his first sermon. There
wasn't in him then the prophecy of his remarkable career.

"That meeting was a triumph. Commensurate with the beginning of the
meeting was the awakening of souls; and that awakening grew to the most
intense inquiry. The altar was filled with 'seekers' night after night.
All plan for regular hours for closing was given up, under the press
of 'inquiring souls.' On Sunday night quite a number were forward for
prayer. There was a tardiness about getting into the life giving light.
Late, the benediction was pronounced, and most of the people retired.
Most of those seeking souls remained in prayer, determined to get the
victory. Some of us remained to pray and exhort and sign. And the
meeting went on. One after another 'came through.' Shouts were heard,
and the songs went on, and the meeting continued until every one of
those struggling ones was brought out into the 'light and liberty of
the children of God.' Such shouting of triumph I had never before seen
the equal. The sun rose over a new day, and still that meeting didn't
close, for we went on singing the triumph of new born souls among the
camps of the people.


ANOTHER

"Another camp meeting was held the same year, on the Touchet River,
four miles beyond Waitsburg. An equally large attendance there. Rev. A.
J. Joslyn and myself went up to help Brother J. H. Adams, preacher in
charge. That meeting ran over two Sundays, and when finally it closed,
there was not left a single person on the ground that had not become a
Christian.

"That year, 1871, in August, our conference was held in Portland,
Bishop James presided. I attended, and was admitted as a 'licentiate.'
In my class there were John N. Denison, W. T. Chapman, A. J. Joslyn,
Ira Ward, J. M. Luark and F. D. Winton. Some of these made noble
records in after years.

"I continued teaching in Walla Walla until the next conference. Summer
of 1872 I taught the school called the 'Old Mission District'--Whitman
Mission--called then Waiilatpu. As a missionary to the Cayuse Indians,
Doctor Whitman settled there, in 1836, and continued until the awful
massacre of November 29, 1847. That awful afternoon the doctor,
his wife and eleven others fell under the murderous tomahawk, thus
baptizing the soil of Oregon with their blood, to the cause of Gospel
truth. When I stood first on that sacred spot, where yet is the coal
and ashes of their burnt mission, and looked just beyond the road,
the mound heaped over the thirteen fallen heroes, what memories--what
reflections--what communion of soul, bore me away to those scenes of
missionary devotion to save a heathen race, and to sacred fellowship
with that martyr company! I seemed still treading in the footsteps of
the noble Whitman, and to hear still his voice, 'turn ye, turn ye, for
why will ye die, O, wandering people.' If it is ever your privilege, go
and stand by that monument, now marking the spot. There is something
about a monument peculiar to itself. It sanctifies the place. With
Moses at the 'Burning Bush' you feel the impulse to remove your
sandals, 'for the place whereon you tread is holy ground.' Monumental
inscriptions are history in epitome. Here are recorded the deeds of the
heroic; great men, great places, and times.

"Our conference was held in Salem that year, where Bishop Foster
appointed me to the Yakima circuit, in Washington.


INDIAN POPULATION

"Of course, the whole country there originally belonged to the Indians,
and they were always a menace to settlement. On the Simcoe Reservation
there were about 3,000 Indians. Then came the Yakima Valley proper;
then across on the Columbia at Priest Rapids, there was the Smoholla
band of about five hundred. Then Chief Moses and his band were just a
little beyond, on the Wenatchee.

"During all the early settlement, there was constant alarm. The spring
of '73 the Modoc war came on. The Indians all over the interior were
uneasy and many of them took the 'warpath.'

"At the culmination of the battle at the lava beds those treacherous
Modocs proposed a treaty, and General Canby, Doctor Thomas, Agent Dyer,
and Superintendent Meacham went out to treat with the Indians. But
Captain Jack and those four others came with concealed weapons, and at
a signal struck down and murdered the peace commission. This inflamed
the whole Indian population of the Northwest. At this time I must go
to the upper valley and meet my appointments, forty miles away, and
through the Indian range, without a single settler. Dodging through as
best I could, I found the people badly scared and ready to fort up. Old
Chief Smoholla and his band of 200 had come over from Priest Rapids and
were camped within the valley.


INTO THE HOSTILE CAMP

"All the people came out on Sunday. Monday came; something must be
done to relieve the terrible strain. Accordingly, four of us saddled
our horses and started for Smoholla's camp. We went unarmed, thinking
it safer to meet them on square footing of friendship. We took them
completely by surprise. We asked to see the chief. The Indians spoke
in the jargon tongue, and told us to tie our horses and wait the
appointment of Chief Smoholla. We took a position on a hill in the
middle of their camp, and had a full view. Not long after we saw all
the Indian men going down to the council tent. Then they sent out an
escort for us.

"As we entered the door of that long wigwam, nearly every warrior
was present, ranged on both sides, the chief at the rear end. He
looked like a king. Stolid as a statue. He was the war leader of the
Columbias. We thought of the treachery of the Modocs, but we could not
back out now. On we went until just before the chief. He motioned us to
stand there; then asked the reason for our coming. I spoke to him in
jargon and explained the purpose of our meeting. Then said we wanted
first to preach a sermon to him and his people from the 'white man's
book of heaven.'

"That seemed to relieve all apprehension on his part and such a
stillness I never saw in any audience before. For the space of half an
hour not a muscle moved; not an eyelid quivered. Rigid attention.

"I then told them that our people had become alarmed, for they thought
so large a band of Indians meant hostility. And that God had made us
all brothers and not enemies. So the Great Father wanted us all to
live together in peace on earth. Then the old chief spoke: 'If we are
all brothers, why has the white man taken our lands from us? Has the
white man any rights here in Kittitas that the Indian has any right to
respect? The Indian came first.'

"Well, that was an unanswerable speech. But I excused the white man all
possible. 'That we could plow and plant where they could not and still
let them hunt and fish.' And I promised utmost friendship on the part
of the white brothers.

"We gave them our handshake and pronounced benediction of God on them,
and Chief Smoholla agreed to accept that as the 'pipe of peace.' We
finally got a change of countenance in that stern face; his hearty
farewell--'Klose tillacum mika,' and then under those balm and fir
trees we most devoutly thanked God for saving us from savage treachery
and rode away.

"It was the influence of Father Wilbur's agency over those Yakimas that
kept them quiet--for he certainly was a major general in the management
of Indians.


FATHER WILBUR ON THE INDIAN AGENCY

"The Indians at once feared and loved him. While at the agency one
time he told us the following story: A German brought a wagon load of
liquor on to the reservation and began selling to the Indians. Down
near the Satas River, twelve miles away from Fort Simcoe, he built
his booth--set a tent--fixed a counter and shelves--put his stock in
and was dealing out the 'fire water' as independently as if wholly
protected by law. Some of the Indians were getting drunk when Father
Wilbur discovered it. He sent word to the sheriff of Yakima County to
go down there and arrest the intruder. The sheriff (I well knew him)
sent word back that he knew that young German too well. That, having
a large family on his hands to support he must let out that job to
someone else; that he could have it if he desired. Next morning Father
Wilbur saddled his riding mule, took a good riding horse with saddle
and some ropes tied on behind. Then he called to his aid an Indian
with saddle horse. Together they rode in sight of the booth; they
dismounted and tied the three horses to trees. Father Wilbur then gave
instruction to the Indian to stay by the horses, ropes in hand, and
come to his help when called. With no kind of weapon, he approached the
place. The proprietor was ready for him--recognizing the agent--and
had a double-barrel shotgun loaded and lying across his counter. When
Wilbur got within forty feet the German took up the shotgun, saying,
'if you come any farther I will kill you.' Wilbur stopped; stood with
a steady eye upon him, spoke not a word. The German began to pour out
a volley of oaths, and after he was exhausted with cursing he took up
a whiskey bottle, poured some out into a glass and drank it. While
engaged in that act, Wilbur moved up several steps. Then the man took
up the shotgun again and swore he'd shoot if he came another step.
After another rage of oaths, he took up the bottle and was pouring
some more liquor. Seeing now his chance Wilbur sprang, like a cat upon
a mouse, right upon that demon--threw him backward on the ground, and
was over him. But the German was a young and very stout man--he threw
his hand back to his belt, grabbed his sheath knife, and made his aim
at Wilbur's side. Seeing the move, he brought his foot with such force
against the man's arm that the knife flew clear across the booth. Now,
the Indian was on hand, and with the ropes they securely tied the man.
Brought the horse--lifted him into the saddle, and soon were out on
the road; and within two hours they had that 'demon' locked safely in
the 'guard house.' Once a day Father Wilbur would go to his cell and
take in bread and water. The man would curse. On going in on the third
day he called to Wilbur: 'I have acted the fool, Mr. Wilbur, now if
you will release me I will go down to my store of 'fire water'--pour
out the last drop of it, go home, and live like a man the balance of
my life.' 'I'll take you at your word,' said Wilbur. He saddled the
horses and the two rode down to the twelve-mile place. True to his word
that German poured out all his whiskey, then telling Father Wilbur
'good-bye' turned away to go home to the Spokane country. 'Hold,'
said Wilbur, 'you will need money on your journey, here is twenty
dollars--go now, and God bless you.'

"About ten years after Father Wilbur was over in the Palouse country on
a preaching tour. Held night meeting at a certain place. At the close
of the meeting a good looking, strong young man came forward to shake
his hand. 'Father Wilbur, I suppose you will not recognize me. I am far
from the place where you last saw me, and a very different man; thanks
to God and to yourself. I am the man that tried to ruin your Indians
with liquor, and you kept me on bread and water for three days. That
little experience made me the man I now am. Come back here, I want to
introduce you to my wife and children.' He had kept his word, and was
now the strongest man in that church.


OUR CONFERENCE

"Convened in July that summer in the City of Walla Walla--first session
of Columbia River Conference. Bishop Merrill presided. There were
twelve preachers present, and that made the entire membership of the
conference. Those twelve men covered the entire field embraced in the
great district, called the Inland Empire. The towns were, The Dalles,
Walla Walla, La Grande, Baker City, Boise City and the Village of
Pendleton. Indeed all of these were but villages. Not one of them was
approached by railroad, excepting The Dalles, not one by any other than
stage coach or your own conveyance. Laborious travel was unavoidable.
My first year in this territory I reached all the settled portions of
two counties and rode 3,000 miles on horseback.


DAYTON CIRCUIT

"When I reached Dayton, my appointment, I found the situation about as
frontier, in all respects, as the settlements of the Yakima. Dayton
was a town of one hundred people. No church within the entire County
of Garfield. The homes of the people were cabins and shanties. There
I had the most wonderful revival in all my ministry. Brother Koontz
helped me. The people came from the whole country 'round. We begun
about the 1st of February with a deep snow and cold weather. Religious
conditions seemed as cold as the weather. But soon the spiritual stream
broke loose, and what a glorious tide of revival--a veritable stream of
salvation. Well nigh one hundred were converted, and the whole country
was turned from the service of Satan unto God. Dancing ceased, and it
was many years before it could again be revived.

"We were able to build a good church in the town that year. This was
the coldest winter that I have ever experienced upon this coast.
Thermometer went down to 35 degrees below zero, and was near that for
a while. I traveled all the time horseback and certainly had good
chance to test the cold. One of my appointments was at a schoolhouse
called the 'Turkey Pen,' eight miles out from Dayton. I rode out to
the neighborhood on Saturday and to Brother Nealy's home. Next morning
was bitter cold. We saddled our horses and started to the schoolhouse,
which was about two miles away. We were well wrapped, but about
half-way over I became unbearably cold. I tried walking a short way,
but on arriving and getting into the house, found that both my ears had
been frozen stiff. While Brother Nealy built a fire, finding some coal
oil, I proceeded to apply it and thaw out. By the time about a dozen
people had come in, I could feel the warm blood coursing all through
again, and we went on with the meeting. People said I had preached the
'smartest' sermon that day that they had heard. 'Yes, no doubt, I am
the smartest preacher you have listened to lately, physically--give the
cold weather the credit.' We all consented.

"After dinner I got into the saddle again, and rode five miles right
up that mountain, in face of the storm, to meet another appointment on
head of the Patit. No one came out, and after various efforts to build
a fire, being too cold to accomplish it--I got on my horse and rode him
a mile away to the nearest house. When I dismounted I had to be helped
into the house.

"I remained with that kind family until the weather moderated. My
presiding elder, Rev. S. G. Havermale, traveled a distance reaching
from Pendleton to the Colville, encircling the Spokane and the
Clearwater country." This much from Brother Kennedy.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Cumberland Presbyterian Church of Dayton was organized on September
6, 1874, by Rev. A. W. Sweeney, whose home had been at Walla Walla and
then at Waitsburg. He was also a man of much power and connected with
all the leading features of church life during that period.

He was succeeded by Revs. R. H. Wills, H. W. Eagan ("Father Eagan," who
afterwards lived at Walla Walla and was said to have performed more
wedding ceremonies than any preacher in the Inland Empire), and J. C.
Van Patten, two of whose sons are noted physicians, one at Dayton and
one at Walla Walla, while another son is one of the leading farmers of
Columbia County.

The Baptist Church was dedicated on September 22, 1878, Rev. J. B.
Bristow being the first pastor. One of the strongest of the early
churches of Dayton was the Universalist, organized in 1876 by Rev. A.
Morrison. Rev. E. A. McAllister became the pastor the next year and
had so strong and enthusiastic a following that his people were able
to erect the largest church in town. They could not, however, maintain
their lead, and their church, sad to relate, was sold for debt and
the congregation disbanded. A Congregational Church was organized and
ministered to at intervals by Father Eells, by Rev. E. W. Allen and
others, but there was no pastorate of much length till 1890. In that
year a notable step occurred in the church life and intellectual life
of Dayton, by the coming of Rev. S. B. L. Penrose, one of the "Yale
Band," later president of Whitman College at Walla Walla, and one of
the leading educators and public speakers of the Northwest. He took up
his first pastorate in the Congregational Church at Dayton and remained
there from 1890 to 1895, then becoming, after an interval at Honolulu,
the president of Whitman College.

A Seventh Day Adventist Church was organized at Dayton in 1877, and
three years later a church was built. Their first elder was Ambrose
Johnson.

There was also a Presbyterian organization at Dayton during the first
decade of its life, but with no building or regular pastor.

At the date of this publication the following churches are in active
operation:

The Christian Church, with a membership of 575, Rev. J. Eliott Slimp,
pastor; the Congregational, with 140 members, Rev. W. C. Gilmore
pastor; Methodist, with 140 members, Rev. A. A. Calendar pastor;
Baptist, 90 members, Rev. Lem T. Root, pastor; Episcopal, with 15
members, no settled pastor, but frequently visited by Rev. John Leacher
of Pomeroy; United Brethren, 60 members, with Rev. J. H. Wilson as
pastor.


DAYTON A CITY OF LODGES

Dayton has been somewhat distinguished as a city of lodges. Their
foundation, too, dates to the period of county and city organization.
The Odd Fellows secured a charter in February of 1876. On March 8,
1877, Patit Lodge No. 10 was duly organized, the first N. G. being Lee
Searcy. The Masons were not much behind in time, for Columbia Lodge No.
26 was organized on October 11, 1877, with J. E. Edmiston as first W. M.

The Ancient Order of United Workmen, the Order of Chosen Friends,
the Knights of Pythias, the Good Templars, and the Grand Army of the
Republic were all organized during the last years of the '70s or first
of the '80s. During the exciting times of the Nez Perce war of 1877
there was a military organization which finally grew into the Columbia
Mounted Infantry, and that in turn became the Dayton Grays. This played
a somewhat important part in keeping alive a certain interest that
made the Dayton country good recruiting ground for the State Guard
of Washington, and during the present enrolling year of 1917 very
responsive to the national calls.


POLITICAL ANNALS

Resuming the thread of political annals with the election of 1882,
the first following the establishment of Garfield County, we find
the following tabulation: For delegate to Congress, Thomas Burke,
democrat, 673 to 442 for T. H. Brents, republican; for joint councilman
from the counties of Walla Walla, Columbia, Garfield and Whitman, J.
E. Edmiston, democrat; joint councilman for Columbia and Garfield,
N. T. Caton, democrat; representative, Elisha Ping, democrat; joint
representative, John Brining, republican; sheriff, J. H. Hosler,
democrat; auditor, J. W. Jessee, democrat; probate judge, J. W.
Ostrander, democrat; county commissioners, E. Bird, democrat, J. F.
Kirby, republican, and E. Crouch, democrat; prosecuting attorney, J. K.
Rutherford, democrat; treasurer, F. C. Miller, republican; assessor,
Henry Hunter, republican, by a majority of one vote; superintendent of
schools, Julia Newkirk, democrat; surveyor, E. D. Miner, republican,
without opposition; coroner, Dr. J. Clarke; sheep commissioner, O. E.
Mack, democrat.

As will be seen, fourteen of the successful candidates were democrats
and five were republicans. The total vote for congressional delegate,
which might be considered representative of the general voting
population, was 1,115. Thus it will be seen that Columbia County, like
Walla Walla, was, during the period before statehood, predominantly
democratic, though not by such steady majorities as to be counted on
confidently. The gradual transition of those, as of other communities
in the state, to prevailing republican dominance, is one of the
interesting movements of the times. Various reasons, some good and some
poor, may be assigned, varying according to political predilections of
the observer. Broadly speaking, the transition was mainly due, in the
author's judgment, to that tremendous movement of thought following
the civil war, favorable to nationalism, the dominance of nation over
state. The strife culminating in the Civil war and reconstruction
thoroughly discredited the theory of state sovereignty, and the vast
enlargement of Federal power swept into the ranks of nationalists an
ever-increasing number of young men. This was more marked in the West
than elsewhere, for the reason that state lines and state pride and
ties have always been loose and weak in the new land where all sections
and nations met on a common footing.

The republican party of the '60s, the party of Lincoln, Seward,
Chase and Greeley, was based on a moral issue, that of the inherent
wrongfulness of slavery. That of the '70s had rather a political basis,
that of national power against local power. The transition again in
the period from 1912 to date, whereby the pendulum has swung from
republican to democratic leadership, has been based primarily upon
economic questions, the conviction having become common that monopoly
and privilege had become entrenched behind Federal patronage and that
a new order of freedom for the individual must be secured. In the
counties under consideration in this volume, as in others in the state
and in the West generally, we see the manifestation of these tides
of thought and changes of viewpoint. As local studies any one of our
counties, Columbia among others, though conservative like most farming
sections, furnishes abundant matter for reflection.

The election of 1884 was marked by the short-lived woman suffrage
provision. By reason of this the total vote was considerably increased.
In Dayton there was a total vote of 1,264, of which women cast 364.

The officials chosen were as follows: Congressman, C. S. Vorhees,
democrat, 1,015 to 959 for J. M. Armstrong; joint councilmen, B. B.
Day, republican, and C. H. Warner, democrat; representative, A. E.
McCall, democrat; joint representative, S. A. Wells, republican;
sheriff, J. H. Hosler, democrat; auditor, J. A. Kellogg, republican;
county commissioners, J. W. Fields, W. R. Marquis, John Fudge, all
republicans; prosecuting attorney, R. F. Sturdevant, republican;
probate judge, J. Y. Ostrander, democrat; treasurer, F. C. Miller,
republican; assessor, Garrett Romaine, republican; superintendent of
schools, R. O. Hawks, republican; surveyor, W. McBride, democrat;
coroner, Dr. E. H. Van Patten, democrat; sheep commissioner, H. B. Day,
republican. A question of considerable local interest was that frequent
one of the building of a courthouse. This proposal carried 986 to 588.
Another interesting question before the territory was that of taxing
church property. The vote in Columbia County was 802 in favor and
701 against. The proposition, however, did not win in the territory.
Twelve republicans and seven democrats were garnered into the official
storehouse, as a result of the election of 1884. The tide was turning
toward republicanism. In the election of 1886 the republican candidates
scored a sweeping success, every county office except that of probate
judge being filled by one of that party. The democratic candidate for
Congress, however, Charles S. Vorhees, again led the procession with
974 to 940 for C. M. Bradshaw. Wm. Ayers, democrat, was chosen to the
council, and George Eckler, a republican, was chosen to the House of
Representatives. The local officers were these: Sheriff, W. R. Marquis;
auditor, Jay A. Kellogg; county commissioners, John Fudge, J. W. Fields
and D. W. Gritman; prosecuting attorney, C. R. Dorr; probate judge,
J. H. Gough; treasurer, F. C. Miller; assessor, Garrett Romaine;
school superintendent, R. O. Hawks; surveyor, John Patrick; coroner,
Dr. E. Bories; sheep commissioner, H. B. Day. There was one rather
curious event in that election, leading to a decision by Attorney R.
F. Sturdevant, which has some general interest. D. W. Gritman and
Alexander Price had an equal number of votes for commissioner, 946.
The former was a republican, the latter a democrat. Mr. Sturdevant
decided that though the number of votes was equal, Mr. Gritman was
entitled to the seat for the reason that the statute provided that no
two commissioners should be from the same district and that Mr. Gritman
had a majority over the other candidate in his district, while Mr.
Price was in a minority in his own district, though having a tie with
Mr. Gritman. The decision seems sound and logical. A complication of
that sort is avoided by the present law providing for nominations by
district, not at large.

[Illustration: ONE OF THE FIRST HOUSES IN DAYTON]

The election of 1888, the last of the territorial days, was in an
"off" year, and excited comparatively little contest. There were only
1,351 votes as against 1,914 in the preceding election. The falling
off was mainly due to the invalidation of the Woman Suffrage law by
Judge Langford, and the consequent elimination of women's votes. The
democrats came back in this election, results being as follows: C. S.
Voorhees for Congress led John B. Allen by one vote. In the territory,
however, the election went the other way, and Mr. Allen took his
seat in Congress. M. M. Godman, democrat, was chosen to the council
and A. H. Weatherford, of the some party, was chosen representative.
The county officers were these: Sheriff, W. R. Marquis, republican;
auditor, Jay A. Kellogg, republican; county commissioners, Alexander
Price and Daniel Lyons, democrats, and J. C. Lewis, republican;
prosecuting attorney, E. H. Fox, democrat; probate judge, J. H. Gough,
democrat; assessor, M. R. Hanger, democrat; superintendent of schools,
G. S. Livengood, democrat; coroner, Dr. E. H. Van Patten, democrat.

To Columbia County, as to the other counties of the state, the year
1889 was a great date, for it was the date of statehood. The general
plan for the election of delegates to the state convention provided
for the division of the territory into twenty-five districts, each to
have three delegates, of which not more than two could be from any
one party. Each party, therefore, nominated two candidates. Those for
District No. 9, including all of Columbia County and the precincts of
Waitsburg, Coppei, Eureka Flat and Prescott, in Walla Walla County,
were: democrats, Lewis Neace and M. M. Godman, and, republicans, E. C.
Ross and R. F. Sturdevant. Mr. Ross having the least vote, the others
were declared duly chosen.

We have given some space to the "life and works" of the Constitutional
Convention of 1889 in a previous chapter, and need say here no more
than that Columbia County, in the election which followed in October,
1889, did not accept the Constitution. The vote was 468 for and 730
against. In similar manner Columbia County registered her disapproval
of Woman Suffrage by 816 to 422, and of Prohibition by 745 to 484. The
result on these three important questions was similar in most of the
Inland section, and with reference to Prohibition and Woman Suffrage,
it was similar over the state.

The Constitution, however, was sustained by a good vote in the
territory, and the state government became duly inaugurated.

The officers chosen in Columbia County in that first election under
statehood were these: Congressman, John L. Wilson, republican, and for
governor, Elisha P. Ferry, republican, both by very slight majorities,
twenty-four in the first case and eighteen in the second; the other
state officers having practically the same vote, all republican except
J. H. Morgan, democrat, for superintendent of public instruction,
chosen by ten over the republican candidate; judge of Superior Court,
R. F. Sturdevant, republican; state senator, H. H. Wolfe, republican;
representatives, H. B. Day, republican, and A. H. Weatherford,
democrat; county clerk, U. Z. Ellis, democrat; other local officers
were not chosen in that election, as it was an "extra" coming in with
statehood.

The number of votes in that election was 1,314. Though the republicans
were in the majority in almost all cases, it was by very scanty
majorities, and it was plain that the good old democratic region of
the Touchet was not yet entirely given over to republicanism. The
precarious hold of that political faith was revealed in the election
of 1890, for in that year the tide turned again and the republicans
were left high and dry on the flats of Salt River, only two, John Woods
for superintendent of schools, and J. C. Lewis for commissioner, being
able to navigate their political barks into the desired haven. The
total vote was 1,338, being an increase over the preceding year of only
twenty-four. The results of the choice were as follows: Congressman,
Thomas Carroll; representative to State Legislature, M. M. Godman;
county attorney, J. E. Edmiston; clerk, U. Z. Ellis; auditor, J. H.
Gough; sheriff, J. A. Thronson; treasurer, W. E. Ayers; commissioner,
first district, I. N. E. Rayburn; commissioner, second district,
J. C. Lewis; commissioner, third district, Daniel Lyons; school
superintendent, John Woods, by two votes; assessor, W. J. Honeycutt;
surveyor, Wilson McBride; coroner, Dr. E. H. Van Patten.


ELECTION OF 1892

The leading point of interest in connection with the election of
1892 was that it was the first in which the people of Washington
participated in the choice of a President. Moreover it was a very
strenuous campaign, and as we view it now it marked peculiarly the
turning point in political thought toward the new set of issues,
questions of labor and capital, money systems, railroad control and
other economic problems, beginning to supplant the issues of the war
and reconstruction. In that election the populists and prohibitionists
appeared both in our new State of Washington and in the country at
large. In Columbia County, as elsewhere, there was much scratching. The
democrats carried the bulk of the county offices in this election, the
republicans securing only the auditor, attorney and one commissioner.
In this election, as is apt to be the case in periods of readjustment,
the party in power suffered most.

On the vote for presidential electors the result was as follows:
Cleveland, 674; Harrison, 618; Weaver, 188; Bidwell, 95.

At that time two congressmen were elected at large, and hence each of
the four parties made two nominations.

The result was that Thomas Carroll and J. A. Mundy, democrats, received
656 and 635, respectively, to 592 and 591 for W. H. Doolittle and J. L.
Wilson, republican candidates. H. J. Snively, democratic candidate for
governor, had 647 to 571 for J. H. McGraw, republican, but the latter
was successful in the state. On the Legislative ticket J. A. Kellogg
and U. Z. Ellis for senator had a tie with 597 each, while Ernest
Hopkins, populist, had 231.

For representative, S. W. Hamill, democrat, was chosen. R. F.
Sturdevant, republican, and J. E. Edmiston, democrat, seem to have
been almost constantly pitted against each other, and at this time the
latter won the superior judgeship over the former. The county officers
chosen were as follows: Sheriff, A. H. Weatherford; auditor, A. P.
Cahill; clerk, Garl Taylor; treasurer, W. A. Newman; commissioners,
I. N. E. Rayburn and R. H. McHargue, democrats, and L. M. Vannice,
republican; assessor, W. J. Honeycutt; attorney, W. H. Fouts.
republican; superintendent of schools, Charles H. Terpening; surveyor,
T. B. Hicks; coroner, Dr. E. H. Van Patten.

Although there was a tie in Columbia County on vote for senator,
and although the democratic candidate for superior judge received
a majority, yet in both cases the republican had a majority in the
district, composed of Columbia, Garfield and Asotin, and therefore Mr.
Kellogg and Mr. Sturdevant occupied those places respectively.

The election of 1894, coming in the very midst of the hardest of the
"hard times"--floods, strikes, Coxey armies, bank failures, "30-cent
wheat," and general turmoil--was reflected in the great gain in the
populistic ranks. This was largely a revolt of democrats against
the Cleveland administration, very much as the election of 1892 was
a revolt against the extreme tariff and other alleged "monopoly"
tendencies of the Harrison administration.

The result was the triumph of the republican candidates, in the
triangular conflict. Every position showed a republican triumph. W. H.
Doolittle and S. C. Hyde received 677 and 671 votes respectively, while
B. F. Heuston and N. T. Caton, democrats, had to be content with 420
and 417, outrun by the populists, W. P. C. Adams and J. C. Van Patten,
with 426 and 446. Cornelius Lyman was chosen representative with 668
to 510 for M. M. Godman. The county officials were: Sheriff, Conrad
Knobloch; auditor, A. P. Cahill; treasurer, J. H. Fudge; clerk, J. L.
Mohundro; attorney, W. H. Fouts; assessor, R. F. Matkin; superintendent
of schools, H. B. Ridgeley; coroner, Dr. G. M. Burns; commissioners, C.
M. Grupe and Granville Hewitt.

The election of 1896 was characterized by a sweeping reversal of its
predecessor. That was the year of the "Peerless Leader" with his "Cross
of Gold." A new deal was on and the old democracy was slipping to
its final doom. A new democracy, under the oriflamme of the People's
Party, a real democracy this time, instead of the pseudo-democracy
of the southern slave baron and aristocrat, was making its appeal
East and West, but especially West, the logical home of genuine
democracy. Fusion tickets and fusion conventions of democrats, silver
republicans, and populists, "three-ring circuses" as they were styled
by stand-patters, marked that great political campaign of 1896. In
Columbia County the triune ticket agreed on by three conventions
meeting simultaneously on September 10th apportioned nominations, so
that representative, auditor, sheriff and superintendent of schools
were of the populists; attorney, assessor, clerk, surveyor, coroner
and county commissioners went to the democrats; the silver republicans
were cut rather short with the solitary assignment of treasurer.

The combination adopted the usual designation of People's Party. In the
election the republicans saved from the general wreck only the clerk
and sheriff, by scanty majorities. The total vote was 1,623, somewhat
in excess of any cast in the county up to that date.

The vote was as follows: The Bryan electors 847, the McKinley electors,
776; James Hamilton Lewis and W. C. Jones for Congress and John R.
Rogers for governor; joint senator, J. C. Van Patten; representative,
George Windust; judge Superior Court, M. M. Godman; sheriff, Conrad
Knobloch; clerk, J. L. Mohundro; auditor, Dick Harper; treasurer, G. A.
Parker; attorney, E. W. Clark; assessor, G. W. Page; superintendent of
schools, Mrs. Ella Terpening; surveyor, Ira Trescott; coroner, E. H.
Van Patten; commissioners, J. H. McCauley and J. C. Marckley.

The election of 1898 witnessed the same alignment, republicans against
the "fusion" of populists, democrats and silver republicans.

The result, however, was another reversal, and all the places were
filled by republicans, with the single exception of superintendent
of schools. The vote resulted thus: W. L. Jones and F. W. Cushman
for Congress; T. A. Anders and Mark A. Fullerton for Supreme Court;
representative in Legislature, C. S. Jerard; sheriff, J. D. Smith;
clerk, L. L. Ellis; auditor, H. E. Gilham; treasurer, F. W. Guernsey;
attorney, W. H. Fouts; assessor, J. F. Porter; superintendent of
schools, Mrs. Ella Terpening; surveyor, Ira Trescott; coroner, G. M.
Burns; commissioners, Alexander Duffy and Cornelius Lyman.

The election of 1900 made it seem that the "fusion" formation was
down and out, for the republicans carried the field by large or good
majorities for every candidate. Results thus appear: Electors for
McKinley 899 to 712 for those of Bryan; W. L. Jones and F. W. Cushman
for Congress; J. M. Frink for governor by 835 to 760 for Governor
Rogers; joint state senator, Edward Baumeister; representative, C.
S. Jerard; judge Superior Court, C. F. Miller; sheriff, J. D. Smith;
clerk, L. L. Ellis; auditor, H. E. Gilham; treasurer, F. W. Guernsey;
attorney, R. B. Brown; assessor, J. F. Porter; superintendent of
schools, W. W. Hendron; coroner, J. W. McLachlan; commissioners,
Cornelius Lyman and Richard Jackson.

In the election of 1902 there was a considerable falling off, over a
hundred votes, from that of 1900, and a marked diminution of interest.
This was again essentially a republican victory, their adversaries
coming through with only the clerk, attorney and treasurer. The
official vote follows: W. L. Jones, Francis W. Cushman and W. E.
Humphrey for Congress by an average of 808 votes to an average of
609 for the democratic candidates, Cotterill, Holcomb and Cole;
representative, Conrad Knobloch, 740 to 732 for the democrat, M. M.
Godman; sheriff, O. M. Stine; auditor, E. V. Thompson; clerk, Clark
Israel, democrat by 808 to 665 for R. M. Campbell; treasurer, E. W.
Alcorn, democrat by 837 to 638 for D. C. Guernsey; attorney, E. W.
Clark, democrat, 792 to 681 for R. B. Brown; assessor, Wilbur Hopkins;
superintendent of schools, W. W. Hendron; surveyor, John Patrick;
coroner, Dr. C. H. Day; commissioners, R. A. Jackson and C. W. Sanders.

With 1904 comes another presidential election, as well as a full state
ticket and the intense interest always belonging to such an election.
The result of the presidential vote was significant of the state of the
public mind, and Columbia County was in this respect an index of the
country at large. Roosevelt was forced upon the unwilling managers and
bosses of the "G. O. P." by the tremendous sentiment in favor of trust
control and other liberal policies by the masses, while Parker was
forced upon the unwilling democratic masses by a coterie of reactionary
managers in New York. The result showed that the masses would win every
time. Parker was snowed under for all time and the already defunct
old-time democratic limited management had a rude jolt in its grave
clothes, which, strange to record, the republican management of the
same type did not heed, and as a logical result they got their jolts
in 1912 and 1916. In Columbia, Roosevelt received an overwhelming
majority, the electors for him receiving an average of 1,083 to an
average of 480 for the Parker electors. Humphrey, W. L. Jones and
Cushman received about 250 majority over their democratic opponents. On
the other hand, George Turner, democrat, had 886 to 719 for A. E. Mead
for governor.

The joint republican candidate for state senator, S. S. Russell,
had 880 votes to 727 for Frank Cardwell, democrat. But, reversing
again, F. M. Weatherford, democrat, beat W. H. Fouts for the lower
house of the State Legislature. The successful county candidates
were: Sheriff, F. W. Bauers, democrat; clerk, Clark Israel, democrat;
auditor, E. V. Thompson, republican; treasurer, E. W. Alcorn, democrat;
attorney, E. W. Clark, democrat; assessor, Wilbur Hopkins, republican;
superintendent of schools, C. B. Leatherman, republican; surveyor,
Wilson McBride, republican; coroner, Dr. C. H. Day, republican;
commissioners, C. W. Sanders and C. E. Shaffer, both republicans.

The election of 1906 resulted thus:

1906

  Representatives to Congress--     Party            Vote

  W. E. Humphrey                  Republican          795
  Wesley L. Jones                 Republican          800
  Francis W. Cushman              Republican          801
  Wm. Blackman                    Democrat            550
  Patrick E. Byrne                Democrat            538
  Dudley Eshelman                 Democrat            538
  A. Wagenknecht                  Socialist            30
  J. H. Barkley                   Socialist            29
  Emil Herman                     Socialist            29
  A. S. Caton                     Prohibition          35
  J. M. Wilkin                    Prohibition          35
  Wm. Everett                     Prohibition          36

State senator, Tenth District, covering Asotin, Garfield and Columbia
counties. Stevenson, Senator; Godman was Representative.

  State Rep., Eleventh
    Dist.--John R. Stevenson      Republican  Successful candidate
  M. M. Godman                    Democrat    Successful candidate
  Sheriff--F. W. Bauers           Democrat    Successful candidate
  County Clerk--Alvin Harms       Democrat    Successful candidate
  Auditor--Walter A. Frary        Republican  Successful candidate
  Treasurer--Thos. E. Gentry      Republican  Successful candidate
  Attorney--R. M. Sturdevant      Republican       (No opposition)
  Assessor--W. S. Hunt            Republican  Successful candidate
  School Superintendent--Nellie
    V. Gregg                      Democrat    Successful candidate
  Surveyor--F. W. Guernsey        Republican  Successful candidate
  Coroner--Dr. John Huntington    Republican  Successful candidate
  County Commissioner Second
    District--Chas. Shaffer       Republican  Successful candidate
  County Commissioner Third
    District--C. J. Thronson      Democrat    Successful candidate

No record of election of 1908.

Though there is no official record, the county proceedings indicate the
following choices:

  State Senator, Tenth District
    (joint)--John R. Stevenson    Republican  Successful candidate
  State Representative, Eleventh
    District--R. A. Jackson       Republican  Successful candidate
  Sheriff--Ed M. Davis            Democrat    Successful candidate
  Clerk--J. H. Swart              Republican  Successful candidate

 (Mr. Swart resigned July 1, 1910, to accept appointment as county
 auditor, R. R. Cahill appointed to fill vacancy, Cahill resigned
 September 1, 1910, account leaving to attend school and W. L. Jackson
 appointed to fill vacancy. All republicans.)

  Auditor--Walter A. Frary        Republican  Successful candidate

 (Mr. Frary resigned July 1, 1910, to accept appointment as postmaster
 and J. H. Swart appointed to fill vacancy.)

  Treasurer--Claude Beckett       Republican  Successful candidate
  Attorney--R. M. Sturdevant      Republican       (No opposition)
  Assessor--A. E. French          Democrat    Successful candidate
  Superintendent of
    Schools--W. H. Kintner        Republican  Successful candidate
  Coroner--Dr. John Huntington    Republican  Successful candidate
  Engineer--F. W. Guernsey        Republican  Successful candidate
  Commissioner First
    District--C. B. Bowman        Democrat    Successful candidate
  Commissioner Second
    District--A. P. Cahill        Republican  Successful candidate
  Commissioner Third
    District--W. C. Woodward      Republican  Successful candidate
  Superior Judge, Asotin,
    Garfield and Columbia
    counties--Chester F. Miller                    (No Opposition)

1910

 Representatives of Congress--    Party            Votes

 Wm. L. LaFollette               Republican          820
 Harry D. Merritt                Democrat            431
 David C. Coates                 Socialist            43
 State Representative, Eleventh
   District--J. A. Fontaine      Democrat    Successful candidate
 Sheriff--Ed M. Davis            Democrat    Successful candidate
 Clerk--J. F. Clancy             Democrat    Successful candidate
 Auditor--J. H. Swart            Republican  Successful candidate
 Treasurer--Claude Beckett       Republican  Successful candidate
 Attorney--R. M. Sturdevant      Republican       (No opposition)
 Assessor--A. E. French          Democrat    Successful candidate
 School Superintendent--Flora
   Morgan                        Republican  Successful candidate
 Engineer--Wilson McBride        Democrat    Successful candidate
 Coroner--B. D. Wiltshire        Republican       (No opposition)
 Commissioner First
   District--Geo. Spalinger      Democrat    Successful candidate
 Commissioner Second
   District--C. J. Thronson      Democrat    Successful candidate
 Commissioner Third
   District--W. C. Woodward      Republican  Successful candidate

 (Owing to county being redistricted thought necessary to elect new
 commissioners throughout.)

1912

                                 Party             Votes

 Presidential Electors           Republican          672
 Presidential Electors           Democrat            855
 Presidential Electors           Socialist           172
 Presidential Electors           Socialist Labor       2
 Presidential Electors           Prohibitionist       59
 Presidential Electors           Progressive         803

 Congressmen at Large--
 J. E. Frost                     Republican          818
 Henry B. Dewey                  Republican          836
 E. O. Connor                    Democrat            820
 Henry M. White                  Democrat            826
 M. E. Giles                     Socialist           150
 Alfred Wagenknecht              Socialist           150
 N. A. Thompson                  Prohibition          49
 J. W. Bryan                     Progressive         611
 J. A. Falconer                  Progressive         619

 Congressman Third District--
 Wm. L. LaFollette               Republican          831
 Roscoe M. Drumheller            Democrat            999
 Robt. Burnes Martin             Socialist           136
 F. M. Goodwin                   Progressive         481

 Governor--
   M. E. Hay                                 Republican                830
   Ernest Lister                             Democrat                  986
   Anna A. Maley                             Socialist                 148
   Abraham L. Brearcliff                     Socialist Labor             2
   Geo. F. Stevers                           Prohibition                46
   Robert T. Hodge                           Progressive               513

 State Senator, Tenth District--J. C.
     Weatherford                         Democrat      Successful candidate
 State Representative, Eleventh
     District--J.A. Fontaine             Democrat      Successful candidate
 Superior Judge, Asotin, Garfield and
     Columbia counties--Chester F. Miller                   (No opposition)
 Sheriff--F. W. Bauers                   Democrat      Successful candidate
 Clerk--J. F. Clancy                     Democrat      Successful candidate
 Auditor--J. H. Swart                    Republican    Successful candidate
 Treasurer--James Bradford               Democrat      Successful candidate

 (Mr. Bradford died July 29, 1913, and M. Riggs, democrat, appointed
 to fill vacancy.)

 Attorney--E. W. Clark                   Democrat      Successful candidate
 Assessor--Claude Beckett                Republican    Successful candidate

 (Mr. Beckett died July 7, 1914, and Blanch Beckett, his wife,
 appointed to fill vacancy.)

 School Superintendent--Maude L. Tucker  Democrat      Successful candidate
 Engineer--Wilson McBride                Democrat      Successful candidate
 Coroner--Dr. J. M. Miller               Democrat      Successful candidate
 Commissioner Second District--R. H.
     Prater                              Republican    Successful candidate
 Commissioner Third District--J. H.
     McCauley                            Democrat      Successful candidate
 Superior Judge, Asotin, Garfield and
     Columbia Counties--Chester F. Miller                      Non-partisan


1914

 United States Senator--
   Wesley L. Jones                       Republican                   1,126
   W. W. Black                           Democrat                       880
   Adam H. Barth                         Socialist                      118
   Ole Hanson                            Progressive                    223
   A. S. Caton                           Prohibition                    122
 Representative Third District--
   Wm. L. LaFollette                     Republican                   1,229
   Roscoe M. Drumheller                  Democrat                       847
   John Storland                         Socialist                      112
   M. A. Peacock                         Progressive                    234
   J. V. Mohr                            Prohibition                    114
 State Representative, Eleventh
     District--John F. Rockhill          Republican    Successful candidate
 Sheriff--W. T. Wooten                   Republican    Successful candidate
 Clerk--E. D. Cleveland                  Democrat      Successful candidate
 Auditor--J. F. Clancy                   Democrat      Successful candidate
 Treasurer--M. Riggs                     Democrat      Successful candidate
 Attorney--R. M. Sturdevant              Republican    Successful candidate
 Assessor--Blanch Beckett                Republican         (No opposition)
 School Superintendent--Maude L. Tucker  Democrat      Successful candidate
 Engineer--F. W. Guernsey                Republican    Successful candidate
 Commissioner First District--Geo.
     Spalinger                           Democrat      Successful candidate
 Commissioner Third District--E. L.
     Lindley                             Republican    Successful candidate

 1916

 Presidential Electors                   Republican                   1,148
 Presidential Electors                   Democrat                     1,164
 Presidential Electors                   Prohibition                     25
 Presidential Electors                   Socialist                      108
 Presidential Electors                   Socialist Labor                  2
 United States Senator--
   Miles Poindexter                      Republican                   1,269
   Geo. Turner                           Democrat                     1,004
   Walter J. Thompson                    Progressive                      2
   Jos. A. Campbell                      Prohibition                     24
   Bruce Rogers                          Socialist                      100
 Representative, Fourth District--
   Wm. LaFollette                        Republican                   1,321
   Chas. W. Masterson                    Democrat                       944
   Walter Price                          Socialist                      104
 Governor--
   Henry McBride                         Republican                   1,082
   Ernest Lister                         Democrat                     1,241
   Jas. E. Bradford                      Progressive                      3
   A. B. L. Gellermann                   Prohibition                     29
   L. E. Katterfield                     Socialist                       94
   Jas. E. Riodan                        Socialist Labor                  1
 State Senator, Tenth District--Elgin V.
     Kuykendall                          Republican    Successful candidate
 State Representative, Eleventh
     District--Geo. Spalinger            Democrat      Successful candidate
 Sheriff--W. T. Wooten                   Republican    Successful candidate
 Clerk--E. D. Cleveland                  Democrat      Successful candidate
 Auditor--J. F. Clancy                   Democrat           (No opposition)

 (Clancy resigned June 4, 1917, account condition wife's health, and
 Dick Harper, democrat, appointed to fill vacancy.)

 Treasurer--M. Riggs                     Democrat      Successful candidate
 Attorney--R. M. Sturdevant              Republican         (No opposition)
 Assessor--Blanch Beckett                Republican         (No opposition)
 Superintendent of Schools--W. W.
     Hendron                             Republican    Successful candidate
 Engineer--Wilson McBride                Democrat      Successful candidate
 Coroner--Dr. J. M. Miller               Democrat      Successful candidate
 Commissioner First District--John R.
     Blize                               Republican    Successful candidate
 Commissioner Second District--R. H.
     Prater                              Republican    Successful candidate

  (Mr. Prater resigned January 24, 1917, for business reasons and C. F.
  Actor, republican, appointed to fill vacancy.)

  Superior Judge, Asotin, Garfield and Columbia counties--Chester F.
  Miller, Non-partisan (no opposition).

(We wish to acknowledge here the valuable assistance of Mr. J. F.
Clancy of the auditor's office in compiling these records of election
returns.)


MUNICIPAL POLITICS

Turning from the political history of the county to that of the towns,
we will give our attention first to Dayton.

Of the founding and of the earliest days of the metropolis of the
Touchet we have spoken already. We have also spoken of the schools
and churches. It remains to take note of the municipal history and
organization and of the journalism of the town. A petition from the
citizens looking to incorporation is worthy of preservation, by
reason of the fact that it was the first step in that direction, and
still more from the fact that it contains what might be regarded as
practically an authorized record of the business men of the town of
that time. It is dated May 5, 1876, and is addressed to the county
commissioners. We are indebted to the "History of Southeastern
Washington" for this excerpt:

To the Honorables, the County Commissioners of the County of Columbia,
in the Territory of Washington:

We, your petitioners, do most respectfully represent that we are
citizens of the Town of Dayton in said county and are qualified
electors under the laws of this territory; that we have resided in
said town for thirty days and upwards next preceding the date of this
petition; that we are desirous that said town should be incorporated,
and a police established for our local government; that the territory
we wish incorporated is bounded and described as follows, to-wit: The
east half of the northwest quarter, and northeast quarter of section
30, and the east half of southeast quarter of section 30, and west half
of southwest quarter, and southeast quarter of the southwest quarter of
section 29, all in township 10, north, range 39 east; also north half
of northeast quarter of southwest quarter and north half of northwest
quarter of southeast quarter of section 30, town 10 north, range 39
east, in the County of Columbia and Territory of Washington, a plat
of which is hereunto annexed and made a part of this petition. And
your petitioners do further represent that said town contains over one
hundred and fifty inhabitants and we do most respectfully pray that you
incorporate said town. Dated April 27, 1876.

John Mustard, A. L. McCauley, A. Vallen, R. F. Sturdevant, Mc. C.
Lyon, J. S. Thomas, R. T. Watrous, F. Maynard, D. C. Guernsey, A. J.
Cain, W. O. Matzger, O. C. White, M. Riggs, E. Tatro, F. G. Frary, A.
M. Sparks, I. G. Abbott, L. L. Davis, W. W. Day, J. W. Maddox, James
Gough, J. M. Hunt, J. M. Sparks, B. Magill, J. N. Day, G. A. Opperman,
A. J. Dexter, Wiley Sparks, Salmon Park, G. L. Kirk, C. Hansen, J. H.
Lister, P. Stedman, H. S. Critchfield, Thomas T. Elliott, A. Jacobs,
J. M. Grinstead, J. H. Kennedy, J. L. Smith, William Hendershott, S.
M. Wait, W. S. Newland, George W. Giles, W. A. Belcher, J. Kerby,
D. S. Richardson, D. F. Spangler, C. W. Frick, H. P. Keach, W. A.
Moody, Thomas Smith, L. E. Harris, R. A. Rowley, R. H. Condon, J.
B. Armstrong, W. A. Sparks, C. A. Clark, William E. Coney, Con.
Ruttlemiller, L. Ritter, J. H. Kennedy, Edward Owens.

The commissioners granted this request and in pursuance of the
territorial law empowering commissions to grant incorporation, they
appointed May 22d the date for electing trustees. Apparently the record
of the results of that election is not available, but the trustees
chosen a year later were J. F. Martin, Perry Steen, George Eckler,
William Metzger and W. S. Strong. The assessor reported the population
of the town at that time as 526.

In 1877 a sentiment developed that the existing form of incorporation
was undesirable, and as the result of a petition by the citizens the
trustees appointed an election for July 1, 1878, upon the question of
the abandonment of that charter. The decision of the citizens at that
election was to abandon the organization and to substitute another. In
pursuance of that decision an election for mayor, common council of
seven, and a marshal, was held on July 16th. D. C. Guernsey was elected
mayor, and the councilmen chosen were J. B. Shrum, G. K. Reed, J.
Mustard, J. L. Smith, J. K. Rainwater, Frank Pierce and D. B. Kimball.
Edward Tatro was chosen marshal.

One of the interesting points called up by old-timers in that stage of
Dayton's history is the development of what is now known as "Brooklyn"
or first styled "Across the Patit." Between September, 1878, and March,
1879, fifteen houses were erected. F. M. Day is said to have been the
first to build in that new tract, followed soon by Mr. Dunkle and Mr.
Brewer. That was for a number of years one of the most popular suburbs
of Dayton. Somewhat separated from the business part of the town by
the pretty little stream of the Patit, and embowered in trees and
shrubbery, it still impresses the visitor as a very charming village
section. Dayton Heights in the eastern part of the town has, however,
taken the lead as a growing residence section during the past dozen
years.

A curious situation in regard to the town government developed.
As a result of doubt about the validity of the existing municipal
government, Jesse N. Day, the father of the city, refused to pay taxes
levied by the county in 1878. County treasurer, H. H. Wolfe, instituted
legal proceeding by levying upon property owned by Mr. Day. The latter
accordingly brought suit, with David Higgins as his attorney, to secure
restitution of his property. N. T. Caton of Walla Walla appeared as
counsel for the county. This suit was called January 14, 1880. The
result was a decision by Judge Samuel C. Wingard of Walla Walla, judge
of the Territorial District Court, that the incorporation of the city
was invalid.

The effect of this decision was to necessitate a new incorporation. By
common agreement Judge Wingard was requested to give informal advice
upon the legal status of the community and the steps that should be
taken to give it a proper judicial character. Thus appealed to the
judge gave the opinion that Dayton had been organized as a town and was
still upon that footing, and that the town might incorporate as a city
under territorial laws. Accordingly the old town government resumed
and continued until the issuance of a new charter by the Territorial
Legislature in 1881, which went into effect with the opening of the
next year.

Under the new charter the Government was to consist of mayor chosen
yearly; seven councilmen, chosen for two years, three elected in
one year and four the next; a marshal chosen by popular vote; and
justice, clerk, attorney, treasurer, health officer, surveyor, street
commissioner and assessor, appointed by Council. The charter named as
mayor and councilmen the following: Mayor, O. C. White; councilmen, G.
E. Church, L. E. Harris, J. L. Smith, John Brining, J. E. Edmiston and
W. A. Belcher.

The period of inauguration of the new charter was marked by three
disasters, a severe fire on December 13, 1880, and another much more
serious, on April 2, 1882, by the latter of which a loss of $90,000,
partially covered by insurance, was sustained. The other disaster was
much greater, and is still referred to with almost bated breath by
old-timers. This was the dreadful smallpox scourge in the fall of 1881.
It was reported that there were 167 cases and twenty-one deaths. The
excitement was great, nearly reaching the proportions of a panic, and
as is apt to be the case at such a time, there were "hard feelings"
and charges of criminal negligence. Dr. M. Pietrzycki, one of the best
physicians and one of the most unique and interesting characters of the
city, was health officer at that time, and the testimony seems to be
on all hands that his course was firm and wise and that he saved many
homes from the deadly scourge.

Meanwhile the charter question was not settled. A memorial was
presented to the Territorial Legislature in 1886, setting forth the
imperfections of the existing charter and petitioning for still
another. This memorial preserves the names of the mayor and councilmen
of that year as follows: Mayor, D. B. Kimball; councilmen, D. C.
Guernsey, T. J. Taylor, E. Ping, H. H. Wolfe, D. H. Hardin, H. F.
McCornack, D. M. Vaughn.

This memorial was not, however, sustained, and the unsatisfactory
charter continued in force for a number of years. At a municipal
election of July 11, 1904, by a majority of one only of the whole vote
of 404, the city voted to abandon the old charter and to adopt the new
form of city government. Under that general charter Dayton has remained
to this day. Since that new municipal organization went into effect the
incumbents of the different offices have been the following:

The city election of December 6, 1904, resulted in the choice of G.
T. Jackson for mayor, W. A. Frary for treasurer, R. M. Sturdevant for
clerk, H. E. Hamm for attorney, C. H. Day for health officer, and for
councilmen, Add. Cahill, G. E. Barclay, Lars Nilsson, E. S. Ryerson, L.
F. Jones, W. L. Jackson, and W. H. Van Lew. The entire number of seven
were chosen at that first election, one at large, three for two years,
and three for one year. Hence in subsequent years there were regularly
chosen three for the different wards and one at large each year.

In the election of December, 1905, the officials chosen were: G. T.
Jackson, mayor; W. A. Frary, treasurer; R. M. Sturdevant, clerk; Leon
B. Kenworthy, attorney; C. H. Day, health officer; Add. Cahill, L. F.
Jones, Everett Eager and W. H. Van Lew, councilmen. In that case, as
usually, the practice of re-election was held in honor.

In the election of December 4, 1906, results were these: A. Wilson,
mayor; G. W. Jackson, treasurer; E. W. Clark, attorney; Jesse Matzger,
clerk; C. F. Schlitz, health officer; Add. Cahill, J. D. Israel, Frank
Gemmel, C. W. Powell, J. A. Muirhead, councilmen.

Results in the election of 1907 were these: R. L. Nottingham, mayor; G.
W. Jackson, treasurer; R. O. Dyer, clerk; E. W. Clark, attorney; C. F.
Schlitz, health officer; G. T. Jackson, J. A. Muirhead, L. M. Vannice,
H. A. Kaeppler, councilmen.

On December 8, 1908, there were chosen: H. C. Benbow, mayor; G. W.
Jackson, treasurer; R. O. Dyer, clerk; E. W. Clark, attorney; C. H.
Day, health officer; John Carr, J. D. Israel, Edgar Eager, F. C.
Hindle, councilmen.

Choices in December, 1909, were these: J. A. Muirhead, mayor; G. W.
Jackson, treasurer; H. B. Ridgeley, clerk; E. W. Clark, attorney; C. H.
Day, health officer; Lars Nilsson, L. M. Vannice, Asa Johnson, J. C.
Fair, C. H. Torrance, John Carr, councilmen.

On December 6, 1910, the following were chosen: J. A. Muirhead, mayor;
J. G. Israel, treasurer; J. L. Wallace, clerk; E. W. Clark, attorney;
J. M. Miller, health officer; E. C. Eagleson, George Brown, Oscar
Griffis, R. O. Dyer, E. H. Van Patten, councilmen.

On December 5, 1911, there were chosen: J. C. Fair, mayor; J. G.
Israel, treasurer; J. L. Wallace, clerk; E. W. Clark, attorney; J. M.
Miller, health officer; Dick Harper, W. G. Thompson, A. Nilsson, C. R.
Rogg, councilmen.

In December, 1912, we find the choices as follows: Dick Harper, mayor;
J. G. Israel, treasurer; J. L. Wallace, clerk; L. B. Kenworthy,
attorney; W. W. Day, health officer; C. E. Shaffer, C. F. Schlitz,
George Brown, E. E. Eager, councilmen.

In 1913 the choices were: W. C. Goddard, mayor; J. G. Israel,
treasurer; L. B. Kenworthy, attorney; J. L. Wallace, clerk; W. W. Day,
health officer; C. E. Shaffer, C. R. Rogg, G. F. Price, J. A. Hanger,
councilmen.

The election of December 8, 1914, resulted: W. C. Goddard, mayor; J. G.
Israel, treasurer; J. L. Wallace, clerk; H. E. Hamm, attorney; W. W.
Day, health officer; A. P. Cahill, Willis Wilson, George Carpenter, W.
L. Jackson, councilmen.

In 1915 results were: C. H. Day, mayor; J. G. Israel, treasurer; J. L.
Wallace, clerk; H. E. Hamm, attorney; A. P. Cahill, C. R. Rogg, A. J.
Knight, G. F. Price, J. A. Hanger, councilmen.

The election of December 5, 1916, was thus: H. E. Barr, mayor; J. G.
Israel, treasurer; J. L. Wallace, clerk; H. E. Hamm, attorney; Willis
Wilson, Lee Rinehart, George Carpenter, W. L. Jackson, councilmen.

It is interesting to note here that the assessed valuation of Dayton in
1917 was $1,027,244.

Various miscellaneous happenings of much interest occurred from time to
time during the years covered by the political history which we have
been tracing out. Dayton seems to have been peculiarly unfortunate
about fires. In addition to those which we have mentioned, there was
one on July 17, 1883, which destroyed the Weinhard brewery, and in
January, 1884, an attempt, generally supposed by incendiaries, to burn
the planing and flour mills of Wait and Prather. A famous criminal suit
against C. F. McClary, Frank Taylor and D. Hutchings was brought on the
charge of incendiarism, resulting in the acquittal of the first, the
discharge of the third by nolle prosequi, and the conviction of Taylor
upon his own confession. On September 25, 1884, there was another fire,
also supposed to be incendiary, and on March 27, 1885, the Woolen Mills
went up in flames, thus ending its untoward career after so promising a
start. June 24, 1887, witnessed still another devastation by fire, the
worst known in the history of the town, entailing a loss of $112,000.

In 1890, August 11th, there was still another visit of the "fire
fiend," causing as great a loss, though not affecting so large a number
of individuals. There was yet another fire, not so great, in August,
1891. These hard experiences with fires led to the establishment of
a number of fire companies and hose companies, the details of whose
history it would be interesting to follow, did space permit. The
Columbia Fire Engine Company seems to have been the longest-lived
of these, continuing from 1882 to 1892. Since inauguration of the
municipal gravity waterworks there have been no destructive fires.

In the year 1890 there was a curious outbreak of burglaries and other
light fingered works of art resulting in numerous criticisms of the
authorities and a final appeal to Judge Lynch. Leroy Burris, who had
been engaged as foreman in the printing office of the _Inlander_,
was implicated in the charge of burglarious practices, was seized by
Vigilantes, and after having been brought face to face with a rope was
let off with banishment.

In 1892 the general unrest and hard times led to various ugly forms,
and one of them was an attempt to imitate Tacoma in the banishment
of the Chinese. The effort to run out the Orientals proved a fiasco,
however, as the general sentiment of the majority of the citizens was
strongly against it, and the sheriff was firm in his announcement of
the probable outcome of any violation of the peace. Gradually the
agitation subsided and the Chinese, who were few in numbers and were
peaceable and law abiding, and who in no manner stood in the way of the
rights and privileges of white citizens, remained unmolested. Dayton
was saved from that most contemptible and inexcusable of all forms of
public riot, a "race war."

The part which Dayton and Columbia County took in raising men for
the Washington Volunteer force in the Philippine war is worthy of
some special note. Not that the other counties and towns were in any
degree deficient in their service, but the number of enlistments at
Dayton was remarkable in comparison with the population. The Dayton
men were enrolled in Company F of the First Washington Volunteers.
Chester F. Miller, whose name has so often appeared in this history in
connection with legal and judicial matters, was chosen captain of the
company; Charles A. Booker was first lieutenant; George B. Dorr, second
lieutenant. The company, like the others of the Washington Volunteers,
bore itself with all honor. One member of the company, Edward W. Strain
of Pomeroy, a member of one of the most conspicuous pioneer families of
Garfield County, was killed in battle, and George B. Fargo and R. A.
Chrystal lost their lives by sickness.

Columbia County is so entirely a farming country that there are
practically no cities and towns of any considerable size except Dayton.


THE TOWN OF STARBUCK

There are, however, several villages whose records, had we space for
them, would afford much matter of interest. The leading one of these
is Starbuck. This has become within the last few years a railroad
point of much importance, being a division and locomotive station on
the O. W. R. & N. System, and, as the result of this, providing homes
for a number of families and being the center of a very considerable
business. It is the junction of the Pomeroy branch with the main
line, and as an immense business is done on that branch, there is the
prospect of a steady increase in the business centering at Starbuck.
The picturesque and piscatorial Tucanon, of historic fame, and the
drainage stream of one of the richest and most beautiful valleys in the
state, passes right through the town, and its bright waters impart a
needed verdure to the rather arid land as well as diffuse a grateful
coolness to the sometimes intense heat which the low altitude and
bluffy hill shoulders on either side impose upon the place.

Starbuck may be said to have come into existence with the construction
of the railroad and the erection of a warehouse and section house in
1882.

It is referred to in the _Chronicle_ of Dayton in December, 1886,
as Starbuck Station. Mention is made also of Col. George Hunter as
receiving at that time the appointment as railroad agent. Colonel
Hunter was noted as a pioneer and was the author of a book on pioneer
life, entitled: "Reminiscences of an Old Timer."

Upon the completion of the Pomeroy branch line in 1886 considerable
building ensued. McIntosh Brothers established a store, a depot
building and several other buildings were put up. Sad to relate these
buildings were destroyed by fire the next year.

In 1888-9 a new era of building came on, the most important structures
being the round-house, machine shops, section houses, agent's house,
turn-table, and some minor buildings, constructed by the railroad
company. But Starbuck seems to have rivaled Dayton in disasters by
fire. On May 18, 1893, the valuable structures of the railroad company,
with much oil and coal and a number of locomotives, became victims of a
fire. The loss to the company was $500,000.

In 1894 Mrs. Mary McIntosh undertook to lay out a town site. The plat
was filed on June 1st. In October of the same year Woodend's Addition
was platted. In 1906 Starbuck became incorporated as a city of the
fourth class.

The municipal officers of the first government were: W. E. Sprout,
mayor; C. A. Blackman, John Roddy, Frank Actor, W. F. Gardner and M.
Ray, councilmen.

Within the decade following incorporation, Starbuck has increased in
population from about four hundred to about seven hundred and fifty.
The increased railroad force and added buildings in connection with
division headquarters has made substantial increases in business, and
at the present the metropolis of the Tucanon is a busy, bustling little
city, with a fine school building, several churches, a flourishing
bank, a number of stores, and many pleasant homes embowered in trees.

The present city government of Starbuck is composed of the following:
Mayor, W. H. Barnhart; councilmen, Wallis Brundson, C. H. List, M. V.
McCool, J. H. Walters, L. E. Hukill; treasurer, Sam Walters; clerk, D.
C. Guernsey; marshal, James Smith.

There are three churches in Starbuck: Episcopal, of which the pastor
is Rev. John Leacher, also pastor of the Episcopal Church at Pomeroy;
Christian, the pulpit of which is occupied by Rev. Mr. Diggins of Walla
Walla; the Methodist, in which services are maintained, but at present
without a stated pastor.

As in all typical towns in the Northwest, Starbuck takes just pride
in her schools and makes generous provision for them. The approximate
value of the school building, with its equipment, is $35,000. There is
a high school department with three grades, having at the present date
nineteen pupils. The enrollment in the eight grammar school grades is
121. The faculty at the present time is: Principal, H. C. Hayes; high
school instructor, Bertha Botts; grade teachers in order from eighth
grade to first, Fred Lehman, Ethel Krouse, May Betts, Mrs. Myrtle
Pettyjohn, Mrs. Ethel LeDuc, Mrs. Brooks Harris.

One narration of much interest connected with the near vicinity of
Starbuck is the attempt on the part of Dr. Marcel Pietrzycki of Dayton,
physician, capitalist, philanthropist, and newspaper proprietor, to
establish a sort of co-operative ownership organization on a large
ranch a few miles south of Starbuck.

We have given in connection with the Dayton schools the main features
of his enterprise.

It would indeed have been an experiment of much interest in
sociological lines, but hardly had the good doctor inaugurated his
plans when failing health and his lamented death brought the great
scheme to an untimely end. A few years later the ranch became the
property of the Grote Brothers, who rank among the most extensive
farmers of the Northwest. But--lamentable to relate--the mansion which
had been the central feature of the builder's roseate schemes, was
lost by fire, and the land which was to have been the scene of a great
sociological demonstration has become a wheat and cattle ranch.

In the near vicinity is another notable place, the property of one of
the most notable families in the region. This is the immense Jackson
ranch. This place was founded and developed by Richard A. Jackson, one
of the foremost of the builders of old Walla Walla County. He became
the most extensive sheep raiser in Columbia and Garfield counties,
his holdings belonging to both. His home was established in a fine
house upon the Tucanon, and the great areas of grain and pasture land
extended for miles from the creek, embracing in all about fifteen
thousand acres. Upon the death of Mr. Jackson, Mrs. Jackson, with
several of her capable children, continued the business with equal
success, and at the present date maintains the former leadership in
the production of wool. At the Lewis and Clark Fair at Portland in
1905, and the Alaska Yukon Exposition at Seattle in 1909, there was on
exhibition a wool fleece from the Jackson ranch, which was said to be
the largest fleece ever known, weighing the almost incredible amount of
sixty-nine pounds. At present price of wool that fleece would be worth
over thirty dollars.

[Illustration: ONE OF THE FIRST HOUSES IN STARBUCK]

Still another enterprise of more than local interest, of which the
office and headquarters are at Starbuck, is the extensive irrigation
project on the Snake River, a short distance above Riparia, founded
and mainly owned by Pres. E. A. Bryan, known throughout the state
and country as for many years the president of the State College
at Pullman. The irrigation tract has been laid out with scientific
accuracy and has become a valuable property under the management of A.
W. Bryan, son of President Bryan.

A weekly paper, the _Starbuck Standard_, with a circulation of about
four hundred, is published at Starbuck by H. G. Roe. It is now in its
fourth year, and performs an excellent part in maintaining publicity
in the vicinity. In a recent number of the _Standard_ we note the
interesting fact of a mass meeting in the town to prepare for placing
the town upon one of the Chautauqua circuits of the Ellison-White
Company for the coming year. That a town and community of so small
population should undertake so extensive an enterprise is good evidence
of the ambition and intelligence of the people.


JOURNALISM IN COLUMBIA COUNTY

As an essential element in the view of the institutions of Columbia
County we will give a sketch of its journalism.

At the risk of repetition we will go back to the beginnings, when
Dayton was still in Walla Walla County, for the discovery of the first
newspaper. That pioneer in the journalistic field was the _Dayton
News_. It first saw the light of this evil world in September, 1874.
It was launched largely for the purpose of "booming" the idea of a new
county with Dayton as the seat. It was simply a four column sheet. Its
politics were democratic. A. J. Cain was the first editor, and Elisha
Ping was the financial backer. Mr. Cain had quite an eventful career,
both before and after, as a lawyer, writer and soldier, playing an
important part in the Nez Perce Indian war of 1877. The _News_ had a
varied career, passing through a number of hands, with brief tenure,
and in 1881 came into the possession of J. Y. Ostrander as editor, and
Walter Crosby as business manager. But it was near its demise. For in
August, 1882, it, like other valuable possessions in Dayton at that
time, went up on a chariot of fire, and never came down. It had played
a good part in the installation of the new county, with Dayton as its
official head.

The _Columbia Chronicle_ came into existence on April 20, 1878. It was
designed as the republican offset to the _News_. T. M. May and H. H.
Gale were the first proprietors, with E. R. Burk acting a short time
as business manager. A "cute" announcement in the first issue is as
follows: "Afloat--We have launched the _Chronicle_ and spread sails for
a long newspaper voyage, and we do not see any long breakers ahead. If
we do not find a breeze, we will make one and sail right along. Fare,
$3. All aboard!"

In a somewhat more sober vein the salutatory of the paper, entitled,
"Our Bow," proceeds thus: "Friends and fellow-citizens; today we
present to you the initial number of the _Columbia Chronicle_. Not
deeming it advisable to salute the public with a lengthy preamble and
platform of pledges, about what we will do and what we will not do,
we will say in brief: The intention is to establish a newspaper here
which shall work for the social and commercial interest of Columbia in
particular and Eastern Washington in general. In starting a newspaper
in Dayton we believe we are only keeping pace with these modern reading
times and the wants and demands of the people.

"We shall endeavor to make the _Chronicle_ a reliable newspaper,
advocating the interest of the farmer, stock raiser, and business man,
and to aid in developing the resources of this magnificent country. We
shall pay special attention to gathering local, territorial and general
news, and make the _Chronicle_ interesting as a home paper. Printing
our own outside we shall have room for numerous correspondents.

"The _Chronicle_ will be republican in politics, and in all our
political and public affairs it will be our aim to advance the best
interest of the people, censuring the wrong and advocating the right on
general principles."

That initial number of the _Chronicle_ contains local items and
advertisements of much interest. Among the former we find mention of
the school, in charge of Prof. J. E. Eastham, and containing fifty
scholars. Parents are exhorted to co-operate with the teachers in
making the school reach its best attainments.

Notice is taken of the death near Lewiston of the Indian Levi, who,
with Timothy, had saved Steptoe's command from destruction in 1858 in
the disastrous expedition from Walla Walla to Spokane.

There is also an item calling attention to the advisability of tree
culture, and settlers are advised to investigate the claims of the
Eucalyptus tree, which is stated to have been found very valuable in
California. The paper asserts that nothing grows so fast as that tree,
unless it be a farm mortgage bearing 1-1/2 per cent interest per month,
compounded. Trees in California, it declares, have made a growth of
from sixty to seventy feet in ten years.

In the advertising columns of that first number of the _Chronicle_, we
find some names well known throughout the history of Dayton.

The Columbia Hotel appears, of which the proprietors are announced
as John Brining and Lane Gilliam. There are a number of cards of
lawyers and physicians. Among the former we note T. H. Crawford, R. F.
Sturdevant and M. A. Baker. Among the latter are T. C. Frary, J. H.
Kennedy, H. R. Littlefield and W. H. Boyd, and the Homeopathists W. W.
Day and J. P. VanDusen.

Of the business advertisements we observe the Standard Soap Works,
conducted by W. W. Gardner and M. S. McQuarrie. J. A. Gavitt announces
his saddle and harness supplies. W. P. Matzger appears as the producer
of artistic photographs. D. B. Kimball, contractor, builder and
undertaker, occupies space. There is quite an ad. for H. I. and E.
A. Torrance as blacksmiths and wagon makers. Also J. Hutcheon and A.
Nilsson call attention to their blacksmithing business.

D. C. Guernsey and H. H. Wolfe announce their grand opening for the
spring trade of 1878. I. N. Arment announces his extensive stock of
watches, clocks, cigars, tobacco, musical instruments, fishing tackle,
etc.

Mr. R. E. Peabody, now the proprietor of the _Chronicle_, set up that
first number of the paper and has been connected with it ever since,
except during an absence of about a year in Montana. Mr. Peabody is
without doubt the dean of all the newspaper men of Eastern Washington.
He, in company with O. C. White, became proprietor in 1890, and in a
short time the retirement of Mr. White left him the sole proprietor.

In 1908 Dr. Marcel Pietrzycki had an interest in the _Chronicle_ for
about four months, during which time he endeavored to advance some
radical views on methods of taxation. The connection of the doctor with
the paper was suddenly dropped when it became apparent to him that his
views were not meeting with popular support.

Doubtless next to Mr. Peabody as a continuous factor in the newspaper
field in this region is Al Ricardo. Mr. Ricardo was born in Mexico of
Spanish parentage. He came to Walla Walla in 1885, and was connected
with the _Statesman_ for fifteen years. In 1900 he went to Dayton and
became interested in two papers, the _Courier_, a democratic paper, and
the _Press_, a populist paper. These papers were combined in 1900 by a
company, but in the next year Mr. Ricardo acquired the entire control,
which he has continued to the present.

The third of the newspapers is the _Dispatch_. This was founded in 1903
by Mr. Harris. The unique feature of it was the effort by Mr. Harris to
maintain it as a daily. This was the only paper in the district covered
by this history outside of Walla Walla, which carried on a daily
issue. It soon appeared that the attempt was an undertaking beyond
the resources of the field, and in 1905 Mr. Harris sold out to H. C.
Benbow, a former resident of Pomeroy, where he had been active both as
a teacher and a journalist. Mr. Benbow reduced the _Dispatch_ to the
weekly edition and has maintained it to the present on those lines.
Its official name is _Columbia County Dispatch_, and it is now in its
sixteenth volume.

The three Dayton papers are clean, well conducted, high-class weeklies,
reflecting with accuracy the conditions of the community, as well as
exercising a wholesome force in aiding to mobilize the rich resources
which center at Dayton. As fulfilling with marked power their functions
they may well be a source of pride to their proprietors and of approval
to the citizenship.


TWO REMARKABLE CRIMINAL CASES

One feature of life in Columbia County seems to demand some attention,
and that is the criminal record. This is not for the sake of mere
sensationalism, but because of some features so remarkable that they
become interesting as a study of the possibilities of human nature and
life.

The first case that we shall touch upon was that of the murder of E.
H. Cummins, railroad agent at New York Bar on Snake River. The story
has been told in various forms. We derive our information mainly from
Dr. E. H. Van Patten of Dayton. The mutilated body of the agent was
discovered early on the morning of July 27, 1882. It was evident upon
inspection that he had been murdered for the purpose of robbery. The
station had been rifled of all valuables, including money. Late in
1882 Canada Owenby, who lived near Pomeroy, was arrested on account
of suspicious circumstances. It was known that he had been destitute
of money but that soon after the murder had become possessed of
considerable money. He was known to have been in Pataha the day before
the murder, then to have disappeared, returning the next morning,
and getting a blacksmith to remove the shoes of his horse. He had
purchased in Pomeroy cartridges for a pistol which he was known to
own, which was of just the size which appeared to have been used for
the crime. After his arrest he made desperate efforts to escape,
leaping, handcuffed, from a second-story window. He had tried to bribe
a guard to swear that he saw him in Pomeroy the night of the murder.
Again he sought to induce the guards by bribes to let him escape.
Still further he asserted that his wife would testify that he was at
home the night of the murder, but when she was called to the stand he
took advantage of the right to refuse to allow her to be a witness.
A bloody shirt was found which appeared to belong to him. The chain
was drawing irresistibly around him. The preliminary trial occurred
at Dayton on January 13, 1883. Without being put under any "tenth
degree inquisition," Owenby was evidently in a dreadful state of mind,
and soon after the discharge of the jury through disagreement, he
confessed, first to a fellow prisoner, and subsequently to the sheriff
and clerk. The confession was somewhat confused and contradictory, but
it involved the assertion that three other men, James McPherson, Ezra
Snoderly, and one Porter, were concerned in the crime. The three were
arrested and brought to Dayton. The officers became so well satisfied
that Porter was innocent that he was released.

In June, 1883, Snoderly and McPherson were tried in the district court,
presided over by Judge S. C. Wingard. It was an intensely exciting
trial. J. K. Rutherford was prosecuting attorney at the time. Judge
Godman, Judge Caton, Judge Sturdevant and Colonel George, the most
prominent attorneys in the region at that time, were concerned in the
case.

The result of the trial was that all three men were convicted of
murder, though both McPherson and Snoderly maintained to the last that
they were innocent. Great efforts were made for a reprieve. Judge Caton
secured a stay of proceedings for McPherson. The news of this excited
great feeling throughout the community where the conviction was strong
that the three were alike guilty in the revolting crime. During the
afternoon of August 4th little knots of men, mainly farmers, might have
been seen talking earnestly, breaking up their groups whenever any
one not in their confidence approached. It was evident that something
portentous was at hand.

The old vigilante organization had representatives in the community.
With that element as a nucleus, a committee called the committee of the
hundred and one, was speedily organized and about midnight a strong
body of men gathered in the courthouse square. They speedily stormed
the jail, in spite of the firing of the guard, overpowered him, broke
into the cell where McPherson was chained, took him out and hanged him.

On the 7th of August, Snoderly was subjected to a legal execution, in
presence of a huge throng, protesting his innocence to the last and
extending his hand to Owenby as he passed his cell, with the words,
"You are taking my life, the life of an innocent man, but I forgive you
and I hope the Lord will forgive you." The sentence of the law was then
duly executed.

Owenby was taken to the jail at Walla Walla, still admitting his guilt
and declaring that he wished to be hanged, as the deserving punishment.

But--strange to tell--within a few months, on December 25th, he, with
a fellow prisoner, escaped. As Sheriff Thompson was going through the
corridor of the jail he was struck to the floor by a brick, evidently
hurled by one of the prisoners. The jailer rushed to the sheriff's
assistance and was stabbed with a pocket knife by one of the convicts.
Rushing from their cells, which had been unlocked, the two men opened
the outer door with the key taken from the sheriff, and escaped.
Securing horses they made their way to the mountains in the vicinity
of Weston, Ore. They there captured two more horses, killed a Chinaman,
and robbed his body of a considerable sum of money. But within a few
days Owenby, his feet frozen and himself in a starving condition,
was found in a barn on the DeHaven ranch near Milton. Being taken to
Dayton, where some lynch talk was started, but soon abandoned, Owenby
lingered a few days, and then died, declaring that all his assertions
of the crime were true, and that he and the other men were all guilty
and worthy of death.


THE HILL CASE

Of this second remarkable case we shall give but a brief account. Its
singular features will appear as we proceed.

A man was shot in a saloon brawl in Colfax, lingered on some days and
then died. There was mixed evidence as to who fired the fatal shot, but
one of the drunken crew named Hill was charged with the offense and
arrested. Feeling was high in Colfax, and Hill's lawyer, the famous Tom
Griffiths of Spokane, regarded as one of the greatest criminal lawyers
at that time and a prominent politician, secured a change of venue to
Dayton. Associated with Mr. Griffiths was J. K. Edmiston, a leading
lawyer of Dayton, one of the most prominent citizens and of the highest
type of man. Mr. Edmiston seems to have sincerely believed that Hill
was innocent. Griffiths made every effort to get Dr. Van Patten of
Dayton to testify that a wound of the nature of that received by the
murdered man was not necessarily fatal, but that death was the result
of drugs administered after the wounding. Dr. Van Patten declared that
only six per cent of the wounds of that type had resulted in recovery.
He was not called to the witness stand. A Doctor Harvey of Spokane was
brought down as an expert witness, and having taken the stand swore
that there was evidence that bichloride of mercury had been used with
the wounded man, and that death resulted from that and not from the
pistol shot. Griffiths worked this testimony with his accustomed skill
and success, and the verdict rendered let Hill off with a sentence of
six months in the county jail.

Dr. Van Patten remembers that in conversation with Mr. Edmiston, upon
the announcement of the verdict, he said, "You have got Hill off with a
light sentence, but it will do him little good if he is ever taken to
Colfax." Within two weeks after Hill had been returned to the Colfax
jail the doors were broken in, the prisoner was hurried into the yard
by a group of determined men, and there he was swung from a rope in
front of the courthouse.

It would not be safe to venture an opinion as to the rights and wrongs
of that Hill tragedy, but on the surface it looks a good deal like one
of those cases of "expert testimony" which is sometimes the legitimate
parent of lynching cases.




CHAPTER III

GARFIELD COUNTY


It has been remarked by various philosophers at various times
concerning various subjects that like causes produce like effects. The
same causes which led to the establishment of Columbia County from the
eastern two-third of the Old County of Walla Walla operated within
a short time to cause a movement for another division, and that yet
again to another, insomuch that Garfield and Asotin became political
entities. Some petty local jealousies and selfish scheming almost
always play their part in county divisions and county-seat fights. Yet
it would be very superficial to attribute to these less worthy motives
the main influences. The fundamental causes after all have usually
been the progressive growth of population and the differentiation of
industry, whereby there arises some real need of new lines and more
convenient official centers.

The pressure of those conditions began to be felt in the northern
and eastern parts of Old Columbia County almost as soon as it was
fairly organized. It was soon discovered that the Touchet region was
one natural unit and the eastern and northeastern part of the county
was another; or rather two, for almost immediately the same line of
reasoning led to the conclusion that the Asotin country was naturally a
separate unit from that of the Pataha.

Although settlement has not been in any way uniform in these four
counties and there has been some shingling over from one to another,
it may be said that in a general way the movement was from west to
east and northeast. While the decade of the '60s was peculiarly the
foundation period of Walla Walla and Columbia, that of the '70s may
be regarded as peculiarly the pioneer age of Garfield, while that of
Asotin may be assigned to the latter part of the '70s and beginning of
the '80s.

We find, however, that a few of the foundation builders were already in
their permanent homes in Garfield County in the '60s, long prior to the
formation of the county. We have already given a list of these first
locations, and our main purpose in this chapter is to take up the story
with county creation. For the sake of topical clearness, however, it is
well to present a summary, even at the expense of a little repetition,
of the first settlement of the different regions of what became the
permanent Garfield County.

As authority for such precounty history we find a very valuable special
number of the _East Washingtonian_. This is the "First Garfield County
Pioneer Edition" of June 6, 1914. This issuance of so elaborate a
number of the paper is a great demonstration of the enterprise of the
publishers of that paper, as well as of the local ambition of the
Pioneer Association of the County, an association which holds an annual
two-day session and which has done much to fasten genuine historical
and patriotic sentiments in the memory of the people of the county.

[Illustration: COURTHOUSE, POMEROY]

From this highly commendable edition of the _East Washingtonian_ we
derive the following summary of first events:


SUMMARY OF THE FIRST EVENTS: THE DAWN OF CIVILIZATION IN THIS TERRITORY

The first white persons that ever came through Garfield County were the
members of the Lewis and Clark expedition. They arrived at Rigsby's
Grove May 3, 1806, and camped for dinner, eating what was left of two
dogs they had purchased from the Indians.

The first steamboat passed up Snake River in 1860.

Columbia Center was the first town laid off in Garfield County in 1876.

The first known murder by the whites was that of a man killed in the
old Rigsby cabin Christmas morning, 1864. The man who did the killing
was named Wilkins and the man killed was the owner of the house. The
old cabin still stands on the Rigsby place.

The first sawmill erected in this county was put up by Henry Sharpnack,
in 1874, just above Columbia Center. It was not successful.

James F. Rose was the first settler next the mountains above Pataha
Prairie, 1869.

Joseph Clary built the first residence in Pomeroy after the original
Sunderland log cabin. It was the residence of B. B. Day and still
stands, the first house west of A Street on Main.

The first women's votes were cast at an election to fill a vacancy of
justice of the peace, January 29, 1884.

The first settlers were in many instances men with Indian women. John
Fogarty lived on the Rafferty place with a Nez Perce half-Indian
woman. She was born at the crossing of the Touchet about where Dayton
now is. Fogarty was drowned in the Clearwater. Thomas Reynolds lived
a mile below Marengo, on the Tucanon, with an Indian woman who had
before lived with two different white men. They had two daughters named
Clydena and Agatha. After the latter the Town of Agatha, Idaho, was
named. Clydena died at Marengo when about fourteen years old. Agatha
married James Evans, son of Berry Evans.

Coleman, for whom Coleman Gulch was named, lived on the Tucanon, a mile
above Marengo, and had a California Indian wife. James Turner lived
on the Alpowa with an Indian woman. Two men named Bailey, with Indian
wives, in 1859, lived on the Touchet, near Dayton.

The first minister to hold services in Garfield County was the Rev.
Father Cataldo, who preached at Rafferty's and McBrearty's.

The first school on the Pataha Creek was taught by W. W. McCauley in
1873. The schoolhouse was located at Owsley's.

J. M. Pomeroy located the land where Pomeroy now stands on December 8,
1864.

The first telegraph was built by the government and ran from Dayton to
Lewiston, through Pomeroy, in 1879.

The Catholics built the first church in Pomeroy, 1878. Father Papes was
the first pastor.

First grain raised on Deadman was in 1878, E. T. Wilson, grower.

Newton Estes was the first settler on the Deadman, 1870.

James Bowers was the first settler on the land where Pataha now is,
1861. In 1868 Vine Favor bought the land and started the Town of Pataha
in 1878.

The first Protestant minister to hold services in Garfield County was
Rev. Calaway, then living in Walla Walla, a Cumberland Presbyterian.

       *       *       *       *       *

It appears from this record that Parson Quinn was the first settler on
the Pataha, having located there in 1860. The first house on the Pataha
was built by Thomas Riley, who afterwards disposed of it to James
Rafferty. One of the first settlers was William McEnery, on the lower
Pataha, in 1862.

The next creek after the Pataha to receive settlers was the Deadman.
This rather lugubrious name seems to have been derived from the fact
that during the hard winter of '61-2, two men perished in the hollow
which became known as "Deadman Hollow." They were supposed to have been
miners from Orofino or Florence. The bodies were not discovered till
spring, and were then suitably interred and the spot marked with a pile
of rocks at a point near the old road from Walla Walla to Lewiston.
That region is now one of the best farming sections in the Inland
Empire. Newton Estes was the first to make a permanent location on
the Deadman, and his date was 1871. Within a short time, S. T. Jones,
A. E. Lee, W. L. Freeman, Frank Ping, John Lynn, and Archie McBrearty
located upon the creek. One event of that stage worthy of special
record was the Alpowa "Toll Road." It was built by B. B. Howard and M.
Fettis, in 1872-3, and in 1873 became the property of N. A. Wheeler.
For twenty-five years it was maintained by Mr. Wheeler and then deeded
by him to the county for $1.00. Pataha prairie, south of the Deadman
and Alpowa, was settled in the early '70s. Rev. William Calaway located
there in 1870; Isaac Coatney in 1871; William Chester, 1871; D. Zemmel,
1871; Robert Storey, 1872.

From these centers of settlement, Pataha Creek, Deadman Creek and
Hollow, Pataha prairie, together with the still earlier Tucanon (spoken
of in connection with Columbia County), and Alpowa (the lower part of
which was early historic ground as the home of Red Wolf and Timothy,
the Nez Perces, associated with the Missionary Spalding), the growth
proceeded during the period prior to county division, following the
familiar lines from sheep and cattle and horses to agriculture.

The most constructive event was the founding of Pomeroy. This thriving
city, the capital and metropolis of Garfield County, was established
by J. M. Pomeroy in 1877. Mrs. Pomeroy, now Mrs. St. George, is living
at the date of this publication, a woman of great vigor of mind and
body, the best authority on the early days in the place of which she
told the author she might be called "the Mother." Mr. Pomeroy came from
Oregon to the territory in 1863, and for a few months took charge of
the stage station at the present site of Dayton. There the youngest
child of the family, now Mrs. Peter McClung of Pomeroy, was born. In
the spring of 1864, Mr. Pomeroy moved with his family to the location
of the town which became his namesake. There in the last part of the
year he purchased of a transient settler, Walter Sunderland, the
right to the claim on which the town now stands. For a dozen years he
devoted his main attention to cattle raising and to the conducting of
the stage station. The author wishes that his readers could enjoy the
privilege, as he has, of hearing Mrs. St. George describe in her vivid
and entertaining way the times of the stage station and the express
boxes with thousands of dollars' worth of gold dust, when "road agents"
were figuring on breaking in and seizing them, when horse thieves ran
off their horses, and when the Vigilantes would occasionally decorate a
tree with the remains of a horse thief as a suggestion for moderation
in becoming attached to other men's stock. As the next best thing we
are going to let Mrs. St. George tell the story in the following sketch
which appeared in the pioneer number of the _East Washingtonian_.

"Pomeroy, Wash., April 5, 1914.--I came from Salem, Ore., where I had
lived with my people for eighteen years, being four years old when my
folks crossed the plains, among the early pioneers of Oregon.

"I was married at the age of fifteen years, and, for a while, lived in
Salem with my husband and two small children.

"I came up the Columbia River by steamer to Wallula, took the stage for
Walla Walla, with twelve other passengers, on April 6, 1864.

"At Wallula I found a great rush of travel, many on their way to the
reported gold strike at Orofino, Idaho.

"I had two pairs of fine blooded pigs in a small box, two dozen fine
chickens, but no baggage except a suitcase with a few things for my
children. My trunks had been left at Portland and came the next day.

"My husband was coming overland with a band of fine Shorthorn cattle
and about twenty head of horses. He had been driving stock for about
four weeks, and I had remained with my mother for awhile, so we would
arrive at Walla Walla about the same time. Arriving there with my
little ones, a stranger in a strange land, with very little money, and
board and lodgings at the City Hotel twenty-five dollars a week, and no
letter from my husband awaiting me, I did not feel very much at home.

"But soon a man with whom Mr. Pomeroy had made arrangements for the
place where we were to live until we could look about and select a
piece of land for our homestead. We were to stay that summer on the
ranch two miles east of Dayton, belonging to Mr. William Rexford, in a
small log house with a fireplace, and there, in September, Mrs. McClung
was born.

"We were as poor and hard up for money as any one that ever came to
this country. In the month of July Mr. King, who at that time carried
the mail, express and passengers from Walla Walla to Lewiston, made
me a proposition to keep a stage stand and feed his hungry passengers
every day, and very soon I was giving two dinners each day to the
coming and going travelers.

"I had told Mr. King that I had nothing to work with, no stove, table
or dishes; nothing to cook and I did not see how I could accommodate
him. I had been helping to break some of the young heifers to milk, and
made some butter to sell, having no other way to make a dollar. I sold
all the butter I could spare for one dollar a pound; but soon winter
would come on and then what would we do with no money, no sale for what
little stock we had? Something had to be done. We had made a garden
soon after we settled and by this time we had some nice vegetables,
which were a great treat to the travelers coming out of the mines.

"Mr. King told me to make a list of what I needed for my house so I
could feed his passengers, and, finally, after much urging, I did so.
He took my list to Walla Walla, had the bill filled, put on a freight
team the next day and brought me a big, nice cookstove with all the
things belonging to it; lots of dishes and linen, and said I could pay
him when I made the money and could spare it.

"The very next day I gave a dinner to ten passengers, and, oh, didn't
they brag on that dinner. I never will forget all the nice things they
said.

"I kept the stage stand there until December 10th, when we bought this
place, where Pomeroy now stands, or rather the improvements on it,
consisting of a large house, a log barn and corral.

"Then the daily stage service was discontinued to once a week, with
this station as a night stopping place, where all that traveled the
road always got their meals. Our house became the famous stopping place
between Walla Walla, Wash., and Lewiston, Idaho.

"When the travel was heavy we made some money, and when the travel was
light I had to work out doors milking cows, making garden and all kinds
of hard work. My little children almost raised themselves, taking care
of the baby, and helping me in many ways. Work, always thinking of how
to make nice things to eat for the traveling public, and how to keep
expenses paid.

"Walla Walla was our trading place, for everything was high at
Lewiston. But if I had anything to sell I sent it to the latter place.

"There was one family living on the Pataha besides us, two or three
squaw men and some bachelors living where the King boys now live, and
for a little while a family was located on the Alpowa Creek. There were
some Indian ranches on that creek at that time. No one lived below
on the Pataha, till you came to the old 'Parson' Quinn place, eleven
miles down, then farther on were two or three cattle ranches--Rice
and Montgomery, Platters, and later Archey McBrearty. There was no
settlement on Snake River except at Almota, no one living on the
Deadman, nor anywhere over there, and no settlers between the Pataha
and the mountains.

"I helped my husband to stake the roads to the mountains. There had
been a road up the Benjamin Gulch, which was so badly washed out it
could not be traveled. We staked a road across 'Dutch Flat' for our own
use, as wood and fencing had to come from that direction.

"There was scarcely enough brush along the Pataha to make a camp fire.
The Indians would burn the grass every year along Pataha, thus killing
the tender willows.

"In those early days the Indians were very plentiful. I have seen as
many as 100 or more pass by our place in one day, their destination
being the Camas and Kouse districts, as Camas Prairie was then called.
Then, later in the season, they would go to a lake at the head of the
Yakima River, high up in the mountains, where the squaws would fish,
and the men hunt deer, which were plentiful.

"During these camping periods, horse racing was the principal
amusement; the Indians had many fine, fast horses, and the several
tribes wagered many dollars and trinkets on the merits of their race
stock. During this racing season many unscrupulous white men, or
'renegades,' would arrive, camping close by, winning the money of the
Indians and selling them liquor.

"The Alpowa Indians were very friendly, and the squaws would work for
me; I would hire them to work in the garden. They would take potatoes
for their pay and pack them on their ponies. If not watched, they would
steal some of the vegetables, but most of them did an honest day's
work and were satisfied with what I gave them for their labor.

"Sometimes I could buy huckleberries from the Indians and dried
antelope hams during the first few years we lived here. There was an
old Indian called 'Squally John,' who would catch salmon on the Snake
River and bring them to us. They would catch hundreds of them and
dry them for the winter and would also get plenty of venison in our
mountains.

"I was afraid of the Indians for a few years, but got over that
feeling. It was slow work for one or two men to make a farm. Not a
furrow had ever been plowed when we came, no fencing. Barbed wire was
not known then, and Mr. Pomeroy had to haul feed for his team, and seed
grain from the Touchet; and that, with the timber hauling from the
mountains, kept him busy, which left the cows and the chores and all
kinds of outdoor work for me to do with one hired man and the help of
the children.

"I was a very busy woman, although I did find time to teach the
children to read and write, and the first lessons were learned at home.
There was a school taught at Dayton the summer of 1869, and we sent
Clara and Ned there. This was a four months' term. The next year we
sent Clara to the sisters at Walla Walla, then, in 1872, Bishop Wells
started the St. Paul School, and Clara was one of the pupils there,
until she finished her schooling and was married to Eugene T. Wilson,
on Christmas Day, 1877.

"In the meantime we had opened a school at the Owsley place, and our
two children attended school there, going five miles in a buggy. There
were ten pupils the first year. The country was settling up everywhere
by this time; many had settled on the Pataha Prairie, and Alpowa, and
over in the Deadman country and along the Pataha Creek.

"When the flour mill was built, a man wanted to put in a stock of
goods; then others came, and a town was laid out.

"Then there was no more frontier."

That Mrs. St. George succeeded at the stage station and in that vital
and fundamental requisite of the traveler in the days of the stage,
viz., good eatables, well cooked and served, was abundantly proven. A
writer in the Walla Walla _Union_ in 1894 drew a toothsome picture of
the gastronomic attractions at Pomeroy and Alpowa, as follows:

"A quarter of a century or more ago there were two famous eating houses
on the stage road between Walla Walla and Lewiston, houses which were
the occasion of many heated arguments between those who had been over
the road as to which was the better, houses at either of which the
traveler, tired and sore from the lurching of the stage, was sure of
a substantial meal, the memory of which, as it flitted through the
brain, lingered and made the mouth water. These were the houses which
the familiar, all-pervading, time-serving drummer contracted into
'Pum's' and 'Freeman's.' The former was located near what is now the
center of the thriving City of Pomeroy; the latter was on the Alpowa,
about half-way between 'Pum's' and Lewiston. Coming passengers dined at
Pomeroy's; going took breakfast at Freeman's. Possibly stage passengers
have eaten better cooked meals and sat down to more attractive tables
than those found at Freeman's and Pomeroy's, but they never said so
while at either place, or elsewhere. Delicious bread, fresh from the
oven, that which was properly seasoned by age, sweet butter, thick
cream in genuine coffee, meats done to a turn, chicken fried or stewed,
vegetables in their season, fruits, pastry, each and all 'fit to set
before a king,' were provided in profusion in both places. In winter
huge fires in equally huge fireplaces thawed out the frozen traveler.
In summer cold buttermilk cooled his heated blood and washed the alkali
dust out of his throat."

As an interesting record of the early days, we find an account in the
_Columbia Chronicle_ of Dayton of the first Fourth of July celebration
in the present Garfield County held in 1878 at the edge of the Blue
Mountains just beyond Pataha flat. The reporter for the _Chronicle_
declares that the celebration was a great success; a near arbor for the
speaker and musicians, plenty of seats, abundant eatables, and great
enthusiasm in spite of the mountain chill prevailing.


THE NEW COUNTY OF GARFIELD

Being obliged to content ourselves with these hurried glimpses at the
precounty history we turn to the important stage of the creation of
the new county. As the reader will recall, the County of Columbia was
set up in 1875. We discover from files of the _Columbia Chronicle_
that agitation in favor of a new county began in 1880. By that
year considerable settlement had been made in the Pataha, Deadman,
Alpowa and Asotin regions and a common subject of discussion was the
inconvenient distance from Dayton as the county seat.

The _Chronicle_ of October 9, 1880, thus views the situation:

"A talk with many of the leading men from various parts of the county
reveals the fact that the people are in no great hurry for a division.
It is generally conceded that the county is too large when the immense
canyons and peculiar lay of the country are taken into consideration,
but it is also conceded that the eastern portion of the county is not
at the present time prepared to support a county organization. All talk
of a division is, therefore, at this time, premature. The people of the
western portion of the county are in favor of forming a new county when
the eastern portion demands it."

One of the features of the case was the number of possible county seats
which began to sprout forth as candidates for the official crown. One
was laid out on Snake River at the mouth of the Alpowa, and that would
be a fine site for a city, too, now the location of several hundred
acres of magnificent orchard. Another was Mentor, on the Pataha, six
miles above Pomeroy. It was at the foot of the "grade" on the Rafferty
place and was first named Belfast. The claims of Mentor, named from the
home of the President whose name was to become that of the county, are
set forth thus in some correspondence from that ambitious place for the
_Columbia Chronicle_ of December 17, 1881:

"The Town of Mentor desires to have a fair chance in the contest. We
stand on our own merits. We have a good townsite on the Pataha Creek;
good roads running to the place. The greatest wheat growing country in
the territory tributary to it. The Pataha and Lewiston survey runs to
this place; the road will, no doubt, be built in time to take away next
year's crop. We are very sorry we did not ask for the capital of the
territory instead of the county seat, but will try that next time. This
place is well known, and is as near the center of the county as it is
possible to locate a town. Lumber is being hauled for buildings, and
the proprietor, Mr. Rafferty, is very liberal in his donations of land
for county purposes. Mentor is the place for the people. You will hear
this place called Dublin, Limerick, and Ireland."

Melancholy was the fate of Mentor. A sarcastic correspondent in the
_Chronicle_ writes, under date of February 11, 1882:

"The lumber pile, which constituted the Town of Mentor, has been
purchased by Mr. Scott and will be brought to Pomeroy. Like Mahomet and
the mountain: If the county seat would not go to Mentor, Mentor will go
to the county seat."

Besides Alpowa and Mentor, the prospective towns of Asotin, Assotin
City, Columbia Center, Pataha City, and Pomeroy were all aspirants. The
last named, laid out, as already noted, in 1877, soon forged to the
front and became the center of an active propaganda for the removal of
the county seat of Columbia or for the erection of a new county. The
former proposition seems to have been at first the prevailing plan. It
excited much opposition on the part of Dayton. An editorial extract
from the _Chronicle_ of October 8, 1881, indicates the turn which
sentiment at Dayton was taking:

"An earnest effort is being made by the citizens of Pomeroy and
vicinity to move the county seat to that town. We object. The county
is large enough for two good counties, and the valley or canyon of the
Tucanon throughout its greater portion affords a natural boundary.
The people of this section are willing to allow the eastern portion a
county organization whenever they wish it, as the division must come
sooner or later. It is reported that two of our representatives in
the Legislature are pledged to the removal and also to give several
more townships to Walla Walla County to buy its influence. They do not
propose to give the people an opportunity to vote on the question,
as they fear the result, but aim to have the change made by the
Legislature without consulting the wishes of the voters of the whole
county. We agree with our Pomeroy correspondent that it is unjust to
compel people east of the Tucanon to come here to transact business,
but it would be equally unjust to compel people on this side to go to
Pomeroy. The only just and equitable way out of the difficulty is to
divide the county on the line indicated and allow the citizens of the
new county to locate their county seat. But with the county seat of
Columbia County beyond the Tucanon, nineteen-twentieths of the people
of this vicinity would petition to be attached to Walla Walla County,
as with the present facilities for travel it would be most convenient,
to say nothing of the great advantage of joining a wealthy county with
public buildings erected and paid for and a brilliant future before it.
This, however, only as a last resort. We trust the Legislature will
take no hasty action in this matter, but will give all parts of the
county ample opportunity to be heard."

As a logical outcome of the situation the Legislature passed an act,
approved by Gov. W. A. Newell, on November 29, 1881, providing for the
new county. As a matter of history this act is valuable for permanent
record and we insert it here:

"An Act to organize the County of Garfield:

"Section 1. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the Territory
of Washington; That all that portion of Columbia County situated within
Washington Territory and included within the following limits, be, and
the same shall be known as the County of Garfield, in honor of James
A. Garfield, late President of the United States, viz.: Commencing at
a point in the midchannel of Snake River on township line between
ranges 39 and 40; thence on said line south to the southwest corner of
township twelve (12), range forty (40); thence east on township line
six (6) miles; thence south to the southwest corner of section seven
(7); township eleven (11), north of range forty-one (41) east; thence
east one (1) mile; thence south three (3) miles; thence east one (1)
mile; thence south one (1) mile; thence east one (1) mile; thence south
three (3) miles; thence east three (3) miles; thence south on township
line to the Oregon line; thence due east on said line to the division
line between Territories of Washington and Idaho; thence north on said
dividing line to a point where it intersects the midchannel of the
Snake River; thence down the midchannel of the Snake River to the point
of beginning.

"Section 2. That E. Oliver, Joseph Harris and N. C. Williams are hereby
appointed a board of commissioners to call a special election of county
officers for said Garfield County, and to appoint the necessary judges
and inspectors thereof; notice of which election shall be given and
the said election conducted and returns made as is now provided by
law: Provided, That the returns shall be made to the commissioners
aforesaid, who shall canvass the returns and declare the result, and
issue certificates to the persons elected.

"Sections 3. That the justices of the peace and constables who are now
elected as such in precincts of the County of Garfield, be, and the
same are hereby declared justices of the peace and constables of said
County of Garfield.

"Section 4. That the county seat of the said County of Garfield is
hereby located at Pataha City until the next election, which is to be
held on the second Monday in January, A. D. 1882, at which time the
highest number of legal votes of said county, given for any one place,
may permanently locate the same.

"Section 5. The County of Garfield is hereby united to the County of
Columbia for judicial purposes.

"Section 6. That all laws applicable to the County of Columbia shall be
applicable to the County of Garfield.

"Section 7. That all taxes levied and assessed by the Board of County
Commissioners of the County of Columbia for the year A. D. 1881,
upon persons or property within the boundaries of the said County
of Garfield, shall be collected and paid into the treasury of said
Columbia County for the use of said County of Columbia: Provided,
however, That the said County of Columbia shall pay all the just
indebtedness of said Columbia County, and that when such indebtedness
shall be wholly paid and discharged all moneys remaining in the
treasury of said Columbia County, and all credits due and to become due
said County of Columbia on the assessment roll of said year shall be
divided between said counties of Columbia and Garfield according to the
assessed valuation of said property of the same year. Provided further,
That nothing in this act be so construed as to deprive the County of
Garfield of its proportion of the tax levied for common school purposes
for the above-named year.

"Section 8. The County of Columbia shall pay to the County of Garfield
the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000) over and above the amount
provided for in this act, for its interest in the public property and
improvements.

"Section 9. The County of Garfield shall be entitled to two members of
the House of Representatives and one joint member of the Council with
Walla Walla and Whitman counties.

"Section 10. The County of Columbia shall be entitled to one member of
the Council and one representative in the Legislative Assembly of the
Territory of Washington.

"Section 11. All acts and parts of acts in conflict with any of the
provisions of this act shall be, and the same are hereby repealed.

"Section 12. This act to take effect and be in force from and after its
passage and approval.

"Approved November 29, 1881."


COUNTY SEAT LOCATION

Very naturally and logically the next stage of evolution of the new
county was the determination of the county seat.

In the enabling act Pataha City was designated as the official head
until the next election to occur on January 9, 1882. Hence ensued an
active, almost fierce, campaign between the four places to which the
race finally narrowed--Pataha City, Assotin City, Pomeroy and Mentor.
The rivalry between the near neighbors, Pomeroy and Pataha, became very
bitter. Each accused the other of double dealing and of trading against
each other in such a way that many believed that Assotin City, on the
extreme southeastern verge of the county, would win the coveted honor.
The result of the election, however, was to give Pomeroy a considerable
plurality, though not a majority--Pomeroy, 411; Assotin City, 287;
Pataha City, 259; Mentor, 82.

The county officers chosen at this first election, eight republicans
and four democrats were as follows: County commissioners, J. W.
Weisenfeldt, J. J. Kanawyer, and Eliel Oliver; sheriff, W. E. Wilson;
auditor, Scott Rogers; probate judge, Benjamin Butler; treasurer, J. N.
Perkins; assessor, H. H. Wise; surveyor, E. D. Briggs; superintendent
of schools, W. H. Marks; coroner, E. A. Davidson; sheep commissioner,
S. T. Jones.

The different precincts, with the vote of each for sheriff, were
these: Pomeroy, 260; Pataha, 184; Tuscanon, 8; Meadow, 28; River, 90;
Pleasant, 69; Columbia Center, 108; Asotin, 66; Cottonwood, 201. This
gives a total of 1,014, and that number indicates the rapid growth
of the region, for the entire population in 1875, only seven years
earlier, was estimated at not to exceed 500.

The county seat contest thus resulted in favor of Pomeroy, but there
was a curious after-clap to this which made up one of the noted law
cases of the Territory.

A suit was brought, entitled "Rice vs. County Commissioners of Garfield
County," to restrain the commissioners from meeting at the point,
Pomeroy, which they had, after canvassing the votes, declared the duly
appointed county seat. The case was tried as an equity case by Judge S.
C. Wingard, Territorial judge at Walla Walla, and his decision was that
the county was without any seat. The ground of this decision was purely
technical, one of those decisions which delight lawyers and judges,
in that it emphasizes the letter of the law, and usually is repugnant
to common people, in that it disregards the plainly obvious intent of
the sovereign people and seems to render them the victims and slaves
of their own instruments. The point was this: The Enabling Act, though
designating a Board of County Commissioners to provide for an election
and canvass the votes for county officers and issue certificates to
them, and though the Enabling Act had also in section 4 provided for an
election of county seat, yet there was no specific power granted to the
commissioners or to any one to canvass the votes for the county seat.
Hence, the judge ruled, there had been no legal choice, and the county
was without an official seat. The findings of the court are summarized
in the following paragraphs:

1. That all that part of the act pleaded in complaint respecting the
submission of the location of the county seat of Garfield County to the
determination of the legal voters, that is to say, all that portion of
section 4 of said act beginning with the words "at which time" to the
determination of said section be, and the same is hereby declared by
the court, unconstitutional and void.

2. That the said pretended election in said complaint mentioned is by
the court held a nullity and set aside.

3. That said defendants are forbidden from making Pomeroy the seat of
government of Garfield County.

4. That said defendants and each of them are enjoined from requiring
any or all of the county officers of said Garfield County to remove
their respective offices to said Pomeroy or there discharge the duties
of their said respective offices.

5. That defendants and each of them are enjoined from incurring any
indebtedness against said county or expending any of its funds in
or about removing county officers to said Pomeroy, or in any manner
attempting to make Pomeroy the seat of government of said Garfield
County. That the following parts of the prayer of said complaint are
refused by the court, to-wit: The court refuses to enjoin defendants
from locating their offices at said Pomeroy, or from transacting there
the county business of said Garfield County, or from their furnishing
offices for all or any part of the county officers of said county.

The costs of this case are taxed to Garfield County.

But this evidently could not be the end of the case. The commissioners
decided to meet at Pomeroy, and the county treasury was established at
the store of Brady and Rush, with Mr. Rush acting as deputy treasurer.
The Pataha forces started another suit to compel the board to meet at
that place. This suit having been defeated, the only recourse seemed be
a new act by the Legislature. This appeal resulted in separate bills by
the two houses. The lower house passed a bill, without opposition, for
locating the seat of government at Pomeroy, though this passed with the
general understanding that there would be a vote by the people of the
county. The bill by the council provided for submission to an election
by the people. But the end was not yet, and the whole matter, together
with several other acts of the Legislature, went to the National
Congress.

On May 13, 1884, the House of Representatives passed a law to sanction
the selection of Pomeroy for the county seat of Garfield County. The
Senate having agreed, this case was ended and Pomeroy entered upon the
peaceful exercise of her official primacy. It is rather a curious fact
that every one of the other contending places, except Asotin, which
became the seat of still another county, has almost reverted to farming
land and Pomeroy is the only place that can be called a town in the
entire county.

[Illustration: STREET SCENE IN POMEROY]

[Illustration: WHEAT WAREHOUSE, POMEROY]

The first assessment of the county, in 1882, gave to real estate a
valuation of $250,345; to improvements, $111,834; to personal property,
$662,891; a total of $1,025,983. The taxes amounted to $26,351.74.


RECORD OF ELECTIONS

Following the initial election, voting population, and assessed
valuation, already given, we may summarize the official events under
the following headings:

At the general election of November, 1882, the voting precincts were:
Pomeroy, Pataha City, Pleasant, River, Meadow, Tucanon, Columbia
Center, Asotin, Cottonwood, Lake, Grande Ronde. The results were
the following, majorities being given in each case: For delegate to
Congress T. H. Brents, 103; joint councilman, J. E. Edmiston, 14;
joint councilman, N. T. Caton, 146; attorney, J. K. Rutherford, 24;
representative, William Clark, 57; auditor, H. B. Ferguson, 142;
sheriff, W. E. Wilson, 299; treasurer, J. W. Rauch, 231; commissioner,
J. D. Swain, 552; commissioner, Z. A. Baldwin, 66; commissioner,
James Hull, 15; probate judge, Benjamin Butler, 226; superintendent
of schools, without opposition, Mrs. T. G. Morrison; assessor, H. H.
Wise, 115; surveyor, E. D. Briggs, 259; coroner, Dr. G. B. Kuykendall,
129; sheep commissioner, C. H. Seeley, 2. J. D. Swain having resigned
as commissioner on account of the prospective setting apart of Asotin
County, James Chisholm was appointed to fill the vacancy.

Of the above officers Messrs. Brents, Swain, Baldwin, Butler, Clark,
Wise, Kuykendall, Briggs, Seeley, and Mrs. Morrison were republicans,
while Messrs. Edmiston, Caton, Rutherford, Ferguson, Wilson, Rauch and
Hull were democrats.

In the next election, 1884, Asotin County having in the meantime been
set apart, the republicans maintained their lead, as on all normal
issues they have continued to do to the present. The total vote of
1884 was 1,314, a large increase over that of two years previous,
even though Asotin had become distinct. But that was the year of the
short-lived woman suffrage regime, and that explains in part the
increase. The result of the election was to give Armstrong, republican,
for delegate, a majority over Voorhees, though the latter was chosen
for the Territory. The joint councilmen, Isaac Carson and B. B. Day,
republicans, received majorities in the county and the republican
candidate for representative, J. N. Perkins, received a majority. Of
the local officers chosen, W. E. Wilson for sheriff, J. W. Rauch for
treasurer, and D. Strain for commissioner, were democrats. All the
others were republicans: Benjamin Butler, probate judge; I. C. Sanford,
superintendent of schools; H. H. Wise, assessor; Hayden Gearhardt,
surveyor; C. O. Kneen and J. F. Martin, commissioners; Dr. G. B.
Kuykendall, coroner; and C. H. Seeley, sheep commissioner.

The election of 1886 totaled 1,313 votes. The republican candidate for
delegate, C. M. Bradshaw received eleven votes more than Voorhees, but
the latter again had a majority in the territory. For joint councilman
and joint representative, O. C. White and R. A. Case, both republicans,
were chosen.

For local officers, W. N. Noffsinger, attorney; Benjamin Butler,
probate judge; Gilbert Dickson, treasurer; I. N. Julian, assessor;
Hayden Gearhardt, surveyor; Dr. G. W. Black, coroner; J. H. Walker,
sheep commissioner, and J. S. Davis and Joseph Scott, commissioners,
were all republicans. The democrats chosen were S. K. Hull for
sheriff, R. H. Wills for auditor, T. Driscoll for superintendent of
schools, and J. Parker for commissioner.

The election of 1888 was notable in several respects. The republicans
chose every local candidate except that for prosecuting attorney,
and he was chosen by only one majority. In the general shiftings of
the next few years he became a republican, but to whichever party he
belonged he has been honored as one of the leading citizens of the
county and state. This was judge Mack F. Gose. Another eminent democrat
appeared in this election as candidate for joint councilman, M. M.
Godman of Dayton. He was chosen in the district but not in Garfield
County.

The woman suffrage amendment had been declared unconstitutional by
Judge W. G. Langford, and hence the vote for 1888 fell to 977. This was
the year of the triumph of John B. Allen over Charles S. Voorhees for
delegate, in the Territory as well as county.

The county officers chosen were M. F. Gose, attorney, by one majority;
George W. Campbell, auditor; Gilbert Dickson, sheriff; G. D. Wilson,
assessor; I. C. Sanford, treasurer; Benjamin Butler, probate judge;
David Miller, J. S. Davis, and J. Fitzsimmons, commissioners; H. C.
Benbow, superintendent of schools; Hayden Gearhardt, surveyor, and G.
W. Black, coroner.

And now we reach the most important and interesting date in the history
of the blushing young Territory of Washington, when she became a
"sweet girl graduate" and stepped upon the platform to receive her
diploma as a full grown state, 1889. Like all other counties, Garfield
was agog with excitement over the great event and there was quite a
boiling in the pot over the choice of delegates to the Constitutional
convention. The enabling act provided that the territory be divided
into twenty-five districts, each entitled to three delegates, of whom
only two could be of one party. District number 8 embraced Adams,
Garfield, Asotin, and Franklin counties. On May 7, 1889, the district
convention of republicans met at Pomeroy to nominate candidates for the
Constitutional convention. I. N. Muncy of Pasco was chosen chairman,
and G. W. Bailey of Asotin secretary. The nominees were Elmon Scott of
Garfield County and D. Buchanan of Adams. The democratic convention
also met at Pomeroy and nominated W. B. Gray of Franklin County. A
peculiar turn took place in this election, and the narration of it
brings forward the name of one of the most respected citizens of the
county and subsequently of the state, S. G. Cosgrove, afterwards
Governor Of Washington. Owing to dissension in the republican ranks,
Mr. Cosgrove became an independent candidate. W. A. George and F. W. D.
Mays, both democrats, also became independent candidates. The upshot of
the matter was that democrats threw their votes largely to Cosgrove,
and, as a result, Scott, Gray and Cosgrove became delegates to the
Constitutional convention.

And now that Garfield County, with her sister counties, had the new
dignity of participation in state government, the elections took an
added importance. The first election under statehood occurred October
1, 1889. In preparation for that event there were county conventions
of both parties at Pomeroy, that of republicans on August 29th and
that of democrats September 7th. To indicate the leaders of parties at
that time we preserve the names of the officers of each convention and
delegate chosen for the state convention. Of republicans, Dr. T. C.
Frary was chairman and W. G. Victor secretary. The delegates were Jay
Lynch, S. G. Cosgrove, W. G. Victor, F. G. Morrison, C. G. Austin and
W. S. Oliphant. Of the democratic, Eliel Oliver was chairman and James
Parker secretary. Delegates were R. E. Wills, F. W. D. Mays, W. S.
Parker and J. S. Thomas.

The results of the election were:

For congressman, J. L. Wilson received a majority of 104 over T. C.
Griffiths, and former Territorial Governor Elisha P. Ferry, 99 majority
over Eugene Semple. That was about the average majority of republicans
over democrats on the state ticket.

The republican candidate for representative to State Legislature, W. S.
Oliphant, had a majority of 34 over his democratic competitor, James
Parker. R. E. Wills, democrat, had a majority of 48 over the republican
candidate, F. E. Williamson, for the new position of county clerk. No
other county officers were chosen at that time. A vote was taken on
woman suffrage in that election, and the result was adverse by 492 to
336. Prohibition carried by 442 to 415.

During the elections that followed, beginning with 1890, Garfield
County, like the rest of the state, had many parties, and much
political activity and (the Lord be praised for this) a deal of good
political education and independent action, which resulted in great
shattering of boss schemes and legislative lobbies and prepared
the way for the progressive politics manifested in the adoption
of initiative, referendum, and recall measures, woman suffrage,
prohibition, and that general advance toward a new Americanism
which had made the western states a wonder to the "effete East" and
a source of consternation to political Troglodytes. Republicans,
democrats, populists, prohibitionists, and socialists, marshalled
their cohorts, set their platforms before the people, and named their
candidates. Some people deprecate political campaigns on the ground
that they "disturb business." They certainly do, but that may be
their greatest commendation. It all depends on what one lives for. If
accumulation of wealth is the sole aim of existence, it is unfortunate
for the "well-fixed" classes to have any disturbance of business.
If political growth, individual development, experience in public
affairs, have place in one's scheme of life, these disturbances and
popular agitations far more than recompense a state for its pecuniary
dislocations. At any rate, the Pacific Coast states have had the
political agitations, and it is somewhat significant that they lead the
Union in general education, nor is it observable that they are greatly
deficient in business advancement.

Garfield County, like the state, usually cast a large majority for
republican candidates in national and state affairs. The result was
commonly the same in local elections. In all, however, there was great
play for independent action. The boss could never be sure of delivering
the goods. In 1890, 1892 and 1894 the republicans carried the field in
national and state elections. In the great breaking-up year of 1896,
the populists swept the ground, with Bryan as candidate for President
and James Hamilton Lewis and W. C. Jones for Congress. In 1898 a
reversal took place and Wesley L. Jones and Francis Cushman forged
ahead of Lewis and W. C. Jones. In the same election Garfield again set
itself down against woman suffrage and also against the single tax.

The year 1900 was another great year in politics, state and nation.
In Garfield County, the year was notable in that it marked a definite
movement in favor of S. G. Cosgrove for governor, and also the
withdrawal of a number of democrats from their former affiliations and
union with the republicans, mainly on the ground of the "sound money"
issue. Mack F. Gose was conspicuous in the new alignment.

The populists had dropped out of this election, but the prohibition,
socialist labor, and social democrat parties were in the field. The
result was a majority for the republicans on national and state issues,
with the exception that the county (as also the state) did itself the
credit of choosing John R. Rogers, democrat, for governor.

The republicans held the fort again in 1902. The total vote for
congressmen as 936, and F. W. Cushman, W. L. Jones, and W. E. Humphrey
received votes of 530, 516 and 517 respectively.

In 1904 the republicans had an overwhelming majority on the
presidential and congressional tickets, giving the republican electors
a plurality of 510, and Humphrey, Jones and Cushman, an average of 300
majority for Congress. But George E. Turner, democrat, passed A. E.
Mead, republican, in the gubernatorial race by 166.

Passing on to the presidential year of 1908, we find a total vote in
the county of 1,003, and a majority for the republican electors of
177. Miles Poindexter, republican for Congress in this district (the
state having been districted since the previous election), carried the
field, and S. G. Cosgrove had an overwhelming majority for governor.
This eminent and well loved citizen of Garfield County realized in that
year his worthy and long cherished ambition to be the chief executive
of the state, and went from a sick bed to be duly inaugurated. But
his activities were ended and within a few weeks he passed on, to
the profound sorrow of the entire state and particularly his friends
and neighbors in the home county where he had been known and deeply
respected so many years.

In 1910 W. L. La Follette of Whitman County received a majority in the
county, as in the district, for congressman, and M. F. Gose was called
to the supreme bench of the state, a choice almost unanimous in the
county, and one recognized in the state as eminently worthy.

The presidential year of 1912 gave a reversal, and the County of
Garfield joined the rest of the Union in a majority for Woodrow Wilson
for President, and also joined the rest of the state in selection of a
democrat, Eugene Lister, for governor.

1914 saw the re-election of W. L. La Follette, republican for
Congress, and W. L. Jones for senator. In the same year occurred the
most peculiar apparent turn in the opinion of Garfield County on
the prohibition issue. For that was the great year of the struggle
over the state-wide prohibition law. It might be regarded as an
east-of-the-mountain proposition, for the East Side reached the crest
of the Cascades with about 28,000 majority, enough to overcome the
heavy adverse vote of Seattle, and have thousands to spare. But,
strange to say, Garfield County, one of the very earliest to adopt
local option, and one of the most pronounced in temperance sentiment,
went against the amendment, and was the only East Side county to do so.
The reason simply was that having tried local option with satisfactory
results, the deliberate judgment was that local option was correct in
theory and practice and should be sustained. It is stated now by those
familiar with conditions that since the adoption and operation of the
prohibition law it has the hearty support of the county, as shown
by the fact that efforts to nullify it in 1916 were overwhelmingly
defeated in the county, as in the state.

[Illustration: VIEW OF A PORTION OF THE IRRIGATED DISTRICT OF
CLARKSTON, ASOTIN COUNTY]

[Illustration: VINE COVERED COTTAGE, CLARKSTON
Showing beautiful effect which can be produced with vines, trees and
flowers.]

In 1916, a more momentous election even than that of 1912, Garfield did
not line up with the state and nation, but gave her vote to Hughes.
She was with the majority on Poindexter for senator and La Follette
for Congress, but gave Lister for governor a slight majority over his
republican competitor, McBride.


COUNTY ELECTIONS

Turning now from national and state choices to the county officers we
find the following:

In 1890, the chosen candidates were: For representative to the state
legislature, James Palmer; sheriff, Gilbert Dickson; clerk, R. R.
Spedden; auditor, Benjamin Butler; treasurer, R. E. Wills; attorney,
W. N. Noffsinger; assessor, H. H. Wise; superintendent of schools,
H. C. Benbow; surveyor, Hayden Gearhardt; coroner, G. W. Black;
commissioners, John Lubling, George Stallcop, and Robert Story. All of
the above were on the republican ticket except R. E. Wills.

In 1892, the following were the successful candidates: Representative,
F. W. D. Mays; superior judge, J. E. Edmiston; attorney, W. E. Greene;
auditor, Joseph Davidson; sheriff, Gilbert Dickson; clerk, E. W.
Gibson; treasurer, H. A. Adams; assessor, R. L. Kirby; superintendent
of schools, H. C. Benbow; surveyor, Hayden Gearhardt; coroner, J.
R. Gose; county commissioners, C. A. Shaffer, E. B. Fletcher, and
Robert Story; sheep commissioner, G. F. Jackson. The parties were much
more evenly divided than in the previous election, for Messrs. Mays,
Edmiston, Greene, Davidson, Adams, Gose and Fletcher were democrats,
the others republicans.

In 1894, results were these: Representative, A. E. Allen; attorney, G.
W. Jewett; clerk, E. W. Gibson; auditor, S. T. Sanford; sheriff, N.
O. Baldwin; treasurer, H. M. Beach; superintendent of schools, E. V.
Kuykendall; assessor, H. L. Wilson; surveyor, Edward Truax; coroner, G.
W. Black; commissioners, George Ruarck and Chris Brockman.

That was the populistic year, for of the above, Messrs. Allen, Sanford,
Beach, Wilson, Ruarck, and Brockman are all set down as P. P.'s.

In 1896, the county officers were as follows: Representative, James
Parker; sheriff, N. O. Baldwin; auditor, S. T. Sanford; assessor, H.
L. Wilson; clerk, A. E. Dickson; treasurer, H. M. Beach; attorney, G.
W. Jewett; superintendent of schools, Emma Nelson; surveyor, Edison
Griggs; commissioner, Chris Brockman; coroner, G. W. Black. That was
another populistic year, for six of the successful candidates were of
that faith.

In the election of 1898, the ebb of the tide of populism became
visible, for of the successful aspirants, only three were P. P'.s. The
chosen candidates were these: Representative, C. M. Baldwin; sheriff,
S. S. Russell; clerk, A. E. Dickson; auditor, J. A. Strain; treasurer,
H. Dixon; attorney, E. V. Kuykendall; assessor, J. P. Buchet;
superintendent of schools, Emma Elsensohn; coroner, W. P. Williamson;
commissioners, S. S. Young and August Young.

Election results of 1900 were thus: Representative, W. L. Howell;
sheriff, J. A. Strain; auditor, E. M. Pomeroy; treasurer, W. H. Dixon;
clerk, H. A. Adams; assessor, F. W. Messenger; superintendent of
schools, Nellie Vallen; attorney, Frank Cardwell; coroner, C. G. Black;
surveyor, J. M. Reid; commissioners, A. H. Malone and D. R. Lewis. In
this election the populists no longer appeared, but several democrats
carried away the trophies, the following being of that party, Howell,
Strain, Cardwell, and Malone.

In 1902, the successful ones were: Representative, W. L. Howell;
auditor, Frank Burch; sheriff, J. A. Strain; clerk, A. A. Kirby;
treasurer, H. A. Adams; attorney, J. T. Ledgerwood; assessor, F. W.
Messenger; superintendent of schools, Nellie Vallen; surveyor, J. E.
Tupper; coroner, C. G. Black; commissioners, J. O. Miles and D. B.
Williams. In that list were four democrats.

The year 1904 brought another presidential year and with republican
victory there came also general success for the same party in the
county votes:

For representative, W. O. Long; sheriff, W. H. Dixon; clerk, A. A.
Kirby; auditor, B. F. Burch; treasurer, J. H. Schneckloth; attorney,
J. T. Ledgerwood; assessor, M. N. Jeffreys; surveyor, J. E. Tupper;
superintendent of schools, Violetta Smith; commissioners, E. G.
Hastings, W. J. Kelly; coroner, G. W. Black. Four--auditor, treasurer,
attorney, and superintendent of schools were democrats.

In 1906 the voters designated: For representative, J. O. Long; sheriff,
W. H. Dixon; clerk, Harry St. George; auditor, J. P. Buchet; treasurer,
J. H. Schneckloth; attorney, A. A. Kirby; assessor, M. N. Jeffreys;
superintendent of schools, Violetta Smith; surveyor, I. J. Trescott.

In that election the auditor, treasurer, and superintendent of schools
were democrats.

Another presidential and gubernatorial year comes in with 1908, and we
find: Representative, H. C. Krouse; sheriff, F. V. Messenger; clerk,
Harry St. George; auditor, J. P. Buchet; attorney, E. V. Kuykendall;
treasurer, J. B. Hawkins; assessor, Daniel Kidwell; superintendent of
schools, Elizabeth McCoy; commissioners, F. L. Miller, J. D. Lyon. Of
these Messrs. Buchet and Hawkins were democrats.

In 1910 the successful candidates were: Representative, W. J. Kelly;
sheriff, B. L. Keatts; clerk, E. E. Powell; auditor, H. St. George;
treasurer, J. H. Schneckloth; attorney, A. G. Farley; assessor, Daniel
Kidwell; superintendent of schools, Mrs. M. E. Liggett; commissioners,
F. L. Miller and E. D. Smith. The party distribution was about as
before, Messrs. Keatts, Schneckloth, and Smith being democrats and the
others republicans.

The outcome in 1912 was this: Representative, C. G. Black; sheriff, J.
C. McKeiman; clerk, E. E. Powell; auditor, H. St. George; attorney, A.
G. Farley; superintendent of schools, Mrs. M. E. Liggett; engineer, R.
W. Rigsby; assessor, A. J. Buchet; commissioners, E. D. Smith, Isaac
Tewalt. All republicans except McKeiman, Rigsby, Buchet, and Smith.

In 1914, we find the following: Representative, C. G. Black; auditor,
E. E. Powell; treasurer, Emma A. Noble; clerk, Harry St. George;
sheriff, W. J. Schneckloth; assessor, A. J. Buchet; attorney, C.
Alexander McCabe; superintendent of schools, Belva L. Ball; engineer,
R. W. Rigsby; commissioners, E. L. Sanford, C. H. Rommel. The politics
were essentially as before.

In 1916 we find: Representative, John T. Ledgerwood; auditor, E. E.
Powell; treasurer, Olive O. Darby; clerk, H. St. George; sheriff, W. J.
Schneckloth; assessor, A. J. Buchet; superintendent of schools, Belva
L. Ball; engineer, M. W. Fitzsimmons; commissioner, Edward Malone.
Politics were about as before.

In the foregoing list we have not included the state senators or
superior judges, for the reason that they were joint with other
counties. It should be stated, however, that in 1906 and 1910, J. R.
Stevenson of Pomeroy filled the position of senator from the district
with conspicuous ability, and that Chester F. Miller of Dayton was
almost continuously the superior judge. It may also be added that the
position of sheep commissioner was dropped, and that a new office,
court commissioner (presumably having no connection with sheep, though
possibly with shearing) was established, and in the elections of 1914
and 1916 was filled by G. W. Jewett.


GENERAL EVENTS

Turning from political events to those of more general nature we
discover that the most important developments in transportation were
connected with three lines of business; the construction of the
branch line of railroad from Starbuck to a little beyond Pomeroy;
improvements in the navigation of Snake River and Columbia River; and
the development of the peculiar shute and tramway system for moving
grain from the high prairies in the northern edge of the county to the
Snake River steamers.

The railroad history goes back to 1883. In April of that year a
delegation of Pomeroy and Pataha men, consisting of B. B. Day, C. B.
Foote, John Houser, Cyrus Davis, and F. W. D. Mays, went to Walla Walla
to meet Henry Villard, head of the O. R. and N. System, and received
much encouragement that a road up the Pataha would be immediately
considered. However, the time was not yet, and, as common in such
cases, time passed on without results.

In January, 1885, Pres. Elijah Smith of the O. R. & N. Co. made the
proposal to the people of the county that if they would grade and lay
ties the company would complete the work and inaugurate the line. To
many farmers this seemed rather a skin game, not a unusual process in
railroad building.

We find some correspondence and some comments in the _East
Washingtonian_ of so much interest that we incorporate them here:

"At this period grain was stacked up on the banks of Snake River
awaiting a sufficient stage of water to permit of its being hauled
away by boats. With the road built it would soon be in the markets of
San Francisco and Portland; the farmers of Garfield would be placed on
an equal footing with those of Columbia County. Grain would be worth
at least 10 cents more per bushel than it was at that time; cattle,
hogs, etc., would not have to be sacrificed at cut-throat prices to pay
taxes and grocery bills. With a railroad tapping the heart of Garfield
County, an era of prosperity appeared likely to prevail. As conditions
existed the county merchants could not take grain for store bills; they
would be compelled to hold most of it until the next year before they
could ship it; they must take all chances upon the price remaining at
what they had paid for it. Within sixty and ninety days their goods
must be paid for; wheat would not answer for that purpose; practically,
the farmers had no reliable market whatever. The theory advanced was,
'Build a road and wheat will be legal tender for all debts.' Under
date, New York, January 24, 1885, Mr. John Harford, of Pataha City
received the following letter from E. H. Morrison:

 "Dear Sir:

 "Your letter received, also one from Doctor Jorgensen, stating that
 the Garfield County people were willing to furnish the grading in
 case the O. R. & N. Company would build a road from Starbuck to
 Pomeroy or Pataha.

 "I am sorry that there should be any opposition from the Pomeroy
 people, as certainly a road to their town would benefit not only the
 people of that city, but the tributary country. In the first place
 it is going to be a very difficult matter to interest the company
 sufficiently to have them build in any event, as there are some
 branches which they think are of far more importance, such as the
 completion of the road to Moscow and the road from Colfax to the
 Farmington country. Therefore it behooves your people to settle all
 your difficulties and unite as one in doing everything to get a road
 to that section of the country.

 "Since receiving your letters I have had an interview with Mr.
 Smith, president, and some of the directors, and I can tell you that
 they are not exuberant over building additional roads in Washington
 Territory or Oregon. But, I think, if in addition to the grading,
 which your people must agree to do, you will secure subscriptions
 sufficient to pay for the ties, that they will go ahead and build the
 road in time for the coming crop. These subscriptions must be in the
 form of notes, of grain notes, something that they can turn over to
 a contractor who will have the building of the road, and in that way
 relieving them of all trouble in collecting the subscriptions.

  "Yours very truly,

  "E. H. MORRISON."

In July, 1885, C. T. Stiles, Cyrus Davis, Charles Ward, G. A. Sable, N.
C. Williams, L. P. Mulkey, F. W. D. Mays, G. A. McCanse, R. M. Smith
and A. C. Short, from Pataha City and Pomeroy, were in Walla Walla.
This was Saturday. Their object was to hold a conference with railroad
officials, and, if possible, induce them to extend the Riparia branch
to tap the rich agricultural country of the Pataha. There were over
two million bushels of grain to ship from Garfield County; it was
impossible for boats on the Snake River to handle such a bulk.

August 10th, H. S. Rowe, general superintendent, and Robert McCleland,
chief engineer, of the Oregon Railroad & Navigation Company,
accompanied by Dr. Joseph Jorgensen and Frank Paine, of Walla Walla,
visited Pomeroy in the interest of a railroad up the Pataha. A mass
meeting was held. Mr. Rowe made the definite promise that if the
right-of-way was procured, together with necessary depot grounds,
the locomotive would enter Pomeroy by January 1, 1886. Here was a
proposition far more reasonable than the previous one demanding that
the farmers grade and tie the road; it demonstrated that the company
was a trifle better "prepared" to extend its lines than it had at
first made the farmer believe. Without the shadow of a doubt there had
been considerable jockeying on the part of the railway magnates in the
preliminary arrangements of the Pataha Creek extension.

By August 15th, the right-of-way from Starbuck to Pomeroy, with one or
two minor exceptions, had been granted to Messrs. Scott, Austin, Wilson
and Lynch. In reality, they had, two years subsequently, secured this
right-of-way for what was then called the Starbuck & Pomeroy Road--one
of the projects that had failed to materialize. These gentlemen offered
to relinquish their claims provided the Oregon Railroad & Navigation
Company would construct the line within a specified time; this Mr.
Rowe promised should be done. A committee of three, viz.: F. W. D.
Mays, W. C. Potter, Dixon Davis, were named to co-operate with the
above named four gentlemen, the railway men, forming a committee of
the whole, to secure the right-of-way through Pomeroy and negotiate
with the owners of the prospective depot grounds as to assessments
and valuations of property required to locate the road. Subscriptions
were solicited from property holders to defray expenses for securing
right-of-way privileges. August 15th the _Columbia Chronicle_ published
the following:

 "Superintendent Rowe, Hon. Joseph Jorgensen and Frank Paine of Walla
 Walla returned from Pomeroy Wednesday evening, having been to the
 Pataha country in the interests of the proposed branch railroad up
 that stream from Starbuck. While there a meeting of citizens was held
 and the depot grounds selected upon the company's land, one-half mile
 from Pomeroy. The people had offered $9 per ton for hauling grain to
 Portland, provided the road was built last season, but it was not
 thought likely that the company would demand more than the regular
 rate in such an event. It is thought that the graders on the Moscow
 branch will be transferred to the Pataha in October, and work on the
 road begun. The people of Garfield County need a road badly and we
 hope their efforts to obtain one will be rewarded."

The following telegram was received at Pomeroy Friday morning, October
16, 1885:

 "I am instructed to commence work on the Pataha branch as soon as
 possible, and will commence immediately.

  "H. S. ROWE."

 "Portland, October 15, 1885."

January 9, 1886, construction trains were running within nine miles of
Pomeroy; but track laying had ceased for some time past. Difficulty was
experienced in getting railroad iron to "the front" fast enough. On the
23rd the track had reached Pomeroy; the railroad "consummation devoutly
to be wished" was an accomplished fact. Here the road ceased; it was
never extended to Pataha City; Pomeroy became the terminus. November
14, 1885, the _East Washingtonian_ published the following:

 "It is a fact that it was only by the 'skin of the teeth' that the
 people of the county have been assured of the speedy construction
 of a railroad in our midst. Had not the order to build been given
 when it was it is not likely that it would have been given for two
 or three years. It was really against the interests of the Oregon
 Railroad & Navigation Company to build the Pataha road this fall.
 Here there was no threatened competition. It would have been much
 more to their interests to have built the Farmington road first,
 because the Northern Pacific is competing for the traffic, while here
 there is no opposition, and no probability of any. It was difficult
 to get money to build any road, and if the company had constructed
 the Farmington branch first, they would so far have exhausted their
 means that we might have had to wait for years for a road. It was a
 fortunate thing for our farmers that things took so favorable a turn.
 We have been assured that the guarantee for the right-of-way and
 depot grounds had much to do in bringing about this result. In fact,
 without this guarantee the road would not have been built, and we
 might have remained for a long time in the same helpless condition we
 have been in for years. It has cost something, and it will cost more
 to secure the right-of-way. A bond was given in the sum of $10,000 to
 secure the right-of-way and depot grounds. Had not a number of our
 citizens come forward and made this bond, there would not have been a
 stroke made on this road."

Thus that great need of transportation was met by co-operation of
railroad and people. It does not seem likely that the O. R. & N. Co.
would have suffered, even if they had met all the expense themselves.
Pomeroy has become one of the greatest original grain shipping points
in the state, which means in the world. In 1916 there were over a
million bushels shipped from the warehouses at Pomeroy.


RIVER IMPROVEMENT

The improvement of the rivers has always been of special interest
and importance to Garfield County. Immense quantities of grain are
produced in the fertile plains of the northern part of the county. To
much of that area the haul to Pomeroy is long and hard and the river
is the best resource. For about half the year Snake River is navigable
from Asotin to its mouth, and for nine or ten months, from Asotin to
Riparia. Steamers of the O. R. & N. Co. have plied regularly for many
years on this latter run, gathering up the wheat along the southern
shore and conveying it to Riparia whence it went by train to seaboard.
It is needless to observe that the railroad is not in business for
its health or for gratuitous service and with practically monopoly
conditions the freight tariffs were heavy. Hence it was clear that an
"Open River" to the sea was of vital importance. Garfield County has
therefore borne an active part in the systematic efforts to secure
Congressional appropriations for these purposes. In the Legislative
sessions of 1907 and 1909, a special effort was made for co-operation
by the State of Washington with the Federal Government for improvement
of Snake River, with the expectation that the Government would thereby
proceed more rapidly with the Celilo Canal, the key to the Open River.
Hon. J. R. Stevenson, representing Garfield County in the State
Senate, performed a most valuable service in securing appropriations
by the state looking to this co-operation. In the face of considerable
opposition from portions of the state not directly interested, Senator
Stevenson handled the situation with great skill and brought the
result to pass which had a decisive bearing upon the Government.
For following the successive appropriations by the Legislature the
Government, convinced of the need and of the wishes of the people,
proceeded to definite and continuous appropriations, culminating in the
Celilo Canal in 1915, as detailed in an earlier chapter. For this happy
result we are indebted largely to Senator Stevenson. In the House,
Hon. W. O. Long of Garfield was equally faithful to the wishes of his
constituents, though not in a committee position to exercise the same
power.

But the most unique feature of transportation on the rivers is the
system of running grain sacks from the highlands, 2,000 feet above sea
level, to the river, seven hundred feet or less, above the sea.

In the early '80s Paine Brothers of Walla Walla undertook to run wheat
down in a wooden chute and sack it below. This was found impracticable,
because of the friction. In 1887 and later a tramway with wooden rails
was built about opposite Wawaiwai. In 1891 a much better tramway was
built known as the Mayview Tramway, owned by a joint association of
farmers. After several accidents and some discouraging experiences
the enterprise passed into the hands of John Worum. Both tramways are
now owned by Max Houser of Portland. It was found that the chutes
either for grain in bulk or in sacks were not practicable on account
of friction. But the tramways, one of them using buckets and the other
cars, after some losses, have proved a great success. The cost of
operation is small, as the weight of the descending cars of buckets
lifts the empty ones, and a vast amount of grain is lowered by them to
the steamers. The tramway at Ilia handles about one hundred and fifty
thousand bushels annually, and the one at Mayview about two hundred and
fifty thousand.

The grain business, nearly equally divided in some years between wheat
and barley, but in recent times with much more wheat, has been the
leading source of income. Two large and well equipped mills, one at
Pataha and one at Pomeroy, furnish constant centers of activity. Both
these are owned by Houser. Mr. Fred Matthes is manager of the Pomeroy
Mill, and Wm. Houser of the Pataha Mill.


THE STOCK INTERESTS

While the grain business is now foremost, Garfield County started
as a stock country and even yet has important stock interests. A
valuable article on the stock interests by J. O. Long appeared in the
Pioneer Edition of the _Washingtonian_, and it is worthy of permanent
preservation. We insert it here:

"Stock raising was the first remunerative industry of Garfield County,
and the first settlers believed that stock raising would be the only
industry that would pay them best for their labor.

Parson Quinn was one of the first settlers. In 1862 he settled on the
place that Gilbert Dickson now owns, and started in the horse business.
Soon after William McEnnery, Frank and Archie McBrearty and others
settled along the lower Pataha and brought with them small bunches of
cattle.

J. M. Pomeroy settled where the city that bears his name now stands,
in 1864, and brought with him 140 head of cattle which he drove from
Salem, Oregon, over the Barlow route to The Dalles, and on up the
Columbia.

The Owsleys came in '68 and brought with them fifteen head of cattle
and a few horses.

Mack Tatman settled on the Tatman Gulch in 1869, and launched into the
cattle business. Newt. Estes, about this time, settled on the Deadman
and became the largest cattle owner in what is now Garfield County. All
of the early pioneers settled along the streams where they fed.

It was thought at that time that the hills you now see growing such
bountiful crops of wheat and barley were fit for nothing but grazing.
When we came, in 1873, they told us we couldn't raise anything on the
old Pataha Flat. In '73 we found the western portion of the county
well stocked with cattle and horses, but the eastern part was sparsely
settled, and there were very few cattle and horses.

At this time a few sheep were ranged, but in a few years the sheep men
began to come in--Charles Seeley, the Logans, Charles McCabe and, a
little later, J. H. Walker, but the sheep industry did not grow to any
great extent in this county. Cattle was the main industry up to '90,
when it began to decline.

From 1873 to 1880 the hills began to settle rapidly, the '70s bringing
such stock men as Tom Burlingame, the Buchets, Williams, Bentley,
Pings, Johnny Lynn, Brown and Wellers. Some of these men acquired large
herds. I have no way of knowing the number of stock when the industry
was at its zenith, but we had lots of cattle to drive and ship out.

The first buyer to come to Garfield County operated on the Tucanon,
near Marengo, about '76 or '77, and the price paid was fourteen to
sixteen dollars for two year old steers, and about eighteen to twenty
dollars for threes. They drove them East, taking one more years to make
the trip.

J. M. Pomeroy was the first to bring in good stock. In the bunch of 140
head were some of the best Shorthorns, or Durhams, as they were then
called, that ever came to this county. People bought and sold "Pomeroy
Durhams" for forty years. Perhaps a large portion of the readers will
remember the roan Shorthorns that Vannattan had on his place below
town, when he sold his ranch to Campbell & Sanford in 1902. They were
descendants of the Pomeroy roan Durhams. Perhaps the majority of the
people living here now do not realize what a stock county this was in
the '70s.

I remember in the summer of '75 or '76 Mr. William Cluster, my father
and myself, then a boy, came down the Benjamin Gulch to the Pataha
looking after our stock. We forded the creek about where the park is
now, and a little way from the creek stood a little log cabin, and in
the doorway stood Charles McCabe, then a young man. We inquired after
our brands and marks, and came on down the north side of the creek,
my father and Mr. Cluster riding along the road and I galloping back
and forth from bluff to creek, scaring the cattle out of the grass so
we could see the brands and marks. We took dinner with Mr. and Mrs.
Pomeroy in the old log cabin that stood for many years afterwards in
the lower part of town, and while we partook of fried trout and other
good things that the pioneer wives knew so well how to prepare the men
discussed the Roan Shorthorns.

To illustrate what grass we had here in those days, I will repeat what
Pearl Smith once said. He wanted to make a trip across the Snake River,
and he had heard so much about the Alpowa he decided to go that way.
He dropped down on the creek about where Vint. Gilbert's place is now
and went on down. When he returned he was asked what he thought of the
Alpowa, and said, 'Those hills reach from hell to heaven, with bunch
grass from top to bottom.'

Garfield County never contained very large stock owners. Newt. Estes
was cattle king with something like one thousand five hundred head.
J. H. Walker owned the largest band of horses, and George Gibson was
the largest sheep raiser. The Owsleys at one time owned 750 cattle and
a good many horses. Mack Tatman at one time had 400 or 500 head of
cattle, and Tom Burlingame 350.

In 1888 Mat Dixon, Moffat Williams and Dave Dixon bought and drove to
Pataha Flat 512 head of cattle. This was the first large importation of
cattle to this county.

About this time, or a few years before, most of the large holders
began to cut down their herds, and some quit entirely. Among them were
Melton, Freeman, Estes and Tatman, and, after a few years, Rafferty and
Bill Kelly practically quit.

The horse industry of the country did not take much change from cow
pony or cayuse till about 1880. A 1,000 pound horse was considered a
good one, and a horse that wore an eighteen inch collar was a large
one. Mr. Ford, who lived on the flat, bought a large Percheron, and
a year later Tucker bought a grade Clyde, and our horses began to
increase in size, and it wasn't long till the 1,000 pound horse and
the eighteen inch collar were things of the past. The draft horse is
here and as good as any county can boast of. We now have 6,581 taxable
horses.

We didn't raise many hogs till the railroad was built to Dayton. Prior
to that a few put up bacon and hauled it to Lewiston. After the road
reached Pomeroy people began to raise more hogs, and according to the
assessor's roll we have 5,254.

The sheep industry has held its own and we now have in the county
11,657, owned principally by Charles Dodge, Weller Live Stock Co.,
Clayton, Palmer, and J. O. Long. Part of the Palmer herd are assessed
in Asotin County. The farmers are now taking up sheep husbandry on
their own farms, and we look for sheep and hogs to increase, and horses
to hold their own. The cattle industry is still on the decline, as the
roll shows only 5,181 head milch cows included, and a thousand or more
were brought in to be fattened. As our pasture land increases in value
the people will discard the cow for the ewe and mare."


THUS MUCH FOR LIVE STOCK, AND NOW FOR SCHOOLS

The schools of any American community must always be accorded a place
of first importance. While our space does not permit extended details,
we must make mention of the beginnings in this vital feature of the
life of the county.

The first school seems to have been the Owsley School, five miles
below Pomeroy, built in 1872. At that time the children of the Pomeroy
family were the only ones in the future town to go to school. As other
families came in the need of another school was manifest, and a new
building was completed in 1879 on what subsequently became the home of
Mr. Benbow. That building was paid for by private subscription, Mr. B.
B. Day being the largest contributor. There were about fifty pupils in
that first Pomeroy School, and from the names the first families can be
noted, there being representatives of the Pomeroy, Heaton, Rew, Milan,
Potter, Hull, Dyer, James, Owsley and Benjamin families. Mr. and Mrs.
De Bow were the first teachers.

In 1873 the first school district on the Pataha Flat was organized by
a meeting of the settlers at the blacksmith shop belonging to George
Gill. The first teacher was William Butler. The pupils met first in a
little log cabin, but in 1874 a schoolhouse was built.

Such was the inauguration of the school system of Garfield County
and of Pomeroy. The first school in Pataha City was started in 1878
with twenty pupils and the first teacher was Mr. Ogleby. The limits
of space forbid us to do more than touch upon the chief stages of
subsequent growth. It may be said that several of the Pomeroy and
Pataha teachers have attained high rank in their profession in other
parts of the state, and that the school system of Pomeroy, including
the high school, has made an enviable reputation for breadth and
thoroughness of instruction. That condition in the chief town has had a
tonic effect upon the country schools. In 1889 the first considerable
school building in Pomeroy was erected at a cost of $10,000 and Mr.
Brown became first principal. Mr. Yerkes followed and under his
regime a high school with a three year course was established. The
principals following Mr. Yerkes were: J. A. Fertig, E. V. Kuykendall,
D. E. Schnebley, Walter Lingenfelter, H. C. Benbow, C. H. Knaff, A.
Kuykendall, R. R. Grant, and in the year 1910, the position of city
superintendent was created, with C. C. Ockerman as incumbent. He was
followed in 1912 by E. W. Collier who still holds the place. A large
addition to the school building was made in 1905, and in 1916 the
present elegant and well equipped high school building was opened.
Through the courtesy of Miss Belva Ball, county superintendent, we are
enabled to present the following data, covering the statistics of last
year both for the county and for Pomeroy.

There have been forty-five districts in the county, numbered
consecutively from one to forty-four. There is also Dist. 100 in
Pomeroy. Several numbers have dropped out, through reorganization.
These are Nos. 2, 15, 22, 25, 27, 30, 38 and 40.

No. 11 is Pomeroy. The teaching force in this district consists at the
present date of Prof. E. W. Collier, Jessie Campbell, Ella Fisk, Emma
Spenger, Charlotte Marshall, Mrs. Laura Davison, Gertrude Wilson, Dessa
M. King, Jennie Dean, C. B. Lindahl, Mabel Owen, H. C. Hayes, Marie
Schmidt, Brightie Considine, A. S. Kubitz, Mamie McCoy.

The total assessed valuation of the county by current report is
$4,192,340. That of the school property, including grounds, buildings,
and equipment, is $370,240.

The total school enrollment is 1,074, the school census is 1,339. The
enrollment of the Pomeroy High School is 120. This is an accredited
school. The school at Pataha has one year high school work. The total
number of teachers in the county is fifty-five.


TOWNS OF GARFIELD COUNTY

From the foregoing glances at the history of the county we turn to
that of the towns. Although, as we have seen, a number of towns were
founded, having county seat ambitions and great expectations, only two
were incorporated, Pomeroy and Pataha City, and of these the latter
surrendered its charter, and hence Pomeroy is the only place that
maintains a corporate existence.

By the courtesy of the _East Washingtonian_ we gather the following
data about the founding of Pomeroy.

"The idea of converting his property here into a city first occurred
to Mr. Pomeroy and took definite shape in 1877. At this time William
C. Potter came with some money and induced Mr. Pomeroy to join him
in a flouring mill enterprise to be operated by power furnished by
water from the Pataha Creek. To this project Mr. Pomeroy contributed
liberally and the mill was built and the town started.

"The townsite plat of Pomeroy was filed for record May 28, 1878.
Those who platted the town were Joseph M. Pomeroy, Martha J. Pomeroy,
Benjamin B. Day and Minnie A. Day. It is located on the east half of
the south half of the southwest quarter of section 31, and the west
half of the south half of the southeast quarter of section 31, in
township 12 north, range 42 east.

"Additions since that time: Wilson's by E. T. Wilson and J. M. Pomeroy,
June 13, 1882.

"Day's by Minnie A. Day and B. B. Day, August 12, 1882.

"Pomeroy's, by Martha J. St. George and William S. Day, September 20,
1881.

"Mulkey's, by Logan P. Mulkey and Charles J. Mulkey, November 14, 1882.

"Darby's, by Walter L. Darby, August 14, 1884.

"Depot, by the Columbia Valley Land & Investment Company, April 30,
1886.

"Potter's, by William C. Potter, August 25, 1887.

"E. M. Pomeroy's, by E. M. Pomeroy, November 28, 1892.

"Crystal Spring, by S. G. Cosgrove, July 28, 1902.

"Highland, by H. C. Benbow and E. V. Kuykendall, July 9, 1902.

"Stephens', by Frank C. Stephens, March 29, 1904.

"The growth of Pomeroy continued to be particularly rapid. In March,
1879, we find the following business houses in the pretty little town:
B. B. Day, general merchandise, and grist mill; Mulkey Brothers,
hardware and tinware; Frary & Williams, drug store; G. A. Sawyer,
Pomeroy Hotel; Calaway Brothers, livery stable; Scholl Brothers,
brewery.

"The first meeting of the Pomeroy common council was held Wednesday,
February 10, 1886. The officers named in the charter were J. M.
Pomeroy, mayor; and C. B. Foote, John Brady, W. J. Schmidt, R. A. Rew
and Jay Lynch, councilmen. At the first meeting, however, R. A. Rew
tendered his resignation and S. G. Cosgrove was appointed in his place.
Frank E. Williamson was selected by the council as city recorder. At
the second meeting February 11, Mr. Williamson tendered his resignation
as clerk. The following officers were appointed by the city council at
this meeting: Recorder, C. H. DeBow; attorney, M. F. Gose; justice of
the peace, W. S. Newland; marshal, G. D. Gibson.

"The initial city election held in Pomeroy was on Monday, July 12th.
Officers appointed for the supervision of the election were D. C.
Gardner and David Dixon, judges; W. S. Newland, inspector, and I. C.
Sanford and Frank Jackson, clerks. There were two tickets in the field,
the People's ticket, with Elmon Scott for mayor; John Brady, William J.
Schmidt, George Gibson, David Dixon and Dirk Zemel, for councilmen, and
the Citizens' ticket with M. F. Gose for mayor, and C. A. McCabe, D. C.
Gardner, S. K. Hull, Jay Lynch and R. B. Porter for councilmen. There
were cast 218 votes with the following result. Mayor, Elmon Scott,
seventeen majority; councilmen John Brady, C. A. McCabe, D. C. Gardner,
S. K. Hull and Jay Lynch.

"In August, 1887, the leading citizens of Pomeroy filed articles with
the county auditor incorporating the 'Pomeroy Improvement Company.'
The object of this organization was to improve the town. The original
capital stock was $15,000 with the privilege of increasing this to
$25,000. Forty per cent was paid in at its inception. Following were
the officers and stockholders: G. B. Kuykendall, president; S. G.
Crandall, vice president; W. F. Noffsinger, secretary; T. Driscoll,
treasurer; C. A. McCabe, H. C. Thompson, C. H. Seeley, trustees. The
stockholders were C. A. McCabe, S. G. Crandall, M. F. Gose, F. W. D.
Mays, J. M. Hunt, Charles Kinzie, W. S. Parker, F. E. Williamson, G.
W. Black, J. G. Hughes, T. Driscoll, H. C. Thompson, W. N. Noffsinger,
John Brady, G. B. Kuykendall, John Rehorn, Charles H. Seeley, G.
L. Campbell, Elmon Scott, R. L. Rush, W. J. Schmidt, Herman H.
Schlotfeldt, H. Darby, J. A. Darby, and W. L. Darby.

"The permanent organization of the Pomeroy Fire Department was effected
at a meeting of citizens held July 23, 1887. A constitution and by-laws
were adopted and the following officers elected: M. F. Gose, president;
J. M. Hunt, vice president; C. H. Seeley, treasurer; J. W. Rafferty,
secretary; John Rehorn, foreman; H. St. George, first assistant;
Charles Kinzie, second assistant. The enrolled membership was over
thirty. Late in that year the department purchased a hook and ladder
truck and a hose cart.

"The first brick building in the City of Pomeroy was erected in the
fall of 1887. This was the First National Bank of Pomeroy; the cost
was $20,000. This was followed by the Seeley block, which, while less
costly, was not inferior in point of architectural beauty to the bank
building.

"The first conflagration of importance following the organization of
the fire department in 1887 attacked Pomeroy Thursday morning, February
6, 1890. The fire broke out near the dividing wall between J. H. Hagy's
boot and shoe shop and the dry goods store belonging to S. Kasper on
Main Street.

"In October, 1890, Company H National Guard of Washington was mustered
into service.

"There were forty-three men in line; officers were: Captain, Harry St.
George; first lieutenant, Elmer R. Brady; second lieutenant, J. W.
Murphy. The company was mustered on October 2d, by Captain Wise, of
Goldendale.

"The greatest fire known in the history of the town occurred July 18,
1890, when the business portion of the town east of Third Street was
swept away. The Garfield County Courthouse was destroyed entailing a
public loss of $10,000.

"In 1898 the City of Pomeroy had a population of 1,500, and the volume
of business done was estimated at one million dollars annually."

During all the time from the establishment of the city, it remained
under the Territorial charter of 1886. But on May 28, 1917, an election
was held for the purpose of voting upon a new charter. It had become
plain that the old charter was no longer adapted to the growing city
and hence the change was made by general consent. A primary election
for officers for the new government was held on July 30th, and on
August 27th, the election took place. As a result of this election the
city government under the new charter was duly inaugurated.

With the officers of the new government it is fitting that those of
the outgoing be named. They were as follows: Mayor, Fred Matthes;
councilmen, C. S. Black, W. A. DeBow, O. S. Williamson, D. E. Smith,
and R. Hender. Clerk, Harry St. George. The officers under the new
government are: Mayor, C. E. Kuykendall; councilmen, first ward, W. F.
Taylor, George Engleson; second ward, B. Y. Rainey, J. D. Lyon; third
ward, J. O. Long; fourth ward, F. M. Robinson; councilman at large, H.
B. Henley; city attorney, A. G. Farley; city treasurer, W. B. Morris;
city clerk, D. A. Taylor.


HISTORY OF BUSINESS HOUSES

We find in the special number of the _East Washingtonian_ so valuable
a resume of the history of business houses of Pomeroy, including
reference to Pataha, that we add it to the excerpts which we have the
privilege to use.

This is by a man peculiarly qualified to write, J. J. McGrath, written
in the year 1914:

"The leading general merchandise stores here twenty-seven years ago
were Brady and Rush, B. Cohn & Co. and Ben Hirsch & Co. The leading
grocery was Dirk Zemel; hardware, H. Darby & Sons; jewelry, McCabe &
Whitcomb; shoe store, J. H. Hagy; furniture, Vassar & Sacknitz; bakery,
George Eller; harness, C. Ed Moore and W. W. Swank; drug stores,
Central Drug Store and I. C. Sanford & Co.

"There were a few smaller stores, among them being Doctor Storey's
second-hand store and dental parlor.

"Soon after this Ben Hirsch closed out and S. Kasper opened a store.

"On September 1, 1887, I entered the employment of E. L. Hemingway, at
Ilia, who conducted a general merchandise store, and grain warehouse.
Mr. Hemingway established these houses some years before the railroad
was built to Pomeroy, and did a large business, people from miles
around coming to Ilia to trade. Many came fifteen and eighteen miles
to purchase their supplies at the Hemingway store. There are but few
people living in the county that were customers of the Hemingway store
in 1889.

"Two years later I became connected with the store of B. Cohn & Co., of
Pomeroy. In 1892 we incorporated the Pomeroy Mercantile Company, and
purchased the merchandise from B. Cohn & Co. The first stockholders
were B. Cohn, C. H. Seeley, M. F. Gose, G. L. Campbell, P. O. Seeley,
M. A. Dunham, J. A. Strain, D. B. Williams and J. J. McGrath.

"Many pioneers will remember some of the stockholders with pleasure.
Some have been very successful in the financial world. In 1912 the
Mercantile Company purchased the stock, fixtures and real estate from
the Pomeroy Mercantile Company. The stockholders of the new company
are C. H. Seeley, R. E. Allen, J. F. Burr, Mrs. J. B. Warren and J. J.
McGrath.

"The firm of Brady & Rush changed to R. L. Rush & Co. in 1890, F. J.
Elsensohn and J. B. Brady becoming junior members. Later R. L. Rush
sold his interest to his partners and took the presidency of the
Pomeroy State Bank, and the firm name was changed to Brady & Elsensohn
until J. B. Brady sold his interest to F. J. Elsensohn. Mr. Elsensohn
continued the business under his own name until he incorporated the
Fred J. Elsensohn Co. Two years later he sold the business to J. N.
Cardwell & Sons, who consolidated it with their business.

"E. W. Wilson and Mrs. M. Gibson came here in November, 1879, and
opened a store in the Dirk Zemel Building. A year later fire and water
nearly destroyed their stock, and the remainder was sold to D. Zemel.

"Dirk Zemel's grocery store was purchased by Allen & Adams in 1890.
This firm came here from Pataha City and opened a store, later
purchasing the Zemel store and consolidating them. Mr. Adams is
now conducting the grocery store. Mr. Allen is vice president and
stockholder in the Mercantile Company.

"About twenty-two years ago, C. H. Mowrey, with A. L. Darby, purchased
the hardware business of H. Darby & Sons, and formed a partnership
under the name of Darby & Mowrey, which business they have successfully
conducted up to the present time.

"In the jewelry business, both C. A. McCabe and L. J. Whitcomb are
dead. Both will be remembered by all old-timers as kind-hearted, honest
men. In the last ten years two new jewelry stores have taken their
place--L. T. Christopherson and George Simenstad, owners. Both carry
large and up-to-date stocks.

"J. H. Hagy sold his shoe store about ten years ago to Powell & Taylor.
Later Mr. Powell sold his interest to Taylor Bros., and later D. A.
Taylor assumed management of the store and his brother opened a store
at Pasco.

"Sacknitz purchased the furniture business from Vassar, and the latter
moved away for a time, returning and opening a store under the name of
Williamson & Vassar, and later Vassar & Son, who are now conducting the
furniture and undertaking business.

"The Central Drug Store, owned and operated by Doctor Kuykendall, was
purchased by his son, C. E. Kuykendall, about ten years ago. He is
doing business where his father did twenty-seven years ago. The East
End Drug Store was sold by I. C. Sanford & Co. to Doctor Black & Son,
and later to M. A. Black. Now it is owned by Crump & Dill.

"In 1892 L. F. Koenig sold his interest in the business conducted
under the name of Koenig & Bournhouser, in Pataha, and, with O. S.
Williamson, opened a store here under the name of L. F. Koenig & Co.
This store has been very successful and is operated today under the
above name, with E. J. Williamson associated with them.

"J. N. Cardwell & Sons opened a general merchandise store here sixteen
years ago, and later purchased the merchandise stock from Fred J.
Elsensohn Co., and consolidated the two stores.

"In the spring of 1890, J. S. Thomas, J. S. Davis and H. M. Hathaway
organized a hardware store under the name of J. S. Davis & Co. Later
the business was purchased by R. E. Wills, C. P. Gammon and J. R.
Stevenson, under the name of C. P. Gammon & Co., and later Wills &
Stevenson. About fifteen years ago Mr. Stevenson bought Mr. Wills'
interest in the business and has since conducted it very successfully.

"In 1890 C. A. Lundy and E. M. Rauch incorporated under the name of C.
A. Lundy & Co., and opened a grain and real estate business. Later they
dissolved the corporation and Mr. Lundy moved to Lewiston. Mr. Rauch
then opened a hardware and implement house, which business he conducts
at present.

"About fifteen years ago Mr. J. P. Ford, who at one time previous
had been manager for an implement house here, returned and formed a
partnership with J. R. Stevenson and opened an implement house. Later
he purchased his partner's interest and conducted a very successful
business. He sold to Morris & Tewalt, later Mr. Morris purchased the
interest of Mr. Tewalt, and became sole owner. He has since enlarged
the business, adding furniture and hardware in connection with the
implement business. Later he purchased the stock of the Pomeroy
Implement Co.

"About twelve years ago Ward & Meyers bought the hardware business of
James Hazelton, and a short time afterwards took in T. B. McKeirnan and
conducted two stores. Mr. Ward sold his interest to Mr. Meyers, and
later the business was purchased by R. J. McKeirnan, J. C. McKeirnan,
B. L. Keatts and W. L. Meyers, and implements and hardware were added.
Later R. J. McKeirnan bought Mr. Meyers' interest. W. L. Meyers then
opened a new harness store.

"About fifteen years ago H. Wenning opened a bakery and grocery, and
conducted it until two years ago, when he sold to S. L. Nicholson, who
has since managed it.

"A number of pioneers in business not mentioned in the above, who sold
their stores and moved away were: Foote & Hull, who were among the
earliest business men; George Eller, Hayden Gearhardt, J. D. Tyrell,
DeBow, Pomeroy Hardware & Implement Co."


PATAHA CITY

From Pomeroy we turn to its one time rival, three miles up the valley.
Pataha City was laid out in 1878 by Angevine J. Favor. In 1882 W. W.
Rigsby added to the townsite the tract known as Rigsby's addition.
A. F. Beal made the survey of the new town. It was at first called
"Favorsburg" and afterwards "Watertown." One of the most important
events was the sale of a water right for a flour mill from a large
spring south of the town by Cassander Woolery to J. M. Bowman and
George Snyder. This was subsequently acquired by John Houser and became
one of the most important mill properties in the state.

The Charter of Pataha City was granted by Judge W. G. Langford on April
3, 1888. As indicating the established residents of the town the list
of those petitioning for the charter possesses historical interest: J.
H. Walker, A. J. Favor, G. D. Wilson, John Harford, John Houser, H. B.
Ferguson, W. J. Wills, B. Steele, H. L. Caples, Thomas Cunningham, C.
A. Lundy, Robert Gammon, J. S. Dennison, A. McQueen, W. B. Wetzel, A.
E. Allen, T. W. Shannon, Elmer Sage, R. M. Smith, Peter Cook, H. C.
Krouse, H. Lanning, L. F. Koenig, R. Bornhouser, Charles Ward.

The first meeting of the board of trustees of Pataha was held in
Harford & Son's bank, on April 12, 1888. John Harford was mayor, and
the councilmen were: John Houser, A. J. Favor, J. H. Walker and G. D.
Wilson. H. B. Ferguson was clerk of the board. H. C. Krouse was the
city marshal, E. D. Briggs superintendent of streets, and E. C. Harford
treasurer.

One of the bitterest contests ever held in Pataha was over the question
of prohibition. There was an election under the local option law in
June, 1886. In the issue of the _East Washingtonian_ of July 3d, there
is a very grave charge against the judges of election, in effect
that they allowed foul play with the ballot boxes during the noon
recess, as a result of which eighty-two "wet" ballots were deposited
in a bunch. It was matter of common knowledge that the "drys" were
in a majority in the town, and so extraordinary a result could not
fail to excite suspicion. The effort in the interest of the "wets"
was unavailing and the entire county finally became dry. On April 7,
1893, a great catastrophe befell the town, for on that day came a fire
which destroyed the larger part of the business portion. That was in
the very hardest part of the "hard times." The year 1894 was indeed
a black year, worse for Garfield County than for Walla Walla and
Columbia, for they, being older, had more accumulations to fall back
on. Wheat was bringing only 25 or 30 cents a bushel, and a good part
of the crop of 1893 had been destroyed by continued rain. In 1894 came
the "Great Flood," railroad strikes, bank failures and general chaos
in the business world. Among other banks, that of Harford & Son at
Pataha closed its doors. Pataha was manifestly on the down grade as a
town. It was and is a beautiful and fertile spot and is now fulfilling
its mission in the world as a central point of farming production. In
April 10, 1911, the question of disincorporation was submitted to vote
and by nearly a unanimous decision the charter was surrendered and
Pataha ceased to be an incorporation. The business men mainly moved to
Pomeroy or elsewhere and the Houser Mill alone remained in undiminished
vitality.

The churches of Garfield County and Pomeroy are entitled to a place in
any historic review.

The first church organization in the county seems to have been effected
in 1878, by Father Peter Paaps, of the Catholic Church on land donated
by J. M. Pomeroy and C. A. McCabe. This church has been maintained
to this day, and with it a parochial school, conducted at present by
the Benedictine Sisters. The present pastor of the Catholic Church is
Father Peter Taufen.

The first Methodist preacher in Garfield County was Rev. George W.
Kennedy, already spoken of in the chapter on Columbia County. He first
came in 1874. Then a year later came Rev. A. J. Joslyn, whose home
was in Dayton. There was no church organized as yet. In 1878 Rev. C.
E. Rigsby established preaching places at a number of points, the
schoolhouses or private residences furnishing meeting places. Two years
later Rev. D. E. George took up the work, and he is remembered as a
typical pioneer preacher. The first Methodist Church in Pomeroy was
built in 1884 during the pastorate of Rev. W. T. Koontz. A number of
pastors followed, the last of whom was Rev. A. Monroe. During his time
a parsonage was built.

The first Baptist Church was organized on June 3, 1888, by Rev. J. H.
Teale, then general missionary for Eastern Washington and Northern
Idaho. Rev. S. E. Stearns became the first pastor. The church building
was erected in 1895, being dedicated on March 29, 1895, by Rev. A. M.
Allyn. Rev. John Cashman was pastor during that period. During the
pastorate of Rev. W. E. Sawyer the parsonage was erected. Rev. C. S.
Treadwell was pastor from March, 1912, to April, 1914. The church has
not a settled pastor at the date of this publication.

Turning to the Christian Church, we find that the first services
in the name of that fellowship were conducted in 1886 by Principal
Wolverton of the Dayton schools. On November 20, 1887, "Brother" J. B.
Daisley organized a church of twenty-five members. Like other early
congregations they held services in store buildings, schoolhouses,
courthouse, or almost any available shelter. In 1889, a house of
worship was erected on a lot donated by Gilbert Dickson, and this was
dedicated by "Brother" N. B. Alley in that year. The present pastor is
Rev. R. Tibbs Maxey.

[Illustration: PICKING GRAPES, AUGERMAYLE PLACE, CLARKSTON]

[Illustration: GRAPE-GROWING (AND GIRL-GROWING) AT CLARKSTON]

A Seventh Day Adventist organization was effected by Elders Van Horn
and Raymond as the outcome of tent meetings conducted by them on the
Moses Hunt ranch on Pataha Flat in 1881. In 1902 the organization
was removed to Pomeroy, and the next year a building was erected.
Occasional church services and regular Sunday School sessions have been
maintained, though there is no settled pastor.

The history of the Episcopal Church calls up the names of two of the
great figures in the pioneer life of that church, Bishop L. H. Wells
and Bishop Paddock. Bishop Wells held services in the old Owsley
schoolhouse in 1873. At that time the only member of that church
in the whole country was Clara Pomeroy, daughter of J. M. Pomeroy,
subsequently Mrs. E. T. Wilson, now living in Tacoma. It is recalled by
members of the family that the girl's tuition at St. Paul's School in
Walla Walla, of which she was an attendant, was paid by cattle on the
range, and that Bishop Wells would go up occasionally to look over his
herd, and on such occasions he would preach in the schoolhouse.

Bishop Paddock gave $500 for a building and Bishop Wells raised $1,000
more, and in 1882 a church building was erected. At the present date
Rev. John Leacher is pastor.

The Congregational Church in Garfield County, was organized at Pataha
in 1890 by the coming of Rev. John Nichols, one of the "Yale Band,"
of which President Penrose of Whitman College was another. The church
was active and a great center of light and stimulation to intellectual
and social life for some years. The Harford, Houser, Reynolds, Wills,
Rigsby, McCanse, and other leading families of Pataha joined with the
pastor to make the church a great force in the whole region. With
the decline of Pataha and the retirement of Mr. Nichols the church
activities ceased, and the Congregationalists centered their interests
on the church at Pomeroy. That was organized on March 15, 1903, by Rev.
D. H. Reid. The building of the Cumberland Presbyterian Church was
purchased. Rev. Edward Owens became the first pastor. In 1913 Rev. John
M. Huggins became settled in that church, and is pastor at this date.


FRATERNAL ORDERS

The fraternal orders are duly represented in Pomeroy. The Masons
are represented by the Evening Star Lodge, No. 30, which received
a dispensation in 1879. In 1886, a Royal Arch Chapter was duly
established.

The Harmony Lodge, No. 16, of the Odd Fellows was granted a
dispensation March 29, 1879, and was organized in the May following.

The Fairview Camp, No. 119, of the Woodmen of the World, dates its
beginnings to July 5, 1892. There is also an auxiliary, the Women of
Woodcraft, organized soon after the beginning of Fairview Camp.

The Knights of Pythias have a strong organization at Pomeroy, known
as Garfield Lodge No. 25. It unites with the Masons and Odd Fellows
in the ownership of Union Lodge Hall, a commodious and attractive
building, the joint ownership of which is an interesting feature of the
fraternity life of Pomeroy.

There is also a lodge of Rebekahs, known as Faith Rebekah Lodge,
organized on May 25, 1888.

The Modern Woodmen and the Foresters of America have organizations in
Pomeroy.

The Women's Christian Temperance Union organization was effected
on June 18, 1884. It has been to this day a powerful influence for
good, not alone in the line of temperance, but in many directions of
community betterment. A free reading room is maintained, a most worthy
agency for good.

Perhaps the most unique and practically efficient organization in the
whole City of Pomeroy is the Women's Civic Club. This was organized
under the leadership of Mrs. Frank Cardwell, as a specific means of
public betterment. The installation of drinking fountains, cluster
lights, clean-up days and instrumentalities, and park improvements, are
to be attributed to this admirable organization.

Worthy of special respect is the post of the Grand Army of the
Republic. It is known as McDowell Post, G. A. R.

The post was mustered in by Captain Smith of Vancouver on April 23,
1885, with the following list of officers and high privates:

S. G. Cosgrove. P. C.; B. B. Day, S. V. C.; J. W. Hardin, J. V. C.; J.
S. Waldrup, surgeon; Henry C. Thompson, chaplain; D. C. Gardner, Q.
M.; James Palmer. O. D.; Charles Lakin, O. G.; J. M. Sawyer, adjutant;
Frank Elliott, S. M.; W. C. Potter, Q. M. S.; David Riley, L. M.
Hoffeditz, Frank Geiger, W. G. S. Ginger, Cyrus D. Burt, J. P. Finch,
B. Talmage. Only one of the charter members, Henry C. Thompson, now
resides in Garfield County.

The charter was signed by Department Commander A. Morrow of Vancouver.

The post looks with pride to the monument erected on the courthouse
square at a cost of $930. This monument was placed in 1904. Money
was raised by a large list of donors, both comrades and their loyal
friends, contributing. It was unveiled on the 4th day of July, 1904,
in the presence of a large concourse of people from all over Garfield
County, besides a number from adjoining counties.


FARMERS' UNION

Garfield County being exclusively a farming community, the Farmers'
Union is naturally a powerful organization. In its officers and
membership are found many of the most influential farmers of the
county, and in view of the fact that our story has necessarily dealt
largely with the chief town of the county, it seems just to end this
portion of the chapter with a more extended view of the Farmers' Union
than we have given to the fraternal orders of the city. We therefore
again take advantage of the courtesy of the _East Washingtonian_ by
including here an article prepared for its special number by C. W.
Cotton.

"Pomeroy Local, No. 10: This local was organized May 4, 1907, by H. D.
Cox of Prescott, Wash., with fifteen charter members and the following
officers: Chris Brockman, president; H. C. Thompson, vice president;
William J. Schmidt, secretary-treasurer; Peter Herke, chaplain; John W.
Oliver, conductor; Frank Rach, doorkeeper.

"The present membership numbers 130 and are collectively worth about
two million dollars.

"The present officers are: James Oliver, president; William Gammon,
vice president; William J. Schmidt, secretary-treasurer; J. W. Ball,
chaplain; R. W. G. Mast, conductor; Henry Miller, doorkeeper; and Peter
McClung, W. A. DeBow and D. B. Williams, executive board.

"As its work shows, No. 10 is one of the successful locals, its
officers efficient and up-to-date--its secretary ranking with the
best in the state. Its members own about 200 shares ($10 each) in the
Tri-State Terminal Warehouse Company.

"The Pomeroy local organized a warehouse company in June, 1908, with
thirty-two stockholders, capital stock, $6,350, divided into 127 shares
of $50 each. All the stock was sold by June, 1909, and will have paid
for itself in dividends during the first six years of its existence.

"This company built a warehouse, 50 x 450 feet, with a capacity of
200,000 bushels. This warehouse has stored the grain of the members
and corrected many abuses of the grain storage business of Pomeroy,
materially reduced the price of handling sacks, coal, posts, etc., and
in a general way has been a benefit to every farmer in Garfield County.

"The Pomeroy Farmers' Union Warehouse Company's first officers were:
William Gammon, president; James Oliver, vice president; William J.
Schmidt, secretary; D. B. Williams, treasurer; Ed Lubkins, manager.
Trustees: William Gammon, D. B. Williams, James Oliver, William J.
Schmidt and J. M. Robinson. The present officers are: William Gammon,
president; W. J. Schmidt, vice president; W. A. DeBow, secretary and
manager, and D. B. Williams, treasurer.

"Mayview Local, No. 4: This local, the fourth to be given a charter
in the State of Washington, was organized by Mr. Cox on May 13,
1907, with twenty-three charter members and the following officers:
W. A. DeBow, president; T. E. Tueth, vice president; C. W. Cotton,
secretary-treasurer; J. D. Lyon, chaplain; Arthur Ruark, conductor;
and Ed Taylor, doorkeeper. Several of these have been continuously
re-elected.

"The membership has increased to sixty, though a number have moved away
and death has taken five of our brothers--Ed and Bert Leachman, Eph
Hess, Charley Ruark and Roy Wade.

"The present officers are: T. E. Tueth, president; A. L. Shelton, vice
president; C. W. Cotton, secretary-treasurer; C. E. Watson, chaplain;
J. F. Dyche, conductor; and Ed Taylor, doorkeeper. Executive board:
J. H. Lambie, C. H. Bishop, E. R. Schneckloth, C. W. Cotton and T. E.
Tueth.

"The Mayview local has always taken an active part in union work and
for two years furnished one of the five members of the state board.

"In January, 1910, it appealed to the O. R. & N. Co. to build a
downtown depot in Pomeroy, without success. Later the appeal was sent
to the state railroad commission. An investigation was promised which
resulted in the present centrally located depot.

"In 1911 it successfully conducted a trial against the Mayview Tramway
Company before the State Public Service Commission.

"In January, 1914, the United States Department of Justice was induced
to begin an investigation of the alleged grain bag trust on the Pacific
Coast. If this investigation has been thorough it will be some time
before grain bags will sell again at 'two for a quarter.'

"It favored the establishment of the paper, _Pacific Farmers' Union_,
bought ten shares of stock, and for quite a while held the highest
per cent of subscribers among its members. It was among the first to
advocate a national union paper.

"The Mayview local owns about 100 shares in the Tri-State Terminal
Warehouse Company and some of its members have profitably shipped their
grain there.

"Ever since its organization it has bought grain bags, fuel, fence
posts, etc., at a material reduction, and has contracted with the
Tri-State Terminal Company for 93,000 grain bags for this year at a
price believed to be the best ever given to the farmers of Garfield
County.

"Central Local, No. 145: This local was organized by the writer,
assisted by T. E. Tueth, January 7, 1911, with fifteen charter members
and the following officers: S. Bratcher, president; J. H. Morris, vice
president; C. T. Castle, secretary-treasurer; John Daisley, chaplain;
J. E. Tueth, conductor; and J. W. Bly, doorkeeper. Other members: W.
H. Keith, J. A. Brown, J. S. Tucker, Dennis Porter, W. B. Brown, Henry
Lynn, Frank Lynn, Hattie Bratcher, and Harriet E. Bly. This local has
kept up its membership and J. E. Tueth is now secretary-treasurer."


THE PRESS OF GARFIELD COUNTY

We have already given a view of the earliest newspapers of what is now
Garfield County, founded prior to county division. For the sake of
clearness we here name them again, with the date of each:

The _Washington Independent_ was founded April 12, 1880, by F. W. D.
Mays; the _Pataha Spirit_ in January, 1881, by G. C. W. Hammond; and
the _Pomeroy Republican_ had its first number March 4, 1882, founded by
E. T. Wilson. The _Republican_ was practically continued by the _East
Washingtonian_, to which we have frequently referred and which has the
distinction of longer continuance under one management than any other
paper in Old Walla Walla County, with the exception of the _Columbia
Chronicle_ under R. E. Peabody.

Peter McClung, the present proprietor of the _Washingtonian_, after
having been for several years an employee, became joint owner with E.
M. Pomeroy in 1889, and in 1893 he became sole proprietor. In 1915 a
corporation was formed of Peter McClung and Ray McClung. As a unique
feature of this incorporation, and for the sake of creating something
like a community paper, a hundred stockholders, the leading men of
the town, have small shares in the enterprise. In this, as in its
excellent news service and the force and cogency of its editorials, the
_Washingtonian_ ranks very high among weekly papers.

Mr. McClung tells us that many attempts at founding newspapers were
made during the early history of the county. There were some eight
or ten newspaper funerals during those early days. Most of them
departed _sine die_. Two, the _Pataha Farmer_ and the _Garfield County
Standard_, were absorbed by the _Washingtonian_.

The files of the _Republican_ of 1882 tempt to larger extracts than
we have space for. In the advertising columns we find the following
lawyers' cards: A. T. Heavilon, Frank H. Brown, J. H. Lister, J. B.
Lister.

R. P. Steen calls attention to the Pomeroy Planing Mill. The doctors
are represented by J. C. Andrews and J. H. Kennedy. B. B. Day
advertises the Pomeroy Flour Mill. That mill was owned by J. H.
Abbott, the pioneer stage line manager of Walla Walla. The mill was
subsequently burned. Mr. Day also had the first store, sold to Brady
and Rush. The St. George Hotel appears, managed by Harry St. George,
still a leader in the affairs of Pomeroy. The sawmill of Jay Lynch
at Iron Springs appears in the columns. We find also saw mills owned
by E. G. Teale and E. Stephens and shingle mill by G. W. Bear on
Pataha Flat. Mention is made of the ferry of J. J. Kanawyer across
Snake River at Asotin. In the issue of March 18, 1882, is a somewhat
vehement discussion of the "Garfield County county-seat contest," with
the Walla Walla _Union_. It appears that the _Union_ had spoken with
some contempt of the fuss and of the criticism of Judge Wingard for
his technical decision. It avers that the expense was only $65.15. The
tone of the article roused the ire of the _Republican_ and it declares
that it had cost $4,607.10, besides interest. In the same number is the
school report, from which it appears that there were 1,198 pupils in
twenty-five districts. That was at the time when Asotin was part of the
county.

On July 15, 1882, we find an item to the effect that William Stephens
had sold lot 1, block 8, to Doctor Kuykendall and R. E. Butler for
$1,000.

In the number of November 11, 1882, is a very interesting item to the
effect that Captain Lewis of Asotin had a limekiln two miles below the
mouth of Grande Ronde River, and that he had stored there 250 barrels
of lime. He anticipated getting out 1,200 barrels the next year. The
statement is made that there is a fine ledge of marble near the same
place.

In concluding this too brief view of the interesting and important
history of Garfield County we are impressed with the thought that if we
were to select the especially unique feature of that history it would
be found in the fact that this county, one of the small counties of the
state and one of the newer ones, has had a remarkable list of men who
have risen to prominence in the affairs of the state or of the country.
It is quite remarkable to give even a partial list of such character.
Two judges of the supreme court of the state, Elmon Scott and Mack
Gose, went from Pomeroy. Governor Cosgrove was for many years a citizen
of the same place. The greatest individual grain dealer in the United
States, it is even said now the greatest in the world, Max Houser of
Portland, was born and raised at Pataha. He is now said to be six times
a millionaire. Recently he has invested $250,000 in Liberty bonds, and
upon his appointment by President Wilson as grain commissioner of the
North Pacific Coast, he decided to devote the entire profits of his
grain business to the Red Cross. Other business men of great note, as
John Davis of Seattle, Frank Williams of Toppenish, and C. G. Austin
of Seattle, had their start in Garfield County. Jay Lynch, one of the
leaders in early history in this county, subsequently became for many
years the Federal agent at the Simcoe Reservation, where he made a
great record for the wisdom and justice of his dealing with the Indians.

The members of the Legislature from Garfield have exercised an
influence in general legislation far beyond the proportionate size of
the county. An instance may be found in the prominent part played by
Senator J. R. Stevenson in the Open River movement.

Every one in Pomeroy would think at once of Dr. G. B. Kuykendall as
a character entirely out of the ordinary. Besides being a "beloved
physician," he has been one of the foremost investigators of history
and of Indian myths and character, and has a high order of literary
ability such as has given him a special place in the state.

Among local features of distinctive interest and character, we may
note those which we have already enumerated; the peculiar community
ownership system upon which the _East Washingtonian_ rests, and the
Women's Civic Club with all its municipal betterments, not indeed
unknown in other towns, for the women of all our towns play a great
part in improvement, but apparently carried to a higher degree of
efficiency than can be found in other places of the size of Pomeroy.

Sum it all up, and we may say that the people of Garfield County, a
genuine red-blooded American community, ambitious, progressive, and
enterprising, set a good example to all their neighbors.


GARFIELD COUNTY PIONEER ASSOCIATION


The Garfield County Pioneer Association was organized July 11, 1909.

First officers were as follows:

  Mrs. Ella A. DeBow, president.
  Secretary, Frank V. Messenger.
  Treasurer, Mrs. Addie M. McClung.
  There were in addition several vice presidents to represent different
    sections of the county.

Officers for the past four years:

  W. L. Howell, president.
  G. B. Kuykendall, secretary.
  L. F. Koenig, treasurer and financial secretary.
  Vice presidents to represent different parts of the country around.

As an organization which has performed a great function in creating
interest in local history and which has done much to preserve early
records, the Garfield County Pioneer Association is worthy of special
recognition. The association maintains a two days' session each year,
and for conspicuous service in the fields upon which this history and
others like it must rely, it is fitting that special mention be made of
it in closing this chapter.




CHAPTER IV

ASOTIN COUNTY


We have described the topography and climate of this latest of the
three children of Mother Walla Walla County, in the first part of
this volume. We also gave some of the general facts relative to first
discovery and settlement. We find, however, in case of Asotin, as of
her sisters, Columbia and Garfield, that the demands of clearness and
unity call for some repetition. We shall therefore bring up once more
the first comers who have already appeared, besides entering more
minutely into the tale of the early days.

We have endeavored to find some distinctive features in the natural
conditions, history, or present state of each county in the family.
While the physical features and climate of the four counties are
essentially the same, each has some characteristic of its own. That
of Asotin is the fact of its long frontage on Snake River, extending
from the southern boundary across the mouth of the Grande Ronde, the
only considerable river in the entire area, facing the entrance of the
Kooskooskie or Clearwater and then still providing the margin for the
Snake to a point just below the entrance of the Alpowa. With this long
river frontage there goes naturally a remarkably varied surface, the
most of the county being an elevated plateau running northward from
the Blue Mountains, and this is cut up by profound canons alternating
with nearly level plains. While this feature of the uplands is most
characteristic, there is an extensive lowland in the triangle beginning
with Asotin and including the great area sweeping around to, and for
some miles west of, the promontory just opposite the mouth of the
Clearwater on which Clarkston is located. This lowland rises by a
series of benches toward the west and south to the high prairies,
though separated from them by the abyss of Asotin Creek.

As might be expected from such a topography, the scenery of Asotin
County is conspicuously grand and beautiful. It would doubtless be
acknowledged by residents in other parts of Old Walla Walla County that
there is no one view equal from a scenic standpoint to that extending
from Asotin to Clarkston, unless it be that fronting the Columbia at
its junction with the Snake. On a clear bright day in spring (which
comes very early in this favored land) go in a launch from Clarkston to
Asotin up the rushing river, look north toward that infinitely varied
and curiously sculptured margin with which the vast farming plateau of
Whitman and Nez Perce counties fronts the junction of the rivers, then
view that superb unfolding of rising prairie on the east with the azure
Craig mountains on its edge, then turn your eyes to the frontage of
Asotin prairie on the west and view the immediate foreground with that
marvellously picturesque "Swallow's Nest" rock parting the two regions
of high land and lowland--and you will be dull indeed if you are not
entranced and if you do not say: "There must sometime be a race of
poets and artists in such a land."

The rythmical native name of Asotin means "Eel," that fish being very
common about the mouth of the creek.

Like most Indian words the sound, and hence the spelling, varies. It
appears frequently with two s's, that being the spelling for one of the
two rival town sites, Asotin and Assotin City, which finally merged
into the present city.

The Nez Perce Indians, who ought to be an authority, are said by
old-timers to sound it "Shoten." It has frequently been given as
"Hashoteen" or "Hasoten" or "Ashoti."

One of the mooted and interesting points in first discovery is whether
it was the Asotin or the Alpowa which Lewis and Clark on their return
trip from the Pacific in 1806 descended, and hence their route from
this region to their appointed meeting place on the Kooskooskie with
the "Chopunnish" Indians with whom they had left their horses. The
language of the journal of Captain Lewis indicates that, descending
the plains, they went "for four miles to a ravine, where was the
source of a small creek, down the hilly and rocky sides of which we
proceeded for eight miles to its entrance into Lewis (Snake) River,
about seven and one-half miles _above_ the mouth of the Kooskooskie."
That would obviously indicate the Asotin Creek. But it is improbable
that the party would have taken so laborious a route as to have struck
the Asotin eight miles above its mouth. Moreover, the general route
indicates the Alpowa. Perhaps conclusive in the matter, however, is
the fact that the journal of Private Gass states that they kept down a
creek "until we came to Lewis River, some distance _below_ the forks of
the Kooskooskie" (seeming plainly to mean the junction of the Snake and
Clearwater). "After lunch," he says, "we proceeded up the south side
of Lewis River about three miles," where they crossed it. Furthermore,
Gass says that the next day, being on the north side of Lewis River,
"at about ten o'clock we passed the forks, and kept along the north
side of the Kooskooskie." In view of these records Elliott Coues,
acknowledged to be the authoritative editor of the Lewis and Clark
journals, decided that the word _above_ in Lewis' journal is a slip and
that below was intended and should be substituted. If we accept this
version, we must admit that these first white men were not actually on
the site of Asotin. However, it is clear that the region became soon
familiar to the trappers. The McKenzie division of the Hunt party in
the first descent of Snake River in the winter of 1811-12 evidently
passed, though we have no record of their stopping places. Later the
Hudson's Bay trappers, Bonneville with his party, and others, made
their way down the Grande Ronde and "Wayleway" (Wallowa) and stopped
on the Asotin, to proceed thence over the Peola, Alpowa, and Pataha
regions, toward Fort Walla Walla, the great emporium of the whole
region. The region is historic ground. The "bar" at the mouth of the
Asotin seems to have been for many years a favorite gathering spot for
the Nez Perce Indians. We are informed by Mr. Edward Baumeister that
the Joseph band of Nez Perces claimed the place, and that the disputed
possession of it was one cause of the Nez Perce war of 1877, in which
Joseph (Hallakallakeen, or Eagle Wing) played so famous a part. Mr.
Baumeister states that the Indians had obviously used the point as
camping ground for a long time, for at the time of his coming in 1883,
the place was covered with "cache-holes" and grave-yards.

[Illustration: ASOTIN FROM IDAHO, LOOKING WEST]

Turning from these pre-settlement times to the era of the entrance
of permanent residents, we wish to pay our acknowledgments first of
all to certain old-time citizens of the country from whom we derived
information and received the courtesies which our pioneers know so
well how to bestow. Without undertaking to name all to whom we are
thus indebted we may especially refer to Mr. Edward Baumeister, Mr.
George Sauer, Major Boggan, J. D. Swain, Doctor Fulton, Mr. and Mrs.
L. J. Wormell, Mr. John Romaine, Mr. A. J. Crow, Mrs. Lilian Clemans
Merchant, Mr. Kay L. Thompson of the _Sentinel_ for use of the files
of his excellent paper, and Mr. Charles S. Florence, city clerk of
Asotin, for use of city records. Prof. W. J. Jerome has kindly provided
information regarding the schools and churches. Mr. and Mrs. F. G.
Morrison of Clarkston are the earliest old-timers now living at that
comparatively new point and gave valuable information. One of the
most interesting of all the old-timers of the entire region is O. F.
Canfield of Clarkston, who, though comparatively a new resident of
Clarkston, has been familiar with the region since 1847, and is a
storehouse of varied information about early days. For more recent
history, Messrs. Foster and Westervelt of the Lewiston-Clarkston
Company have provided much valuable data relating to the great
enterprise of their company, the greatest of its kind in this part of
the state. We are indebted to Mr. J. E. Hoobler, Mr. E. E. Halsey,
one of our advisory board, and G. L. Ackley, city clerk, for other
more recent information about Clarkston. The "History of Southeast
Washington," published in 1906 by the Western Historical Publishing
Company of Spokane, contains a large amount of valuable matter and to
it we make acknowledgment for various data and early statistics.

Mr. Baumeister has directed our attention to the interesting fact that
when Asotin was part of Walla Walla County there was a voting precinct
opposite Lewiston known as Asotin Precinct. No one lived there at that
time, but the precinct was laid out to accommodate miners or packers
who might be going to Idaho, but who claimed Walla Walla as their
residence.

A view of the beginnings of white settlement in what is now Asotin
County following the era of the trappers takes us back to historic
times, when Spalding gave Red Wolf (Herminilpip) apple seeds from which
trees grew, one of which can still be seen at the mouth of the Alpowa;
when Colonel Craig and "Doctor" Newell ranged through the country; and
when Timothy, the savior of Steptoe's defeated command, and Tema, his
"klootchman," lived on the Alpowa, the "place of rest," as they called
it, where this old aboriginal couple lived genuine Christian lives, a
good deal better than some of the supposed superior race. Tema is said
by Newton Hibbs, as quoted in the "History of Southeast Washington," to
have even remembered the coming of Lewis and Clark.

In 1857 an Indian reservation was laid out by Perrin Whitman, a nephew
of Dr. Marcus Whitman, and for a long time a resident of Lewiston. That
reservation included most of Asotin, but it was not permanent. In 1863
the boundary line was moved to a point seven miles east of Lewiston,
and hence Asotin became open territory. But not for several years was
there any permanent resident. Sam Smith seems to have "squatted" in
1861 at a point on the Alpowa near Timothy and kept a little store
and sort of stopping place for travelers for the mines. Near the same
place, though strictly speaking within the present limits of Garfield
County, was D. S. King. He, too, kept a stopping place for travelers.
In 1861 also the ferry between Lewiston and the present Clarkston
shore was put in by a union of several of the old-timers, Colonel
Craig being a leader in the enterprise. This was afterwards known as
Pearcy's Ferry. Several settlers were temporarily located on the flat
where Clarkston now stands, Robert Bracken apparently being the first.
As quoted in the History of Southeast Washington, Mr. Bracken stated
that when he first located there in 1862 his nearest neighbor on the
south was in the Grande Ronde Valley, 150 miles distant. His neighbors
on the north were at about the same distance. There was, of course,
quite a little town growing up at Lewiston right across the river.
Mr. Bracken's chief business was stock raising and mining. Like most
other stockmen he had been nearly broken up by the hard winter of 1861.
Mr. Bracken states also that in 1862 Starr and Atwood of Portland had
a little sawmill in the timber at the edge of Anatone prairie, and
in the fall of 1862 they erected on what is now the site of Asotin
the first frame building in the county. Lumber was hauled from that
mill to the Snake River and floated to Lewiston, where it brought
eighty-five dollars a thousand. An interesting item is contained in
the Asotin _Sentinel_ of June 23, 1900, referring to a visit of Henry
Leland to Asotin. He was at that time connected with the Washington
State Historical Society. He made the statement that he had not been
there since, as a boy, he had assisted his father, Alonzo Leland, in
handling lumber from a mill situated at the edge of the timber on
what became the Pinkham Ranch. According to Mr. Leland the lumber was
hauled to Asotin by ox teams and there put into the river to float to
Lewiston. In the fall of 1862, a cabin was put up on Asotin Creek by
two trappers, whose names are not recalled, but whose cabin stood until
about 1881. Following the transient occupation of the Clarkston flat by
Mr. Bracken came Doctor Simmons with a partner, Ben Jones, both of whom
were subsequently murdered in Montana. Simmons had, however, before
going, sold his location to John Greenfield, and he maintained a horse
ranch there for a number of years. It was because of the horses being
there in such numbers and a good many of them leaving their remains
that the name "Jaw-bone Flat" became applied to the flat between
Clarkston Heights and the present City of Clarkston. Some, however,
affirm that that uneuphonious name was derived from the peculiar
contour of the shore at that place.

The earliest permanent settler on the Asotin seems to have been Jerry
Maguire. His location was on the creek about three miles above its
mouth. According to Mr. Boozer, his son-in-law, now living in Asotin,
the location was made in 1866. His attention was mainly given to stock
raising, though he engaged also in the business of packing supplies
to the mining camps. A little later Thomas Rebusco took up a place
on the creek where he raised vegetables, apparently the first in the
county, for which there was a great demand in the mines. Another
of those earliest settlers on the Asotin was D. M. White, right at
the present location of the town. Noble Henry, now living on the
reservation in Idaho, took up a residence for a time, beginning in
1868, a "squaw-man." In the early '70s some addition was made, though
seemingly in a somewhat sporadic and experimental manner. The man who
might be styled the founder of the Town of Asotin was Theodore M. E.
Schank. The _Sentinel_ of October 9, 1885, in giving an obituary notice
of Mr. Schank, says: "Mr. T. M. E. Schank was born in Christiania,
Norway, and emigrated to this country in 1852, and engaged in the
harness and saddlery business in New York City. About the year 1854 he,
in company with others, left for South America, Mr. Schank locating
at Buenaventura, U. S. of Colombia, where he engaged in business. One
year after his arrival there he departed for California, where he was
successfully engaged in mining for a number of years, from where he
drifted to the Puget Sound country, where he engaged in business of
various kinds. During the mining excitement of 1860, Mr. Schank went
to Lewiston, Idaho, and opened a harness and saddlery shop and did a
thriving business." According to the _Sentinel_ Mr. Schank located
in 1872 or 1873. His location was on what is now the central part of
Asotin, his house still being in existence. It was not till a number of
years later that he undertook to start the town, and that is another
story. In 1870, Charles Lyon, T. P. Page and George B. Fancher, took
claims farther up the creek. Gad Hopwood, William Hopwood, and James
Hopwood, Lige Jones and David Mohler, were also among those earliest
pioneers. Most of them were bachelors. Mrs. Fancher is said to have
been the first white woman in the district.

Aside from rearing stock and putting up the little sawmills on the edge
of the timber, there had as yet been no thought of utilizing the vast
upland prairies of the major part of Asotin. As described earlier,
those prairies were cut up by the swift descending tributaries of the
Asotin, spreading out fan-like and dividing the highland into a series
of prairies. There was a luxuriant growth of bunch-grass all over
that wide expanse. The decade of the '70s had been a great time for
development of wheat raising on the Walla Walla and Touchet. There had
been some beginnings on the Pataha and Deadman. The idea had rather
suddenly seized the minds of many men that where bunch-grass would
grow so well wheat and barley would also grow. As a result of this
sentiment the later '70s witnessed the greatest rush for homesteads as
yet seen in the Inland Empire. Not alone south of Snake River, but into
Whitman and Spokane counties and in the Big Bend country, the settlers
poured in a steady stream. Having for a number of years thought of
the high prairies and rolling hills which make up the larger part of
Eastern Washington as suited only for pasture, the eager land hunters
now suddenly became possessed of a land fever and by hundreds and
thousands ran out their lines and set up their homes. It was a great
time. Many suffered hardship, having to live in "dug-outs," and being
scantily supplied with food and clothes. But it was just simply the
great American story over again, and in that rush for land we read the
very key to American life and progress, individual freedom and personal
ownership of land and the instruments of wealth. There is really no
way to cultivate genuine ambition and the qualities of true democracy
except by the ownership of land. Where the bulk of the population
are hired "hands" or day laborers, economic servitude is inevitable.
Either State Socialism or personal ownership of land by the bulk of the
people is what we must come to in this country. It looks very much as
though we as a nation were at the deciding point. If big corporations,
railroad monopolies, Weyerhaeuser timber syndicates, oil trusts, are
to acquire the bulk of the land, it is either socialism or serfdom.
The American people can take their choice. The rush for land is the
evidence of their preference. So long as there is land distribution, as
in the decade of the '70s, the American ideal is safe.

Among other regions which witnessed that land rush were the prairies
of Asotin. It is safe to say that the majority of the families that
located there (and the same is true of the larger part of Eastern
Washington) made their locations in 1876, 1877, 1878 or 1879.

Most of the names now borne by the different sections of the Asotin
lands are those of the first settler in each tract. The easternmost of
the ridges is known as "Montgomery Ridge," from B. C. Montgomery, who,
with Samuel and William Galloway, John Galloway, James T. Maness, and
John Bushnell, was the first to locate there. Among other prominent
settlers still living are George Sauer, George and William Appleford,
the Stones and McMillans, W. J. Boggan, and C. A. Hollenbeck. The next
ridge westward was known as "Weisenfels Ridge," from J. A. Weisenfels.
On this ridge also located the Mathenys and the Flocks. One of the
marked characters there was J. N. Boggan.

The largest expansion of the prairie is Anatone Flat. Various
explanations are given of this fine sounding name, some rather
far-fetched and fantastic, as the one that one of the earliest settlers
pronounced "any town" with rather a Hibernian accent, from which his
neighbors whimsically constructed the name. Mr. Baumeister understands
it to be the name of the Indian wife of one of the settlers. Another
gives it as the name of a pretty Indian girl who lived there in early
times. Mr. A. J. Crowe gives as his opinion that Anatone is the Nez
Perce word for cold or clear spring and thinks that it refers to the
spring of very cold, pure water which makes its way directly through
the Town of Anatone.

We will not undertake to give a complete enumeration of the early
settlers on Anatone Prairie. Most of them came in 1877-8-9. Several
families there locating have been represented by members prominent
in the official, business, or educational life of the county. In the
natural progress of events a number have transfered their homes to the
Town of Asotin. Among those early residents and families we note the
names of Charles Isecke (the pioneer merchant of Anatone), Pinkham,
Shumaker, Woods, Robison, Sangster, McIntosh, Tuttle, Puffer, Carter,
Dodson, Farrish, Perciful, Forgey, Whiton, Trescott, Welch, West,
Skinner, Wormell, Romaine, and various others.

The "Ayers Ridge" was first settled by Ben Ayers. The "Meyers Ridge"
was first settled by Charles Meyers.

The "Cloverland Flat" had for its first settler and builder of the
first house Brad Hodges. J. D. Swain, coming in 1878, built the second
cabin. Mr. Swain is now living in Asotin. He had a varied and typically
pioneer career. Born in New Hampshire he went first to California,
thence to Oregon, where he lived ten years on French Prairie near
Salem, then settled on the Patit near Dayton in 1874, from which place
he went to Cloverland in 1878. He was chosen county commissioner of
Garfield County in 1882, and resigned on the movement for the erection
of the new county of Asotin, and of that he became one of the first
commissioners. Like several others of his vicinity he lived in three
counties, Columbia, Garfield and Asotin, without changing his residence.

Among the other prominent early settlers of Cloverland Flat we find
the names of Petty, Wamsley, Fine, Walter, Sergeant, Philips, Johnson,
Morrow, Barkly, Trent and Heltorf.

A special point of interest is connected with D. T. Welch, for the
reason of his determined effort to locate the county seat at Theon,
on Anatone Prairie. He had a sightly place and saw a city in his
mind's eye growing up there. The old-timers did not always realize that
the chief city of any given area must inevitably seek easy and cheap
transportation facilities, either navigable water or railroads. No town
on the Flats could compete with one on the river.

One of the most interesting of the old-time achievements was that of
William Farrish, who still lives in Asotin and who gave the author his
own personal account of it. In 1878 he conveyed a portable sawmill from
Asotin to the timber line just beyond Anatone. There was no graded
road up the long ridge and he was compelled to push and pull the huge
weight right up the rough ridge by "hitching up all the oxen and horses
in the country"--as he expressed it--and propelling the mill by sheer
power. It was a great task and at several places the mill came very
near getting away and starting down hill. But muscle and brain and
perseverance triumphed, and the mill reached its destination.

The mill was located just at a exciting time for the settlers. In 1877
the great "Joseph" war of the Nez Perces had occurred. Up to that time
there had been friendly relations between the whites and Indians. The
old-timers relate many interesting stories of the general good will
manifested by the Indians on Anatone. Mrs. Merchant of Asotin, to
whom we are indebted for one of the most interesting of our special
contributions, a daughter of the Clemans family, relates how, as a
little girl, she was accustomed to be on a most friendly footing with
the many Indians who would pass through Anatone on their immigrations
from river to berry patches and hunting grounds. When the flame of
war suddenly burst forth in '77 over the ownership of Wallowa, a good
many of the Asotin branch of the Nez Perces joined the hostiles. The
followers of Timothy and Lawyer, true to their traditional friendship
for the whites, stood steadfastly by their old policy. Although the
hostile Nez Perces did not cross to the west side of the Snake River,
the settlers expected them. Some abandoned their homes. The house of
Jerry Maguire was transformed into a fort, and the settlers on the
creek gathered there for defense. But 1877 passed, the expected savage
foray did not materialize, and the settlers resumed their locations.
Then in 1878 came the even more savage Bannock war. The scene of it
was far distant, but the settlers again became fearful of attack by
fragments of unfriendly natives roaming around in the Blue Mountains
and Wallowa. It was just at that time of trepidation that Mr. Farrish
dragged his mill to the timber line. It arrived opportunely. The first
work for it was to cut lumber for a stockade for defense against Indian
attack. The structure was laid out somewhat less than a mile west of
Anatone on the land of John Carter. Fortunately it was not needed, but
it has historic interest.

Another of the important settlements was Peola, on the high land
between the waters of the Alpowa and the Asotin. It belongs rather
to Garfield than to Asotin, but extends into both counties. It is a
fertile region, of essentially the same soil, climate, and conditions
as the Anatone and other flats. F. G. Morrison and John B. Dick were
among the leading pioneers of that region.


ESTABLISHMENT OF ASOTIN COUNTY

Such may be said to have been the beginnings of what became Asotin
County. As easily seen, it possessed a unity of its own and within
a year of the setting apart of Garfield from Columbia, agitation
for similar action for Asotin arose. As the reader will recall from
the chapter on Garfield County, Assotin City was a candidate for
county-seat of that county. Outrun by Pomeroy in that race, the next
logical step was a new county. The first active movement looking to
the new county concentrated at Theon. Mr. Welch, as related, had
ambitions for that point both as the business and official head of the
new county. As a result of a mass meeting at Theon, Jackson O'Keefe
of Assotin City was delegated to visit the Territorial Legislature
in the session of 1883 in the interest of a bill for the erection of
a new county. There seems to have been little organized opposition.
The minutes of the house show that there was some discussion over the
name. Some advocated the name of Lincoln, and in fact the bill first
passed in that form. The council on October 18th passed an amendment
to use the name of Asotin, and two days later passed the amended bill.
On October 27, 1883, the governor, W. A. Newell, signed the bill, and
Asotin (spelled with one s) became the fourth of the group produced by
the fission of Old Walla Walla.

We find some interesting records and comments on this notable event
in the _Asotin Spirit_. This pioneer paper of the place, it should be
noted, had been moved to Asotin from Pataha, where it had been known as
the _Pataha Spirit_. The first number was on Friday, October 25, 1883.
The publishers were J. H. Ginder & Co.

In commenting on this notable event the _Spirit_ notes the fact that it
is left to the judgment of the appointed commissioners to choose the
temporary seat as between Assotin City and Asotin, and that it can be
moved at the next general election by a two-thirds vote of the county.
The _Spirit_ continues: "Early Wednesday morning a crowd assembled at
Mr. Schank's new store building and the flag was brought out. As the
national emblem was run up the pole three hearty cheers for Asotin
County went up from the hearts as well as the throats of the assembly.
And now that the efforts of this people have been crowned with success,
so far as division and temporary location of county seat are concerned,
we should not allow ourselves to be lulled into a masterly inactivity
and deceive ourselves with the idea that nothing more is to be done,
for as sure as we do what we have done will be undone."

As a matter of historical reference, it is well to preserve the
legislative act of the territory establishing the county:

       *       *       *       *       *

An act to create and organize the County of Asotin:

Section 1. Be it enacted by the Legislative Assembly of the Territory
of Washington: That all that portion of Garfield County situated within
Washington Territory, and included within the following limits, be, and
the same shall be constituted and known as the County of Asotin, viz.:
Commencing at a point in the channel of Snake River on the township
line between ranges forty-four (44) and forty-five (45); thence running
south to the northwest corner of section thirty (30), township eleven
(11) north, range forty-five (45), east of the Willamette meridian;
thence west six (6) miles; south one (1) mile; west two (2) miles;
south one (1) mile; west one (1) mile, to the northwest corner of
section three (3), in township ten (10) north, of range forty-three
(43), east of the Willamette meridian; thence south eighteen (18)
miles; thence west three (3) miles; thence south to the Oregon line;
thence east on said line to the midchannel of Snake River; thence down
Snake River to the place of beginning.

[Illustration: ASOTIN COUNTY COURTHOUSE]

[Illustration: ASOTIN HIGH SCHOOL]

Section 2. That J. D. Swain, John Weisenfels and William Critchfield
are hereby appointed a board of commissioners, with power to appoint
the remaining county officers to serve until the next general election
or until their successors are elected and qualified. For which purpose
the county commissioners herein appointed shall meet at the county
seat of Asotin County within thirty (30) days after the approval of
this act, and appoint the necessary officers for said county, and
perform such other acts and things as are necessary for the complete
organization of the County of Asotin.

Section 3. That the justices of the peace and constables who are now
elected as such in the precincts of the County of Asotin be, and the
same are hereby declared justices of the peace and constables of said
County of Asotin.

Section 4. That the County of Asotin is hereby united to the County of
Garfield for judicial and legislative purposes.

Section 5. That all the laws applicable to the County of Garfield shall
be applicable to the County of Asotin.

Section 6. That the county seat of said County of Asotin is hereby
temporarily located at Asotin, which in this connection shall mean the
Town of Asotin, or Asotin City, at which place it shall remain until
located permanently elsewhere in said county by a majority of qualified
electors thereof, and for which a vote shall be taken at the next
general election, viz.: on the Tuesday next following the first Monday
in November, A. D. 1884 and the officers of election shall receive said
vote and make return thereof to the commissioners, who shall canvass
the same and announce the result in like manner as the result of the
vote for county officers. _Provided_, that if there be not a majority
vote in favor of such location of county seat at any one place at such
election, the qualified electors of the county shall continue to vote
on that question at the next and each subsequent general election until
some place receives such majority, and the place securing a majority of
all the votes cast shall be declared the permanent county seat of said
Asotin County.

Section 7. That all the taxes levied and assessed by the board of
county commissioners of the County of Garfield for the year 1883, upon
personal property within the boundaries of said County of Asotin,
shall be collected and paid into the treasury of said Garfield County
for the use of said County of Garfield, PROVIDED, HOWEVER, That the
said County of Garfield shall pay all the just indebtedness of said
Garfield County, and that when such indebtedness shall be wholly paid
and discharged, all moneys remaining in the treasury of said Garfield
County, and all credits due and to become due said County of Garfield
on the assessment roll of said year, shall be divided between said
counties of Garfield and Asotin according to the usual valuation of
said property of said year: PROVIDED FURTHER, That nothing in this
act shall be so construed as to deprive the County of Asotin of its
proportion of the tax levied for common school purposes for the above
named year.

Section 8. The County of Garfield shall pay to the County of Asotin the
sum of one hundred and fifty dollars ($150) over and above the amount
provided for in this act, for its interest in the public property and
improvements.

Section 9. The auditor of Asotin County shall have access to the
records of Garfield County, without cost, for the purpose of
transcribing and indexing such portions of the records of property
as belongs to Asotin County, and his certificate of the correctness
thereof shall have the same force and effect as if made by the auditor
of Garfield County. It is hereby provided, however, that nothing in
this act shall permit the record books of Garfield County to be removed
from the office of its auditor.

Section 10. The salaries of the county officers of Asotin County shall
be as follows, viz.: Auditor four hundred dollars ($400) per annum;
treasurer, three hundred dollars ($300) per annum; probate judge, one
hundred and fifty dollars ($150) per annum; school superintendent,
forty dollars ($40) per annum; county commissioners, four dollars
($4) per day each, while at work on their official duties; and these
salaries shall be their full compensation from the county treasury, and
be in lieu of all other fees from the county.

Section 11. All acts and parts of acts in conflict with the provisions
of this act are hereby repealed.

Section 12. This act shall take effect and be in force from and after
its passage and approval.

Approved October 27, 1883.

       *       *       *       *       *

On November 12, 1882, the commissioners appointed by the Legislature,
J. D. Swain, John Weisenfels, and William Critchfield, met at Mr.
Schank's store in Asotin and effected a regular organization. Mr.
Weisenfels was chosen chairman, and J. E. Bushel was appointed clerk.
Rather curiously there seems to have been much rivalry among the
citizens of the town to provide an official meeting place and it seems
to have been rather the glory than the pecuniary emoluments which
stirred their desires. Probably the motives behind the contention were
connected with the two rival sites, that of Assotin City above and
Asotin lower down the river. Alexander Sumpter was proprietor of the
former site, and he offered his store, rent free for a year, together
with necessary equipment and furniture. Mr. Schank offered his house
on the Asotin site, rent free fora year. D. B. Pettyjohn offered his
hall on the same terms. S. T. Jones offered to provide fuel gratis.
As the rivals bid against each other they increased their offers. Mr.
Schank added to the rent-free house the proposition of Mr. Pettyjohn to
perform the duties of treasurer for the year for the nominal salary of
$300, but to return the amount to the county. W. H. Wood strengthened
this offer with a similar one to perform the duties of auditor at a
salary of $400, but to refund the same. With these inducements Mr.
Schank's offer gained the day. The rival locations were not far apart
and the town has practically come to include the two.

The first assessment for the new county, made in 1884, was as follows:
Real estate, $137,676; improvements, $40,211; personal, $227,021;
total, $404,908. The acreage under cultivation was given at 5,532, and
the total of deeded land as 42,918. The county census of 1885 showed a
total population of 1,514. In the same year the report of production
showed 300,000 bushels of wheat, 100,000 bushels of barley, and 50 tons
of fruit.

In interesting comparison with those figures of 1885, we may take a
jump ahead at this point to 1917, and give the summary of assessments
as provided for us by the courtesy of E. W. Downen, county assessor:
Value of live stock, $391,618; hay and grain in warehouses and in hands
of producers, $412,095. The total of personal property, $1,245,540.
That represents 50 per cent of the actual value. Real estate
assessment, also 50 per cent of actual value, is this: Total number of
acres assessed, 238,339.33; number of acres of orchard land, 4,649.36;
other tillable farm land, 83,059; value of orchard land, $1,667,510;
value of other farm land, $1,172,645; value of city property, $769,965;
total real estate, $3,610,120.

Almost the first question that came before the voters of the county
upon its creation was the determination of the county seat. Asotin
and Theon were the chief contestants, with one vote for Anatone and
two for Assotin City. The promoters of Assotin City announced before
election day that they would not push the candidacy of their location,
preferring to throw their strength to the twin place a mile down
the river. The result of the election was: Asotin, 377; Theon, 106.
Asotin has held the official headship to this day, though surpassed in
population by Clarkston, and in more or less of chronic unrest lest the
metropolis dispossess the older town. An election for a change occurred
in 1916, but resulted in no change. The precincts participating in that
first election, November, 1884, were: Asotin, Cottonwood, Grande Ronde,
Lake and Pleasant.

The next political question of general interest was that of
prohibition. That was a question that would not and could not down,
for the reason that it involved ideas of right and wrong and economic
efficiency on one side, and pecuniary gain or loss on the other. A
local option law, allowing a decision by precincts had been passed by
the Territorial Legislature in 1886, and, as a result, nearly every
precinct in the state had a line-up, the general results being to show
a powerful sentiment in favor of prohibition, but not enough to give
a majority of precincts. The result in Asotin precinct was 69 to 70,
lost by one vote. In Cottonwood precinct it was 77 to 27, very heavily
affirmative. In Grande Ronde it was 12 to 21, lost. In Pleasant it was
15 to 6, more than two to one in favor.


RESULTS OF ELECTIONS

Asotin County, like others of its group, and in fact the entire state,
is normally republican. But to its great credit, be it said, the county
is independent, and the boss has a very uncertain tenure. We have seen
from the act organizing the county that the three commissioners named
were empowered to name the county officers, to serve until the general
election of 1884. In pursuance of their duties the commissioners,
Messrs. Critchfield, Swain, and Weisenfels, at their first formal
meeting on November 14, 1883, appointed the following county officials:
J. L. Vinson, sheriff; H. Wamsley, assessor; S. S. Bennett, probate
judge; Charles Goodwin, superintendent of schools; J. J. Kanawyer,
treasurer; J. O'Keefe, surveyor; A. J. Allen, coroner; S. T. Jones,
sheep commissioner; G. S. Rogers, auditor. By reason of the declination
of Mr. O'Keefe, Mr. Allen, and Mr. Jones, M. S. Kling, J. M. Robison,
and R. Tuttle, were appointed to fill the places of surveyor, coroner
and sheep commissioner respectively.

Much interest was felt in the first general election of 1884, and
the republicans and democrats marshalled their respective hosts in
the usual convention formation. It was in that election that the
territorial law providing for woman suffrage first came into play, and
in that election, November 4, 1884, about 80 of the 500 votes were cast
by women. The results of the election were as follows: J. M. Armstrong,
republican, for Congress, 266 to 226 for C. S. Voorhees, democrat;
joint councilman for the counties of Columbia, Garfield and Asotin,
B. B. Day, republican, 269 to 252 for C. H. Warner, democrat; joint
councilman for the counties of Walla Walla, Columbia, Garfield, Asotin,
Whitman, Adams and Franklin counties, I. Carson, republican, 252 to
211 for S. L. Gilbreath, democrat; joint representative for Asotin and
Garfield counties, J. A. Perkins, republican, 210 to 193 for M. C.
Harris, democrat; joint prosecuting attorney for Columbia, Garfield
and Asotin counties, R. F. Sturdevant, republican, without opposition;
county commissioners, G. B. Wardwell, A. J. Sherrod, and H. W. Ward,
the first two republicans, the last a democrat; probate judge, R. A.
Case, republican; auditor, H. E. Benedict, republican; treasurer, D.
J. Wann, republican; sheriff, J. L. Vinson, democrat; assessor, J. A.
Weisenfels, democrat; coroner, J. J. Lewis, republican; superintendent
of schools, Angie Bean, republican; surveyor, A. Schrader, republican;
sheep commissioner, W. R. Tuttle, republican. Rather curiously,
considering that there were as yet no churches in the county, there was
a vote on taxing church property, a general question, of course. The
vote was, affirmative, 158; negative, 214.

It will be seen that of the successful candidates above, the large
majority were republican, though the votes were very variable.

The outcome of the election of 1886 was similar to that of 1884. C. M.
Bradshaw, republican, led C. S. Voorhees, democrat, though the latter
was the choice of the territory. O. C. White, republican, led W. E.
Ayers, democrat, for joint councilman. R. A. Case, republican, defeated
D. H. Poyneer, democrat, for the house. W. N. Noffsinger, republican,
for joint attorney, lost by one vote to L. J. Dittmore, democrat.

For the county officers the choices were: A. Stiffel for sheriff; H.
E. Benedict for auditor; Jackson O'Keefe for treasurer; J. L. Vinson
for probate judge; J. A. Weisenfels for assessor; Mrs. S. E. Morrill
for superintendent of schools; H. C. Fulton for coroner; A. Schrader
for surveyor; W. R. Tuttle for sheep commissioners; M. Scully, J. D.
Swain and G. B. Wardwell for commissioners. Of the above, Messrs.
O'Keefe, Vinson, Weisenfels and Mrs. Morrill were democrats; the others
republicans.

The election of 1888 shows a considerable diminution in the vote,
due to the invalidating of the woman suffrage law. In this election
John B. Allen triumphed for delegate to congress over C. S. Voorhees,
and the result was the same in the territory. D. T. Welch and W. S.
Oliphant, republicans, were chosen to the council and lower house of
the legislature. The county candidates chosen were A. Stiffel for
sheriff; H. E. Benedict for auditor; Edward Knox, G. W. Philips, and
Frank Huber, for commissioners; W. N. Noffsinger for joint attorney;
G. A. Rogers for probate judge; J. O'Keefe for treasurer; W. R. Tuttle
for assessor; W. W. Henry for superintendent of schools; D. Carson for
surveyor; Len Henry for coroner; James Fuller for sheep commissioner.
The democrats carried a larger proportion of the county offices than
before, Messrs. O'Keefe, Henry, Carson, Philips, and Huber being of
that political persuasion.

The great year of admission to statehood, 1889, had now arrived, Asotin
County was part of District No. 8, of which Adams, Garfield, and
Franklin were the others. Elmon Scott, D. Buchanan, and W. B. Gray were
the ones designated in Asotin County, though, as related in the history
of Garfield County, S. G. Cosgrove, running as an independent, was
chosen in the district instead of Buchanan.

[Illustration: VIEW FROM LEWISTON-ASOTIN HIGHWAY]

A special election occurred on October 1, 1889, for the purpose of
accepting or rejecting the Constitution, choosing state officers, and
voting on location of state capital, woman suffrage and prohibition.

The results in part were these: For Congress, J. L. Wilson, republican,
172; Thomas Griffiths, democrat, 124; for governor, E. P. Ferry,
republican, 171 to 125 for Eugene Semple, democrat; for joint senator,
C. G. Austin, republican, and for representative, William Farrish,
republican. The county clerk was the only local officer named at that
election. John Dill, a republican, was chosen. The vote of the county
was heavily against the Constitution, 201 to 83. Woman suffrage lost
by 97 to 173. Prohibition lost by 113 to 147. Ellensburg received a
majority for state capital, Olympia getting but five votes. It thus
appears that on those special questions at the first election after
statehood, Asotin County was on the losing side in every one.

In the campaign of 1890 the prohibitionists became an active factor
and in one way or another their proposition was held before the people
until in 1914 adherents of all parties joined in the state-wide law and
it was passed by strong majorities. But for many years the party was
small and weak.

The vote of Asotin County in 1890 was small, there being for
congressman only 266. For congressman, John L. Wilson was again
successful. William Farrish was again chosen representative to the
state legislature. The local choices were these: James Justus for
sheriff; Jackson O'Keefe for treasurer; O. Gilmore, R. R. Van Ausdale,
and W. H. Smith, commissioners; D. T. Welch for clerk; William
Rogers for assessor; H. E. Benedict for auditor; D. W. Savage for
superintendent of schools. Of the elected, Messrs. Rogers, Benedict,
Welch, Van Ausdale, Gilmore and Justus were republicans, and Messrs.
Smith, Savage, and O'Keefe were democrats.

The election of 1892 was the first presidential election in which the
State of Washington took part, and, of course, interest was great. It
was also the year of a full state election. The strenuous times and
many mooted questions and new affiliations and realignments of men and
parties made the election one of momentous concern in every unit of
political organization. The result in Asotin County, as in the state,
showed that the republicans were still in the saddle. For President,
the republicans won, 194 to 148 for the democrats, 18 for the people's
party, and 16 for the prohibitionists. John L. Wilson was chosen by a
scanty plurality for Congress, and John H. McGraw by a somewhat larger
plurality for governor. For representative, William Farrish was chosen
again by 234 to 135 for his democratic competitor.

The county candidates chosen were: G. C. Perciful, attorney; D. T.
Welch for clerk; L. B. Howard for treasurer; H. E. Benedict for
auditor; George Kinnear, for assessor; J. L. Wormell for sheriff; D. S.
Jennings for superintendent of schools; M. S. Kling for surveyor; W. H.
Smith and Robert Sangster for commissioners.

The remarkable feature of the election of 1894 was the entrance into
state and national, and of course local politics, of the populist
or people's party, and its sweeping, though short-lived successes.
The leaders of this party in Asotin County were Peter Maguire, W. J.
Boggan, B. W. Knox, G. C. Perciful, L. K. Brown, John Weisenfels,
and J. B. Dick. Politics were rendered something of a chaos by this
movement, and viewed in the retrospect the student of the present can
recognize in that fact infinite cause for gratitude. There is nothing
so essential to political education as occasional radical upheavals.
The populist movement was a sign of political thought by the masses,
and it was a cause of the overthrow of "regular" rule--i. e., boss
rule--and the beginnings of a new democratization--and that is just
about the direction whither the world of 1917, with blood and anguish,
and ultimate new vision, is tending. The result of the election of 1894
in Asotin County for two congressmen in the three-cornered conflict
was that Hyde and Doolittle, republicans, had 165 and 166 votes to 162
and 165 for Van Patten and Adams, populists. The democrats were badly
in the rear with only 52 and 51. C. C. Gibson, a populist, was chosen
to the legislature. For county offices: J. L. Wormell for sheriff;
George Kinnear for assessor; D. T. Welch, auditor; J. W. King, clerk;
D. S. Jennings, superintendent of schools; George Burger, surveyor; L.
Woodruff, coroner; L. B. Howard, treasurer; Robert Sangster and Frank
Huber, commissioners. Of those chosen, Messrs. Kinnear, Woodruff,
and Huber were of the people's party. Messrs. Welch, King, Jennings,
Burger, and Sangster were republicans. Mr. Wormell and Mr. Howard were
democrats.

With another presidential year of 1896, there was even more intense
interest. The populists were apparently stronger than ever. The
democrats hardly entered the field at all. There was a marked increase
in the vote of the county, reaching almost five hundred.

In the presidential contest the result was victory for the people's
party by 254 to 214 for the republican. The P. P. candidates for
Congress, J. H. Lewis and W. C. Jones, obtained 252 to 216 and 211
respectively for Hyde and Doolittle, republicans. For governor, John
R. Rogers, P. P., led Sullivan by thirty. For joint senator, Edward
Baumeister, republican, led J. C. Van Patten by ten majority. R. W.
Caywood, P. P., for representative defeated D. T. Welch by nine. For
county officials: G. W. Kinnear, P. P., for sheriff; J. W. King,
republican, for clerk; Elmer Waldrip, republican, for auditor; W. S.
Rogers, republican, treasurer; Lee Williams, P. P., attorney; H. A.
Whiton, P. P., assessor; Hallie E. Robinson, P. P., superintendent
of schools; George Burger, republican, surveyor; John Steele,
republican, coroner; Frank Huber, P. P., and Samuel Downen, republican,
commissioners.

In 1898 in Asotin, as throughout the country, populism was on the
ebb tide, that is, so far as votes were concerned. It would be a
great error to consider its influence declining. It had accomplished
a permanent mission, the effects of which the country feels today.
In the election of 1898 W. L. Jones and F. W. Cushman, republicans,
restored the prestige of their party in Congress. In the Legislature
of the state, J. F. Crisman, republican, was the choice of the county.
Of the local officers we find: J. L. Wormell, sheriff; Elmer Waldrip,
auditor; A. G. Burnett, clerk; W. S. Rogers, treasurer; M. J. Garrison,
assessor; J. B. Jones, superintendent of schools; Walter Brooks,
attorney; C. L. Swain, surveyor; Charles Iseke, coroner; S. C. Downen
and G. W. Cummings, commissioners. Of the above all were republicans
except J. L. Wormell.

The election of 1900 showed a great increase in the vote. On the
presidential ticket it was 757, of which the republican electors
secured 398. Cushman and Jones were re-elected. John R. Rogers,
democrat, held a slight lead over his republican adversary for
governor. For joint senator Edward Baumeister was again victorious,
by increased majorities. J. F. Crisman was re-elected for the House.
The local officers were: J. L. Wormell, for sheriff; W. G. Woodruff,
for clerk; John B. Bell, auditor; C. S. Florence, treasurer; Walter
Brooks, attorney; W. J. Garrison, assessor; J. B. Jones, superintendent
of schools; L. K. Brown, surveyor; Charles Fairbanks, coroner; B. W.
Yeoman, Alexander Robinson, commissioners. All republicans except
Sheriff Wormell, Clerk Woodruff, and Surveyor Brown.

The election of 1902 being an "off" year, there was something of a
recession of interest. The people's party having nearly vanished, the
contest came between the G. O. P. and the populized democratic party,
to the general discomfiture, however, of the latter. The republicans
carried the election for congressmen and representative, and all the
county offices except one commissioner, surveyor, and clerk. The
successful county candidates were G. W. R. Peaslee, representative;
Robert H. Richards, sheriff; W. G. Woodruff, clerk; J. B. Bell,
auditor; C. S, Florence, treasurer; E. E. Halsey, attorney; R. A.
Wilson, assessor; Lilian Clemans, superintendent of schools; J. Swain,
surveyor; H. R. Merchant, coroner; Jackson O'Keefe, C. D. Cowan,
commissioners.

The year 1904 witnessed another presidential election. It was the
period of flush times. The shadows of the previous decade seemed
to have been dispelled and general activity and a new rush of
population, investment, rising prices, increase in land values,
a spirit of speculation, railroad building, and apparent general
progress characterized the period. As might be expected the tendency
to sustain the party in power, especially in view of the announced and
supposed progressive views of President Roosevelt, became manifested
in tremendous republican majorities. A socialist ticket appeared in
the county, for the first time. The vote cast, 1,066, was the largest
yet known in Asotin County, and gives evidence of a marked increase in
population, as well as a profound interest in results. The republican
presidential electors, five in number, headed by S. G. Cosgrove, had
an average majority of 525 over the democratic. W. E. Humphrey, W.
L. Jones, and F. W. Cushman, for Congress, had nearly four hundred
majority over the democratic candidates. A. E. Mead, republican for
governor, had 528 to 469 for George Turner. For joint state senator, S.
S. Russell, republican, had 603 to 375 for Frank Cardwell, democrat. H.
C. Fulton, republican, was chosen representative by 563 to 440 for J.
L. Wormell, democrat, and 34 for Christian Frost, socialist. For local
officers the choices were: C. S. Florence, auditor; W. G. Woodruff,
treasurer; R. H. Richards, sheriff; M. P. Shaughnessy, clerk; G. H.
Rummens, attorney; Lilian Clemans, superintendent of schools; Frank E.
Brown, assessor; Jay Swain, surveyor; H. R. Merchant, coroner; S. C.
Downen and Frank Body, commissioners. All of the candidates chosen were
republicans except Mr. Woodruff.

With 1908 we reach another presidential year and another republican
victory. The electors for President Taft received an average majority
of 290. Miles Poindexter, as a republican candidate (it seems desirable
to indicate clearly in his case which particular ticket he was on each
time) received a decisive majority, as the first in his long series
of meteoric successes. S. G. Cosgrove had a majority of 365 over his
democratic adversary, Wm. Goodyear. J. R. Stevenson of Pomeroy and E.
E. Halsey of Clarkston had strong majorities for State Senate and House
respectively. The local candidates chosen were: G. N. Ausman, auditor;
Homer L. Post, clerk; M. P. Shaughnessey, attorney; E. H. Dammarell,
treasurer; R. A. Campbell, sheriff; Mary Brannan, superintendent of
schools; Jay Swain, surveyor; C. N. La Fond, assessor; J. R. Walthew,
S. D. Hollister, Jr., commissioners.

The election of 1910 gives results similar to its predecessors so far
as the political complexion was concerned. In this election M. F.
Gose of Pomeroy, a man in whom all parties in the judicial district
had confidence, and who had in the mutations of time transferred
his allegiance from democratic to republican party, received the
unanimous support for the non-partisan supreme judgeship. W. L. La
Follette of Whitman County carried Asotin, as well as the district,
for congressman. E. E. Halsey was re-elected for representative. For
local places, we find J. L. Wormell for sheriff; Homer E. Post, clerk;
E. H. Dammarell, treasurer; G. N. Ausman, auditor; C. N. La Fond,
assessor; S. D. Steininger was chosen for superintendent of schools,
but did not qualify and Mary Brannan was appointed to the place; J.
C. Applewhite, attorney; Jay Swain, surveyor; H. C. Fulton and Eli
Bolick, commissioners; H. R. Merchant, coroner. In this as in previous
elections, it may be said that Judge Chester F. Miller of Dayton
received constant support for superior judge.

Reaching the year 1912, we find ourselves again facing a great national
crisis, out of which momentous history has come. We may note here some
changes in precincts in the county and give them as recorded in that
election: Anatone, Asotin, Bly, Clarkston, Cloverland, Grande Ronde,
Grouse, Pleasant, Theon, and Vineland. The total vote in that year
was 1,901, the large increase being due to the inauguration of woman
suffrage. The vote for presidential electors was: Progressive, 513;
republican, 579; democratic, 551; other parties, 158. For Congress,
the republican candidates, Frost, Dewey, and La Follette, received
majorities; M. E. Hay, republican, for governor, had 802 to 501 for
Eugene Lister, democrat. For state senator, G. N. Ausman, republican,
was chosen, and E. E. Halsey was again elected for representative.
C. F. Miller again received the vote for superior judge. For local
positions: J. L. Wormell, sheriff; L. A. Closuit, clerk; R. M. Snyder,
auditor; E. R. Downen, treasurer; J. C. Applewhite, attorney; W.
G. Woodruff, assessor; W. J. Jerome, superintendent of schools; J.
E. Hoobler, H. C. Fulton, and Eli Bolick, commissioners. That was
something of a democratic year, as Messrs. Wormell, Snyder, Applewhite,
and Woodruff belonged to that party.

In the election of November 3, 1914, there was a total vote of 2,046.
In that year the long contested question of prohibition came to a
decision on the Initiative Law No. 3, providing for prohibition with a
permit system for individual importation. In this decision, the county
vote was overwhelmingly affirmative, being 1,447 to 425. W. L. Jones
was chosen United States Senator by 803 to 608 for Black, democrat,
and La Follette for United States representative by 818 to 567 for
Drumheller, democrat. For representative to State Legislature, E. E.
Halsey was again chosen. For local officers the choices: F. M. Halsey,
sheriff; J. W. Stephens, clerk; Delta Krausdelt, auditor; E. R. Downen,
treasurer; W. S. Woodruff, assessor; W. J. Jerome, superintendent
of schools; V. S. Shelman, engineer; R. C. Stone, O. E. Bailey,
commissioners. These officials were quite evenly divided as to party,
the sheriff, clerk, auditor, assessor, and commissioner, Stone, being
democrats, the others republicans.

[Illustration: MAIN STREET, ASOTIN]

[Illustration: VIEW OF ASOTIN, LOOKING EAST]

Another presidential year, of still more momentous issues and dramatic
surprises comes in with 1916, the year in which the whole world was
reeling with the most insane war ever recorded, and of which it is
evident that the United States must be the ultimate arbiter. We find
in Asotin County in that election 2,506 votes. We find also some
changes in voting precincts. They appear thus: Alpowa, Anatone, Asotin,
Bly, Clarkston, Cloverland, Grande Ronde, Grouse, Hanson, Pleasant,
South Clarkston, Theon, West Asotin, West Clarkston. The total votes
of the three Clarkston precincts was 1,237, with one voter reported
absent. That of the two Asotin precincts was 519, with three absent.
The prohibition question again came to the fore with several measures
designed to impair the law passed in 1914. On Initiative No. 24, one
of those measures, the vote was 314 for to 1,572 against. It may be
added that the negative vote in the state on that measure (allowing
manufacture and sale of beer), as well as the others of the same
character, was so overwhelming, 100,000 or more, that it was hardly
worth while to count it.

The national results of the election were: For the Wilson electors,
1,136; for the Hughes electors, 1,004; for Poindexter, republican, as
senator, 983 to 926 for Turner, democrat; for La Follette, republican
for congressman, 1,142 to 819 for Masterson; McBride, republican
for governor, 927 to 1,182 for Lister, democrat. E. V. Kuykendall,
republican for joint senator, had 1,170 to 882 for Thomson, democrat.
E. E. Halsey again went to the lower House of the Legislature, his
fifth successive election. The local officers were: F. M. Halsey,
sheriff; Homer L. Post, attorney; E. R. Downen, assessor; A. A. Alvord;
superintendent of schools; P. P. Oehler, engineer; G. A. Fraser,
treasurer; Lillie Ausman, auditor; J. W. Stephens, clerk; C. Shumaker,
J. K. McIntosh, commissioners.


MISCELLANEOUS HAPPENINGS

Turning from the record of political events to what may be denominated
the miscellaneous happenings of the county history, we may note that
Asotin has had its full share. The beautiful creek that now furnishes
the water for several thousand acres of the great Clarkston project, a
stream of much picturesque beauty as it makes its way, swiftly indeed,
but with apparent serenity and general decorum through the lower
end of the town into Snake River, has taken the liberty on several
occasions to gather up reinforcements from the plains through which
its tributaries have worn their way, and has come sweeping down the
steep declivities in torrents that threatened to tear out everything in
its course. It is quite well under control now, due to the extensive
impounding and distribution processes of the irrigation system, but
formerly in case of sudden rain or Chinook winds, the vast amount of
surface from which the water must drain through the single channel
might transform it in a few hours from a bright pellucid mountain creek
into a veritable river of turbid torrents. The most famous floods were
those of 1887, 1894, and 1897. That of 1894 was the greatest in a
general way in the Columbia and Snake and all their tributaries ever
known by white men, and according to Indians has not been equaled for
many years, possibly several centuries. Nearly the whole of the lower
part of Asotin was covered and the road between Asotin and Clarkston
was under water in numerous places. So far as destruction from the
creek was concerned, however, the flood of May 20, 1897, was the most
disastrous of any. This was due to a cloud burst covering most of
the upper sources of the creek. Since there was but a gentle rain at
Asotin there was no conception of what was impending from above, until
the roaring of the torrent heralded its approach. For a distance of
fifteen miles the bed of the stream was swept clean. All the bridges
were carried out and many of the houses, gardens, and other property
destroyed.

Mr. Baumeister points out in his beautiful yard, with its stone wall
ten feet high on the creek margin, how the water rose high above the
top of the wall. Considering the irresistible force of a column of
water fifteen or eighteen feet high rushing down that steep descent
and considering the destruction of property it seems strange indeed
that there were no human lives lost. It seems to have been by a series
of fortunate happenings that those in peril were in positions to save
themselves. The schoolhouse in the Hopwood District was swept away, but
the teacher, hearing the tumult, had led the children to the hillside
just in time.

The most notable fires in the history of Asotin Town were on February
3, 1886, in which the Pioneer Hotel belonging to Mrs. Lile was
destroyed, and that of March 15, 1893, in which the City Hotel,
belonging to Mrs. Myers, was burned. The feature of the second fire
which gave it great notoriety was that a man named Frank Sherry
perished in the flames. It appeared that Charles E. Myers, the husband
of the woman who conducted the hotel, but who had been separated from
her, had been found not guilty of killing a man some years before as
result of difficulty about his first wife. The sentiment upon the
discovery of the death of Sherry became intense in the town and it was
reported to officers that there was a plan for lynching Myers, who had
become charged with having fired the hotel in order to punish his wife
and a man of whom he was jealous. _The Sentinel_, in speaking of the
event in its issue of March 31st, declares that the reports of purposed
lynching are exaggerated and that the people of the place have no other
thought than a fair trial. As a matter of fact, Myers was conveyed to
Dayton. He was subsequently tried for murder. The case was remarkable
in that it was appealed twice to the Supreme Court and on the first
appeal was retried. The verdict of guilty was affirmed in both cases.
Petitions for pardon were sent to Gov. John H. McGraw, but he declined
to stop the course of judicial decision, and Myers, without at any time
having confessed the crime, was executed on September 30, 1895, two
and a half years after the alleged crime. The execution took place at
Pomeroy, and in accordance with the barbarous and horrible law then
prevailing was public, and it is stated that hundreds of men, women and
children were present.

The annals of the county were marked in August, 1896, with the lynching
of a half-breed, Viles, for a sexual outrage, and the same kind of
punishment for a similar offense with murder was meted out to a boy
named Hamilton in the same month of 1903. The old timers in discussing
those events express the opinion that though lynch law is to be
deplored, and though in the second case the criminal was a half-witted
degenerate, yet the proof was clear in both cases (for both confessed),
and the condign punishment well-merited.

Turning from the miscellaneous events to the constructive industries of
the county, we may say that there has been a steady and substantial,
though not rapid increase in population, production, and property
valuation, year by year from the date of county organization. The
original stock industry gave way to grain farming, and in that Asotin
County has been, for its area, one of the most productive in the state.
It is asserted that Asotin warehouses and platforms along the Snake
River from which the steamboats gather up the wheat, constitute the
greatest initial grain shipping point or series of points on the O. W.
R. and N. R. R. system.


ORCHARDS AND GARDENS

But though the wheat and barley of the prairies constitute already
a great production and will in the future constitute a still larger
source of revenue, the most interesting and important industry is
horticulture and fruit raising. In the area of land devoted to
intensive farming under irrigation, Asotin has nearly as much as
the other three counties of old Walla Walla put together. This very
important productive area, which comprises the most distinctive feature
of the county, centers at Clarkston. The history of this industry and
this place constitutes a chapter by itself, unique in the history of
the Northwest.

The Clarkston project has been practically the work of one of the
most noted historic families of the United States, that of the Adams
family of Boston. Charles Francis Adams the second, when president of
the Union Pacific R. R., formed the conception of an irrigated tract
under ideal conditions upon land which he could see had superior
advantages of location, soil, and climate, that is to say the broad
flat, with successive benches, on the west side of the junction of the
Snake and Clearwater. That location was first called Lewiston. Then in
remembrance of the historic name of Concord, Mass., dear to the New
Englanders who were founding the enterprise, the name Concord was used.
Objections on the part of local residents arose, and on April 6, 1900,
the name of the voting precinct was changed by the county commissioners
to Clarkston, as the fitting mate to Lewiston, recalling the two
leaders of the first expedition of discovery. By special petition to
the Federal authorities the name of Clarkston was adapted for the name
of the town.

The enterprise at Clarkston was in reality, it should be observed, a
second thought on the part of Mr. Adams, for his first plan was the
development of what is now known as the Indian Cache Ranch, formerly
known as the Adams Ranch, on the north side of the Clearwater, a
short distance above Lewiston. That splendid property was the first
undertaking of Mr. Adams.

The first organization of the project at Clarkston was effected in
1896 under the name of the Lewiston Water and Power Co., of which
Henry Adams the Second, son of Charles Francis Adams, became the
head. This company ultimately had a capital of $2,000,000. In 1900
the company acquired the property of the Lewiston Light Company which
had been formed in 1899 to provide electric light and power for
the City of Lewiston. In 1904 the Asotin Land and Water Company's
holdings were acquired and the projects were all blended in the
Lewiston-Clarkston Company, and that in turn was reorganized in 1910 as
the Lewiston-Clarkston Improvement Company. Henry Adams, with members
of his family, retained the majority of the stock. At the present
time, the properties are segregated into two distinct divisions. The
Lewiston-Clarkston Improvement Company conducts the land business,
while the utility work, the light and power business, is conducted
under the name of the Washington-Idaho Water, Light and Power Co.
Such is a bare outline of the general plan and changes effected by
reorganization of this remarkable enterprise. Entering a little more
into detail, it is of interest to note that the initial incorporators
of the Lewiston Water and Power Company were E. H. Libby, formerly of
Yakima, C. C. Van Arsdil and Dr. J. B. Morris of Lewiston, and G. W.
Bailey and Wm. Farrish of Asotin. This incorporation acquired 2,500
acres at low figures, ranging from ten to twenty-five dollars per acre,
largely from the original entrymen, Edward Pearcy, E. J. Warner, Wm.
Caldwell, S. Wildenthaler, Joseph Alexander, Chris Weisenberger, D. S.
Dent, John Aubin, together with a tract that had been secured by the
New England Mortgage Security Company. E. H. Libby became president of
the company. Land secured, water was the next requisite. The Asotin
Creek had already been filed on and in 1896, July 18th, water actually
reached Vineland. Mr. Libby acted as manager, with intermissions,
until April 7, 1911. Mr. Libby, with W. G. Clark, engineered the
reorganization of the Lewiston-Clarkston Company, which in 1910 became
the Lewiston-Clarkston Improvement Company. At that time Spencer
Trask & Company of New York, took $600,000 bonds of the new company
and acquired an interest in the common stock. H. L. Powers, now of
Lewiston, became vice president and manager in 1911, with Henry Adams
as president, and retained the position till 1912, when he removed
to Lewiston. He continued to act as vice president of the Lewiston
Land & Water Company. Robert A. Foster, who had come in 1910 as
engineer, became in 1912 the vice president and general manager of the
Improvement Company, and in 1914, its president.

Land and water secured, the next necessity was a bridge across Snake
River. Clarkston was so logically connected with Lewiston, though in
another state, that a direct connection by a bridge was vital. The City
of Lewiston granted to Mr. Libby a charter for the construction of a
bridge in May, 1896. It was completed and opened for traffic June 24,
1899. This was a great bridge, 1,450 feet long, lifted so high above
the river as to allow steamers to pass under. The first articles of
incorporation of the bridge first known as the Lewiston-Concord Bridge,
were dated November 26, 1897, and the incorporators were E. H. Libby
and George W. Bailey. The incorporation was practically identical with
the Lewiston Water and Power Company. Being across a navigable river
the plans had to be approved by the secretary of war, and a permit
granted by Congress. These necessities were duly accomplished in 1898.
The contract for the construction called for $110,000. In 1914 the
bridge became the joint property of the two states, for $80,000.

Asotin Creek has a mean annual discharge of 39,410 acre feet. The
system makes provision for a domestic and municipal consumption for
10,000 people, and irrigation supply for 6,000 acres. The main pipe
line is eleven miles long, and is from thirty-two to forty-eight inches
in diameter, made of wooden staves, except where it crosses Maguire
Gulch, a very high pressure steel pipe, four feet in diameter is used.

[Illustration: ONE VIEW OF THE PARTIALLY COMPLETED TWENTY MILLION
GALLON POMEROY GULCH RESERVOIR. A LINK IN THE PRESSURE WATER SERVICE
FOR THE IRRIGATION AND DOMESTIC SUPPLY OF CLARKSTON-VINELAND]

The Pomeroy Reservoir has a capacity of 20,000,000 cubic feet or 460
acre feet.

The major part of what has generally been known as Clarkston-Vineland
has been sold by the company and is cultivated in small tracts,
beautifully laid out and developed, trees, flowers, shrubbery, and
lawns, a continuous village, thus fulfilling the noble ideal of the
projectors as being a model irrigation project. The company has,
however, retained possession of the larger part of the magnificent
Clarkston Heights and is handling that property as a unit. It is a
district hard to match among the irrigated tracts of the Northwest.
It has every conceivable advantage of soil, climate, scenery, water
supply, and when ultimately sold will be one of the rare home lands
of the world. The company still owns about one-third of the townsite
of Clarkston and about five thousand acres of land, of which 927.98
acres are in apple trees in a solid body. The apple trees are divided
as follows in percentages: Winesap, 40 per cent; Yellow Newtowns, 15;
Spitzenberg, 15; Jonathan, 10; Rome Beauty, 10; assorted varieties, 10.
The average holding on the tract is only 3-1/2 acres, making this the
most densely populated irrigation district in the United States.

The electric power and light properties of the company, under another
organization, as stated, constitute a system by themselves. The power
plant comprises the Asotin power station, the Pomeroy power station,
the Clarkston auxiliary steam plant, and the Lewiston sub station;
a total of 3,200 horse power. There is also a power development on
the Grande Ronde River, 2-1/2 miles above the mouth and 28-1/2 miles
from Clarkston, with a minimum of 6,900 horse power, and a peack load
capacity of 10,000 horse power. Through these plants the company
supplies with power and light the towns of Asotin, Clarkston, Lewiston
and Lapwai, having a population of about fifteen thousand.

One of the most important recent enterprises in the development of this
section is the electric railway from Lewiston across the interstate
bridge to Clarkston and Vineland, a total amount of four miles of
street railway. This work was completed in the summer of 1916. It is
owned by the Lewiston-Clarkston Transit Company. Contrary to the recent
experience of some of the "Twin City" trolley enterprises, which have
been seriously affected by jitney competition, this undertaking is said
to be amply rewarded by financial results. There is so much transit
during the fruit picking and packing season and there is so much
general activity of movement to and from Lewiston, that the cars are
almost constantly well filled. There was a total of 2,000,000 passenger
crossings over the bridge during the year ended at this writing.

The Clarkston-Vineland region has none of the first pioneer settlers
left. There are, however, a number of what may be called the second
wave of immigration, prior to the inauguration of the Improvement
Company. Mr. and Mrs. F. G. Morrison are said to be the earliest comers
now living in the town. They came in 1878, though not to the place
where they are now living. At the time of their coming the ferry was
maintained by Ed Pearcy. E. J. Warner had a claim in what is now the
business part of Clarkston. "Johnnie" Greenfield, an old bachelor, was
then living on the "flat." He was a landscape gardener of much ability,
having been employed to lay out Woodward's Gardens in San Francisco.
There was a family named Pearsall living a little west of the present
home of Mr. Morrison, having four sons, Jerry, Jake, William, and Ed.

We referred earlier in this chapter to O. F. Canfield. He is a man of
unique interest, both by reason of keen intellect, many adventures in
the wildest regions of the Pacific Coast, and his peculiarly marked
pioneer traits. He came as a ten year old boy with his father, W. D.
Canfield, and the family from Iowa across the plains in 1847. Being
late in reaching Oregon, the father decided to accept the urgent
invitation of Dr. Whitman that he remain at Waiilatpu (Mr. Canfield
says that the Indians sounded that historic name more as _Waiilatipsu_)
for the winter. They had been there but about a month when the dreadful
Whitman massacre of November 29, 1847, occurred. The father of the
family was shot by the Indians, but by reason of a glancing bullet was
not seriously, though painfully wounded. In the general excitement
he evaded observation and remaining in hiding till night managed to
communicate with Mrs. Canfield and the children. Thinking from all
the indications that the Indians were not going to murder the women
and children, Mr. Canfield decided to try to reach Spalding's station
at Lapwai where he hoped that he might find rescuers for the captives
at Waiilatpu. Though bleeding from his wound, and having but scanty
food or clothing in the freezing weather of winter he set out and with
terrible suffering reached Lapwai. The son, now a white haired man
of seventy-eight, tells us that his father would never have reached
Lapwai, had not old Timothy, the Nez Perce chief of the Alpowa,
succored him and carried him across the river. Being on the north
side of the river he was comparatively safe and reached Lapwai. Years
after, so Mr. Canfield tells us, he saw Timothy, then very old and
destitute. Telling him that he was the son of the man whom he saved at
that momentous time, he told the old Indian that he wanted to pay him
for saving his father. But Timothy would not take anything. He said,
striking his breast, that he had "_hyas close tumtum_." It was "_halo
chickamon_." Finally Mr. Canfield induced the old man to accept some
tobacco and an overcoat as presents, but not as pay.

Mr. Canfield told another Indian story of very different character,
worthy of preservation. When Howlish Wampoo, the famous Umatilla
chief, was the ruler of his tribe he had many horses, some fine racing
animals. There was a great horse racer at that time named Joe Crabbe,
living in Portland. Crabbe had known of Howlish Wampoo's fast horses
and was anxious to get up some races and incidentally clean up some
big bets. Going to Umatilla he finally engineered a big meet with the
Indians. The crowning event was to be between Crabbe's champion and
anything that the Indian chief could bring on. Howlish Wampoo was very
crafty. He might have been a Teuton diplomat of the present. He brought
out and made a great parade of a spotted horse which he said he was
going to run, and then innocently put the horse in a corral very handy
to the white men. Crabbe's hustlers took the horse out in the night, no
Indians being in sight, and tried him. They found that he was nothing
extra fast, and so they made all their plans in the light of that
discovery. The next day came the great race. Everything was excitement,
and betting went to a great pitch. Crabbe finally put up $1,500 on his
horse and at last even his silver mounted saddle and spurs. Howlish
Wampoo accepted the bets with seeming reluctance and Indian stoicism.
When the horses were brought out Crabbe saw with some suspicion that
the spotted Indian racer looked a little different and stepped a
little different from what he did the day before. As he told Canfield
in relating his experience he "felt a sort of cold chill go down his
back." But it was too late to back out. Off they went, a four mile
race, two miles to a stake, around it and back again. The Indian horse
was evidently not the same horse. He went like a shot out of a gun and
reached the goal post so much ahead that his rider turned back to run
again with Crabbe's champion, and then beat him into camp. The Indians
made an awful clean up on the white men's bets. Howlish Wampoo, with
just a faint suspicion of an inward grin on his mahogany countenance,
told Crabbe that he might have his saddle and spurs back again, and
enough money to get home on.

Afterwards Crabbe made great offers to the Indian for the spotted
racer, wishing to take him East or even to Europe, for he was satisfied
that he could beat the world in a four mile race. But Howlish Wampoo
would never sell the pet racer.

Mr. Canfield remembers the events of the Whitman massacre with
intensity and narrates them with vividness. He considers the
fundamental cause to have been the fear by the Indians that the whites
were going to dispossess them of their lands, and that their fears in
that respect were fostered by Tom Hill, a renegade Delaware Indian,
who had drifted across the continent, having come considerable part
of the way with the Canfields. Jo Lewis, a half-breed, who had been
greatly befriended by the Whitmans, was another inciting cause. Both
of them were bad men and grossly betrayed their benefactors. The fatal
scourge of measles and the death of some of Whitman's patients was
an occasion for the outbreak, but the fear of white occupation was,
in Mr. Canfield's judgment, the real cause. He says that he knows
that Tamsucky was the leader in the massacre and that it was he who
buried his tomahawk in Whitman's head. There was reason to believe
that Tamsucky afterwards greatly regretted his act. There were four
Indian chiefs, Isticcas, Moolipool, Tinsinmitsal, and Beardy, who were
steadfast friends of the whites. This assertion of Mr. Canfield is the
more interesting by reason of the fact that Miles Cannon in his recent
book, "Waiilatpu," asserts that Isticcas was a traitor and participated
in the massacre. Mr. Canfield is confident that that is an error. Mrs.
Jacobs (well known in Walla Walla, now living in Portland, an eight
year old child at the time of the massacre, a member of the Osborne
family, who were present at the tragedy), supports Mr. Canfield's
statement, declaring that old timers asserted that if there were any
Christians in the country, Isticcas was one. Mr. Cannon in his book
also expresses the opinion that Mr. Rogers basely asserted to the
Indians that Doctor Whitman was poisoning them, hoping thereby to save
his own life. Mrs. Jacobs declares that this statement is absolutely
false and that Mr. Rogers, like the rest of the victims, died like a
hero and a Christian.

Doctor Whitman, according to Mr. Canfield's recollection, while one of
the noblest and bravest of men, was not a "fighting man," submitting
rather tamely, as he thought, to insults by the Indians. Nor was he
so large and powerful a man physically as some have described him.
The most valuable testimony about Whitman is found in the statement
by Mr. Canfield that he heard him several times discussing the future
of this region with the elder Canfield. He urged him to remain in the
Walla Walla Valley, pointing out that since it had become American
territory it offered greater inducements to settlement than any other
part of Oregon. He thought it better than the Willamette Valley. He
declared that it was the best sheep country in the world, that during
the eleven winters since he came to Walla Walla there were only two in
which sheep could not have grazed the year round. He proposed that Mr.
Canfield locate near Waiilatpu, and the next year join with himself
in an organized drive of a large band of sheep into the country and
the inauguration of a permanent wool industry. He figured that they
could work their wool down to The Dalles and there reach regular boat
connections and from the Lower Columbia ship by sailing vessels to
New York, Boston, and Europe. It was certainly a great conception and
demonstrates anew the practical judgment and far vision of the martyr
of Waiilatpu.


THE TOWNS OF ASOTIN COUNTY

Asotin and Clarkston are the only organized towns in Asotin County.

As stated earlier there was a double location, Assotin City and Asotin,
for what has now become one town under the latter name. The former
place was laid out by Alexander Sumpter in May, 1878. On July 22,
1880, the dedication was made by Mr. and Mrs. Sumpter, and at the same
time a postoffice was located there. The next year Mr. Sumpter erected
a warehouse. The ferry across Snake River was established by J. J.
Kanawyer in October, 1881.

A flour mill was put up in 1883 by L. O. Stimson at a point about
two-thirds of a mile up the creek from its mouth. That mill was run for
a time by John Dill, then by Curtis and Braden, who bought out Stimson.
A little later than Mr. Sumpter's location, Mr. Schank employed A.
T. Beall to survey his land near the mouth of the creek for a town
site. The plot of this location was filed November 10, 1881, by T. M.
E. Schank, W. H. Reed, Louise D. Reed, and Alexander Reed. Various
additions have been made to the original site. Mr. S. J. Sergeant
tells us that when he came to Asotin in 1879, there was nothing except
Schank's cabin. During the next year Mr. Schank and Mr. Reed set out in
earnest to start their town. In the issue of the _Sentinel_ of April
24, 1885, we find an advertisement that would do credit to a Spokane
real estate dealer setting forth the desirability of the location for
business, loans or investment. Lots are announced at from thirty to one
hundred and fifty dollars, and "sure to advance."

In the _Asotin Spirit_, beginning October 19, 1883, succeeded by the
_Sentinel_, June 24, 1885, we find other interesting ads, of that day.
In the first number of the _Spirit_ Pettyjohn and McAlpin advertise
their general store. F. E. Scott of Theon announces that he will sell
wines, whiskeys, oysters, candies, medicines, and toilet articles. The
ferry of J. J. and P. Kanawyer appears and it is asserted that the road
to Lewiston by that crossing is far better than any other. The Assotin
Flour Mills of Curtis and Braden have good space, and they announce
that they will give thirty-five pounds of flour and six pounds of bran
for a bushel of wheat.

[Illustration: MAIN STREET, LOOKING SOUTH, CLARKSTON]

[Illustration: PUBLIC LIBRARY, CLARKSTON]

In the _Sentinel_ of various issues in 1885, we find the advantages
of the Pearcy ferry displayed. The Lile House of J. D. Lile appears.
In the _Sentinel_ of June 24, 1885, is a flaming prospectus of a
"Grand Social Hop" to occur in Embree Hall on the eve of the Fourth.
The floor managers were to be Wm. Critchfield, J. P. Fine, and Henry
Thomason. The committee of arrangements was to consist of C. S. Morey,
J. P. Fulton, Al Stiffel, and A. M. Morris. The Packwood Pearce and
Warner String Band was to provide music. Tickets were to be $2.25. The
_Sentinel_ of October 9, 1885, contains the obituary of Mr. Schank
who had died by suicide, hanging himself in his own house in what was
supposed to be a moment of aberration through business worry. In the
same number is a remarkably drawing ad., by Baumeister and Co. to the
farmers. The cards of L. J. Dittmore and G. W. Bailey, lawyers, appear.

It may be very suitable to give here the successive stages in the
history of the one paper which has held the field substantially all
the time. Coming to Asotin from Pataha and taking with it the name of
_Spirit_, it was published at first by J. H. Ginder and Co., to be
succeeded, March 28, 1884, by D. B. Pettyjohn, editor and proprietor.
October 9, 1885, the paper became the _Sentinel_, published by the
Sentinel Publishing Co. It continued under that name for over fourteen
years, and on November 4, 1899, appeared as the _Asotin County
Sentinel_, the editors and proprietors being Elmer Waldrip and Kay
L. Thompson. Mr. Thompson has been sole proprietor since 1902, and
has conducted the paper with conspicuous ability, making of it one
of the best weeklies in the state. It can be truly affirmed that the
_Sentinel_ has been a great factor in the development of Asotin County.

In 1887, the rival town sites had practically blended, or rather
the most of Assotin City had slid down to Asotin. The time for
incorporation seemed to have arrived. On May 28, 1888, a meeting of
citizens was held in Baumeister's Hall, for preparing incorporation
papers. These were approved by Judge W. G. Langford, territorial judge,
on June 15th, and thus Asotin became an incorporation. The judge
appointed D. Talbot, H. C. Fulton, W. J. Clemans, J. N. Rice, and
Edward Baumeister a provisional board of trustees. The first election
was held April 1, 1889, and the trustees elect were as follows: J. K.
Rice, D. J. Wann, J. H. Bingham, M. B. Mitchell and James Michie.

But like some other "plans of mice and men" this went "agley." The
Supreme Court of the new state made a decision in February, 1890, which
invalidated such towns as had been incorporated by order of district
courts.

This set aside all the proceedings of Asotin thus far. Feeling that
the indications thus far were such as to justify incorporation, the
citizens petitioned the county commissioners on May 29, 1890, to
call an election for incorporation under the state law. An election
having been set it was duly held on June 21st. Thus Asotin was duly
reincorporated under state law, and the officers selected were these:
Mayor, Charles Isecke; councilmen, H. E. Benedict, Edward Baumeister,
N. Ausman, Richard Ruddy, and L. B. Howard; treasurer, J. O'Keefe.

Different citizens of Asotin to hold the place of chief executive
of the city have been Charles Isecke, who, as stated, was the first
incumbent of the office in 1890, and who held it for three years, and
was again chosen in 1906 to serve for two years. Edward Baumeister was
elected mayor in 1905.

J. B. Jones was the choice for mayor in 1908 and continued in 1909 and
1910.

The first council chosen on June 21, 1890, consisted, as noted, of H.
E. Benedict, Edward Baumeister, N. Ausman, R. Ruddy, and L. B. Howard.

Without endeavoring to give the complete list of city officials we will
pass on to 1905, and in that year we find the council composed of Kay
L. Thompson, J. B. Jones, M. B. Coon, G. A. Brown and H. Critchfield.
In 1906 the personnel of the council was this: E. H. Dammarrell, S. J.
Sargeant, F. B. Jones, M. B. Coon, Kay L. Thompson. In 1907, Messrs.
Coon, Sargeant, and Dammarrell were re-elected, and R. Graham and Ben
Ayers came in as new members. In 1908, Mr. Ayers was re-elected, but
the other four were new men, A. Beckman, C. Brantner, M. J. Garrison,
H. C. Fulton. In 1909, all held over with the exception of Mr.
Garrison, the new member elect being E. G. MacFarlane. Beginning with
1910 the mayors and councilmen have been the following:

1910--J. B. Jones, mayor. Councilmen: A. Beckman, M. J. Garrison, Ben
Ayers, E. G. MacFarlane, and C. M. Brantner. Treasurer: I. N. Brazeau.
Clerk: C. S. Florence.

1911--Mayor: J. R. Glover. Councilmen: Kenneth McIntosh, Jay Swain, Ben
Ayers, E. G. MacFarlane, and M. J. Garrison. Treasurer: Ed Bucholz.
Clerk: E. Matthes.

1912--Mayor: J. R. Glover. Councilmen: Ben Ayers, Chas. S. Florence, A.
Beckman and K. McIntosh. Treasurer: Ed Bucholz. Clerk: E. Matthes.

1913--Mayor: J. R. Glover. Councilmen: Ben Ayers, K. McIntosh, A.
Beckman, Chas. S. Florence and Geo. W. Bailey. Treasurer: Ed Bucholz.
Clerk: E. Matthes.

1914--Mayor: J. R. Glover. Councilmen: Ben Ayers, Geo. W. Bailey, L. H.
Jurgens, W. A. Forgey and A. Beckman. Treasurer: Ed Bucholz. Clerk: I.
N. Brazeau.

1915--Mayor: A. A. Wormell. Councilmen: E. R. Downen, K. McIntosh, W.
A. Forgey, L. H. Jurgens and Ben Ayers. Treasurer: Ed Bucholz. Clerk:
C. A. Laufer.

1916--Mayor: A. A. Wormell. Councilmen: L. H. Jurgens, Ben Ayers, A.
A. Alvord, K. McIntosh and E. R. Downen. Treasurer: Ed Bucholz. Clerk:
Chas. S. Florence. On April 4, 1916, Wormell resigned, and on April 18,
1916, M. J. Garrison appointed mayor by council for unexpired term.

1917--Mayor: M. J. Garrison. Councilmen: L. H. Jurgens, E. R. Downen,
Ben Ayers, A. A. Alvord and K. McIntosh. Treasurer: Ed Bucholz. Clerk:
Chas. S. Florence.


CLARKSTON INCORPORATED

The incorporation of Clarkston has its first mention in the minutes
of the county commissioners on January 7, 1901, when a petition from
71 citizens was received asking for such action. The proposition was
lost by vote of 15 to 37 on August 5th. The petitioners returned to the
charge on May 5, 1902, to incorporate Clarkston and Vineland as a city
of the third class. This was defeated May 24th by 70 to 110. At the
meeting of the commissioners on July 8, 1902, there came still another
petition, asking that Clarkston be incorporated as a city of the fourth
class. An election on that issue was held on August 2d, and this time
incorporation won, 45 to 31. At the next meeting the commissioners
rearranged the precinct, making the limits of Clarkston coterminous
with the incorporation and from the remainder creating Vineland
Precinct.

[Illustration: HIGH SCHOOL BUILDING, CLARKSTON]

Following this election Clarkston was duly incorporated, and the first
city government had its meeting for formal organization on August
26th. Alexander Robinson was the first mayor. L. S. Lehm was the first
treasurer. The council consisted of George S. Bailey, C. S. Whitford,
A. S. Burnett, V. Anderson, and S. J. Roberts. Wm. Porter was appointed
clerk, Robert F. Klein marshal, and E. E. Halsey city attorney. The
first regular election occurred in December, 1902. The former officers
were re-elected, with the exception of Burnett and Roberts, who were
succeeded by S. T. Ramsey and Mr. Halligus. Mayor Robinson died in
1903. The election of December 8, 1903, resulted in the election of
F. C. Brown as mayor. The councilmen consisted of S. T. Ramsey, C. S.
Whitford, A. S. Burnett, V. Anderson, and A. J. Wood. Mr. Lehm was
re-elected treasurer. The appointive officers were continued.

Mr. Frank N. Brown continued to be rechosen to the position of mayor
from 1903 to 1907. The mayors following were these: R. M. Yount,
1907 to 1908; D. B. Parks, 1909 to 1910; R. M. Yount, 1910 to 1913;
Dr. Paul W. Johnson, 1913 to 1914; E. J. Bailey, 1914 to 1916; J. E.
Hoobler, 1916 to 1917. During the period from 1903 to 1917, we find
the councilmen to have been: from 1903 to 1908, J. E. Hoobler, E. R.
Stevens, S. T. Smiley, C. W. Hunton, and E. J. Bailey; 1909, F. M.
Hartley, J. E. Heritage, S. L. Fowler, I. W. Rucker, H. S. Jones; 1910
and 1911, J. E. Hoobler, D. H. Stephens, S. L. Fowler, I. W. Rucker,
D. H. Ransom; 1912, T. W. Hartley, J. E. Hoobler, I. W. Rucker, Herman
Frank; 1913, J. E. Heritage, Mr. Daege, E. J. Dewar, J. P. Goetchius,
H. G. Jones, F. M. Hartley, Herman Frank; 1914, Robert Meyer, J. H.
Maynard, Herman Frank, H. S. Jones, F. M. Hartley, Mr. Bundy, J. E.
Heritage; 1915, F. M. Hartley, W. E. Potter, John Whistler, P. T.
Lomax, F. M. Talbot, L. M. Faulkenbury, P. F. Stillings; 1916, J.
H. Maynard, E. J. Price, H. S. Jones, F. M. Hartley, Mr. Bundy, P.
T. Lomax, Mr. Hill--by resignation of Mr. Hartley, Lee Morris was
appointed; 1917, John Getty, J. H. Clear, L. E. Morrison, I. W. Knight,
M. W. Isle, W. O. Bond, C. B. Thomson. For several years past G. L.
Ackley has been clerk.

Both Asotin and Clarkston have maintained commercial clubs since
their early days. In Asotin the officers of the present are Edward
Baumeister, president; and Charles S. Florence, secretary-treasurer.

The club at Clarkston was organized on September 11, 1899, and was
first known as the Business Men's Association. Its first special aim
was the gravelling of the very dusty streets. The officers of the
first organization were: H. C. Whetstone, president; C. M. Evans, vice
president; T. W. Enos, secretary; Alexander Robinson, treasurer. In
1908 it was reorganized, named Commercial Club, and the officers chosen
were: E. H. Libby, president; R. B. Hooper, vice president; J. E.
Hoobler, secretary-treasurer.

An attractive, though not large building was erected, with the
expectation of using it as a library, but when the Carnegie Library was
built, the former building became the property of the city, and is now
used as a council room, as well as a Commercial Club meeting place. The
present officers of the club are: E. J. Bailey, president; Lee Morris,
vice president; Lester Hoobler, secretary-treasurer. By reason of the
departure of Mr. Hoobler to join the army, the duties of secretary are
now in the hands of G. L. Ackley.

The educational system of Asotin County, like that of other units of
old Walla Walla, has been typically American, one of the bed rock
institutions in the upbuilding of the new land. From the first the
people of the county have taken pride in their schools and while not
absolutely true at all times and in all places to the highest interest
of their children--as none are even in the State of Washington--they
have results which make a demonstration of high ideals. There has been
steady advancement from the log schoolhouse day to date.

The first school in what is now Asotin County was at Anatone, then
the most flourishing community in what was then the eastern part of
Columbia County. It is worthy of special note that the building was
erected and the school maintained by the settlers themselves without
any county appropriation. Miss Angie Bean, now Mrs. Tuttle and now
living on Anatone Prairie, was the teacher of that pioneer school.
We are informed by Mr. John Romaine, who came to Anatone in 1878,
that the school was at its best during the first dozen or so years of
its existence. As has not infrequently occurred in exclusively grain
regions, the large farmers have absorbed the small ones and after a
certain stage has been reached population tends to decline. As a result
school districts diminish. Thus it has proved at Anatone.

The first school in Asotin City dates to 1881. The first teacher was
Miss Blanche Marsilliott. There seems to have been much tribulation at
Asotin about building an adequate schoolhouse. Not until 1904 was there
sufficient space for the steadily increasing numbers in the town. Even
with the handicap of insufficient space and equipment a high standard
seems to have been maintained, insomuch that the report of the State
College at Pullman indicated that the graduates of the Asotin High
School stand at the head in preparation for advanced work.

As giving a clear and effective general view of the present status of
the schools of Asotin County, we incorporate here a few paragraphs
for which we are indebted to Prof. W. J. Jerome, formerly county
superintendent and now city superintendent of Asotin.


PRESENT STATUS ASOTIN COUNTY SCHOOLS

By W. J. Jerome

The county being strictly an agricultural district, except for a
small portion devoted to the fruit industry, the school population is
comparatively small. Nevertheless the interest in education has always
been great and is steadily increasing.

The number of school census children in the county in May, 1917, was
1,777 but the number actually enrolled in the schools of the county for
the year was 1,884. The fact that the number enrolled is greater than
the number of census children is largely due to the fact that a large
number of children come into the schools of Asotin and Clarkston from
other places to take advantage of the good schools and the mild winter
climate.

The county contains two fully accredited high schools, Asotin and
Clarkston. Clarkston had a total enrollment during the past year of
1,005, Asotin, 317. The interest in education in each of these places
is very great and each maintains a fully equipped high school not
only carrying the regular old line courses but offering courses in
industrial arts as well. The Asotin School was the pioneer in the
county in the newer branches and is at present the best equipped
school in the county for work in manual training, home economics,
agriculture and science work. However Clarkston is now beginning a
program of industrial education that will soon place that district in
the forefront in this line of work.

There are also two other centers, Anatone and Cloverland, which have
introduced these new subjects and are rapidly building up splendid
little high school centers.

Perhaps the greatest change in the county has come to the one room
rural schoolhouse. In many cases the simple log building has been
replaced by a neat modern building, heated and ventilated by some of
the new heating and ventilating systems and provided with all modern
equipment.

Many of the remote rural schools employ normal graduates at good wages,
provide hot lunches during the cold weather, have a library, do some
work with tools and are as much abreast of the times as the schools of
the towns.

In the matter of expense for public education, the question never has
been how little but how much can we afford to give or how much can we
give. The configuration of the county has made necessary many remote
and small communities and it is astonishing how much the people in
these remote communities have been willing to sacrifice to educate
their children and when it has been impossible to maintain a local
school on account of the small valuation or small number of pupils many
families have annually moved to town for the winter months to give
their children the opportunities of the schools.

The amount spent last year, 1917, for the entire county was $65,793.
When it is remembered that we have not a mile of railroad in the county
and no manufacturing industries whatever and that our total valuation
is but little over $4,000,000, it will be plain that Asotin County
shows its interests in education in a most practical way.

Every year a considerable number of young people enter higher
institutions of learning, and an increasing number are coming back into
the county as teachers, ranchers, etc.

Perhaps the most striking thing about the schools of the county is the
great variety of physical conditions found. At Asotin and Clarkston
and other points on the Snake River the climate is mild, in fact a
veritable winter resort for this entire section, while up on the high
flats one could imagine himself on the prairies of Iowa or the Dakotas
in the winter. Some of the schools are situated on steep hillsides,
some in the great pine woods, some beside the beautiful Asotin Creek.
Some of the pupils ride to school on horseback, some come in autos,
some in sleds through the deep snow, some cross the wide Snake River
every day in row boats, some are brought in by school wagons. Some live
next door and some come in from the ranch seven miles away, but the
great majority walk in the good old-fashioned way.

Among the teachers responsible for the present condition of Asotin
County schools should be mentioned the following: J. B. Jones, for
many years superintendent of schools of Asotin, when Asotin maintained
the only high school in the county. Mr. Jones served a term as county
superintendent and is now a leading banker of the county. Another
teacher whose work will never be forgotten is Miss Lillian Clemans,
now Mrs. Lillian Clemans Merchant. Mrs. Merchant was a leading teacher
in the county for many years and took a leading part in educational
matters for four years as county superintendent. J. W. Graham, now
superintendent of the Pullman, Wash., schools, but for several years
a leading educator of the county as superintendent of the Clarkston
schools. W. J. Jerome, at present superintendent of the Asotin city
schools, who has been associated with these schools and with the
educational interests of the county for eight years. Gus Lybecker has
had charge of the Anatone schools for four years and is now beginning
a fifth year as the head of a new consolidated district at that place.
C. B. Thornton has been associated with the Cloverland schools as
principal for several years and is now the county superintendent of
schools.

No resume of the schools of the county would be complete that failed
to mention the three men who for many years worked together for
the Clarkston schools: Dr. P. W. Johnson, W. E. Howard, and Elmer
E. Halsey. Dr. H. C. Fulton, G. W. Bailey, William Farrish, W. G.
Woodruff, and Kay L. Thompson served Asotin in a similar fashion for
many years, indeed some of these men put in as much as twenty years
as school board members. In every district there is one or more but
usually one central figure, who takes a vital interest in the welfare
of the children and gives unstintedly of time and talent for the
schools of the district. The author wishes that all these splendid men
could be mentioned here, for to them as much as to teachers we owe our
schools.

       *       *       *       *       *

In treating of the other counties, we have devoted considerable space
to the churches. These indispensable agencies of the higher motives
and higher life have had the same general place in Asotin as in the
other counties. To some extent the same men whose names we noted in
Walla Walla went on into the newer fields. Early in the history of
Asotin City the Baptists effected an organization and erected a church.
Soon the Presbyterian, Methodist, United Brethren, and Christian
denominations became also established and maintain their church work to
the present day.

Clarkston also has a full quota of well sustained churches: Methodist,
Christian, Presbyterian, United Brethren, Church of God, Lutheran
(Norwegian), St. John's Evangelical (German), Catholic, Adventists,
Baptist, and Episcopal.

The fraternal orders are also well represented in both cities. The
first lodge in the county was Hope Lodge, I. O. O. F., at Anatone.
The Good Templars seem to have been pioneers in lodge organization
in Asotin City, dating to 1885. The first Odd Fellow lodge was known
as Riverside Lodge No. 41, and was organized in 1886. Other lodges
followed, and at the present date we find the following represented:
I. O. O. F.; Woodmen of the World; Women of Woodcraft; Grand Army of
the Republic; Sons of Veterans; Women's Relief Corps; Modern Woodmen;
Rebekahs; United Artisans; Stootki Tribe of Red Men; Masonic.

In Clarkston the orders are the Knights of Pythias, Masons, Odd
Fellows, Yeomen, Woodmen of the World, and Modern Woodmen.

[Illustration: PAROCHIAL SCHOOL, CLARKSTON]

Many more interesting and valuable details of the history and present
status of this youngest of our four counties might be given here, did
space allow. But we must be content to close with further reference
to that indispensable aid to the historical writer, and that is the
newspaper. We have already spoken of the _Sentinel_ of Asotin and
have made our acknowledgments for much valuable data derived from it.
Clarkston also has a weekly paper, the _Clarkston Republican_. The
_Vinelander_, however, was the first paper at that point, appearing
in 1898, published by Messrs. Leach, Henshaw and Lewis. The year
following C. S. Florence, now of Asotin, acquired the paper and
published it for a year, changing the name to the _Vineland Journal_.
At the opening of 1900, Messrs. Lewis and Leach, having retired from
their pioneer venture, undertook another by the publication of the
_Clarkston Chronicle_. This also was short lived, being suspended
after only about five months. There was still another transient in
the field of journalism, the _River Press_, existing from July, 1903,
to April, 1904, the publisher being at first Frank Barnes, followed
by B. T. Warren, and he in turn by O. U. Hawkins. Meanwhile the
_Republican_, the only permanent newspaper at Clarkston, had been
launched in January, 1901, by L. A. Woodward. After a few unimportant
shiftings, by which Mr. Woodward retired and again resumed possession,
the _Republican_ in 1904 passed into the possession of Messrs. Willis,
Murdock, and Garver. Mr. A. J. Garver became and still continues to
be the chief owner. The managing editor at the present date is W. A.
Wyatt, and the paper is now known as the _Clarkston Republic_.

We leave this jewel of a county, with her sister jewels, at this stage
of our story, anticipating for her great advances in the developments
which are certain to accrue to the world, and particularly to the
Pacific Northwest in the better days which are bound to succeed the
insanity and destructiveness of the present unholy war which racks the
earth.




CHAPTER V

PIONEER REMINISCENCES


This is a chapter of remembrances. The author has felt that the
work would be incomplete without some space devoted to the personal
experiences of those who made the history. Out of the vast amount of
matter which might be available he has selected such narrations as
cover the widest range and afford the greatest variety.

Some of these selections are of early letters, the writers of which
have long since passed away. A few were prepared originally for the
Inland Empire Pioneer Association. The larger number have been written
especially for this work by those who are still actively engaged
in the affairs of the community. It is with the belief that this
collection of actual experiences and observations will constitute a
chapter of present interest to the pioneers and will be a source of
ever-increasing pleasure and instruction to their descendants, that the
author gives it a place as the crowning feature of the book.

We first incorporate a letter by Doctor Whitman, never published
before, significant of the life and conditions, as well as the habit
of thought and mode of expression of that first stage in the history
of Old Walla Walla. Doctor Whitman's letter gives a vivid view of the
variety of interests with which he was concerned. It is as follows:

  Waiilatpu, September 29, 1845.

  Rev. Elkanah Walker.

 Dear Brother: I take a moment only to write as Mr. Eells is soon to
 be off.

 The first thing I have to say is, will you send Cyrus here to school
 this winter in case we have one, which we expect we may? I. W.
 Gilbert, formerly my day and Sabbath School scholar, has come up from
 the Willamet and will be likely to winter here, and most likely we
 may employ him to teach.

 If you send you may do well to come this way as you go to Lapwai [Mr.
 Walker was located at Tshimakain in the Spokane country] and leave
 Cyrus here.

 Few of the immigrants call on us.

 Four hundred and fifty wagons passed Fort Hall, but from seventy to
 one hundred went to California and one hundred left the trail at
 Malade to go to Waskopum. As they are so early they have no great
 need of provisions short of The Dalles. Most are now passed.

 Mr. Eells can tell you about Mr. Green's letter to me. We can now
 have little hope of a reinforcement. I do not think it best for me to
 say anything in relation to the subject hinted at in your first, but
 may at another time.

 I am trying to burn some coal [charcoal] in order to have a little
 work done in the shop. I hope also to get a millwright for a few days
 to set the sawmill at work.

 We would like scholars enough to take some of our time, the more the
 better. Mrs. Whitman is anxious also and more than willing to have as
 many as possible.

 With esteem and expectation of seeing you and letting you have a
 first rate article of corn meal, with our united compliments to you
 all.

  Yours truly,
  MARCUS WHITMAN.

A letter of an earlier date than that of Doctor Whitman, by one of the
immigrants of 1843, is of great interest for a number of reasons. We
give it here as containing the spirit of that first genuine American
immigration, the one that sealed the American possession of Oregon.

  Waiilatpu, October 27, 1843.

  Jesse Looney to John C. Bond,
  Greenbush, Warren County, Ill.

 Dear Sir: I embrace the opportunity of writing to you from this far
 western country afforded me by the return of Lieutenant Fremont to
 the States this winter. He thinks he will be at Independence, Mo., by
 January next, which will be in time for those who intend coming next
 season to this country to get some information about the necessary
 preparations to be ready for the journey.

 It is a long and tiresome trip from the States to this country,
 but the company of emigrants came through safely this season to
 the number of 1000 persons with something over 100 wagons to this
 place, which is 250 miles east of the Willamet Valley, and, with the
 exception of myself and a few others, have all gone on down there,
 intending to go through this winter if possible. About half of them
 have traded off their stock at Walla Walla, twenty-five miles below
 here [he means the Hudson's Bay fort] and are going by water. The
 balance went on by land to the Methodist Mission, 175 miles below
 this, intending to take to the water there.

 I have stopped here in the Walla Walla Valley to spend the winter,
 in order to save my stock. This is a fine valley of land, excellent
 water, good climate, and the finest kind of pine timber on the
 surrounding mountains, and above all a good range for stock both
 summer and winter. The Indians are friendly and have plenty of grain
 and potatoes, and a good many hogs and cattle. The missionaries
 at this and other missions have raised fine crops of wheat, corn,
 potatoes, etc., so that provisions can be procured here upon as good
 or better terms than in the lower settlements at present. Cattle are
 valuable here, especially American cattle. Things induced me to stop
 here for the winter, save my stock and take them down in the spring.

 In preparing for the journey of Rocky Mountains, you cannot be too
 particular in choice of a wagon. It should be strong in every part
 and yet it should not be very heavy. The large size, two-horse Yankee
 wagons are the most substantial wagons I have seen for this trip.
 You should haul nothing but your clothing, bedding and provisions.
 Goods are cheaper here than in the States. Let your main load be
 provisions--flour and bacon. Put in about as much loading ing as
 one yoke of cattle can draw handily, and then put on three good yoke
 of cattle and take an extra yoke for change in case of failure from
 lameness or sore necks, and you can come without any difficulty. The
 road is good, much better than we had expected, but is long. Bring
 all the loose cattle you can, especially milk cows and heifers. Do
 not attempt to bring calves. They will not come through, and by
 losing them you will be in danger of losing their mothers.

 I cannot urge you too strongly to be sure to bring plenty of
 provisions; don't depend on the game you may get. You may get some
 and you may not. It is uncertain. We were about five months on the
 way to this place, and I had plenty of flour, etc., to do me, but
 most of the company were out long before they got here, and there is
 little or nothing in the way of provisions to be had at the forts
 on the way. I would advise you to lay in plenty for at least five
 months, for if you get out on the way you will have trouble to get
 any till you get here. I would advise you to start as soon as the
 grass will admit. We might have started near a month sooner than we
 did, and then would have been here in time to have gone through with
 our cattle this winter. We left Independence, Mo., the 22d of May and
 we are just about a month too late. Myself and family were all sick
 when we left and continued till we left Blue River, and the rain and
 wind, but when we reached the highlands along the Platte we began
 to mend. My health is better than for years, and so far as I have
 seen this country I think it is very healthy. There was five or six
 deaths on the road, some by sickness and some by accident, and there
 were eight or ten births. Upon the whole we fared much better than
 we expected. We had no interruptions from the Indians. Our greatest
 difficulty was in crossing rivers. Mrs. L. says prepare with good
 strong clothing or sage brush will strip you.

 This shrub is very plenty, and was hard on our teams, especially
 those that went before, but it will not be so bad on those that come
 next year, for we have left a plain, well beaten road all the way. I
 will have a better opportunity of giving you accounts of this country
 next spring, and I want you to write the first chance and to direct
 to the settlement of Willamet.

 So no more, but remain,

  Your brother till death,
  JESSE LOONEY.

In connection with these letters dealing with the mission at Waiilatpu
and the immigration of 1843, we wish to include two of much interest,
not hitherto published, both dealing with Doctor Whitman. These are
letters of much later date than the preceding, though pertaining to the
times of the mission.

The first of these is by Perrin Whitman to W. H. Gray. Perrin Whitman
lived many years at Lewiston and was well known in all that region.

Letter from Perrin Whitman to W. H. Gray:

  Lapwai Station, October 11, 1880.

 About the 20th of April, 1843, I left Rushville, Yates County, N. Y.,
 with Dr. Marcus Whitman (my uncle) for Oregon. I distinctly remember
 of his telling his mother and friends that his visit with them would
 be necessarily short, as he had on his way east from Oregon, notified
 all who were desirous of emigrating to Oregon to rendezvous at
 Westport and Independence, Mo., and that he would pilot them with
 their wagons across the Rocky Mountains to the Columbia River. The
 immigration, consisting of about one hundred and twenty wagons, left
 the Missouri line about the last of May and reached Waiilatpu (Walla
 Walla Valley) about the 5th of the following September.

 The doctor piloted them the whole distance, as he had promised to do.
 Gen. J. C. Fremont (at that time a lieutenant) arrived at Waiilatpu
 with his Government train across the plains a few weeks after the
 arrival of our immigration.

 Doctor Whitman's trip east in the winter of 1842 and '43 was for the
 double purpose of bringing the immigration across the plains, also
 prevent, if possible, the trading off of this northwest coast to
 the British Government. I learned from him that the Mission Board
 censured him in strong terms for having left his missionary duty
 and engaged in another so foreign from the one they had sent him to
 perform. While crossing the plains I repeatedly heard the doctor
 express himself as being very anxious to succeed in opening a wagon
 road across the continent to the Columbia River, and thereby stay, if
 not entirely prevent, the trade of this northwest coast, then pending
 between the United States and the British Government.

 In after years the doctor with much pride and satisfaction reverted
 to his success in bringing the immigration across the plains and
 thought it one of the means of saving Oregon to his Government. I
 remained with him continuously till August, 1847, when he sent me to
 The Dalles. He was murdered the following November.

 The above statement is correct and true, so help me God.

  P. B. WHITMAN.

The next letter is from Judge O. S. Pratt, the territorial judge
who presided at the trial of the Indians implicated in the Whitman
massacre. It was addressed to Mrs. Catherine Sager Pringle, one of the
adopted children of Doctor Whitman, evidently in response to inquiries
for information.

While the facts which it states might be known from other sources, it
is of much interest as a summary of the permanent views of Judge Pratt
upon the life and character of Doctor Whitman.

  San Francisco, March 4, 1882.

 Dear Madam: In my reply to your letter of January 20th last, I wrote
 you I thought the late Doctor Whitman was born in Ontario County, N.
 Y. I said I would soon know as I had just written to a friend who had
 the means of knowing the doctor's birthplace and would be likely to
 send me exact information on the subject. In reply to a letter, which
 I caused to be written to Mrs. Henry F. Wisewell, residing at Naples
 in Ontario County, N. Y., who is the doctor's sister and the only
 surviving member of his father's family, I received today, under date
 of February 22, 1882, an answer dictated by her, stating that "Marcus
 Whitman was born in Rushville, Ontario County, N. Y., September 4,
 1802--the county then being very wild and new. In infancy he narrowly
 escaped death by burning, his cradle having taken fire from a brand
 falling out of the fireplace, when left alone. His father died in
 April, 1810; the same fall the son was sent to Plainfield, Mass., to
 live with his grandparents. He then attended school and returned to
 Rushville when eighteen years old. At the latter place he studied
 medicine and received a diploma at the Fairfield (N. Y.) Medical
 College. He thereafter practiced medicine a short time in Canada,
 and afterwards for a few years near his native place. The Rev. Mr.
 Parker of Ithaca, N. Y., while preaching in the interior of that
 state on behalf of the Northwestern Indians, became acquainted with
 Doctor Whitman; and the latter having become deeply interested in
 Mr. Parker's efforts, first went with him to explore Oregon in the
 spring of 1835, and returned to his native village about Christmas of
 the same year, bringing with him two Indian boys. They were sent to
 school and learned rapidly and were soon able to read well and write
 legibly.

 "In February, 1836, the doctor married Miss Narcissa Prentiss, a
 resident of Prattsburg, N. Y., and not far from his native village,
 who, with the doctor and the Rev. and Mrs. Spalding and the Indian
 boys, left April, 1836, for Oregon, their mission field, traveling
 west of the Mississippi, with pack horses and mules. Mrs. Whitman and
 Mrs. Spalding are understood to have been the first white women who
 ever crossed the Rocky Mountains. The doctor thereafter returned but
 once, starting October 7, 1842, and reached New York April 2, 1843,
 having suffered many hardships by the way, sleeping for the most part
 on the ground, and being at one time without food five days, and in
 his greatest extremity was compelled to kill his dogs to sustain
 life. From New York, before visiting his family, he hurried to
 Washington on his mission with the Government, which was to secure,
 if possible, Oregon to the United States. Not long afterwards he
 returned to his home west of the Rocky Mountains, and was, as is well
 known, massacred with his wife and others by the Indians, November
 29, 1847."

 I trust the foregoing, which may rightly be treated as authentic,
 will leave no uncertainty as to the birthplace and some of the
 important facts connected with the history of the late Doctor
 Whitman's useful life.

  Respectfully yours,
  O. S. PRATT.

Turning now from the letters to special contributions we will first
present one dealing with the Cayuse war, following the great tragedy at
Waiilatpu. This contains the personal experience of W. W. Walter, an
immigrant to the Walla Walla country of 1859. He lived many years near
Prescott. This article was written from his dictation by his daughter,
Mrs. Pettyjohn.


CAYUSE INDIAN WAR

By W. W. Walter

In December, 1847, word reached the settlements in Oregon that the
Cayuse Indians had killed Doctor Whitman and wife and twelve others.
A runner carried the word to Vancouver, and a messenger was at once
dispatched to Oregon City to Governor Abernethy, while Peter Skeen
Ogden, factor of the Hudson's Bay Company, with a small company of
Hudson's Bay men set out at once for the scene of the massacre--where
he accomplished his wonderful work of ransoming the white captives held
by the Indians.

"No other power on earth," says Joe Meek, the American, "could have
rescued those prisoners from the hands of the Indians." And no man
better than Mr. Meek understood the Indian character, or the Hudson's
Bay Company's power over them.

The Oregon Legislature was in session when the message from Vancouver
arrived, telling of the massacre. A call was made at once for fifty
riflemen to proceed at once to The Dalles--to guard the settlements
below from an invasion of the Indians. This company was known as the
"First Oregon Riflemen."

Word came that the Cayuse Indians were coming to kill all the settlers
in Oregon, and it was deemed best to meet the hostiles on their own
ground.

After the first fifty men had started for The Dalles, five companies of
volunteers were organized. I went from Tualatin County (now Washington)
in Capt. Lawrence Hall's company of volunteers--every man furnishing
his own horse and equipment--every one who could contribute a gun, or a
little powder and lead--that was the way we got our munitions of war.

We rendezvoused at Portland, awaiting marching orders, which were
given about January 1, 1848. We were in Portland a week or more, and I
remember myself and some other lads made a ride back to the Plains to
attend a dance--Christmas week.

About January 1, 1848, we started for the Cayuse Country, three hundred
men, all told--we marched across the country and ferried over the
Columbia at Vancouver. There the Hudson's Bay Company let us have a
cannon, and it was an elephant on our hands.

From Vancouver we traveled up the north side of the Columbia (dragging
that old cannon along) to a place above the Cascades where we built a
ferry boat and crossed the river again to the south side and followed
up the trails to the Dalles. We still kept our cannon, making portages
with it, and at the Dalles mounted the thing on a wagon. The fifty
men stationed there to hold the Mission were greatly annoyed by the
Indians, and just after we arrived a report was brought in that there
were hostile Indians up the Deschutes River, and two of our men on
horse guard were decoyed by the Indians and killed. It happened thus:
The Indians stripped their horses and let them graze near the guards,
giving the impression they were loose horses. Our men thought them
their own horses and went after them, when the Indians, who were
concealed in the grass with ropes on their horses, fired and killed the
two men. Those were the first men killed in the war.

So when we heard of the Indians up the Deschutes we were anxious for a
fight and started for them. The battleground was at the mouth of Tygh
Creek on the ridge where we, as emigrants, had come down the Deschutes
hill two years before. We met the Indians early in the morning. The
first we knew of their whereabouts we saw them formed in line on the
front of a high hill. To reach them we had to climb that hill, facing
their fire. We left our horses and took it afoot up that hill, but they
did not stand long--we soon routed them--we had but one man wounded.
We followed up with continuous firing on both sides--then we had our
horses brought up and gave chase. As the country was level on top the
hill we followed them five or six miles--they outstripped us, as they
had splendid fresh horses; we skirmished all that day--camped on the
hill at night, then the next day followed on until we reached their
deserted camp. There we found a very old and feeble Indian man and
woman--too old to travel. They were deserted and alone, with a little
pile of food lying by them. They refused to talk, so we learned nothing
from them--so we left them undisturbed and returned to the Dalles,
where we fitted up some old emigrant wagons and got some emigrant
cattle and Mission cattle, and made up a train of wagons to haul what
little supplies we had with us. We now started for the upper country,
following the old emigrant road.

We had our next encounter with the Indians at Wells Springs between
Willow Creek and Butter Creek. We camped there for the night--in
the morning we had just gotten out of camp when we began to see
Indians--Indians in every direction, in squads of ten and fifty, just
coming thick. There were enough of them to eat up our little band of
three hundred. We went only about a mile and a half when Col. Gilliam
called a halt and we began preparations for a fight.

It was estimated over one thousand Indians were on the ground. A party
of chiefs came out and called for a talk. Col. Gilliam, Tom McKay,
Charlie McKay and Mungo, the interpreter, went out to meet them. When
they met it was learned there were Indians from all the northern
tribes besides the Cayuses. There were Coeur d'Alenes, Flatheads, Pend
d'Oreilles and Spokanes.

The Cayuses had sent runners to all the different tribes telling them
the Whites in Oregon had killed all the Catholics and Hudson's Bay men
who were friends to these Northern Indians--they told them they had
killed Tom McKay, their best friend, and were now coming to kill them
and take their country. But when an old chief met the commission, he
saw and recognized old Tom McKay and knew then they had been deceived
and asked an explanation.

When Tom McKay, who was intimately acquainted with those northern
Indians, and whose influence over them exceeded that of any other
man in the country, told them the true story and that they were only
up there to punish the murderers of Dr. Whitman and people, the old
Flathead chief promised to take no part and to draw off all except the
Cayuses. When the haughty Cayuse chief, named Grey Eagle, heard this he
was so enraged he turned on McKay and said, "I'll kill you, Tom McKay,"
and drew his gun to fire, but McKay was too quick for him and fired
first, killing the chief.

Grey Eagle was a great medicine man, and had boasted he could swallow
all the bullets fired at him and McKay shot him in the mouth. As the
Indians turned to run, Charlie McKay shot Five Crows, breaking his
arm, but he escaped. It will be remembered he was the Indian who held
captive a girl from the Mission. Five Crows, however, shot the powder
horn off McKay, so you can see they were in pretty close quarters.

We boys gave McKay great credit for the service he done us--for our
little band of three hundred looked pretty small compared with the foe.

Now, the battle was fairly on. The Northern Indians drew off on a hill
and the Cayuses made a dash on us, about six hundred strong, all well
mounted, riding in a circle and firing whenever a chance came. The
Indians never left their horses--if they dismounted, the horse was
fastened to the rider. When an Indian was killed we would always find
the horse standing by his fallen rider, usually tied by the hair rope
to his wrist.

(The horse rode by Grey Eagle was a beautiful gray, and McKay's son
Alec rode him many years.) The fight lasted the whole day long--that
cannon that had caused so much vexation of spirit was of but little
use, as the Indians scattered so--it was fired a few times at a squad
of Indians at long range--it served more to terrorize them than to
kill, as it made a tremendous noise and they no doubt thought it great
medicine. It was an impressive sight to see those hundreds of Northern
Indians, splendidly mounted and armed after the Indian fashion, sitting
on their horses at one side all day long, watching the progress of the
fight. What a picture that would have made!

We camped that night on the battleground, but the next morning the
Indians were gone. I think neither side could claim a victory. As we
traveled that day Indians kept in sight all day, but did not interfere
with us until we reached the Mission at Waiilatpu, where we performed
the sad duty of gathering up the remains of the martyrs and burying
them. We found parts of bodies lying around, scattered about. We found
a skull with a tomahawk wound in it--we supposed it was that of Mrs.
Whitman. We also found locks of her beautiful yellow hair in the yard.
It was taken to Oregon City and placed among the Oregon State Documents.

We made a sort of stockade by building a wall breast high of adobe from
the old buildings--also built a corral for the horses by placing rails
end in the ground, and corraled the horses every night and guarded them
by day. We slaughtered what cattle we could find and jerked the meat
so we would have supplies in case we were corraled by the Indians. We
subsisted on Indian and Mission cattle--no bread.

After getting settled in camp, parts of two companies, myself one of
the number, escorted Joe Meek and his party to the snow line of the
Blue Mountains as he started on his famous trip across the continent
at midwinter, as an agent from Oregon, to ask protection of the United
States Government for the suffering settlers in the wilds of Oregon. He
was accompanied by Squire Ebberts and Nat Bowman, both mountain men,
and three others. So we left the little party to pursue their journey
amid untold perils while we returned to Fort Waters, as the Mission
was now called. This was in February. About the first of March about
eighty-five or ninety men were called to go out on a raid to gather
up what cattle we could and learn what we could of the whereabouts
of the hostiles. My company went, as we were the best mounted men in
the command. Not thinking to be gone long, we rode light and took no
provisions.

We traveled what was long known as the Nez Perces trails, cross the
country to Copeii, where we were met by two friendly Indians. They told
as the Cayuses were camped at the mouth of Tucanon. Our interpreter,
Mungo, said he could pilot us there. We concluded to hunt them up.

So at dark we started going down Copeii, then across the country to
Tucanon to where Starbuck now is. There we crossed and followed down
the creek, reaching the encampment just at break of day. Just as we
crossed Tucanon we ran onto an Indian guard, but he got away and ran to
camp--so when we got near camp two Indians came out with a white flag.
I will state here that runners had been sent with word that if friendly
Indians would raise a flag of truce they would not be molested, as we
were only seeking to punish the Cayuses. So when they sent out the flag
and asked for a talk, Col. Gilliam went forward. They claimed to be
Palouses and friendly to the Whites. Said the Cayuses had gone across
Snake River, but had left lots of stock behind which they would turn
over to the volunteers, and that they would go out and gather them in
for us. So they began running in horses and cattle, we helping--and
all went merrily along. However, we soon noticed the lodges going down
as by magic and the boys on the hill saw them busily ferrying their
families over the river, and asked why they were moving. They said
their women were afraid of the Whites and wished to go. So by their
cunning manoeuvres they had detained us half a day, and we, without
any food since the early morning before, were beginning to feel pretty
hungry.

When they had delivered up all the stock, Col. Gilliam said we would
drive out to grass and camp and eat. So we started out, but soon
discovered we had been duped the worst way. They were the Cayuses--even
the real murderers were there, and they were after us. Now there was
no thought of eating. Indians on every side, yelling like demons,
calling us women--afraid to fight. It was a running fight all day long
and we were still holding the stock at night--in McKay Hollow, where
we strung along the little hollow seeking shelter from the Indians by
hiding behind the banks. We did not dare kindle a fire. On examination
it was found thirty volunteers were wounded, but not dangerously. Our
ammunition was about exhausted and we were half famished.

The older men and officers evidently realized we were in a pretty
serious predicament, but we young boys had no idea of the danger we
were in, not as I see it now. During the night Gilliam ordered the
stock turned loose--as we were now about out of ammunition he hoped by
turning the stock loose to get rid of the Indians. The boys objected
to that move, but instead of the Indians leaving us that only renewed
their courage. They thought we were giving up, and attacked us more
savagely than ever. We were pretty well hidden and in no immediate
danger, so we saved our ammunition and only fired when sure of an
Indian--they frequently came in range when circling around us. In the
morning they still hung on our heels. As we started out they followed
us on--calling to Mungo repeatedly, asking why we did not stop to
fight, while he abused them in return.

The Indians would drop behind until a bunch of us were a distance from
the command, then make a dash, trying to cut us off, and we surely
were not cautious. Tom Cornelius, Pete Engart and myself were a little
behind when an Indian shot Engart in the calf of the leg. He fell from
his horse, saying he was killed. Tom and I jumped from our horses and
shook him up and told him he was not hurt--he gave up. We finally threw
him up astride his horse--we cursed him and told him to ride--_and he
rode_. By this time the Indians were on us and the boys ahead had not
missed us. I tell you we made a race for it, one of us on each side of
the wounded man, but we made it.

Another time that day Mungo's horse was shot from under him. Tom
Cornelius and I saw him fall and ran back to him. He had stopped to
take his saddle--we were just in time, as the Indians were coming
pell-mell, shouting, "We've got Mungo." I took Mungo behind me and Tom
took his saddle and away we went. This was the way we were at it all
the way, some one in close quarters all the time.

Mungo told the Cayuses we would fight when we reached the Touchet and
got water. Then began the race for the first stand at the Touchet.
The Indians beat us on the lower side, but we headed them off above
the ford. Some Indians hid in the brush and shot at our men as they
passed on the trail. We were trying to get our wounded men across, but
the Indians were killing horses and men. I was in the company up the
creek. When we came down, Col. Gilliam told Lieut. Engart to rout those
ambushed Indians. Engart called for volunteers to go in after them. I
was one with twenty others. We started for the hiding place, skirting
along the brush, expecting any minute to run on them. When we did find
them, not more than five or six of us were together in the lead, and
the Indians were firing at another squad of men some distance away--we
were within thirty feet of them. I fired and hit my Indian just as he
turned to run, striking him in the back of the head. He fell and I
stepped back behind a bush to reload, when another man ran in and stood
in my place; as he did so the Indian rolled over and fired at him,
killing him. Just then Nate Olney, an old Indian fighter, ran in with
a tomahawk and made a good Indian of him. He scalped him and I carried
the grewsome trophy at my saddle horn when I returned home. We killed
about sixty Indians there. It was hard to make an estimate of how many,
as they carried their dead away unless too hard pressed.

All during this battle the chief sat on his horse on the rocky point
just above Bolles Junction [the present junction] and gave command
and encouragement in a loud and stentorian voice. He could be heard
for miles. Finally a bullet sped his way and he was killed--and he
being the medicine man, the battle ceased and a council was called.
We were now across the Touchet. We were carrying our wounded men on
litters made by stretching blankets on willow poles--taking turns
carrying--that was a hard job. As we began to climb the hill beyond
the Touchet we heard the Indians let up their death-wail--they were
gathered together on those low hills just north the Bolles Junction
depot.

We traveled on to Dry Creek that day; there we went into camp and
spying some Indian horses on the prairie, myself with some others ran
in a bunch, near some brush where some of our men were hidden, and
as they passed, shot two. That was the first horse meat I had tried
to eat, but it made me sick--though they were young unbroken horses.
I was sure they tasted of the saddle blanket--suggestion, I suppose.
When we woke next morning there was four or five inches of snow on our
blankets--we had no tents.

A runner had been sent on to the Mission and a wagon sent out for our
wounded men. My bunkie and I got up early, mounted our horses and rode
on to the Mission that morning. The boys soon were preparing provisions
for the famishing troops, but after starving so long the smell of food
cooking made me sick and I could not eat until the next morning. Some
of the boys were so ravenous they had to be restrained or they would
have killed themselves eating.

Now we laid around camp, getting into mischief, and I learned to smoke.
The only regular rations issued us was tobacco--and the smokers seemed
to take such comfort in the pipe, I too indulged.

When we came into the Indian country Gilliam told us we could have
any Indian horses we captured. I was pretty handy with a rope and got
away with three head from the battle at the Touchet. One, a fine horse
rode by a chief, I was particularly proud of. A big burly Dutchman in
another company also coveted that horse, so one morning he put his
rope on him and led him into camp. I at once claimed the horse and
proceeded to make good my claim. He resisted and we got into a "scrap";
he had friends, so had I. All took sides--it was decided we fight for
possession; the winner to get him. That suited me all right--so at it
we went. Men say it was a hard fight, but I won and took the horse to
lead him off, when an under officer, a friend of the Dutchman, stepped
up and took hold of the rope, saying, "I'll take this horse." I was
only a boy of nineteen years, but I did not intend to give up the horse
without a struggle, and was considering the consequences of hitting an
officer when Colonel Gilliam walked unobserved into the ring, cut the
rope behind the officer's hand, handed the rope to me and walked away
without a word. I tell you I was the proudest boy in that camp--and
after the colonel was gone I could not resist crowing at the Dutchman
in true boy fashion. This is just an example of how justice was meted
out in the army of volunteers.

In the spring about two hundred recruits came. We now numbered about
five hundred men. Then a party set out for north of Snake River to hunt
Indians. I was with the company. We crossed the Snake at the mouth of
the Palouse--we made a camp at Little Falls--were at Big Lake on Cow
Creek and all over the upper country, but failed to find any number of
Indians. We fired a few shots at stragglers now and then, but had no
regular engagement. The Cayuse warriors had scattered about among other
tribes, many going over the mountains to wait until the soldiers left
the country.

A detachment of men was sent to Walker's Mission, called Tshimakain,
where Walker and Eells and their families were located as missionaries
among the Spokanes. We got the families and brought them back with
us. We came back across country, crossing Snake River at the mouth of
Alpowa Creek to an Indian encampment known as Red Wolf's Land--then
we returned to Waiilatpu. This expedition went out the first of May.
Sometime in June we began our return trip to Oregon, having been out
about six months.

I remember while camped in the Umatilla country I was breaking an
Indian horse to ride--and he would throw himself whenever I mounted. I
had become pretty mad at his persistence in lying down, so concluded to
tie him down until he would be willing to stand up. I did so and left
him close to camp--but in the morning I was minus a horse--the wolves
had eaten him up. We had much to learn in those days.

On this trip Colonel Gilliam was killed accidentally. In pulling a gun
from a wagon it caught in a rope and was discharged, killing him. He
was a good man and a good officer, well liked by all his men, as he was
a friend to all.

We arrived at Oregon City a few days before the Fourth of July. The
Governor rode out and reviewed the troops, as we were on parade. Every
man had his horse decked out in Indian trappings and we were as wild as
a band of Indians. Crowds of people had gathered to welcome us home.
The Governor made us a short talk and dismissed us. Thus ended the
organization of Oregon's First Mounted Volunteers--we all scattered out
to our homes.--Thus ends Mr. Walter's article.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another of the pioneers of '59 was W. S. Gilliam, son of the Colonel
Gilliam referred to in Mr. Walter's article. Mr. Gilliam was one of the
most honored and useful of Walla Walla's pioneers. A number of years
ago he prepared a contribution for the Pioneer Association which we are
presenting here. We are making selections on account of the length of
the article. The first pertains to the journey across the plains in
1844, and gives a view of some of the interesting events there:

"The next morning a sight opened up to us that can never be seen again
by mortal man. As far as the eye could reach up the valley of the
South Platte and as far on the bluffs as we could see was black with
buffaloes. The quantity of the buffaloes was one thing that the early
travelers could not exaggerate.

"Under the guidance of Mr. Sublette we struck across the country from
the last mentioned camp to the North Platte. In the course of the
day we descried a large band of buffaloes under full headway, making
directly for the train. We hastily gathered our guns and put ourselves
in position, and as soon as the head of the herd came in shooting
distance we commenced firing on them and succeeded as we thought,
luckily, in turning them around the rear of the train. I think I may
safely say that while we were in the buffalo country we were hardly
ever out of sight of the animals.

"We struck the North Platte the next day and traveled up the stream
most of the way to Fort Laramie, where we laid by a day. We met Mr.
Joseph Walker here, who was a noted mountaineer and also an old friend
of my father's. He happened to be going our way as far as Fort Bridger
and made a very acceptable guide for us.

"The day we laid by I was taken with a very violent fever and remember
but little that happened till we got to Sweet Water, where I became
convalescent. I remember seeing Independence Rock, covered with names
innumerable, and the Devil's Gate, where the river had cut its way
through a hill, leaving perpendicular banks perhaps a hundred feet high
and a gorge not any wider than the stream.

"We followed up Sweet Water several days to a point where we left it
to our right and took into the South Pass across the Rocky Mountains.
After a moderate day's travel we camped at the Pacific Springs, the
first water that we had encountered that flowed westward. I remember
that we felt quite jubilant over the affair and thought that this was
quite a circumstance in our journey. In passing over the country from
here to Fort Bridger we crossed the two Sandies, Green River, and Ham's
Fork. We stopped a day at the fort and next day, it being the first day
of September, we started a northerly course across the country to Bear
River. We followed down this stream to the Soda Springs, which was a
great wonder to us. On an area of perhaps one hundred acres hundreds of
springs boiled up, many in the bed of the river."

Following this is an estimate of Captain Grant, the Hudson's Bay
commandant at Fort Hall. As the character of Captain Grant has been the
subject of controversy, the views of Mr. Gilliam have much interest:

"We camped here and next morning when we started we left the river,
and after traveling some sixty or seventy miles we reached Fort Hall,
then a Hudson's Bay Company trading post, where Mr. Grant was chief
factor. Here a circumstance occurred that has caused me through life
to regard Grant as a bad hearted man. Peter H. Burnett, a noted man
of the previous emigration, had written a letter of instruction and
encouragement and sent it to Grant with instructions that he should
read it to the emigrants when they reached Fort Hall. When we arrived
there the letter was called for and Grant read it to us. It was a
very welcome note, giving us useful instructions about the route and
strong encouragement about the country we were going to. But you
can hardly conceive of the barrels of cold water he poured onto Mr.
Burnett's words of encouragement. The circumstances were such that such
a proceeding was of no profit or benefit to him or the company he was
serving, for it was next to impossible for us to turn back. We were
from the very nature of our situation compelled to go ahead, and he
well knew that his discouragement could avail nothing towards stopping
us. I have never been able to regard him as a good man."

A retrospect by Mr. Gilliam, and an account of settlement in the
Willamette Valley contains matter of interest:

"It may be well enough to take a retrospect of things as they were then
and compare them with things as they are now. We traveled through the
territory that now constitutes the states of Kansas, Nebraska, Wyoming,
Utah, Idaho and well through Oregon, and in all this vast region we
did not find one single home, unless you, by a strained construction,
call a mission or trading post a home. There were a thousand miles of
this journey, which required six months to perform it. We stood guard
to protect our lives and property from hostile Indians. This being the
year that Polk was elected president, the earliest news that we got of
it was in July following, and we considered ourselves rather fortunate
in getting it thus early; it having come by ship, when in fact we did
not expect to get it until the arrival of the emigrants in the fall.
When a presidential election occurs now if we do not get the news the
next day we feel that we are unfortunate in being deprived of the news
so long.

"I took my first trip back three years ago. I was three days in making
it, and on the route found two large cities, Salt Lake and Denver, and
seemingly happy homes everywhere, and made the trip in a comfortable
manner that was undreamed of in those early days.

"Well, to return. We wintered where the town of Cornelius now stands,
about eighty rods south of the depot, with Messrs. Waters and Emerick,
who were keeping batch at that time. The winter was very mild, which
impressed us very favorably with the climate.

"In February father went up the country to select a land claim. I think
his was the first claim taken south of the Rickreall. The town of
Dallas stands on part of it. He came back with a glowing account of the
country he had seen and particularly of the place that he had selected
for a home. So we got ready and as early in March as traveling was good
we started for our new home. We arrived there the 16th of March, it
being Sunday. The whole country was a natural park, and, combined with
the ideal spring day that we reached there, made it seem to me like
dreamland.

"We went to work in good earnest building a log cabin, but before we
could complete it we were overtaken by the equinoctial storm, which
gave us some very serious discomfort. The next thing to do was to put
in some garden and sow some wheat. Will say that nature gave us a
bountiful yield in both field and garden.

"During this season we suffered some privations in food. For instance,
at times we had to substitute boiled wheat for bread. It is hardly
necessary to say that we did not do this from choice, but having
plenty of wild meat, milk and butter, we could have a meal that would
hardly pass muster now, but I can assure you that a person would be
a long time starving to death on it. We never had any shortage of
breadstuffs after the first season, for there was a grist-mill built in
the immediate neighborhood the next year, where we could get flour any
time."

Mr. Gilliam's brief reference to Dr. Whitman is of special value:

"A large share of the immigrants who wintered at Dr. Whitman's during
the season settled in our immediate neighborhood and I learned a great
deal about the Doctor's character from them. It seemed as if he had
made a deep impression on them, for they talked a great deal about him,
and from their talk I came to have a high regard for him. They told me
that he would come home from Wallula, a distance of twenty-five miles,
before breakfast, or if necessary go up to where they were building
the sawmill, a distance of eighteen miles, before breakfast. In fact,
his energy seemed to have no bounds and no obstacle with him seemed
insurmountable. It was this summer of 1845 that he visited Willamette
Valley and while there he called on my father, and as it happened I was
away from home and therefore failed to see him, a circumstance that
I have always regretted, more especially since he has become such an
important figure in history."

The portraiture of early conditions in the Willamette, reference to his
father's death, gold discovery, and then settlement in the Walla Walla
country follow:

"The immigration of 1847 brought from Washington City father's
appointment as postal agent with instructions from the Post Office
Department concerning the same. On a recent visit with my sister at
Dallas, Ore., who has all the papers, I had the pleasure of inspecting
them anew. I found them queer reading from our standpoint.

"In the fall of 1847 father disposed of the place we settled on and
moved up the country about twelve miles and bought a place on Pedee.
This fall one of my sisters married. In the meantime some Indians
had become acquainted with us and were living in the immediate
neighborhood. They took some interest in the wedding and were very
curious to know what her husband gave for her, it being their custom to
sell their daughters into marriage. They were surprised beyond measure
when told that she was given to him.

"It was November of this year that the Whitman massacre occurred.
Father was at once notified that he was requested to take command and
of the volunteers that were to be raised to march against the hostile
Indians. He left home abruptly early in December, never to return. His
death was the heaviest blow that has ever befallen me.

"The next year was one long to be remembered in Oregon. It was the
year of the discovery of gold in California. It was late in August
that reports of the discovery began to reach Oregon. They reported the
mines to be so rich that at first they were discredited; but they were
soon confirmed in such a way as to relieve all doubts. It would be hard
to exaggerate the excitement that was raised upon the confirmation of
the news. In fact, it would be hard to excite a community in any other
way to the pitch ours was on this occasion, more especially when we
consider how small it was. Everybody that could get away dropped their
business and left. My brother-in-law and I rigged ourselves out with
a saddle horse and pack-horse apiece and started. We had to travel
through the Rogue River and Klamath countries in considerable bands to
protect ourselves against the hostile Indians, but by the time we got
to where it was dangerous we had fallen in with plenty of company, so
we had no trouble on that score. We passed through the hostile country
without being attacked or having any horses stolen. In fact, to me it
was a trip that afforded me some of the keenest kind of pleasure, new
scenery every day and some of it, Mt. Shasta, for instance, was of the
grandest kind. It was the first time I had left the parental roof.

"When we got well into the Sacramento Valley, just after we had struck
camp, an acquaintance rode into camp with his pack-horse and proceeded
to camp with us. He had a thrilling story to tell of his previous
night's experience. It seemed that the company he traveled with through
the hostile country were highly disagreeable to him, so when they
reached the Sacramento Valley, where the Indians were friendly, he tore
himself away from it and was traveling alone. During the first day of
his lone travel he bought a salmon of the Indians. When he camped that
night he cooked part of the salmon for supper and laid the balance
within a few feet of where he made his bed. After retiring, while
looking out into the increasing gloom, he saw an approaching form that
looked as large as a covered wagon. His bearship, for such it was, very
coolly and unconcernedly appropriated the remainder of the salmon and
sat down within a few feet of him and quietly ate it. After eating he
still sat there, seeming to ponder on what to do next. In the meantime
the campfire got into the dry grass and burnt towards where Mr. Bear
was sitting. When it got unpleasantly near him he slowly moved away
and disappeared. Some Indians were at the camp in the morning and were
shown the track. They assured him the best they could that he was very
fortunate in not being served up for a supper for Mr. Bear. When he
reached our camp and narrated the circumstance he remarked that he had
concluded that he would not camp alone any more.

"I went into the mines and worked with only fair success until
late next spring, when I became homesick, and not appreciating the
opportunities as I would have in later life, I returned home, where I
arrived the 16th of June, 1849.

"After resting a few days I visited a camp meeting that was in progress
near Salem. I had visited the meeting at the same grounds the year
before. I was very forcibly impressed with the difference in the dress
of the people in the two years. The first year, before California had
poured her wealth of gold into the country, the people were dressed in
very plain pioneer style, the men in buckskin pants with the balance
of the suit corresponding, the women in calicoes and muslin. But this
year it was very evident that they had freely availed themselves of the
privilege that the great quantity of gold that had found its way to
Oregon gave them to improve their attire, for in the case of the men
broadcloth had taken the place of buckskin, and in the women silks and
satins had replaced calico and gingham.

"In 1851 there was a vacancy in the sheriff's office and I was
appointed by the county commissioners to fill the vacancy. During my
incumbency, in the discharge of my duty as sheriff, it fell to my lot
to execute a death warrant by hanging a man by the name of Everman, who
had committed a very foul murder. It was not a very pleasant duty to
perform and most certainly one that I never wanted to be called on to
repeat. This was the first execution for murder in Polk County, and I
think the second in the territory, excepting the Indians that were hung
at Oregon City for the murder of Doctor Whitman and others.

"There was another circumstance that grew out of the murder case that
gave me the unenviable distinction of being the only man that ever
put up a white man at auction and sold him to the highest bidder. The
man in question was a brother of the above murderer. He was found
guilty of being accessory to the murder after the fact, which would
entitle him to a term in the penitentiary. There was no penitentiary
in the territory at that time, and the judge in sentencing him to a
term made the provision in the order that in default of there being a
penitentiary he be sold to the highest bidder for the same term that
he was sentenced to the penitentiary. Some of my lawyer friends tell
me that the judge assumed a very doubtful right in so sentencing the
culprit; but no legal move was made to invalidate the judge's order, so
the matter rested.

"The above execution occurred on the 11th of May, 1852. That year my
future wife crossed the plains and settled in the neighborhood where
I lived. After a year's acquaintance we were married and moved onto a
donation claim that I had three miles northwest of Dallas. At this time
I was engaged in cattle raising.

"We lived here until 1859, when I became disgusted with the long, wet,
dreary winters. That, coupled with the growing shortage of public
pasturage, caused us to sell and seek a country with less winter rains
and more public range. From what we could hear of the Walla Walla
country we concluded that the winter weather and range were about
what we wanted, so we at once decided to emigrate thither. In July I
gathered up the cattle and started. The journey was somewhat tedious,
a part of it being over dusty roads and the weather at times hot. I
reached Dry Creek at Mr. Aldrich's place, early in August. I bought
a man's claim just above the Aldrich place. I stayed some two weeks
getting the cattle settled on the range. I started back for the family
the first day of September, traveling with saddle-and pack-horse.

"On my way back I had the good fortune to fall in with an immigrant who
had been in Oregon and knew the locality where my land was, to sell him
my farm, and was thus relieved from being detained on that account.

"I reached home in twelve days after leaving Dry Creek and found the
folks all well. We hurriedly made arrangements for our departure to the
place that I had selected for our new home. We bundled our household
goods into a wagon, bade good-bye to our friends and started. We drove
over the country to Portland, where we put the wagon and team on the
boat and got on ourselves, and finally landed at The Dalles. From there
we took the wagon to Walla Walla, arriving at our new home the 23rd of
October.

"There was nothing there in the shape of a house but a miserable hut
that would neither protect us from the rain or cold. Therefore it was
very important to build a house at the earliest possible time. I took a
man with me into the mountains to assist me in getting out the timbers,
and put another one to hauling them as fast as we got them cut; so it
was but a few days till we had the material on the ground with which to
build a cabin. We at once put it up and finished it so as to make it
endurable for the winter.

"This was a tolerably severe winter, a great deal of snow and cold
weather; but the stock got through in good shape for the reason that
the grass was fine in the late fall, which put them in good shape to
withstand bad weather; and the country was all open so that they could
range on to the creeks and browse when the grass was covered with snow.
As to ourselves, we got along fairly well in the line of provisions,
but I can assure you we did not enjoy any delicacies. We had plenty of
bread, meat and potatoes, but as to the bread I remember that at times
I had to work for it. When the flour was low I had to take corn to a
neighbor's who had a steel hand mill, and grind it into meal. I think
any person who has ever had the experience of grinding on a hand mill,
in the matter of recollection will be like myself, that is, he will
remember it.

"When spring came, the first I did was to gather up the cattle that
had got considerably scattered. When that was attended to we went to
seeding and planting garden. The season being very favorable everything
planted grew luxuriantly. I have never since seen such a crop of
potatoes as we raised that year. We estimated the crop at 600 bushels
per acre, and I am inclined to believe that it was over rather than
under the estimate. I often hear people remark that it rains more now
than when the country was first settled. I can confidently say that
there has never been a season in which more rain fell in summer season,
with possibly the exception of 1862, than fell this season of 1860. I
heard remarked that had it not been for the peculiar nature of our soil
that readily absorbed it the crops would have been generally drowned
out. I look back upon this season as being one of the most enjoyable
of my life. The summer was all that we could want it to be. I heartily
enjoyed looking over the beautiful country, fresh from the hands of
nature and unmarred by the hands of man; everything seemed to smile.
The country became endeared to me and I have never seriously thought of
making any other place my home.

"To give an idea of how little people then in the country knew of its
value, when it was being surveyed it was talked among the people that
it was a waste of Government money to survey it, for the reason that
there was so little of it fit for settlement; and today you could not
get an acre of that land for less than forty dollars. [At present date
about a hundred and forty.] It was universally believed that all the
country was worth anything for was its grazing qualities, excepting
the low bottoms, which were known to be very productive. Everybody
who came to the country then came with the intention of raising stock
on the fine pasturage that the country afforded. Nobody came with the
intention of farming, for the reason that it was thought that a very
small part of the country would produce grain.

"In 1861 I was elected a member of the Territorial Legislature, which
I have always thought was unfortunate for me, for the reason that the
following winter was the hard winter and my presence at home would
have been very desirable and beneficial to my interests. As soon as
the legislature adjourned, although the severe weather was still in
evidence, I started at once for home. We traveled in public conveyance
as far as Monticello. We found the Columbia thoroughly frozen up and
waited a few days, hoping that there might be a breakup, but as the bad
weather continued and showed no signs of a change, Mr. Moore, a member
of the Legislature, and I concluded to start on foot for The Dalles. It
was one of the hardest trips I ever had. We traveled mostly on the ice,
but at times would take to the land, where trails were beaten between
neighbors in the snow who lived along the shore. We were fortunate
enough to find lodging every night and to procure meals when we wanted
them.

"After about a week of weary traveling we reached The Dalles, where we
got saddle horses. A Wells, Fargo & Co. messenger fell in with us here,
which swelled our company to three. We had traveled a couple of days
when my two comrades became badly afflicted with snow blindness. The
trail had been broken through the snow, but had later filled up with
fresh snow. It took the practiced eye to follow it. My comrades being
snowblinded it devolved on me to lead and break the way. The weather at
times was intensely cold, but we found lodging every night except one;
luckily for us, it happened to be one of the mildest nights we had, and
with some blankets we passed the night fairly comfortably.

"We reached Walla Walla about the last of February. The war was raging
then to such an extent and travel impeded that we brought news that was
six weeks old.

"I found my folks all well and hearty, but the destruction of our stock
was something frightful. When I looked them up later I found about ten
per cent of them alive; but being in the prime of life and enjoying
perfect health I was not discouraged.

"This season the Orofino and Florence mines poured wealth into the
country to such an extent that money was very plentiful and produce
very high. I succeeded in putting in a large lot of potatoes and
vegetables and some grain. The season being highly favorable everything
grew splendidly and produced abundantly and brought a very high price,
potatoes selling at four and one-half cents per pound and other things
in proportion; so at the end of the year I had to a large extent
retrieved the losses that I had sustained by the severity of the winter.

"Ever since I had heard so much about Doctor Whitman from the
immigrants who wintered with him in 1844, and especially after his
tragic death, I had become interested in him and in the site of his
mission, but had never visited it. In June this year I took a day for
it and got on my horse and rode to the old site. Father Eells was
occupying it then. I told him the object of my visit. He was very kind
indeed and took a great deal of pains in showing me about the place and
explaining things the best he could. He took me to the ruins of the
old adobe building and explained the plan of it and showed me the spot
where Doctor Whitman, according to reports, must have fallen. He then
took me to where the victims of the massacre were buried, and while
standing there one of us kicked the loose dirt and turned up the lower
jaw bone of one of the victims. One of the teeth in the bone was filled
with gold. We buried it as well as we could without tools and inferred
from the circumstance that they had been buried in shallow graves
or been dug up by badgers. I went home feeling that I had been well
rewarded for my ride.

"The next year, 1863, I was elected sheriff. I have nothing to report
that was unusual during my term, the usual routine of business incident
to the office and no executions for murder or anything else worth
speaking about. At the same time I was appointed deputy collector of
internal revenue under Philip D. Moore. The duties of this position
were simply collecting revenue that fell to the Government. The most
unpleasant part of my duties was my responsibility for the considerable
sums of money that I had in my possession.

"After the expiration of my term I returned to the farm and entered
into the usual humdrum routine pertaining to farm life.

"In 1869, for the first time since leaving, I took a trip to Oregon.
The election occurred the day before I started. The telegraph line
had reached Umatilla. When the boat landed there the messenger went
immediately to the telegraph office with the election news. This was
my first contact with the telegraph, and it was hard for me to realize
that while the operator was sending the dispatch at that very moment it
was being received in Portland.

"At The Dalles we met the first tourist who had come on the newly
completed transcontinental railroad to San Francisco and from thence by
steamer to Portland and from Portland by river steamers to The Dalles.

"I went to Dallas, where most of my people lived. I had a very
enjoyable visit, having been away ten years. In due time I returned
home and found the folks all well.

"My reminiscences having come down to and partly including the year
1869, the year that the transcontinental railroad was completed, I
think about this time they should lose their character as pioneer
reminiscences and thus far their interest to the public; for I think
the future historian will draw the line between those who came in an
ox-team and those who came on the railroads. So I feel that my task is
done, and when a person's work is finished it is a good time to quit."

From the reminiscences of Mr. Gilliam we turn to those of one of the
honored builders, still living in Walla Walla, F. W. Paine. As one
of the earliest business men of the region, Mr. Paine is peculiarly
qualified to give a picture of the business men and conditions in Walla
Walla in the early '60s. We feel ourselves fortunate to be able to
present this article from his pen:


BUSINESS MEN OF THE '60s

"In approaching the subject I realize my utter inability to fitly
handle even so small a quota of so large a class, which comprises men
of the most eminent minds from among whom are found the financial
geniuses to solve the most intricate problems of the world's commerce,
from among whose ranks have been chosen by their fellow countrymen men
to occupy and administer the highest offices of the nation, and the
contingent which I am about to consider, the business men of Walla
Walla, has afforded men of more than local fame, not only in their
own calling, but men as well who have been chosen from their own
sphere to fill places of honor from city councilman to United States
senator; the achievements of this class impel the conclusion that the
calling of general merchandising affords a training which adapts the
mind to the handling of large affairs. To come to my subject, as I now
recall the appearance of Main Street, the home of the business man in
the spring of 1862, as I first beheld it, it might be described as a
development of the old Indian trail along the natural elevation of
the south bank of Mill Creek, forming a dry ridge much used by the
Indians in horse racing before the whites appropriated it for the more
advanced purposes of a business street, which, by the way, established
its own azimuth which still maintains and which incidentally misses
all the cardinal points of compass. Architecturally viewed it would
seem that the earliest occupants of this street differed in their
opinions as to the established width, for at that time there was gross
irregularity in the building line, as well as ups and downs in the
sidewalks, each owner apparently deeming it his own affair, that of
fixing the line. When building his house, sidewalk, and frequently a
board awning on scantling supports, to afford a show place for his
merchandise, while in the matter of the building line 'the crooked
have been made straight, the rough places have not all been made
plain,' a few still remain perhaps to attest the tenacity of error.
With this much for outside appearances let us now step inside where we
are met by the subject of this sketch, a business man of Walla Walla,
a man approaching middle life, of good presence, well informed on the
country in general, its business prospects and opportunities, his stock
of merchandise, and his patrons, who, if stockmen, ranged from the
Cascades to the Rocky Mountains; if a packer his range was nearly as
wide, or if a miner his field covered much the same vast territory, the
magnitude of which seemed to be measurably reflected in the men who
partook of its largess, for the merchants of early Walla Walla were
of the stalwart type who rose to the occasion and occupied the field
in a creditable manner, for few of the class known in California as
'Cheap Johns,' ever tarried long in Walla Walla. They came but soon
recognized their betters and left for more congenial surroundings.
As time sped on and the country settled up business grew to be more
complex in its administering. Gold dust and gold and silver bars as
important factors in the circulating medium, gave place to gold and
silver coin, and greenbacks brought in by the immigrants of the middle
'60s were tolerated at fifty to seventy-five cents on the dollar, but
no lesser coin than a twenty-five cent piece was accepted in exchange
for merchandise and even the saloons treated anything smaller with
disdain; but the country was filling up with settlers, and as they
became fixed and permanent citizens, credits were extended, some of the
leading houses even in the early years, carrying heavy accounts with
farmers and stockmen. This necessitated the merchants' assistance in
marketing their products, thus these business houses became dealers in
wool, wheat, barley, etc., which continued for many years and proved
a substantial source of revenue which went far toward helping out the
year's profits and also encouraged investments in other lines, such as
transportation facilities, flouring mills and various manufactures, in
which the business man frequently took the lead, as he did in most of
the important doings of the day; for instance, in the matter of public
spirit a record may be found in his generous subscriptions to induce
the construction of railroads, for the building of hospitals, churches
and educational institutions, and for their maintenance, and again in
the voting of taxes for public schools and public buildings, both of
the city and county. This matter of voting taxes brings to mind that
even this early, politics was an institution to be reckoned with, but
the business man seldom sought its honors. His political creed was,
business before pleasure or politics. When election day came around
he voted his party ticket and enjoyed the diversion, so it did not
interfere with business. He seldom accepted office, and then only as
a matter of duty, but when such responsibilities were undertaken they
were discharged with fidelity to the trust imposed.

"Of his religion he took a less serious view, but his hand was ever
open to the deserving in a good cause, it mattered not from whence
the call. To illustrate, in the early days there came to this city a
man most devout, a reserved and gentle mannered man, who, finding no
church of his denomination, proceeded to build one near to the business
district. He contributed largely of his own rather limited means and
completed the building. Among the many brilliant sermons delivered from
its pulpit were some very caustic and pointed, directly aimed at the
shortcomings of the business world. He became noted for his good work,
both in and out of the pulpit, but one day his church was accidentally
burned, a total loss and no insurance. Whereupon a prominent business
man (who for himself had little use for churches) seemingly prompted by
his sense of justice, and as he said, 'a desire to see a good man get
a square deal,' took prompt action and with a subscription list headed
by a liberal sum, set against his own name, he proceeded to interview
the business places, omitting none. Everything that was operated for
money was in business to him, at least for that day, and was assessed
and collection made at the same time. When he had made the round of
Main Street, even before the ashes were cold, he had enough to build
a new church. No one asked was the money tainted, but the church was
built and much good resulted therefrom. One other instance I recall,
when a preacher who had gathered many souls into his fold, somewhat
on his merits as a good 'mixer' (this word belongs to politics, but
if the good man could say even now he would approve its use here).
After he had scheduled members enough to justify building a church he
went among the brethren for subscriptions. Meeting two of his business
acquaintances he made known his plans to which they readily subscribed
a generous sum, only conditioned upon his steeple rising higher than
that of the church across the street. To this he readily assented, and
the spire stands today to attest his good works.

"Some historian has said, 'History is not written with a microscope,'
nor should it be written with one's eye blinded to events that it were
better had never occurred, but so long as man continues to indulge
erroneous thoughts, those thoughts will be expressed in actions which,
with their effects, will be recorded. So, notwithstanding the enviable
record of the average business man of his day, there was the inevitable
exception when someone went wrong, or, so to say, was swept off his
feet by the lure of the open games of chance, presided over by the
man with the starched shirt and polished nails. Such heaps of gold
and silver, bags of dust even all so temptingly lay, just waiting the
turn of a card, the jingling of coins, the hustle and murmur of the
crowds, the glint and dazzle of the lights, the music and the song,
the tinkle of the glasses, the odor of cocktails and champagne, a
perfect riot of sensations, and over all that transport of abandon so
free of all restraint, 'society' looked on complacently, law lacked an
introduction, but 'twas all so sociable he took a hand or perchance
bought a few chips and the better to celebrate his first winning,
ordered a cocktail and cigar, and then was soon on the road that men of
all callings frequented in the very early days. Little wonder that an
occasional business man was found among the discard.

"Elsewhere I note that occasion was had to mention so many of the
names of firms and men in business in the early days, that I will not
attempt to repeat them, suffice to say that rare and potent conditions
must have worked together to produce a force of men so fitting to the
time and place as were these, to prosecute their chosen calling as a
means to success; some, to be sure, looking only to a temporary stay
which as time wore on, grew to be permanent, others, casting their
lot with the county from the beginning, remained to amass fortunes
of no mean proportions. Several having reached business limitations
here, naturally gravitated to larger cities, to enjoy a wider field
of operations, where they continued to court the Goddess of Fortune
successfully. Of those who remained many have attained to places of
honor, and of few indeed could it be said that the world was no better
for their having lived in it, and taken as a whole, the history of the
county would be sadly abbreviated were it to be deprived of a record of
their doings."

One of the best known of the pioneer families of Walla Walla is that of
the Ferrels. As a charming narrative of the typical events of a journey
across the plains and settlement in Walla Walla in the early days, we
incorporate here a paper by Mrs. Brewster Ferrel.


A WOMAN'S EXPERIENCE CROSSING THE PLAINS

  May 1, 1864.

We started from Corydon, Wayne County, Iowa, to travel the wild and
desolate plains and seek a home in Walla Walla, Wash. This is a true
story, but before you get through reading it you will not wonder at the
people out west calling us green immigrants.

My husband and I and our little boy, who was two years old, and my
husband's brother, were all that came in our wagon. We had a good
little mule team. I have had a kind regard for mules over since I took
that trip. Did not know a mule could learn so much.

The first day was a sad one going past our relatives and old neighbors'
homes and stopping to say good-bye. Our people gave us little presents,
tokens of love, and lots of good advice, such as, "be careful and don't
let the Indians get you," or, "be a good girl and come back some day."
Well, we did come back twenty-four years after, but not with a mule
team.

The first night we stayed at a house. Next morning the good woman said,
"I will give you some pickled meat." So she went out in the meat house
to get it, and there was a skunk drowned in the brine. We thanked her
and got our meat at another place.

The next night we camped out, the first I ever slept out of a house,
and when bedtime came our little boy cried, oh, so hard to go home, but
we got him quiet and slept well; that was one thing we could do on that
trip.

Woman-like, I was very much afraid of the bad roads. We had all of
our belongings piled in that wagon, and among other things were our
firearms. We came to a very bad place in the road. I took our little
boy out of the wagon and we were walking behind when a shotgun that
was lying in the wagon went off and the shot came very near us. Then I
concluded in the wagon was the safest place and soon got so I was not
afraid to ride over any kind of road.

We traveled alone till we got to the Missouri River. Then we came to
a string of wagons about a mile and a half long. They were waiting to
be ferried over the river. We came there in the forenoon, and took our
place in line and moved up as the wagons went over. We stayed there all
that day and camped there that night. Next morning we got over.

Then we traveled with a train and the Indians came around our wagons;
some of them begged for food. One day when we sat down on the ground
to eat our dinner about a dozen big red-faced fellows came and stood
around with tomahawks in their hands. I did not want any dinner that
day, but they went away peaceably, and we traveled on over good roads
and through beautiful country up Platte River and on and on and soon
got used to seeing Indians. Sometimes they would follow our wagons and
some one would throw a piece of bread out to them and they would run
after the wagon and pick it up; then throw another piece, till they
would look like little chickens after an old hen.

Fuel was very scarce in that country. We had to burn sage brush, dead
weeds, or anything we could get. Sometimes my husband would keep
feeding the fire while I baked the flapjacks, as we called them.

The men folks were all the time looking out for good grass and water
for the stock, which they would herd on the grass till late at night,
and than tie them to the wagon wheels. In the morning they would take
them out again and herd them until starting time, which was pretty
early, as we wanted to hurry through to Walla Walla. We gave our mules
all the scraps we had left from our meals and they relished it very
much and would hunt in the wagon for the dinner box and look and wait
for their lunch.

There were some mean people crossed the plains. There was a man and his
wife and three grown daughters traveling in our train. One day when we
lay over we heard a commotion, and looking toward a tent we saw a girl
pitch out of it and a man's boot and foot up in the air. The girl said
her papa kicked her out because she had forgotten to water the horses.
One other time we had stopped to rest and I heard a woman cry and swear
and pray, first one and then the other. I said to a friend, "Let us
go and see if we can help her;" but she said "No; it is a woman with
a very loathsome disease and the man that drives the team was kind to
bring her out west." The man would cook a little food and hand it to
her and then go away.

Well, the people were not all bad; we found some very dear friends on
our trip. I never will forget them. It was a trying trip on us all.
We had some dangerous streams to cross. We would come to some that
looked impossible to cross. We would stop and plan and try the depth
in every way possible, and then block up the wagon bed to the top of
the standard, then tie them fast to the wagon, then cautiously drive
in almost holding our breath. We had four mules and the leaders were
small. Sometimes we could not see much of them but their heads. Our
little boy would laugh and enjoy the excitement, but I took many a cry
when I thought of where we were taking him. We had started and must
get through. I had about forgotten to mention the weather, which was
very stormy. It rained and snowed and blew our wagon sheet off and
everything we had got wet. Our flour got musty; we had to eat it; we
could get no other.

By this time we were getting pretty well up Platte River, and did not
see many Indians, but were hearing a good deal about their committing
depredations, and commenced to corral our wagons of nights. That was to
drive in a circle, unhitch, then the men would pull them close together
by hand, and after herding the stock would bring them in and tie to the
outside wheels of the wagons for the night.

One day our train came up to a corral of this kind and the women were
sitting around crying and the men were standing in groups talking very
earnestly, and not a hoof in sight. We soon learned their troubles.
They had left their stock out a little way from the wagons to feed
without any guards and the Indians had seen their opportunity and run
between them and their stock and run them off. What those poor people
did we never learned. We had to travel on.

One morning a few days after this sad scene we passed a train which had
not started out yet, and came upon another sad scene. Two men had left
their train in the evening and drove about a mile ahead, in order to
get better grass for their horses. Just at dusk they were sitting on a
log near their wagons when eight Indians came behind them and commenced
shooting them with arrows. The men jumped for their guns, but before
they reached their wagons the Indians had them both down. They left
them for dead and then took the four horses and guns and ammunition and
$800 in money and everything else they wanted out of the wagon, and
left. But one poor fellow was not quite dead. After the Indians left he
crawled a little way off in the brush and lay there till next morning.
When we came along he crawled out and told us all about it. We stayed
with him till his train came up, then helped him to bury his partner,
and then went on. I was pretty homesick for a few days.

We were getting into the mountains and the roads were bad, and so were
the Indians. We were very cautious; two men stood guard every night,
taking turns.

The weather was getting warm and pleasant after all, and through all of
our hardships we had some pleasant and amusing things happen. There was
a good many jack rabbits along the road. We had a rabbit pot-pie pretty
often. One day about a half-dozen men got after a rabbit and were
running past our wagon and shooting with their pistols. My husband was
walking by our wagon and said, "Hand me the shotgun," and I handed it
to him. He shot and brought down the rabbit, then gave it to me. That
ended the race and raised a laugh.

Once in every two days we would stop a day and rest, lay over, we
called it, to do our washing. We would take a bucket and camp kettle
and go to the creek; that was all the utensils we had to wash with.
When the clothes were dry they were ready to put on--no ironing on that
trip. We saw irons, tubs, washboards, and a good many other things that
people had thrown out of their wagons because their teams were giving
out. We did not dare to pick them up and haul them for fear our own
teams would give out. I knew one woman that had a cook stove in her
wagon and she was so anxious to bring it through that she would get out
and push on the wagon when it was going up hill, but she had to give it
up and set it out and go on without it. We were beginning to find out
how dependent we were on our teams.

Before we left home our neighbors and friends gave me a lot of nice
pieces and helped me make a keepsake quilt. I prized it very highly.
One day, I put it out to sun and some fire blew on it and burned it up.
Then I shed a few tears. Much as we needed everything we had we would
lose and leave our things at the camps. We lost our axe and coffee pot
and our comb. Then we tried to borrow a comb, but found out there were
but few in the train. So we women got together and had our hair cut
off. Then we were called the short-haired train.

The health of our train was pretty good. Sometimes a family would get
very sick from eating too many wild weeds they would gather and cook
for greens so as to have a change, as variety of wood was getting
scarce.

We brought a keg of sorghum syrup with us, and would have had plenty to
last through, but one day our little boy was missing, and looking in
the wagon we saw him. He had found the matches and was just putting
the last bunch in the syrup keg, so we had to do without sorghum.

One night we stopped near an old fort where some men were staying. So I
felt pretty safe, but before morning we found out they were worse than
Indians, for they had whiskey to sell and some of the men in our train
got some whiskey and got drunk, then fought and quarreled all night.
Next morning when a few wagons were ready to start the men that had
been drunk were asleep. Another train came along and we drove on with
them. It seemed a trip where every one had to look out for self. We
did not dare to stop long to help the unfortunate or we would not get
through ourselves. We did not start out to die on the plains. We passed
many a new made grave.

At this time it was as disagreeably hot as it had been cold on the
start. One time we tried traveling at night to avoid the extreme heat,
but that would not do.

I have not given many dates, as I have forgotten most of them. Am
writing this mostly for my children and grandchildren to read and want
it to be as near true as I can remember.

We learned that the main thing on that trip was to keep on moving. As
we got near and into the mountains the weather got cool and pleasant.
But, oh, such mountains and roads, sometimes they would seem almost
perpendicular, but we would climb and get up most all out of the wagon
walking, then slide down on the other side, then up, then down, and
soon day after day some of the mountains seemed almost solid rock.

One day we came to a beautiful little stream. Someone that was walking
dipped up a cup of water and said, "Will you have a drink?" I took the
cup. Imagine my surprise when it almost burned my lips. Those were the
first hot springs we had ever seen. Then we came to a place that looked
like it was covered with ice and frost, but it proved to be salt. We
picked up some pieces and used it for cooking.

We began to hear more rumors about the Indians and could see signs of
their mischief. So we corralled our wagons very carefully and went to
bed and were sleeping soundly when all of a sudden we were awakened
with hearing screaming and very rapid shooting. I jumped out of bed
and said, "The Indians have attacked us." My husband got up and said,
"I will go and see what the trouble is." Then I got all of the guns
and ammunition to the front of the wagon ready for battle, and was
piling the sacks of flour and bacon around our little boy, who was yet
asleep, when my husband came back and said it was coyotes yelping and
the guards were shooting at them. So we went to bed again and were soon
asleep. That was one thing we could enjoy on that trip.

Well, we finally got over the Rocky Mountains. You need not be
surprised if I tell you that our shoes were getting thin and pretty
badly worn. We did not start with an over supply and our clothes were
wearing out fast and we were looking pretty rough and sunburnt.

We came to some more deep rivers and had to block up our wagon beds
so we could cross. Then we came to a country infested with crickets.
I never saw anything like it; they were almost as big as a mouse and
could chirp and jump in such big bands. Our mules shied at them. Well,
we were glad to get out of that country.

One day looking ahead in the distance we saw something coming that
looked like covered wagons, but as it drew near we could see it was
actually coming the other way toward us, something we had not seen for
hundreds, yes, thousands of miles. Well, they came on and passed us.
It was a pack train, wonderful sight for us. They frightened our teams
in their weak and half-dead condition. Then someone said those were
cowboys.

Then we came to where some men camped. They were excited over losing
a lot of mules and horses. They were driving a band out west. The
Indians had stampeded them and run a lot of them away. We saw several
dead horses which the men had ridden to death trying to get the band
together again. We traveled on and came to some timbered mountains.
Now we could have plenty of wood to cook with. It was a treat to have
plenty of wood and water at the same time.

One evening after we had corralled our wagons and the guards had taken
the teams out to grass one of the men came running back and said, "Get
your guns quick; there is a drove of elk right among our stock." The
men hurried out with their guns, fired, and brought down two big elks
and dragged them into camp. I remember it so well, they looked so much
like one of our little mules. The men skinned them and cut them up and
then decided that my husband had fired the most fatal shot; so we had
first choice piece. The meat was fine.

We came to a desolate looking place. It was in a deep canyon and we
had to stop over night. There were some old bleached bones and a lot
of tangled hair. Someone said it was human hair and bones and that the
Indians had massacred a train and their bodies had never been buried.
We did not know how much of that was true, but at that time we could
believe almost anything. After all, our Indian troubles were mostly
scares, but as the old saying is, you had as well kill a person as
scare him to death.

By this time we came to some more awful hills to come down. We all got
out of wagons and the men tied ropes to the hind wheels and held back
while the teams and people slid down. Well, we all got down and went on
our way rejoicing, and finally got into some pretty country and laid
over to let our teams rest, and do our washing.

That day I took a stroll down by the creek and saw a big fish lying in
some shallow water in a little island. I very cautiously slipped around
between it and the main creek and put my hands under it and threw it
out on land. Then I wrapped my apron around it and went carrying it
into camp. It was alive and weighed about eight pounds. We would not
eat it for fear it might be sick, but some of the boys wanted it, so I
gave it to them. They cooked it and ate it and said it was very good.
Next morning we hitched up and traveled on.

The weather was pleasant and we began to see signs of civilization and
met another pack train which was loaded with flour, bacon, whisky,
and tobacco. I should not have said signs of civilization. But we
saw better things further on. Some of our people tried to buy some
provisions of them, but they would not sell; said they were taking them
to the mines and expected to get a dollar a pound for what they had.
Our money was pretty scarce and what we had was greenbacks and only
worth fifty cents on the dollar out West.

Then we came to a little garden and a cabin back in the brush. We could
see the green lettuce and onions through the fence. Some of our boys
said they would make a raid on that garden, but when they got on the
fence they saw a tree on the other side and a man hanging by the neck
from a limb of that tree. Then they said, "We don't want any garden
sass." We learned later that it was only a paddy stuffed with straw.
Our provisions were getting scarce and our teams were getting weaker,
and we very anxious to get through.

We finally arrived in the Grande Ronde Valley and then we spent the
last cent we had to buy a beef bone and some fresh vegetables. Then
all got together and made a big dinner. All sat down and ate together.
After dinner we all shook hands and said good-bye. Then each one went
his own way.

We started to cross the Blue Mountains and one of our mules got sick.
We had urged him too much. He seemed to be asleep on his feet, held his
eyes shut, and wanted to pull all the time. Well, he pulled through. I
had almost learned to love those mules, they had been so faithful.

We arrived in Walla Walla, Wash., footsore and weary, in just three
months from the day we started.

When we arrived in this beautiful little valley without a dollar and
scarcely any clothing and no provisions we had a pretty hard time. Now,
when a family gets their house and everything they have, burned, the
people around get together and help them, and it is right they should
in this land of plenty; and when a criminal leaves the penitentiary
they give him a suit of clothes and some money. But there was no help
for the green immigrants, as we were called, and I suppose we were, at
least in some respects.

We did not understand the western slang and Indian talk that we heard
so much. It was something like this. A man that had been out West about
five years was eating dinner with us, said, "That is hiu mucka muck."
He was referring to something on the table. We asked him if he liked
this country. He said, "You bet your life!" We said, "Why do so many
men out West wear revolvers on their belts and big knives in their
boot legs?" He said, "It is necessary to keep order; we have a man for
breakfast quite often."

Then we would hear the remark, lots of men out West are made to bite
the dust with their boots on; and then, you sabba, or savvy, and many
such expressions. Well, we finally got initiated. And the people were
very kind to us. We never saw a time when we appreciated our neighbors
so much. They were friends in need and in deed.

This country was covered with bunch-grass, flowers, Indians, coyotes,
and grasshoppers. A few white people were living along the creeks in
little huts. Some were growing a little wheat and others small grain
and gardens. Everything was very high priced. Wheat sold for a dollar
and a half a bushel. There was scarcely any fruit to be had at any
price. When I go through this beautiful valley, now a little less than
forty years after, and see wagon loads of delicious fruit going to
waste it makes me think of those times.

Well, we went to work; had to rustle, kept at it from early morn till
late at night. But we would jump from one thing to another. There
seemed to be too many chances. First we would settle on one piece of
land, then on another. There were thousands and thousands of acres
of good unclaimed land all about us, but people thought none but the
sloughs would grow anything. After two or three years of changing about
we finally bought eighty acres of land and settled down. Paid eight
hundred dollars for it. We gave thirty dollars, a horse, and our only
cow to make the first payment. At this time we had two children in our
family.

Before we had any wheat to sell it came down to fifty cents per bushel.
The country up to this time had been settled mostly by men; only some
of them had Indian women for wives. The families that settled this
country first were nearly all new married people and a baby came to
almost every home in less than two years for a dozen years or more.

One day I went to visit a dear neighbor and I was complaining of hard
times and she said, "We have been living on boiled wheat for several
days." I believe there were a good many others doing the same thing.
Those hard times seemed to bind neighbors close together. Three or four
of us would get together and go two or three miles to get some wild
gooseberries and elderberries and red haws and fix them up for fruit.
They were pretty good when there was nothing better.

I will now mention some of the Indian scares that we had to endure.
We had been warned by the newspapers to look out for the Indians, as
they were on the war path and had murdered some of the white settlers
and had mangled them terribly. So one Sunday the people were holding
meeting on Mill Creek in a little school house when a little girl came
running in, crying, and said, "The Indians are killing my mama and
papa." Some of the men hurried to the house, which was about a mile
away, and the young boy preacher got on a horse and away he went as
fast as his horse could go to warn the people at their homes that the
Indians had broken out. He stopped at our house and asked for a fresh
horse, as his was about run down. We did not have any, so he went
rushing on and stopping at every house to give the alarm. My husband
and several of the neighbor men had gone from home that day. Imagine
the scene. We were running from one house to another; each one of
us had three or four little children. After about a dozen of us got
together we decided to go to a log cabin that was near and wait for
the Indians to come. There was one man in the cabin and he was getting
ready to shoot out through the cracks between the logs. When a man
came from the seat of war and said no one is seriously hurt, it was a
drunken row and only one Indian was killed, we all went home and the
boy preacher got over his scare and has been long since a good and
noted preacher. And the Indian that was supposed to be dead came to
life again. Some of the men took him to town and had a trial and the
jury sentenced him to wash his face. Well, this is one of the many such
scares as some others can remember that are yet living.

I will relate one more incident. At this time there was a saw mill at
the head of Mill Creek and there were several families living at the
mill. The men had built a fort for the women and children in case the
Indians should attack them. One day some men who lived in the valley
took their teams and wagons and started to go to the mill, but when
they got in the mountains they saw a band of Indians coming down the
trail beyond the mill. The men at once stopped, unhitched from their
wagons, and jumped on their horses and used the tugs for whips and came
down the mountains on double quick and reported to all the people along
the road what they had seen, and the people were soon leaving their
cabins and running for the brush. And those at the mill saw the Indians
coming and they went running to the fort. Some one relating the scene
said the men could run faster than the women and children and got into
the fort first. Well, the Indians came and were friendly and very much
surprised when they saw the people running and said they had been back
in the mountains hunting and fishing and did not know that there was
any war going on.

The health of a people in a new country is usually good, but we would
sometimes get sick. Would hardly dare think of sending for a doctor.
There was no money to pay one and there could hardly be one found. But
there was a woman who lived in our neighborhood that had a good doctor
book. It was Doctor Gunn's work. She went by it in her own family, and
the neighbors sent for her. She would take her doctor book under her
arm and go to visit the sick. Then they would read and study together
and use the simple remedies prescribed in that book and get along
pretty well. In that way she got into quite a large practice. She often
rode a little blue pony. People would sometimes make the remark, "I
think there is someone sick at a certain house. I see the blue pony
tied at the gate."

This woman officiated where more than a hundred babies were born. She
was very successful, never lost a mother or child while she was taking
care of them. She most always went back every day for a week to see the
patient and wash and dress the baby. And most of the time she had one
of her own to take with her. She made no charges, as she did not have
any license. But she received a good many presents, and is sometimes
yet pleasantly reminded of by-gone days. Just a few days ago she
received a photo of five large, stalwart men and a letter from their
mother saying these are pictures of your boys; see how they have grown.
Then another time a picture came from a distance of two large twin boys
and a girl and word saying, see how your boys have grown.

I have not made mention of any names in this sketch, thinking it would
be just as interesting without.

Well, I must get back to my pioneer days that I started to write about.
Schools and churches were scarce. One woman taught a school in her
home of two rooms. She had about a dozen scholars. About one-third of
them were part Indian children. As I said before, some of the men that
came out West first came alone and took Indian women for wives. People
called them squaw men. We remember another woman that taught school in
her home of one room. At noon when the children were out playing she
would cook dinner and the family would eat, then she would take up her
school again.

We would sometimes go three or four miles to church in a home of one
room where three or four persons lived. The preacher would stand up
in the corner between the table and fireplace and preach, while the
congregation sat around on the beds and benches and boxes. Every corner
would be full. Many a one received a blessing in those humble meetings.
But we did not have to do that way very long. People with such energy
soon built school houses and churches.

Building material was hard to get. When one man worked for or sold
another man anything he would often pay him in gold dust. They used
that a great deal. We would take our little sack of gold dust and go to
town to buy things, and the merchants would weigh and blow and spill it
till we would not have much left. I said go to town; there was not much
town to go to. It was not like the town the little boy said he could
not see for the houses. One would hardly know it was a town by the
houses. At that time there was about a dozen, mostly business houses,
scattered around in Walla Walla.

  MRS. BREWSTER FERREL.

Equally characteristic of the first days is the narration of the "first
boy in Walla Walla." This was Charles W. Clark. One of the honored
citizens of Walla Walla, he was doubtless "the first boy to ride down
Main Street," as he expressed it. Through his kindness we are able
to present here some scenes from his memory of the first days in the
history of Walla Walla.


RECOLLECTIONS OF THE FIRST BOY IN WALLA WALLA

I was born on August 29, 1846, in Oregon, on my father's claim near
LaFayette, Yamhill County, from which the family was taken to Oregon
City and thence to Portland.

Needless to say, Portland was then a raw, crude town on the edge of the
Willamette River, with no business places except on Front and First
streets.

In 1855 my father, Ransom Clark, left home for Colville mines. On his
way home to Portland he selected the place on the Yellowhawk, since
known from his name, ran out the lines with a pocket compass, for there
was no Government survey. The place was nearly in a square and extended
from about where the road just east of Harry Reynolds' house now is to
the present Whitney Road.

My father was on the place in 1855 when the Indian war broke out, and
he, like all the other settlers--few in number, of course--was ordered
by the United States commandant to leave the country.

That war prevented my father's making proof on the claim, but the
Government ruled that since the settlers had been obliged to leave
on account of war, they should not lose their time, but could resume
possession and continue to prepare for making final proof.

We lived in Portland until 1859, when announcement was made that Indian
disturbances were at an end. In the fall of 1858 father had returned to
the claim. With the coming of winter he went back to Portland, but on
March 1, 1859, he went back again to Walla Walla, taking me with him. I
was then twelve years old, a strong, active boy, and accustomed to all
sorts of work and capable of being of much assistance to my father in
starting the place.

We came from Portland with a team and wagon, putting them on the
steamer at Portland and going as far as The Dalles; thence driving to
Walla Walla. Mother was left alone in Portland with my brother Will,
then two years old.

We had quite a lot of apple and peach trees which we obtained at the
Tibbetts and Luelling nurseries, near Oregon City. I can tell you the
Walla Walla Valley looked beautiful in those early spring days. It
was just a waving sea of new grass, green all over without a fence or
anything to obstruct riding anywhere that we might wish.

We reached our claim on March 28th. So far as I remember there was
not another white boy in the whole valley, except at the fort, or
whose parents were employed at the fort. Some of the army officers had
children, but I hardly ever saw them. I had no playmates except the
Indian children, and they were very friendly. There were no women, that
is, no white women outside the fort, unless two or three transients.
There were several Indian women married to white men, former Hudson's
Bay men, down the valley at Frenchtown and elsewhere.

When we reached the claim we discovered that "Curly" Drumheller and
Samuel Johnson had done some plowing on the south edge of our place,
from the spring branch to Russell Creek. We sowed it with oats and
there was a good crop, which we threshed out with flails in the fall.
We set out some of our fruit trees on the flat just southeast of where
Harry Reynolds' house now is. Those were, I am sure, the first trees
ever brought to Walla Walla, that is, after those that had been raised
from seed by Doctor Whitman at Waiilatpu. John Foster bought the trees
which were set on his place from our lot. The bill for those trees from
Seth Luelling is still in possession of my brother Will.

After remaining six weeks my father returned to Portland to get my
mother and brother. I was left to keep the place, in company with
Robert Horton. We had nothing but a tent for a house, but we managed
to get along very comfortably. My main work was to cook. I helped
plow on John Foster's place to help pay for the logs which Foster had
gotten out that spring or summer for making our cabin. On Sundays and
sometimes on other days I would go to "town," which was just a mongrel
collection of shacks and tents, with a confused mass of settlers,
Indians and soldiers straying through. The chief amusement was horse
racing and gambling. There was a straightaway track where the cemetery
now is and another just about through where the chief part of town now
lies. The first circular track was laid out by George Porter about
three miles down the valley, running around the peculiar hill on the
Sam Smith place, afterward the Tom Lyons place.

The saloon business was very active then and every species of vice
flourished. There was a man named Ed Leach who had come with father and
me from The Dalles, who had afterwards drifted around town.

One day I was near the saloon owned by W. A. Ball, and I saw that there
had just been something going on, for there was a bunch of men standing
around talking excitedly.

Ed Leach was there, and seeing me he pulled me over to a place where I
saw blood on the ground, and he said, pointing out the puddle of blood,
"There, Charlie, is where I got him." He had just killed a man.

Nothing was done about it, so far as I know.

W. A. Ball was uncle of my wife, and one of the first business men in
Walla Walla. He was the one especially who insisted on giving the name
of Walla Walla to the town. Some wanted to call it Waiilatpu, while
some favored Steptoeville.

One day while in town a man called to me saying that he had heard it
rumored that my father was dead. I paid no attention to this, for I
had heard from him a few days before, that he had safely reached home,
was getting ready to return, and that everything was well. There were
no mails at that time and the only way to get messages was through
the army or by stray travelers. It would take a week or two to hear
anything from Portland.

But though I paid no attention to the rumor it proved a sad reality.
That very day after I had returned to the tent which I called home, my
mother's brother, Uncle Billy Millican, who is still living in Walla
Walla, appeared and told me that it was only too true, that my father
had been taken suddenly sick and had died a number of days before, and
that my mother was even then on her way to Walla Walla.

The next day she came, having come on the Steamer Colonel Wright, of
which Lew White was captain, on her second or third trip from The
Dalles to Wallula. From that place she came with Capt. F. F. Dent in
an army ambulance to Walla Walla. That Captain Dent, by the way, was a
brother-in-law of General Grant.

As you can imagine it was a sad, hard journey for a woman who had just
been made a widow, and who was soon to be again a mother.

It shows something of the nerve and heroism of pioneer women that they
could go through such experiences. My mother had been strongly advised
to give up her claim. A man had offered her $300.00 for it, and Judge
Shattuck, one of the leading lawyers of Portland, urged her to take it,
assuring her that it would be the most that she could ever get out of
it. But father had been greatly impressed with the prospective value of
the place and the prospects of the town, and my mother had been so much
impressed with his views that she determined to hold the claim.

Accordingly, after spending two weeks with me she returned to Portland.
I spent that summer, sometimes a very lonesome one, in the tent, or
hoeing the garden which he had put out, and in September Robert Horton
and Uncle Billy Millican put up a cabin from the logs.

The cabin was put on the present location of Harry Reynolds' house.
It was moved from there a few feet many years ago, and put on a good
foundation, so that it is now just about as sound as ever. It is
undoubtedly the oldest house now existing in the Inland Empire, in
which a white woman lived. My mother was about the first white woman in
this region, after the missionary period.

My mother came back to Walla Walla in October of that same year, 1859,
with her newly born child, then six weeks old, to live the remainder of
her life in Walla Walla.

During those early years the valley seemed to be filled with Indians,
but they were very kindly and well disposed, and we had no trouble with
them, even though a good part of the time we were alone, mother and
the baby and the little boy and myself as the nearest a man about the
place. We had plenty of horses and cattle and chickens and garden and
had an abundance of the necessities, though no elegancies.

There were two principal Indian chiefs, and they, with their squaws
and children were often around the house. They were fine Indians.
Yellowhawk was one of them, and his location was on the creek named
after him, on what is now the Billy Russell place near the Braden
schoolhouse. The other was Tintimitsy. His location was on what became
the J. H. Abbott place.

As I remember the old town in 1860, there were several shack stores.
One was that of Neil McClinchy, on what would now be between Third and
Fourth streets.

Baldwin Brothers were about between Second and Third. Frank Worden was
located just about where the Third National Bank now is. Guichard and
Kohlhauff had a store on the same corner where the White House Clothing
Store now is. John F. Abbott had a stable right in what is now Second
Street, just about what would be between the Jaycox Store and the
Jones Building. There was no order or system to the streets for many
years, and, as we know, they are very irregular now, having followed
convenient trails or breakings through the cottonwoods and birches
which grew on the creek.

The creek at that time ran right on the top of the ground and in high
water ran out in many places. Quite a stream at high water ran through
just about where Senator Ankeny's house is, over through the present
high school grounds and thence joining Garrison Creek.

During the long, cold nights of winter in 1860-61 we lived alone in our
cabin. Mother and I would grind our flour in the big coffee-mill. One
regular job we had, and often we were up till midnight working at it,
and that was to make sacks for the flour-mill which A. H. Reynolds, in
partnership with J. A. Sims and Capt. F. F. Dent, put up in 1859 on
what is now the Whitney place.

But my mother was anxious that I should have some schooling, and
having become married to Mr. Reynolds, she sent me to Portland Academy
for two years, and two years more to LaFayette where I lived with my
grandparents.

When I returned in 1865 I was a man. Walla Walla was growing. That was
right in the midst of the mining times and the Vigilantes, when they
had "a man for breakfast" nearly every morning. It was a wild, exciting
time, but through it all Walla Walla has grown to be the beautiful city
of which we are now so proud.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have devoted considerable space in the early part of this volume
to Indians and Indian wars. The narrative of W. W. Walter gave a view
of the Cayuse war from the standpoint of a participant. Other wars
with the natives followed. The most spectacular and in many ways most
remarkable of all was that of 1877, with the Joseph band of Nez Perces.

We incorporate here an account of the personal experiences of W. S.
Clark, one of the leading pioneers of Walla Walla, and one of the best
informed students of early history.


THE NEZ PERCE WAR

On the morning of June 19, 1877, a courier reached the City of Walla
Walla bringing the sad news of the engagement on Camas Prairie between
the Nez Perce Indians and Colonel Perry's troop of cavalry in which
one-half of Perry's troop had been killed. The news caused a great deal
of excitement. Word also came that the citizens of Lewiston were in
danger of a raid by the Indians and that the settlers were pouring into
town from all sides and help was much needed.

Thomas P. Page, county auditor of Walla Walla County, started to work
raising a volunteer company. At 1 o'clock in the afternoon a meeting
was called at the courthouse where the facts were presented and
resolutions were passed promising aid to the people of the Lewiston
District. One hundred names were soon down on the roll and all who
could get horses were to start that night. The quartermaster at the
fort here gave us rifles and sixty rounds of cartridges apiece. At 6
o'clock that evening the following party left Walla Walla en route to
Lewiston: A. Reeves Ayres, John Agu, Ike Abbott, A. L. Bird, Chas.
Blewett, W. S. Clark, Lane Gilliam, H. E. Holmes, Albert Hall, Jake
Holbrook, Frank Jackson, John Keeney, J. H. Lister, Henry Lacy, Wm.
McKearn:, S. H. Maxon, Aleck O'Dell, C. S. Robinson, J. S. Stott, Ben
Scott, Albert Small, Frank Waldrip, T. P. Page, L. K. Grimm and J. F.
McLean.

We arrived at Dayton at 1 o'clock that night, and put our horses in
the livery stable and ourselves to sleep in the hay-mow overhead. Next
morning we breakfasted at the hotel. A. R. Ayers, H. E. Holmes and
Tom Beall were missing. We traveled to Marengo where a short stop was
made and the troops under Colonel Whipple came up. The volunteers took
the Indian trails across the hills and the regular troops followed the
wagon road. We stopped two hours on the Pataha and then traveled on to
Dan Favor's ranch which was about fifteen miles this side of Lewiston,
where we went into camp. Here we waited about three hours for supper,
there being some misunderstanding as to the getting of the meal. When
the troops came up they camped at the same place.

On the morning of the 21st, after paying our bills, we traveled on to
Lewiston. Leaving our horses on this side of the river, we crossed over
to the town where we met Major Spurgeon, the commander at that place,
who gave us to understand that the settlers nearby were in no immediate
danger and told us that, if we cared to go on into the Indian country,
we could be of service, but would have to be under the command of the
regular military authorities.

We re-crossed the river to our horses and, after dinner, signed our
names to report to General Howard for eight days of service. We then
elected our officers as follows: T. P. Page, captain, L. K. Grimm,
lieutenant, and John F. McLean, sergeant. Then we again crossed over to
Lewiston, this time with our outfits, and were regularly mustered in
for eight days of service. Up to this time, Ayres, Holmes and Beall had
not caught up with us. Some thought that they had backed out and gone
home, others thought that they would yet come up.

Major Spurgeon directed us to Fort Lapwai to report to General Howard,
where we arrived at 6 o'clock in the evening. Here we had supper, after
drawing on the post commissary for rations. It rained on us all that
night. The morning of the 22d we spent in repairing and fixing up our
outfits. At 1 o'clock we were again on the march as General Howard's
guard, the troops going in advance. There were three companies of
infantry, two companies of cavalry, one company of artillery and one
company of volunteers.

As we were starting off from camp that afternoon we were surprised as
well as pleased to see Doc Ayers, Doc Holmes and Ike Abbott coming
up. They were forgiven for their delinquency when we learned that
they had gotten lost, being led astray by Beall whose horse gave out
and who then gave up the expedition and went back home. They joined
us in the march without waiting to secure any dinner. While we were
going up Craig Mountain Ike Abbott's horse got away from him and he
did not catch him until several hours later. On the evening of the 22d
we made camp on Craig Mountain, putting our horses out with those of
the regular troops, and Sergeant McLean detailed J. H. Lister, Frank
Waldrip and myself to be on guard the first part of the night and Lane
Gilliam, A. L. Bird and Frank Jackson for the latter part. This was our
first guard duty and I thought that upon me rested the entire burden of
herding those 300 head of horses.

On Saturday, June 23d, we started early and traveled along the mountain
until after noon when we reached the great Camas Prairie. I was very
much surprised at the extent and richness of this prairie on any part
of which, it was claimed, timothy hay would grow. We passed the place
where our former citizen, Lew Day, was first attacked by the Indians
and later came to Ben Norton's place on Cottonwood where we camped.
Owing to the fact that we were in advance of the command, Captain Page
put a guard on the house and barn. He placed Henry Lacy as guard over
the barn and, after the command came up, Captain Wilkinson started to
enter the barn and Henry stopped him. The captain told Henry who he
was. Still this did no good and the captain turned and went away. Henry
Lacy and Charley Blewett were the youngest members of the company.

The following morning Aleck O'Dell, Lane Gilliam, Al Hall, Jake
Holbrook, Ben Scott, Ike Abbott, Wm. McKearn and I got up early
and started for Mount Idaho, nineteen miles distant. We passed the
place where Norton and his family, John Moore and Miss Bowers had
been overtaken by the Indians, also the place where a load of goods
for Mount Idaho had been captured by the Indians. We passed through
Grangeville and went on to Mount Idaho, arriving there at about 12
o'clock. We hitched our horses to the fence of a man by the name of
Aram (?) who gave them some hay. Mr. Brown at the hotel told us that
dinner would be at 4 o'clock. We told him that we were hungry and could
not wait. He wasn't long in getting us something to eat.

During our stay here O'Dell and one or two others had their horses
shod. I went into Volmer's store and wrote a letter home. Mr. Scott,
the manager of the store, showed us many courtesies. Both he and Mr.
Volmer had formerly lived in Walla Walla. Mr. Scott said that all
the people in that district who could were preparing to leave for
the Salmon River. Mr. Aram (?) invited us all in to dinner, which
invitation we gladly accepted.

Here we secured the following information with regard to the
depredations of the Indians. Joseph's band from the Wallowa and the
Salmon River Indians under White Bird had been camped on Rocky Canyon,
eight miles from Mount Idaho. The Indians attacked on Thursday, June
14th. The settlers on White Bird suffered severely. Jack Manuel was
living there with his wife and baby. The baby was killed and Mrs.
Manuel, after being horribly mistreated, was locked up in a room of
their house and then the house was burned to the ground. James Baker,
who lived about a mile below Manuel's place on White Bird, was killed.
Samuel Benedict was killed but his wife and little girl escaped and
came safely into town. H. C. Brown was shot in the shoulder but escaped
in a boat and was later found by the cavalry. Harry Mason was killed
but his sister escaped in the brush. William Osborn was also killed.
Those killed on John Day's Creek were Henry Elfreys and his nephew,
Robert Bland, Dick Divine, and two Frenchmen. The Elfreys were killed
by the Indians with their own guns which had been secured while the
settlers were at work in the field.

The settlers on Camas Prairie shared a similar fate. According to Mr.
Scott, Lew Day left Mount Idaho to place the settlers on the prairie on
guard and to give notice to the troops at Lapwai. The Indians overtook
him about two miles beyond Norton's house. They immediately fired
on him, hitting him twice in the back. Lew turned and went back to
Norton's place where he found Norton and his family getting ready to go
to Mount Idaho.

Norton, with his wife and boy, Joseph Moore, Miss Bowers, Mr. and
Mrs. Chamberlain and their child and Lew Day all got into the wagon
and started for town, the Indians following and firing on them. Four
miles the other side of Grangeville the Indians succeeded in killing
the horses and they were forced to abandon the wagon. Hill Norton and
Miss Bowers made their escape and came into Grangeville, bringing the
first information of the attack. Norton was killed, Joseph Moore was
hit twice, Mrs. Norton was shot through both legs, Mr. Chamberlain
and their child were killed, the child's head being split open with a
hatchet, and Mrs. Chamberlain was shot in the breast with an arrow.
Theodore Schwartz, another settler, was wounded.

At 6 o'clock that evening we started back to camp and arrived there at
9 o'clock. On Monday, June 25th, we left our camp on the Cottonwood and
continued our march to Johnson's camp or ranch, where we again made
camp. On the road we passed the place where, before the outbreak, about
one hundred lodges of Indians had been set at the lakes, on the rocks,
in the canyons and on the prairie. Also we passed over the ground of
Colonel Perry's retreat. Captain Page picked up some twenty cartridge
shells within a distance of fifty yards. At Johnson's we were given a
camping ground to the right of the main column, about half a mile from
wood and water. The boys were dissatisfied and we secured permission to
camp within the enclosure at Johnson's house. H. E. Holmes, Ike Abbott
and C. S. Robinson were put on guard.

After breakfast on Tuesday morning, June 26th, we left camp to
reconnoiter. We were in advance of the command that day. In our
reconnoitering we came across the body of a dead soldier about two
miles from camp. We were compelled to rest at times to allow the
infantry an opportunity to dig trenches which we might use in case of
need. About 12 o'clock we reached the summit looking down on White Bird
Creek. During the morning's ride most of the soldiers killed in Colonel
Perry's fight with the Indians were buried. For several miles we kept
coming upon their dead bodies.

In the afternoon, with Chapman as guide, we rode along the top of the
divide between Salmon River and White Bird. It was rough and tiresome
riding. We saw fresh tracks and Chapman told us that we were liable to
meet Indians at any time. Soon we discovered three Indian scouts across
the river and shortly after that we discovered the whole band moving
farther up the mountain. We fired a number of shots toward them but
they were too far away and we were only wasting our cartridges.

We then left the ridge and went down on the bottom at Manuel's on
White Bird. We went inside the gate and looked at the remains of the
buildings which the Indians had burned. A few of the volunteers strayed
down to the creek and what was their surprise to see, sitting in a
little shed which the Indians had spared, a white man whom we all soon
found to be Jack Manuel, and whom we had previously reported as among
the killed. He had been wounded in the back of the neck by an arrow and
had also been shot in the hips.

Our next task was to get Manuel out and away to safety. We soon fixed
a pole in a broken buggy that was standing near and by fastening what
spare ropes we had to the buggy and to the pommels of our saddles we
succeeded in getting him away. Finding that we were not making headway
fast enough, our captain sent to Captain Miller for two pack mules
which were soon at hand. Then, making the pole into shafts, we soon
arrived at camp where we turned Mr. Manuel over to his friends, who
were to care for his wounds and take him to Mount Idaho the following
day. It had rained all that day and we had had a hard day's work.

On June 27th we broke camp and marched to White Bird, the soldiers
burying the dead soldiers we found which they had not had time to bury
the preceding day. It was there on the White Bird side of the divide
that the terrible battle had taken place. That night we camped within
a short distance of the Salmon River which we expected to cross the
following day. It seemed likely that, on crossing the river, we would
have a fight with the Indians for we could see them for hours that
afternoon riding their horses about and swinging themselves from side
to side in all kinds of capers.

After we had made camp we received instructions to escort the pack
train back to Lewiston where they were going for supplies. On reaching
Lewiston the eight days for which we had engaged were up and, believing
that the army of General Howard was fully able to conquer Chief Joseph
and his braves, we returned to our homes.

On the afternoon after our return came word of the ambushing of
Lieutenant Rains and a dozen volunteers and regulars, and the killing
of Blewett and Foster near Cottonwood. The troops there had known
that the Indians were in the vicinity and the lieutenant called for
volunteers to go and hunt for Blewett and Foster, who had gone out
earlier in the day and had failed to return as they had been ordered
to do. The lieutenant and his men had not been gone long before a
volley was heard and, on other troops tracing them up, they found that
they had all been killed from ambush at the one volley. Foster had
been killed earlier in the day near the road at the entrance to the
prairie. Blewett had been killed a little later, around the mountain,
undoubtedly after a run for his life.

This Charley Blewett was my next-door neighbor and had been for ten
years prior to his death. We were students together at the school in
district number one and also at Whitman Seminary. We had all regretted
very much leaving Charley but he wanted to stay and Colonel Whipple
said that he would look after him. This he did, taking him into his own
mess. As soon as conditions would permit we had his remains brought
home and he was given a military funeral.

The long chase after Chief Joseph and his Nez Perce Indians, with one
or two fights and finally his surrender to General Miles, is now a
matter of history. While General Howard has been greatly maligned it
must not be forgotten that he was fighting one of the bravest tribes of
Indians in the United States.

       *       *       *       *       *

Among the most attractive features of Walla Walla is the park. This has
usually been known as "City Park" for lack of a better name. Discussion
has been rife as to a better and a permanent name. That question is
still pending but the author ventures to express the opinion here that
the most appropriate name would be "_Pashki_," one of several forms
of the Indian name for the location of the park and also used for the
creek. The word means "sunflower."

We are fortunate to be able to present a sketch by Miss Grace Isaacs,
a "Native Daughter" of Walla Walla, and one of the foremost among the
creators of the park.


THE PARK AT WALLA WALLA

"When Mr. Olmstead outlined a plan for Walla Walla's parks ten years
ago, it was a source of satisfaction to discover that the work by our
first park commission was along similar lines.

"The Olmstead plan included a boulevard encircling the city and
connecting a series of parks in the four quarters of the town,
embracing land now leased by the golf club and other tracts owned
by the city. Its fruition has been regarded by many as a beautiful
dream, or an ideal not realized in this generation by some of our men
of affairs. Not so, however, with some enthusiasts, encouraged by the
president of the Park Commission, John W. Langdon. When the plans for
our first City Park were outlined, this forty acre tract, a part of the
oldest farm in the valley, had been the property of the city for some
years, it having been acquired by the purchase of the water system,
and contained two of the main reservoirs of spring water, which then
supplied the town. John F. McLean, as a member of the City Council,
had endeavored to improve the tract, but was handicapped for lack of
funds, and by lack of interest among his colleagues to the extent of a
resolution in the council to sell a part of the land for building lots.
Mr. McLean opposed this plan so vigorously, and continued to urge the
park's improvement so earnestly, that others became interested, and
when Mayor Tausick appointed the first Park Commission, Mr. McLean was
a member, with Mr. Langdon, John P. Kent, Mrs. J. C. Huckett and Mrs.
E. S. Isaacs.

"It was in 1901 that Mrs. Conde Hamlin of St. Paul, a member of the
Civic Improvement Committee of the General Federation of Woman's Clubs,
at the invitation of The Women's Reading Club and the Art Club of Walla
Walla (at that time the only clubs in Walla Walla, though our city
has the distinction of having organized in 1885, the second woman's
club in the State of Washington, it being also one of the first dozen
in the United States), gave us our first public lecture upon Civic
Improvement. The Commercial Club supplied the theatre and W. P. Hooper,
vice president of the Commercial Club, presided and introduced the
speaker. The immediate result was the organizing of local Improvement
Clubs of men and women, that did much to prepare public sentiment for
a broader development. The Women's Clubs which had already their civic
committees, making tentative experiments (of trash cans and such)
received an impetus, and finally the Park Commission was appointed, and
Mr. Langdon proceeded to draw a plan for the improvement of City Park.
A park superintendent was secured and then came the question of money.
It would require $4,000 to lay the system of water pipes through forty
acres; the Council gasped, and said 'dare we do it?'

"A mass meeting of women was called, and a petition to the Council
asking that this work be done, was circulated by women, and assumed
the remarkable length of fourteen feet of names when presented to
the Council. Needless to say, the argument was irresistible, and the
work was hurried to completion. There being still the necessity for
funds, the Woman's Park Club thus organized on the broad lines of
membership, willingness 'to work for parks' constituting eligibility to
membership, and year by year its plans have been carried to completion
in proportion to the state of the exchequer. Dreamland, a tract of
ten acres in the southwestern part of town, has been acquired, and
following Mr. Olmstead's recommendations, an effort is being made to
secure land for another in the northwestern area, which is more than
a mile from the Dreamland, and two from City Park. There are also
eight acres on Boyer Avenue known as 'Wildwood' awaiting development,
as well as the land lying along Mill Creek, previously mentioned as
leased by the Golf Club. Walla Walla possesses abundant land for all
the recreation places she will need for one hundred years at least, if
wisely conserved.

"The Park Club established and maintains the playgrounds in two parks,
and hopes another season to build swimming pools. For the establishment
of this department credit should be given the eloquence of Jane Addams
and of Judge Lindsey in depicting the need for the right environment of
children in their leisure hours. It was with the hope that preventive
measures might make some of the unhappy conditions of cities impossible
in this community. The Park Club has for eight years given annually a
'Community' entertainment, usually an open air festival in the park.
The Pageant of 1914, written and staged by Porter Garnett of the
Pageant Association of America, the artist who has staged so many of
the Bohemian Club's Grove Plays, will linger long in memory as 'the
most beautiful thing Walla Walla ever did.' It was a wonderful artistic
success, owing to the devotion of the Park Club to ideals, which were
epitomized by Mr. Garnett as 'those whose Civic pride and constructive
idealism have enabled them to dare and to achieve.'

"The year 1917 has been marked by a 'Kirmess,' the proceeds of which
are to be devoted to Red Cross work. It is the judgment of all
concerned that though the park needs work, the soldiers in the field
need our money more."

       *       *       *       *       *

While there are naturally many more recollections in respect to Walla
Walla and its near vicinity, yet we have a number of others of great
interest from other parts of the field.

We are turning therefore, now from Walla Walla to the youngest sister
of the counties, Asotin. We have first a reminiscence of early
settlement in Asotin County, by Mrs. Mary A. Wormell, whose family is
among the most prominent of the builders of the county:


SOME PIONEER RECOLLECTIONS OF ASOTIN COUNTY

By Mrs. Mary A. Wormell

In the summer of 1880 the writer came with her family to that portion
of Asotin County known as Asotin flat. We arrived late in July
from California travelling by the "prairie schooner" route. We had
encountered many difficulties and no little discouragement en route,
and heard many disparaging stories about the new country towards which
we were travelling. One Californian, disgusted and homeward bound,
solemnly informed us that we would see icicles in Washington a foot and
a half long. And as the darky said: "We have seen all that an' mo'."

One day we met a family taking the back trail that had left our
locality the year before with this slogan printed on the new, white
cover of their "prairie schooner"--"Washington or Bust." They passed
slowly by, a weary, dejected looking outfit, and the weather-beaten old
canvas top bore the single word--"Busted." But even this demonstration
of defeat did not daunt us, for we were already "busted," had nothing
to lose and everything to gain, so we kept right on as the western
phrase so aptly puts it--"hitting the trail," to the north that brought
us at last to what is now Asotin County. It "looked good" to us then
and has kept right on looking good to us ever since.

[Illustration: A SPANISH CHESTNUT, CLARKSTON-VINELAND, 1907]

The townsite of Asotin at that time was a cattle range. There was
one cabin but farther up the river in what was later called the
"upper town" was a store and postoffice conducted by Alex Sumpter.
We proceeded to climb the hill driving where we could, for there was
practically no road. Upon reaching the plateau we gazed out over miles
and miles of bunch grass prairie that stretched away, seemingly, in
unbroken lines to the foot of the Blue Mountains nearly twenty miles
away. As we drove on we passed here and there a settler's home with a
few acres broken and fenced. There were the Bean, Ayers, and Bolick
ranches, while a little further on we came to the Boyer place. Nearer
the mountains there were many families; namely: Whiton, Scott, James
and Andrew Robinson, Sangster, Kanawyer, Dodson, Perciful, Flinn,
Bay, Huber, Dundrum, Shelman, Foredyce, Sweigert, and many others. We
located about four miles from Anatone, which at that time consisted
of a small store and postoffice conducted by Chas. Isecke. The only
schoolhouse in what is now Asotin County, was located about one-half
mile distant from the postoffice. Back in the Blue Mountains a few
miles was the saw mill of Messrs. Bean and Farrish.

The immediate neighborhood in which we lived held the honor of being
the first on the "flat" visited by the "stork"; Elmer Pintler, second
son of Mr. and Mrs. Edward Pintler, being the first white child born
on Asotin flat, and Ellen Caroline Bay, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. John
Bay was the first girl. Both little toddlers were two years old or
thereabouts when we moved into the neighborhood.

The country was now filling up rapidly; all fear of Indian troubles was
past, and the people were intent upon making comfortable and permanent
homes for themselves and their children. Money was so scarce that it
was often said that tamarack rails were "legal tender." Every man was
owner of a few, at least, for it was the only fencing known here at
that time. Consequently every man, at some time during the year, went
into the mountains and demonstrated the accomplishment of Lincoln.

The nearest flour mill was at Colombia Center, some thirty or forty
miles distant, and the yearly trips to that point were long and
tedious, over a track that could scarcely be called a road. The country
was full of cattle, so beef was cheap, being two or three cents per
pound, but pork was scarce. Vegetables were also scarce that year,
owing to a grasshopper raid. In 1881, instead of grasshoppers, there
were crickets, which passed through the country in May, but were
too early to do much damage, and the gardens were fairly good that
year. These raiding pests did not visit us again and all vegetation
flourished in the new soil.

The Pine Grove schoolhouse, the second to be built on the flat, was
built in the fall of 1880, and school was conducted there that winter.
This was not the first term taught in the district however, as a Mr.
Morgan had taught the few children in the neighborhood, the year before
in the home of Mr. Pintler. All school districts held at first only
three months of school, but it was a beginning out of which has grown
our school system of today of which all are so justly proud.

The diversions of the time, for there are no people on earth more
sociably inclined than the pioneer, were visiting, dancing, quilting
bees, barn and house raisings, "turkey shoots" on holidays, and of
course the patriotic celebrations of July Fourth.

As to dress, the people wore what they had and were glad to get it.
Cowhide and calico were the latest importations. It was not what they
wore but what they were that counted, and that simple garb clothed some
of the finest characters that I have ever known. Wherever there was
sickness, sorrow, or trouble of whatever sort, that home was filled
with friends with sympathetic hearts and helpful hands.

Of churches there were none and no resident minister, though an
occasional visiting or circuit minister held services in the
schoolhouse, but each school district maintained a flourishing Sunday
school. The most convenient and common mode of travel to these
gatherings was on horseback.

In 1883 Asotin County was established. We were very proud and later
when statehood was granted we felt that we were making progress by
leaps and bounds.

Year by year the acreage was increased, new fences were run, and in
an amazingly short time, the vast herds of horses and cattle that had
grazed peacefully there or wandered in long wavering lines, along the
deep old trails to the nearby water holes, gave place to the wide
fields of waving grain and passed on to the wilder regions.

And so we grew, the old log cabins with their mud and rock chimneys
were replaced by more pretentious dwellings, better farm buildings
began to appear, more machinery was purchased, the cayuses and the
gaunt range cattle were weeded out to make room for better livestock.
Along all lines we sought to improve the general equipment and thus
add to the farm's efficiency. Each year brought much progress and some
failure. There were hard winters and years of drought. There were good
times and hard times, but these were just the incidents common to the
life of every community. We weathered them all--and today are proud
that our little corner is a worthy part of the "Great Northwest."

In passing along any one of the numerous fine highways of which our
county boasts today, one meets occasionally an old pioneer slipping
smoothly along in his high powered motor, and there comes to mind a
picture of that same traveller, thirty or forty years ago, toiling
along that same highway, over a rough rutted course, that could only
by the greatest courtesy be called a road, with his jaded cayuse team
and lumber wagon, creeping along with the summer sun blazing down
upon him or the howling blizzard of winter buffetting, beating him
pitilessly, and the biting cold freezing him to the very bone. Picture
the contrast, dear reader, and rejoice in the progress of forty years.

In all the years to come we will be found working together for all that
makes for development and betterment along all lines, for in such unity
alone, can there be real progress. We know that each coming year is
better than the last, and all unite in the wish that good old Asotin
County may see many of them.

       *       *       *       *       *

Another of the most prominent of the early families of Asotin County is
the Clemans family. A daughter of that family, now well known in Asotin
city as Mrs. Lillian Clemans Merchant, was for some years a teacher,
and then the superintendent of schools. We are glad to present here a
valuable and entertaining account of the early schools of Asotin County
from Mrs. Merchant:


BEGINNINGS OF SCHOOLS IN ASOTIN COUNTY

By Mrs. Lillian Clemens Merchant

The writer was not among the earliest settlers of this portion of
Washington, having reached the county in the autumn of 1885, although
the schools and school systems of the county were still in the
embryonic stage, we having enjoyed the privilege of attending school
in the first schoolhouse in the county, a little log building 12 by 14
situated about one-half mile from Anatone.

This seat of learning had one window on either side and was furnished
as follows: A few rude desks of varying sizes fashioned from rough
lumber but soon worn smooth by the activity of the children by whom
they were occupied, a long bench made of a hewed log with eight upright
pieces driven into it for legs, being used as recitation bench, a small
crude table constructed from native wood served for the teacher, a
few planed boards painted black in the rear of the room sufficed for
a board, a piece of sheep-skin tacked on a block of wood served as an
eraser, while a small box heater occupied the center of the room.

Many of the children rode cayuse ponies to school, staking or hobbling
them in the open, that they might feast on the tall bunch grass that
was so abundant. School was held only during the spring and summer
months. On rainy days the riding equipment was of necessity brought
into the schoolhouse. The odor emanating from them and the huddled
groups of wet children and the lunch pails made a peculiar combination
of odors, but in those days we knew nothing of germs. Children were
taught to value the privilege of attending school as almost sacred. A
year's work was frequently done in a term of three or four months, much
stress being placed upon the three R's.

These pioneer children represented many nationalities. One family in
the locality were direct descendants of the Wadsworth family of New
England to which the poet Longfellow belongs. There were many of Indian
blood. One of these young Indian women of distinguished lineage (half
breed) grew to womanhood with us. Later losing her father, her mother
having died in the girl's infancy, upon opening of the reservation of
the Nez Perces, secured her allotment and was persuaded by the teachers
of the Indians to attend Carlisle, which she did. But in recent years
we happened to be at the interstate fair, and walking into the main
pavilion where an Indian baby show was being held, there we saw our
schoolmate, a proud and happy mother wrapped in the regulation blanket
with the "blue ribbon" pinned on her dusky babe which she held in her
arms. Recognition was mutual, but owing to the natural reserve of her
race we secured no explanation of conditions.

Fortunately in those early days requirements for securing a teacher's
certificate were not rigid, so teachers were plentiful but none
qualified to teach beyond the grammar school work, necessitating a
removal for high school work which could be ill afforded at that time.
At Lewiston, Idaho, about twenty miles distant the Methodist Church
established a so-called college which flourished for a time. Many of
the young men and women of Asotin County availed themselves of the
educational advantages offered by it.

As soon as the normal school at Cheney opened its doors Asotin County
was represented, but in order to go there the student was compelled to
leave Anatone at 7 A. M., reaching Asotin four hours later and from
there another stage was taken which connected with the Uniontown stage
in Lewiston, Idaho. About 2 P. M. the Uniontown stage, now designated
as a wild-west stage coach, being drawn by six to eight horses,
carrying often fourteen to sixteen passengers, took the timid student
in charge and transported him as far as Uniontown. It being dark and
the train not leaving until morning a stop was made over night. The
train was boarded the next morning for Spokane, a stop of a few hours
in that thriving little village, and then off to Cheney which was
reached later in the afternoon, thus making two days for the trip. But
the influence of the splendid men and women in charge of the normal and
the excellent opportunities offered the student over his environment in
his home county was a splendid recompense for the sacrifice he had to
make in leaving Asotin County home folks and friends. But the return
of the student and his entry into the teaching profession where he was
given a royal welcome by all neighbors and old friends made him feel
once more that the effort was more than worth while.

The association of the teachers with the parents in these communities
was close indeed. It was the good fortune of the teacher to be
entertained over night in every home, although humble, thus acquiring
first-hand knowledge of the environment of every child under his or
her supervision. It was also the teacher who set the example for the
young people in the community thus almost invariably improving the
moral status. The teacher was often the Sunday school superintendent
or called upon to direct the community choir or was instrumental in
organizing debating societies or spelling schools, thus again coming
in close contact with the entire neighborhood. Out of this association
many friendships were formed that counted for much in the later
development of the county. The remuneration received by these teachers
rarely exceeded forty dollars per month, many receiving less, but these
faithful teachers who still remain in the county in various walks of
life have the satisfaction of thinking that their work was appreciated
when they observe the places these pioneer children occupy in the
county.

The county school superintendent was also an efficient factor in those
early days. He might be justly compared to a missionary. Every school
board and likewise patrons of the district looked to him for close
supervision of the work, as also did every teacher expect in him a high
tribunal for the settlement of difficulties that occasionally arose
through some misunderstanding.

Since the organization of the county the office of county
superintendent has been held by both men and women, as to service
about equally divided. Speaking from a woman's standpoint, school
visitation in early days in the county was not an easy matter. The
roads were extremely poor, schoolhouses far apart, many of which
were not accessible by vehicle. One was compelled to drive until the
road ceased to be fit for travel or terminated abruptly, at which
time the team was converted into saddle horses when the journey was
continued. Arduous indeed! was the trip but one was fully repaid when
some homesick teacher brightened under the encouragement given and the
children put forth an extra effort to make their school the best in the
county in attendance or improvement along some line designated by the
superintendent, the result to be passed upon by that officer upon the
next official visit. Some of the children in these isolated districts
were twelve and fourteen years old and never had the privilege
of being inside of any public building except their own little
schoolhouse, had never had the pleasure of spending a dime. These hardy
pioneers always shared their best with the superintendent. We recall
one of the young women superintendents having gone out for a survey of
the rural schools being entertained in a home over night where the only
bed in the home was a bunk nailed up to the side of the wall and filled
with straw. This the hostess and her three months' old baby shared
with the visitor, while the husband went to the barn loft to sleep.
This young woman so hospitably entertained was made to feel in this
humble home that those people struggling against poverty knew she was
interested in the development of the various districts and always had
the loyal support of every one in those communities. All worked for the
common aim--the betterment of local conditions.

In early days it was not out of the ordinary for Indians to appear at
the farm houses demanding a meal. One incident has been brought to
our knowledge where two blanket Indians went into a house asking for
a meal in almost unintelligible English, but during the progress of
the meal one of the girls of the family was murmuring a few German
phrases which she had learned from a neighbor, whereupon the younger of
the two Indians asked in splendid English why she had not learned the
languages when young. It developed that he was able to converse in five
languages, being a college graduate, while at this time Asotin County's
children had no advantages above the grammar grades. But let it be
said to the credit of these pioneer children who are the fathers and
mothers of the present younger generation that they made good and are
seeing that their children are getting the best the great state offers
educationally.

Thirty years have brought vast changes educationally--classical,
industrial and literary courses having been added to our systems, the
schools having been inspected and placed upon the accredited lists
of the state. Children are provided free transportation to and from
schools; hot lunches are provided; buildings equipped with splendid
heating systems and sanitary conditions are generally observed.
Teachers are paid excellent wages and are well prepared for their work.
The county superintendent is provided with an automobile for visitation
of schools which are practically all reached by an excellent system of
highways.

As an outcome of this superior development many of our young men are
holding positions of trust in the present crisis, in the service of
Uncle Sam both at home and abroad.

Would we return to the old conditions and times were we given our
choice? We love to dwell upon the early times, the struggles, the happy
hours, to think of those who were friends during those trying years,
but we wish our county to keep pace with the progress of the whole
Northwest. So we, in the future, as we have done in the past, as loyal
united citizens, will boost for the educational, spiritual and civic
growth of Asotin County.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have given the personal reminiscences of pioneers of Walla Walla and
Asotin counties. We are now giving something of the recollections of
the first woman in what is now Columbia County, one of the pioneers of
1859, Mrs. Margaret Gilbreath:

S. L. Gilbreath and I were married at Albany, Ore., in March, 1859, and
started at once for Washington Territory with a band of cattle, one
wagon and team, and three herders.

At the Cascade Mountains two other men, John Wells and Tom Davis,
with a wagon and cattle, joined us. We soon found it impossible to
hurry on with the wagons, so they were left behind until the road was
opened, the rest coming on with the stock. Pack horses carried the
camp equipment. It was hard work opening up the trail on account of
fallen trees and deep snow. We camped on Butter Creek and sent two men
on to find suitable grazing land for our cattle. They returned in a
few days reporting that good land with plenty of bunch grass could be
homesteaded on the Touchet River. Having succeeded in bringing up our
wagons under much difficulty, we continued on our way to Walla Walla.

Captain Dent, commander of Fort Walla Walla, stopped us and insisted
that we settle near Walla Walla. We could not do this as the horses of
the garrison had eaten all the grass from the range and we were looking
for good pasture.

We inquired of the captain if we would be safe from the Indians if
we went to the Touchet Valley. He assured us that the Indians were
peaceable, which Mr. Gilbreath believed as he had served as volunteer
through the Indian wars of 1855 and 1856, and knew of the Nez Perces
fighting and scouting for the whites through the war. We found them
always friendly, unless they had been drinking.

Leaving Walla Walla we proceeded on our way to The Crossing, which is
now Dayton, reaching there August 27, 1859.

Mr. Stubbs, whose real name was Theodore Schnebley, lived here in a
log house with his squaw wife. He sold whiskey to the Indians, thereby
causing the whites much trouble. In coming into the Valley of the
Touchet we left the Indian trail and came down a ravine, in some places
having to shovel out places in the ravine to keep the wagons from
turning over. These wagons were the first brought into the Touchet
Valley.

The next day, after our arrival at The Crossing, we started to build
a corral for the cattle, but discovered a den of rattlesnakes. After
killing ten we decided to move down the valley to a fine location near
a big spring of pure water. This land we homesteaded.

The Indian chiefs were frequent visitors at our cabin, calling soon
after we came. Timothy and Lawyer and their friends sometimes sent
messengers on ahead to tell us they were coming to dine with us. We
would hasten to get ready a good meal for we thought it best to keep
them friendly.

Many times we expected trouble from them. Once they rode up the trail
shouting and firing off their guns. That night they burned the house
of Mr. Stubbs. Sometimes they would imitate wolves howling and slip up
near the house to see if there was a man there to know whether to scare
the white woman or not.

Once they came and demanded food and money and continued to frighten
me until I grabbed a rifle and started toward them. Then they threw up
their hands and laughed and said I was afraid.

Several times they would run a beef into the woods and kill it,
carrying home the meat. One night when the Indians had been drinking
and were giving us a great scare, two men hunting cattle and Reverend
Berry, who preached at our cabin once a month, happened to be there.
We were certainly glad to have company.

One day Mr. Gilbreath was plowing rye grass with oxen when Reverend
Berry came riding up. He stopped his work and waited for Mr. Berry
to come up to him, then said, looking at his clothes and general
appearance, "A Methodist preacher, I suppose." "Yes, I am," was the
reply. "Well, go on to the house. My wife is a Methodist and will be
glad to see you." Reverend Berry preached in our cabin all that fall
and winter of 1859 and 1860. His congregation consisted of Mr. and Mrs.
Herren, Mr. Stubbs and his dusky wife, Mr. Gilbreath and I, and men who
happened to be in the neighborhood. Mr. Berry afterward made his home
in Walla Walla for some years.

Whiskey Creek was so named because a band of outlaws made this region
their rendezvous, selling whiskey and stealing cattle. Their names
were Bill Bunting, John Cooper, Bill Skinner, George Ives and several
others who were later hanged in Montana for crimes. The authorities
there evidently knew their business, for these were the men who caused
the Vigilantes to organize against them. Many prominent men took part
in ridding the new country of these undesirables, among them Anderson
Cox and J. W. McGhee. It was said that in dealing with the thieves
Mr. McGhee said to George Ives who was up for trial: "George, we want
you to leave, and we want it to be a long time before you come back."
Mr. McGhee's deliberate way of speaking evidently carried weight, for
George left.

The first crop of wheat in the Touchet Valley was raised on the land
of Israel Davis on Whiskey Creek. He was leaving for the Willamette
to buy sheep and Mr. Gilbreath harvested the wheat by cradling, and
threshed it out by horses tramping on it. One night a wind came up and
Mr. Gilbreath and hired man got up out of bed and began the work of
cleaning the eat by pouring pails full of it from a scaffold to the
ground. In this manner over a thousand bushels were cleaned. This was
intended for seed for the coming year, but the hard winter of 1861 and
1862 followed when food for man and beast became so scarce that most of
it was sold to the needy for food, and to keep the teams from starving.
Some of the settlers ground the wheat in coffee mills and used it as
porridge. We sold our wheat for $2 a bushel. We could have sold at any
price but Mr. Gilbreath would not take advantage of their great need.

This was the most terrible winter ever experienced in the valley. The
snow drifted so deep that many of the cattle were frozen standing up.
Out of 300 of ours two cows and a calf, which we fed, were left. The
timber wolves killed a good many cattle that winter. One day a wolf
attacked a calf and the mother heard the cry of distress coming from
some distance. When she reached it, the wolf was starting to devour
the body. The cow fought it from the calf for a day or two, making the
most piteous cries. Other cattle smelled the blood and came bawling for
miles around. The sound of hundreds of frenzied cattle bawling will not
soon be forgotten.

We were fortunate in having plenty of supplies that winter, as we had
prepared to send a small pack train to the mines at Elk City. The deep
snow made it impossible to get supplies, so the neighbors called on us,
and our stores were opened to feed them. Our stock of food was divided
among thirteen families. The snow was so deep that only a narrow trail
could be kept open to Walla Walla by miners coming to and from the
Idaho mines. The snow lay on the ground until March, and in shady
places until June. We had to go to Walla Walla in the spring and buy
barley for seed.

Miller and Mossman who ran a pony express to the mines, stopped at our
cabin for meals, and for exchange of horses. Their saddle-bags were
often loaded with gold dust. Joaquin Miller, who is now known as one
of our best western poets, was then a rough frontiersman, dressed in
buckskin.

Having moved to a new log house, school was held in our cabin in
the spring of 1862. Five or six children attended. Mr. Harlin, an
Englishman, was the teacher, and he stayed with us.

Another school was taught in 1863 in the Forrest brothers' cabin. These
men were brothers-in-law of Jesse N. Day, who later founded Dayton.
Frank Harmon was the teacher and A. W. Sweeney of Walla Walla was the
first county superintendent.

Reverend Sweeney organized a Cumberland Presbyterian Church at
Waitsburg. Among others, Mr. and Mrs. Long and daughter and Mr.
Gilbreath and I were charter members.

Our first child who died in infancy was the first white child born in
the territory now included in Columbia, Garfield and Asotin counties.
The oldest living person born in this territory is Mrs. John Steen,
daughter of George Miller.

I was the only white woman in this territory for two months, until
Lambert Herren and family came and settled near. Mrs. Robt. Rowley, who
was two months old at that time, is the only living one of the Herren
family of eight children.

Mrs. Herren was a typical pioneer woman, fearless and kind-hearted,
nursing me and others in times of sickness, in the absence of a
physician. When the Indians threatened me, I sent for her and she came
with shotgun and indignation, and rescued me.

Great changes have taken place since those early days, and many
incidents of vital interest to us then have been forgotten, but the
kindness and simple living of the early settlers are not easily
forgotten.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have had occasion in this volume to make frequent reference to Mr.
and Mrs. J. M. Pomeroy, founders of the town named from them.

One of their daughters, now Mrs. Peter McClung, living still in her
home town, was the "first child" in Pomeroy now living there. She
has kindly given us a short sketch of what might well be called the
atmosphere and the feeling of her childhood home.

We are pleased to include it here as the closing contribution of this
chapter of memories.


RECOLLECTIONS OF POMEROY

By Mrs. Peter McClung

To write a story of my experience as a child on the land now occupied
by the town of Pomeroy will not require extended space. Days were much
the same with the three children of the Pomeroy family isolated from
neighbors by distance measured in many miles. Being the youngest of
the three children my amusements were in large measure directed by my
brother, who was my senior by four years, and my sister, the oldest of
the trio.

My earliest recollections recall the counting of the election ballots
at our home which was the precinct voting place for the half dozen
votes then polled here. It was my great privilege and delight to sit
beside my father, for many years one of the members of the election
board, and listen to the humdrum tones of the men's voices as they
uttered the words that made for the success of some doughty pioneer
with political ambitions, or the defeat of one who had fallen a victim
to the solicitations of over-zealous friends.

For several years my father cast the only republican ballot in the
precinct. I soon reached an age that enabled me to comprehend that fact
and know its significance. Our voting precinct contained many thousand
square miles--bounded on the south by the Blue Mountains, on the
north by the Snake River, on the east by Idaho and on the west by the
Touchet River. I sometimes wonder if the deep interest I now feel in
all elections and campaigns is not in part due to my early experiences
wherein the heat of the neighborhood contests centered about me.

My play time was long and often lonesome, the same, I suppose, as that
of other pioneer children reared in the interior of this semi-arid
region. Great was my pleasure when I was allowed to ride my pony over
the hills after cattle, or to follow my brother on a hunt for prairie
chickens or ducks. When my father's two greyhounds, "Peggy" and "John,"
made one of their frequent raids on the then ever-present coyotes,
with the rest of the family my cup of happiness was near the point
of bubbling over. Old "Rero's" peculiar bark warned us of the near
approach of predaceous animal or bird.

The Pataha Creek then teemed with fish and angling occupied much of my
time. The great birds' nests in the trees that fringed the streams,
the cubby-holes of the animals along its banks, the caverns in the
granite-ribbed Pataha hills, in the fancy of a child, contained wonders
impenetrable, yet much there was revealed. With the beginning of the
town began a new life for me.

       *       *       *       *       *

We insert at this point a notable speech upon a notable occasion by
one of the most distinguished citizens of Walla Walla, who is also
one of our Advisory Board, and whose support and suggestions in the
preparation of this work have been of utmost value.

This is Governor Miles C. Moore, last Territorial Governor. Upon his
retirement on November 11, 1889, he delivered the following address,
one eminently worthy of preservation in the literature of the State of
Washington.


ADDRESS OF EX-GOVERNOR MOORE

Ladies and Gentlemen: A custom has grown up here at the capital city
and crystallized into unwritten law, which requires the retiring
governor to deliver his own valedictory, and also to salute the
incoming administration. In accordance with that custom I am here
as the last of the race of territorial governors to say "Hail and
farewell." Hail to the lusty young State of Washington, rising like
a giant in its strength; farewell to old territorial days. It is an
occasion for reminiscence, for retrospection. To those of us who have
watched at the cradle of Washington's political childhood, this
transition to statehood has its pathetic side. It stirs within us
memories of the "brave days of old." The past rises before us.

We see again the long line of white canvas-covered wagons leaving the
fringe of settlements of the then western frontier, through tear-dimmed
eyes we see them disappear down behind the western horizon, entered
upon that vast terra incognita, the great American desert of our
school days. At last we see them emerge, after months of weary travel
upon the plains of eastern Washington, or, later, hewing out paths in
the wilderness, striving to reach that "Eden they call Puget Sound."
Hither year after year came the pioneers and builded their homes and
planted the symbols of their faith upon the banks of your rivers, in
the sun-kissed valleys of your inland empire, under the shadows of your
grand mountains, and upon the shores of this vast inland sea.

Very gradually we grew. The donation act passed by Congress in 1850,
giving to each man and his wife who would settle thereon a square
mile of land in this fertile region, attracted the first considerable
immigration. It also probably saved to the United States this northwest
territory. The entire population, which at the date of organization as
a separate territory, in 1853, was 5,500, had grown to only 24,000 in
1870, and to 67,000 in 1880.

Still with an abiding faith in the ultimate greatness of Washington,
and the attractions of her climate, when her wealth of resources
should become known, the old settler watched through the long years
the gradual unfolding of these resources, the slow increase in
population. At last the railroad came, linking us with the populous
centers of civilization. They poured upon us a restless stream of
immigration. A change came over the sleepy old territory. These active,
pushing emigrants, the best blood of the older states, are leveling
the forests, they are delving in the mines, they are tunneling the
mountains, they are toiling in the grain fields, they are building
cities, towns and villages, filling the heavens with the shining towers
of religion and civilization.

The old settler finds himself in the midst of a strange new age and
almost uncomprehended scenes. The old order of things has passed
away but your sturdy self-reliant pioneer looks not mournfully into
the past. He is with you in the living present, with you here today,
rejoicing in the marvelous prosperity visible everywhere around him,
rejoicing to see the empire which he wrested from savage foes become
the home of a happy people, rejoiced to see that empire, emerged from
the condition of territorial vassalage, put on the robes of sovereignty.

We are assembled here to celebrate this event, the most important in
the history of Washington, and to put in motion the wheels of the state
government. Through many slow revolving years the people of Washington
have waited for their exalted privileges. So quietly have they come at
last, so quietly have we passed from political infancy to the manly
strength and independence of statehood, that we scarce can realize that
we have attained the fruition of our hopes.

Let us not forget in this hour of rejoicing the responsibility that
comes with autonomy. Let us not forget that under statehood life will
still have woes, that there will still be want and misery in this
fair land of ours. To reduce these to the minimum is the problem of
statesmanship. The responsibility rests largely with our lawmakers now
assembled here. A good foundation has been laid in the adoption of an
admirable constitution pronounced by an eminent authority "as good as
any state now has and probably as good as any will ever get." Upon this
you are to build the superstructure of the commonwealth by enacting
laws for the millions who are to dwell therein.

You have the storehouse of the centuries from which to draw, the
crystallized experience of lawmakers from the days of Justinian down
to present times. To fail to give us good laws will be to "sin against
light." "Unto whomsoever much is given of him shall be much required."
The eyes of all the people are upon you. It is hoped and confidently
expected you will bring to the discharge of your duties wisdom,
industry and lofty patriotism; that when your work is done it will be
found to have been well done; that capital and labor will here have
equal recognition and absolute protection; that here will arise an
ideal commonwealth, the home of a race to match our mountains, worthy
to wear the name of Washington.

Now that I am about to surrender my trust and return to private life, I
desire to testify to my grateful appreciation of the uniform kindness,
forbearance and courtesy accorded me by the people of Olympia, and
by all the citizens of Washington, it has been my good fortune to
meet during my brief term of office. I shall always cherish among
the pleasant experiences of my life the seven months passed here as
Washington's last territorial governor.

To your governor-elect you need no introduction; if not a pioneer, he
is at least an old settler. It is a graceful tribute to this class
that one of their number was selected to be the first governor of the
state. It affords me pleasure to testify to his thorough and absolute
devotion to its interests. His every thought is instinct with love for
the fair young state. I bespeak for him your generous co-operation and
assistance.

       *       *       *       *       *

With Governor Moore's address as last Territorial governor, this volume
may fittingly close. The development of the Territory there so vividly
summarized by him, has continued and has indeed exceeded all forecasts
during the twenty-eight years of statehood, from 1889 to 1917.




BIOGRAPHICAL

[Illustration: WILLIAM P.  WINANS]




Old Walla Walla County

BIOGRAPHICAL


WILLIAM PARKHURST WINANS.

No history of Walla Walla would be complete without extended reference
to William Parkhurst Winans, who was an octogenarian at the time of
his demise. He had long been identified with the northwest and his
life was one of great usefulness and activity. He was of Holland
ancestry, descended from an ancient family belonging to the Holland
nobility. The ancestral line is traced back to Jean Winants, who was a
lawyer at Antwerp, living in 1580. The line comes down through Goswin
Wynants, who was born March 22, 1630, and was pensionary adviser for
the province of Limbourg in 1666 and was afterward a member of the high
council of Brabant by letter patent April 16, 1668. Goswin Arnould,
Comte de Wynants, was born July 20, 1661, was a member of the council
of Brabant by letters patent August 20, 1692, and in 1716 became a
member of the council of the privy council.

The following year he was called to Vienna as president of the supreme
council of the affairs of the Lowlands. He was created a viscomte
by letters patent December 24, 1721, then comte by letters patent
September 23, 1727. He passed away in Vienna, March 8, 1732. He had
married Catherine Christine Van-den-Broeck, who was born September 23,
1667, and died December 19, 1746. Ten children were born to them. The
coat of arms is described as follows:

"On a field argent, three bunches of grapes; a chevron azure,
surmounted by a cheif gules. A helmet with a mantle azure and gules,
and the crest, a Moor holding a bunch of grapes." The motto--"Fors
Non Mutat Genus," the liberal translation of which is "Fortune cannot
change the race."

When the Dutch colonized the new world in the beginning of the
seventeenth century, their descendants modified their name, adapting it
to the English orthography and pronunciation--Winans.

John Winans, of Elizabethtown, New Jersey, born in Holland, 1617, was
married in 1664 to Susanna Melyn. He was one of the eighty "associates"
who bought land from the Indians. He died in December, 1694, and his
will is now on file with the secretary of state at Trenton, New
Jersey. His wife was Susanna, daughter of Cornelius Melyn, the famous
patron of Staten Island, who led the popular party against Stuyvesant,
"central figure of his day." In 1640, Cornelius Melyn had a grant of
all of Staten Island.

The records show nine children born to John and Susanna Winans; and
Isaac, the youngest, 1684-1723, was the direct ancestor of the Winans
family as represented in Walla Walla. To him and his wife, Hannah, were
born six children: Hannah, Phebe, Isaac, Abraham, William and Elias.

The third of this family, Isaac Winans, was born in 1710 and died in
1780. He served as a member of the committee of safety during the
Revolutionary war and for loyalty to the colonies was taken prisoner
by the British and died from cruelties in the Sugar House in New York.
He was married twice and the children of Isaac and Margaret Winans
were Isaac, Mathias and Abigal. To him and his second wife, Magdalene
Winans, there were born five children, namely: Jane, Margaret, Moses,
Susanna and Elizabeth.

The sixth member of the family whose record has just been given was
Moses Winans, who was born November 9, 1753, and who departed this life
January 28, 1822. He served during the Revolutionary war in Captain
Squire's company of the Essex County Militia. His wife, Ruth, was born
August 5, 1758, and died January 26, 1817. They were the parents of
eight children.

The youngest one of these children was Jonas Wood Winans, who was born
January 19, 1802, and died October 1, 1878. He married Sarah Stiles
and they became the parents of William Parkhurst Winans, whose name
introduces this review. It was on the 20th of December, 1827, that
Jonas W. Winans wedded Sarah Stiles, who was born July 23, 1806, and
who departed this life January 8, 1858. They had a family of eight
children. Isaac, the eldest, was born October 20, 1828, was married
December 20, 1851, to Sarah Webster and died August 31, 1907. Ebenezer
Connett, born May 5, 1830, was married October 29, 1857, to Margaret
B. Rose. Meline was born February 15, 1833, and died January 12, 1845.
William Parkhurst was the next of the family. Sarah Jane, the fifth
child, was born July 7, 1839, and on the 30th of November, 1866, became
the wife of Augustus Dow. Her death occurred May 17, 1870. Jonas Wood,
who was born November 11, 1840, was married September 13, 1876, to
Alice E. Jones and died September 2, 1899. Elizabeth Magdaline, born
June 3, 1843, became the wife of William A. Hubbard, and died March
21, 1895. Mary Stiles, born January 23, 1846, was married January 31,
1877, to Dorus E. Bates, who died August 15, 1880, and on the 25th of
February, 1896, she became the wife of Augustus Dow.

William P. Winans lived to reach the age of eighty-one years and the
long period was one of great usefulness and activity, characterized
by rapid and substantial advance in business and by devotion to the
general good. He was born in Elizabeth, New Jersey, on the 28th of
January, 1836, and was a little lad of ten years when his parents
removed with their family to Pittsfield, Illinois, where he continued
his education in the public schools. He had started on a business
career in that state when ill health caused him to cross the plains.
In his early boyhood he had worked on his father's farm and at the age
of eighteen had become a clerk in a store, being thus employed through
the succeeding five years. At the doctor's orders, however, he was
forced to "get outdoors" and, attracted by the Pike's Peak excitement,
he joined three companions, and with a prairie schooner and four yoke
of oxen they started for Colorado. When within ten days of their
destination they met a party of miners who were returning home and who
had had an encounter with the Indians, some of them being wounded. The
next day they met scores of other wagons with their owners retracing
their steps and in one day passed over seven hundred wagons eastward
bound. All told the same story--that it was not a poor man's district,
for the gold was in quartz formation instead of being placer gold. One
night when Mr. Winans and his companions camped he noticed that the
wagon was headed east instead of west.

The next morning his partners, who were older than he, told him
that they had decided to return, but Mr. Winans refused to go back,
whereupon his companions unyoked his two oxen, turned them loose, put
his blankets and his share of the provisions by the side of the road
and left him. Next day, at noon, a wagon westward bound halted and the
driver asked Mr. Winans why he was camped there and which way he was
headed. Mr. Winans replied "westward." He joined forces with this man
and eventually they reached Cherry creek, now the city of Denver, then
containing about six or seven houses. One day a man by the name of
George Grimes, who had previously lived in Oregon, said: "I am through
here. I am going to Oregon. Do any of you fellows want to go along?"
Mr. Winans responded, "I'll go," and selling his oxen, he bought a good
saddle and two horses, one for a pack horse and the other for a riding
horse. One plan which the party pursued on their way westward was to
camp at night, build a fire, get supper and then move on in the dark
for a mile and camp, so the Indians would not surprise them, learning
of their whereabouts by means of the fire. At length Mr. Winans arrived
in Oregon in September, 1859, and located on the Umatilla river,
stacking the first grain in that vicinity. He also taught school in
Umatilla county in the winter of 1860-61 and he served as a clerk of
the first election in Oregon, which was held in 1860, the year in
which Lincoln was elected president. In July, 1861, he removed to Fort
Colville, Washington, and upon the organization of Spokane county was
appointed deputy county auditor.

The next year he was elected to the position of auditor, in which
capacity he served for two terms. He was afterwards appointed clerk for
the United States district court for the district comprising Spokane
and Missoula counties under Judge E. P. Oliphant. At a later period
Mr. Winans engaged in merchandising and in 1866 he was again called to
office, being elected county superintendent of schools. He aided in
building the first schoolhouse north of the Snake river in a district
that was two hundred by four hundred miles, lying between the Cascades
and the Rockies and extending from Snake river to the Canadian border.
With all of the early events which aided in shaping the history and
developing the country he was closely associated. In 1867 he was called
upon to represent Stevens county in the territorial legislature,
serving during that and the succeeding year and again in 1871. In 1870
he was appointed sub-agent of the six non-treaty tribes of the Colville
country, thus having to do with a group of Indians who had refused
to make peace with the government. He took the part of the settlers
against a proposed change of boundary of the Indian reservation and
saved some valuable lands for the settlers--lands which they had been
using for years and which they had brought under a high state of
cultivation.

All during these years Mr. Winans was engaged in merchandising, but
in 1871 disposed of his commercial interests in Colville and removed
to Walla Walla, where he formed a partnership with Major R. R. Rees,
thus establishing and conducting the largest store in Walla Walla in
the early days. The business was originally carried on under the firm
style of Rees & Winans and afterward was Johnson, Rees & Winans. Mr.
Winans remained very active in the conduct of the business, which
was developed to extensive proportions, but in 1890 he withdrew from
mercantile interests and became president of the Farmers Savings Bank,
which had been organized in September, 1889. The bank was opened at
Second and Main streets, where it has since been located. In 1890 the
bank was in temporary quarters while the old building was torn down
and the new Rees-Winans building was erected. Mr. Winans remained
president of the bank and active in the management of its affairs until
his death. He was always found at his desk and seldom took a vacation.
His life was one of intense and well directed activity and he never
stopped short of the successful accomplishment of his purpose, while
at all times the methods which he followed were those which would bear
the closest investigation and scrutiny. He had extensive interests
other than his connection with the Farmers Savings Bank and for thirty
years he was one of the directors of the First National Bank of Walla
Walla. His activities were ever of a character that contributed to the
progress and prosperity of the community in which he lived as well as
to the advancement of his individual fortunes.

On the 6th of October, 1869, Mr. Winans was married to Miss Lida Moore
and to them were born three sons who are yet living, sketches of whom
follow this. Mrs. Winans passed away December 4, 1876, and on the 20th
of November, 1879, W. P. Winans was married to Miss Christine McRae,
who survives him. They were the parents of three children. William
Stiles Winans was born May 6, 1881, and died December 16, 1891. Freeman
Earl Winans was born February 19, 1883, and married Miss Florence Ladd,
November 23, 1908. He is department manager of the United States Rubber
Company at Seattle. He is also a member of various fraternal orders.
Sarah Jean Winans, born September 19, 1885, was married in 1909 to
Major George Leroy Converse, Jr., Fourth Cavalry, U. S. A. She is the
mother of two children, George Leroy IV and William Parkhurst Winans.

It was on Sunday, the 22d of April, 1917, that Mr. Winans passed away.
He had attended church on that day and in the afternoon went for an
auto trip to pick wild flowers, of which he was very fond. Death
called him suddenly, his illness lasting less than an hour, and the
news of his demise was received with the deepest regret because of the
prominent part which he had taken in the public life of the community
and by reason of the firm hold which he had upon the affection of his
fellow townsmen. He was a most public-spirited citizen, interested
in everything pertaining to general progress and improvement, and he
lived to witness the remarkable transformation of the county as it
emerged from pioneer conditions. The funeral services were held in
the Presbyterian church and his remains were interred in Mountain
View cemetery, the Knights Templar commandery attending in a body and
officiating at the interment. Resolutions of respect were passed by the
Farmers Savings Bank and the First National Bank, and memorial services
were afterward held in the Presbyterian church, in which speeches were
delivered paying high tribute to Mr. Winans as a citizen, as a business
man, as a Mason, as an educator and as a Christian. The children of the
Sunday school, remembering his love for wild flowers, gathered many
of the blossoms of the field to decorate his grave. Thus was ended a
life of much usefulness, in which Walla Walla benefited greatly as the
result of his public spirit and his devotion to high ideals.


GILBERT PARK WINANS.

Gilbert Park Winans, the eldest son of William P. Winans, was born
January 25, 1870, at Fort Colville, near Spokane, Washington, and when
quite young removed with the family to Walla Walla, where he pursued
his education. He was married in Vancouver, Washington, to Carrie
Duckett, a daughter of Henry Duckett and a descendant of an old English
family. They now have one child, Yancey Park. Gilbert P. Winans is a
merchant and is prominent in fraternal circles, holding membership with
the Independent Order of Odd Fellows and the Benevolent Protective
Order of Elks, being a past grand in the former, in which organization
he has filled all of the chairs of the local lodge.


PHILLIP MOORE WINANS.

Phillip Moore Winans is a prominent figure in banking circles of the
northwest, now occupying the position of cashier of the First National
Bank of Walla Walla. The story of his life is the story of thrift and
business sagacity grafted onto western energy and enterprise. It is
true that Mr. Winans did not have a humble origin or experience the
early privations of some men who have achieved success, but on the
other hand not one in a thousand who have enjoyed his modest advantages
have turned them to such excellent account. The wisdom, energy and
success with which he has pushed his way along is a study for American
youth. A native son of Walla Walla, he was born on the 10th of
December, 1874, his parents being William P. and Lida (Moore) Winans,
who are mentioned elsewhere in this work.

Reared under the parental roof, he acquired his early education in
the public schools of Walla Walla and afterward attended the Whitman
Academy and Whitman College, from which he received his Bachelor of
Arts degree as a member of the class of 1894. Following his graduation
he made his initial step in the business world in connection with
banking interests. He entered the Farmers Savings Bank of Walla Walla
in a clerical capacity and in March, 1895, he resigned his position
there to become connected with the First National Bank, with which he
has since been identified, covering a period of twenty-three years.
Advancing through the various positions of clerk, paying teller, and
assistant cashier, he became cashier in 1909 and has since occupied
that important position. The thoroughness of his training, his laudable
ambition and his keen sagacity have made him a most competent official
of the bank and one who has contributed in marked measure to its
growing success. His activity in this connection has not only made him
one of Walla Walla's representative business men, but also one who is
widely known in the banking circles of the northwest.

In 1899 Mr. Winans was united in marriage to Miss Rose M. Blalock, the
youngest daughter of Dr. N. G. Blalock, one of Walla Walla's early
pioneer settlers and a very prominent and gifted man of the northwest
country. Mrs. Winans passed away in November, 1914, and in February,
1916, Mr. Winans was again married, his second union being with Miss
Catherine V. Eppinger, of Portland, Oregon, a lady of culture and
refinement, who holds membership in the Women's Reading Club of Walla
Walla and takes a very active and helpful part in church and charitable
work.

Both Mr. and Mrs. Winans are members of the Presbyterian church.
Fraternally he is identified with the Masons and in his life
exemplifies the beneficent spirit of the craft. He holds membership
in Walla Walla Lodge, No. 7, F. & A. M.; Walla Walla Chapter, No. 1,
R. A. M.; and Walla Walla Lodge, No. 287, B. P. O. E., of which he is
a past exalted ruler. A prominent member of the Commercial Club, he
served as its vice president and one of its directors for five years.
He is also a member of the board of directors and is secretary and
treasurer of the Walla Walla Golf Club. He was one of the organizers
and has been a member of the executive board of the Associated Students
of Whitman College and has filled the position of treasurer of that
organization since it was formed. His political indorsement is given
to the republican party and while he keeps in touch with the current
of political thought and action he has never been an aspirant for
office. He ranks, however, with Walla Walla's foremost citizens and has
always been active in every movement for the promotion and upbuilding
of city and state. He has conducted important business affairs without
allowing personal ambition or interests to dwarf his public spirit
or activities. His personal characteristics and social qualities are
pronounced and he is an acceptable companion in any society in which
intelligence is a necessary attribute to congeniality. The simplicity
and beauty of his daily life as seen in his home and family relations
constitute an even balance to his splendid business ability.


ALLEN LIDA WINANS.

Allen Lida Winans, the youngest son of William P. Winans, was born
in Walla Walla, April 25, 1876, attended the common schools and was
graduated from Whitman College with the class of 1901. He is now with
the Hazelwood Company, Limited, of Walla Walla. Fraternally he is a
Knight Templar and Consistory Mason and is very prominent in the order,
in which he has held office. He is also identified with the Independent
Order of Odd Fellows.


ALPH PATRICK CAHILL.

Alph Patrick Cahill, manager and cashier of the Broughton National
Bank at Dayton, Columbia county, was born at Markesan, Green Lake
county, Wisconsin, October 7, 1859, a son of William R. and Angeline
C. (Church) Cahill. His paternal grandfather, Patrick Cahill, was born
in Dublin, Ireland, in 1800, while his maternal grandfather was one of
the pioneer preachers of western Pennsylvania. William R. Cahill, the
father, became one of the early settlers of the state of Wisconsin and
contributed in substantial measure to the pioneer development of Green
Lake county. At the time of the Civil war he responded to the country's
call to arms and went to the front in defense of the Union.

At the usual age Alph P. Cahill became a pupil in the public schools of
his native state, passing through consecutive grades until he completed
a high school course in Oshkosh, Wisconsin, in 1873. He then turned
his attention to the occupation of farming but afterward engaged in
merchandising and subsequently took up the milling business. Step by
step he progressed as the years went on and in 1909 he assisted in the
organization of the Broughton National Bank of Dayton, Columbia county,
Washington, and has since continued as its manager and cashier, largely
shaping the policy and directing the activities of the institution. He
has been most careful to safeguard the interests of stockholders and
depositors alike, while the progressive methods of the bank have ever
been tempered by a wise conservatism.

On the 2d of December, 1882, Mr. Cahill was united in marriage to
Miss Irene M. Starr, a native of Oregon. For his second wife he chose
Frankie G. King, a native of Columbia county, and a daughter of one
of the pioneers of this section, William B. King, who was an old-time
stage man, operating the Walla Walla-Lewiston stage and mail route in
the early days. The second marriage was celebrated April 14, 1915. Mr.
Cahill's children are: Roy R., who is a graduate of Whitman College
and also of the law school of Columbia University of New York and who
married Jessie M. Criffield, a daughter of W. R. Criffield, of Walla
Walla; Fred V., who is a graduate of Washington University and is now
engaged in mercantile business and who married Grace J. Crossler; May,
who is the wife of Frank G. Barclay, a Columbia county farmer; Patrick
E., who married Ethel Johnston and is a bookkeeper in the Broughton
National Bank; Mack, a graduate of the Newberg (Oregon) high school;
and Burr, who is at home.

Fraternally Mr. Cahill is connected with the Odd Fellows, the Knights
of Pythias and the Masonic orders, being a Royal Arch Mason. He has
always been an active worker in these different organizations and has
been presiding officer in each. In politics he has ever been a stalwart
republican since age conferred upon him the right of franchise and
from 1892 until 1896 he filled the position of county auditor, his
re-election being an acknowledgment of his excellent service during
his first term. He was county commissioner from 1910 until 1912 and
he has always been loyal to every cause and trust reposed in him. His
military record covers three years' service with the National Guard.
His fidelity to duty has never been called into question, whether in
behalf of the public or in the conduct of his business interests. There
is nothing spectacular in his career but his record is that of a busy
life, such as contributes to the substantial force of every community.


JOHN A. DAVIS.

At the time of his death John A. Davis was in excellent financial
circumstances and was recognized as a prominent farmer of Walla Walla
county but during the early days of his residence here he endured many
hardships and privations, the conditions being then those of a frontier
region. He was born in Owen county, Indiana, November 17, 1839, and was
a son of Willoughby and Mary (Orman) Davis, both natives of Tennessee.
However, they removed to Indiana at an early day and remained there
until 1848, when they went to Wapello county, Iowa, where the father
continued to follow agricultural pursuits until his death. There the
mother also passed away.

It was in Iowa that John A. Davis received his education and grew to
manhood. In 1863, following his marriage, he and his wife made the
seemingly never ending journey across the great plains to the Pacific
northwest by ox team. They settled on a homestead on Mill creek in
Walla Walla county, and their first residence was a log cabin covered
with a clapboard roof and with a stick chimney. At that time there were
but few settlers in this region and there were many inconveniences
to be endured, but the rich soil indicated that in time the country
would be well settled and highly developed, and the pioneers labored
with confidence in the future. After residing upon his homestead for
a time Mr. Davis purchased 550 acres of excellent land on the Oregon
state line and there made his home until his death. He made excellent
improvements upon the place and followed up-to-date methods in his work
with the result that his resources steadily increased.

Mr. Davis was married in Iowa to Miss Carolina Snoddy, a native of Clay
county, Indiana, and a daughter of James and Anna (Kendall) Snoddy,
the former native of Kentucky and the latter of Tennessee. The father
died in Indiana and the mother removed with her children to Iowa and
there spent her last years. To Mr. and Mrs. Davis were born fourteen
children, namely: John H., deceased; Margaret, the wife of Charles
Sweezy; James, deceased; Mary, the wife of William P. Reiser; Frank,
a farmer residing in Oregon; Laura, the wife of Fred Kaser; William
N.; Rosie, deceased; Estella, the wife of John Garvey; Clara, the wife
of H. Miller; Edna, at home; Nellie, deceased; Gertrude, the wife of
Raymond Reiser; and Elmer, who is married and living on the home farm.

[Illustration: JOHN A. DAVIS]

[Illustration: MRS. JOHN A. DAVIS]

Mr. Davis was not active in politics, as the management of his farming
interests left him little time for outside activities. He passed
away in 1907 and was laid to rest in Mountain View cemetery at Walla
Walla. He was an honored pioneer of the county, and his death was
deeply regretted by all who had come in close contact with him. His
salient qualities were determination, enterprise and industry, and
these enabled him to do his part in bringing about the agricultural
development of this section. Mrs. Davis gives her personal attention
to the leasing of the farm and to the management of all the business
affairs of the estate and is recognized as woman not only of excellent
judgment but a typical pioneer mother of whom her children and
grandchildren, in fact the entire community, justly feel proud.


ASEL HOYT BURNAP.

Asel Hoyt Burnap is a resident farmer of the Walla Walla valley, who
since 1911 has lived upon his present place, comprising thirty acres on
section 27, Hill township, Walla Walla county. Here he is engaged in
the live stock business and his land is largely devoted to the raising
of alfalfa. He was born in Barton county, Kansas, November 29, 1879,
a son of William D. and Mary (Hoyt) Burnap, who were natives of Ohio.
On leaving that state they became residents of Illinois in 1869 and
there remained until 1876, when they established their home in Barton
county, Kansas, where they continued to reside until 1881. In that
year they removed to Lamar, Missouri, where they remained until 1885,
when attracted by the opportunities of the northwest, they crossed
the plains in one of the old-time prairie schooners and established
their home in Wallowa county, Oregon. In 1893 they came to the Walla
Walla valley and settled upon a farm but at a subsequent period became
residents of La Grande, Oregon, where the father passed away. He was an
honored veteran of the Civil war and served from beginning to end with
the Seventh Missouri Cavalry, risking limb and life to win the cause
for the Union. The mother survives and is now living in Pendleton,
Oregon. Their family numbered seven children, five of whom are living.

Asel H. Burnap spent the period of his boyhood and youth largely in
Oregon, where he acquired a public school education when not busy with
work in the fields. He continued at home until he had attained his
majority, after which he engaged in the live stock business on his
own account. It was in 1911 that he purchased his present place of
thirty acres on section 27, township 7 north, range 33 east. Here he
has since resided and is extensively and successfully engaged in the
raising of alfalfa, which furnishes excellent food for his stock. There
is no finer tract to be found in the valley and Mr. Burnap is wisely
and successfully directing his business affairs, so that prosperity is
attending his labors. He is, moreover, the secretary and treasurer of
the West Side Hawley Irrigation Corporation. He has not only closely
studied the question of supplying water to the land but has taken up
every phase of the business and knows exactly what can be accomplished
in this section of the state along the line of profitable farming and
stock raising.

In 1905 Mr. Burnap was united in marriage to Miss Evalina Cummins and
to them have been born three children, Maud L., Leland G. and Melvina
A. The wife and mother is a member of the Congregational church and
Mr. Burnap holds membership in Trinity Lodge, No. 121, I. O. O. F.,
being a faithful follower of its principles. His political endorsement
is given to the republican party, which he has supported since age
conferred upon him the right of franchise. He is a progressive young
business man, alert and enterprising, and well deserves mention among
the substantial and worthy citizens of the Walla Walla valley.


J. C. WEATHERFORD.

One of the distinguished and honored citizens of Columbia county is J.
C. Weatherford, a successful agriculturist, making a specialty of stock
and wheat raising. He was born in this county on the 21st of May, 1882,
and is a son of F. M. Weatherford, whose sketch appears on another page
of this volume.

During his boyhood and youth J. C. Weatherford attended the common
schools and completed his education by a course at Armstrong Commercial
College, from which he was graduated. On putting aside his textbooks,
he turned his attention to farming and purchased a tract of land which
he has since operated with marked success. He is now the owner of five
hundred acres of very valuable and productive land, most of which is
devoted to wheat, and he gives considerable attention to the raising of
stock.

In 1910 Mr. Weatherford married Miss Fleta Ward, also a native of
Walla Walla county, and they have a little daughter, Antoinette,
who was born November 19, 1916. Mrs. Weatherford is a member of the
Episcopal church, and Mr. Weatherford's fraternal relations are with
the Benevolent Protective Order of Elks and the Knights of Pythias. The
democratic party has found in him a stanch supporter of its principles
and his fellow citizens recognizing his worth and ability elected
him state senator in 1912. For four years he filled that responsible
position with credit to himself and to the entire satisfaction of his
constituents. He has also served as school director and has done much
to promote the interests of his community along various lines.


F. A. JONAS.

An energetic and farsighted business man, F. A. Jonas is meeting with
a substantial measure of success as a member of the Perrine-Jonas
Company; general merchants and foremost business men of Waitsburg. He
was born in Lewiston, Idaho, on the 27th of October, 1865, and is a son
of Milton and Eliza (Gilman) Jonas, both of whom were natives of Iowa.
They were married, however, in Florence, Idaho, having removed to that
state in young manhood and womanhood. The father crossed the plains
with an ox team to California in 1860 and there engaged in gold mining
until the winter of 1861-2, when he removed to Walla Walla county,
Washington. He then turned his attention to farming and stock raising
and continued to make his home in Walla Walla county until 1875, when
he took up his abode in Columbia county, where he continued to devote
his energies to general agricultural pursuits throughout the remainder
of his active business life. He was very successful as a farmer and he
and his sons acquired between thirteen and fourteen hundred acres of
land. His business affairs were carefully managed and his investments
judiciously made, and as the result of his close application and
persistency of purpose he won a substantial measure of success. His
death occurred September 8, 1908, while his wife had passed away
September 16, 1906.

J. A. Jonas was reared upon the home farm and was educated in the
district schools. In 1888 he started upon his business career a horse
raiser and from that point gradually worked into farming, which he
carried on upon leased school and railroad land. In 1891 he purchased
six hundred acres of such land, but the widespread financial panic of
1893 swept away the profits of five years' work. His land, however,
was bought under contract and he was to hold that. In 1895 or 1896 he
had finished his payments upon the property and in 1905 he bought two
hundred and forty acres adjoining. In 1909 he disposed of his landed
holdings for fifty-four thousand dollars and in 1910 he purchased an
interest in the mercantile business of the J. N. Gravelle Company
of Waitsburg, at which time the style of the firm was changed to
the Gravelle-Jonas Company. In 1911, L. R. Perrine purchased Mr.
Gravelle's interest in the business and the present firm, known as the
Perrine-Jonas Company, thus came into existence. They conduct a general
mercantile business and are ranked among the leading firms in this line
in Walla Walla county, carrying a fine stock of goods, while their
reasonable prices, honorable dealing and earnest desire to please their
patrons have secured to them a very gratifying trade.

On the 1st of January, 1888, Mr. Jonas was joined in wedlock to Miss
Mary A. Kinder, of Waitsburg, by whom he has three children, namely:
Beulah I., May I. and Ethel. Mr. Jonas gives his political allegiance
to the republican party, while fraternally he is identified with the
Masons, belonging to Waitsburg Lodge, No. 16, F. & A. M.; Dayton
Chapter, No. 5, R. A. M.; Walla Walla Commandery, K. T.; El Katif
Temple, A. A. O. N. M. S., of Spokane; and Waitsburg Chapter, No. 9,
O. E. S., of which his wife is also a member. Mr. Jonas is now worthy
patron of the Star, a position which he has occupied for the past ten
years, and his wife is worthy matron. He is also identified with the
Woodmen of the World and Mrs. Jonas holds membership in the Christian
church. They rank among the leading and influential residents of
Waitsburg, having much to do with its material, social, intellectual
and moral progress, and they enjoy the highest respect of all who know
them.


FRANK NEACE.

Frank Neace, who is actively engaged in farming in Columbia county,
was born in Walla Walla, Washington, on the 19th of October, 1875,
and has always been a resident of this state. The spirit of western
enterprise which has been the dominant factor in the upbuilding of the
Pacific coast country has been manifest throughout his entire career.
He has worked with steady purpose to accomplish desired results and
has attained a substantial measure of success. He is a son of Louis
Neace, of whom extended mention is made elsewhere in this work, and
while spending his youthful days under the parental roof he attended
the public schools and also continued his education in the Waitsburg
Academy. On reaching manhood he became associated with his brothers
and father in the conduct of extensive farming operations and in 1903
located on the farm on which his brother Louis now resides and which
was then owned by the father. For five years he cultivated about one
thousand acres of land in that place and in 1908 he removed to his
present home farm, which was then also owned by the father and which
became his property after the father's death. His farm comprises
thirteen hundred acres of land, which he cultivates to grain and
his broad fields present an attractive picture giving proof of the
industry and ability of their owner. Mr. Neace keeps in touch with the
most progressive methods of soil cultivation and development and has
added to his farm many modern improvements, so that the place is now
splendidly equipped with all the accessories and conveniences known to
the model farm of the twentieth century.

In 1903 Mr. Neace was united in marriage to Miss Katy Fulton, of
Milton, Oregon, who is a graduate of the commercial department of
Columbia College. Mr. Neace belongs to Touchet Lodge, No. 70, K. P.,
of Waitsburg, and he is widely and favorably known not only among his
fraternal brethren but by the general public as a substantial and
influential citizen, his life record being such as to commend him to
the regard and confidence of all with whom he has been associated.


JAMES STOTT KERSHAW.

Among the residents of Walla Walla whose memory goes back to the
pioneer days of this section is James Stott Kershaw, who became a
resident of Walla Walla county in 1861. He at once turned his attention
to farming, resolutely continuing the work of cultivating the fields
in spite of many hardships, and at length prosperity began to reward
his labors. He is now in excellent circumstances and is living retired,
enjoying the comforts of life. He has reached an advanced age but is
still hale and hearty and young in spirit and interests.

His birth occurred in Yorkshire, England, July 5, 1835, and he is a
son of John and Mary (Dewhurst) Kershaw. The father passed away in
1841 and in the following year the mother came with her four children
to the United States. They went to Carbondale, Pennsylvania, where
an uncle of Mrs. Kershaw's was living. Ten days after the arrival
of the family, however, the uncle died and the mother removed with
her family to Wahpeton Falls, New York, where she and her children
worked in factories engaged in the manufacture of cotton prints. While
thus employed the oldest daughter, Hannah, at that time eleven years
of age, was drowned in the creek in which she had been washing the
blocks from which the calicoes were printed. A short time after this
tragedy the family removed to Fall River, Massachusetts, where James
S. Kershaw learned the carpenter's trade, while the other sons worked
in factories. The mother also did whatever work she could find to do
and thus by common effort the family succeeded in making a living. On
July 28, 1856, they removed to Belvidere, Illinois, traveling by ocean,
river and the Erie canal. They found that the middle west offered the
opportunities which they had expected to find and James S. Kershaw soon
found work at his trade, while his two brothers became farm hands. In
a short time they had saved enough money to buy an acre of ground and
built a small house thereon. In 1859 our subject started for Pike's
Peak but on reaching the Missouri river heard such bad reports of that
region that he and three companions turned back, while one proceeded
westward.

[Illustration: MR. AND MRS. JAMES S. KERSHAW]

While living in Illinois Mr. Kershaw became acquainted with some who
made a business of driving horses to California for sale. They were
enthusiastic in their praise of the climate of the Pacific coast and
the almost limitless opportunities for advancement there and their
reports of the far west influenced the family to go to the coast.
Accordingly they sold their home, bought a team and provisions to last
them throughout the long journey and in the spring of 1861 set out for
their new home. It was not definitely decided in what locality they
should settle, but the general preference was for California. They had
been advised to "never camp twice in the same place" and when the train
of which they were a part made a halt of a few days at Fort Laramie,
four families, including the Kershaw family, left the main train and
continued the journey. Later they overtook four other families and
not long afterward were joined by four more and still later caught up
with a train of eight families under the command of Colonel Black.
In this train was a Mr. Babcock, who had settled in the Walla Walla
valley in 1859 and was just returning from the east with his family.
His description of the country around his home was so attractive that
the Kershaws gave up their half formed plan of going to California
and decided to locate in the Walla Walla valley. For some time they
were the guests of Mr. Babcock and then they inspected the surrounding
country with the view of determining on which tract of land to settle.
They chose the quarter section adjoining Charles Actor, on the present
site of Dixie, and during the first winter lived with Mr. Actor. That
first winter was one to discourage the faint-hearted, for the weather
was severe, more so than it has ever been during the many years since.
In addition to the extra work which the cold entailed in the care of
stock the early settlers had a great deal of difficulty in securing
enough wood to keep their homes warm and their food consisted almost
entirely of beef and flapjacks. Moreover, the wheat had a great deal of
smut in it and this had to be washed out and the wheat dried before the
grain could be ground into coarse flour in a coffee mill. The following
spring the Kershaws leased Mr. Actor's land and also began to improve
their own holdings. As soon as possible they erected a log house
and there resided until some years later when they erected a larger
residence across the road from Dixie. This town received its name from
the fact that the song "Dixie Land" was new at that time and had been
introduced into Walla Walla county by the three Kershaw brothers, who
were musicians and were often called upon to sing at local gatherings.
They became known by the name of the "Dixie Boys" and when the founders
of the new town were wondering what to name it, friends of the Kershaws
suggested that it be named Dixie in their honor.

After operating Mr. Actor's land for two years William G. Kershaw took
up a homestead adjoining the present town of Dixie and the family
removed to that place. The mother passed away there on the 17th of
January, 1875, dying of pneumonia after six days of illness, and was
the first person buried in the Dixie cemetery, which is located on
land included within the Kershaw homestead. Our subject was married in
the same year and erected a home on land which he had acquired east of
Dixie. He held title to three hundred acres there and also had a third
interest in one hundred and sixty acres on Dry creek and forty acres of
timber land. Year after year he gave his time and attention to the work
of plowing, planting and harvesting and his labors were rewarded by
abundant crops, from the sale of which he derived a gratifying income.
Through hard work and good management he gained a competence and in
1900, when his son, A. C. Kershaw, was married he turned the farm over
to him and for six years Mr. and Mrs. James S. Kershaw resided in
Dixie. In 1906, however, they removed to Walla Walla, where they are
still living.

Mr. Kershaw was married December 8, 1875, to Miss Mary A. Cook, who
came to the United States from England in 1870 with an uncle, William
Yeend, his wife and ten children. They made their way at once to
California but after remaining there for a few months came to Walla
Walla county, which they reached in December of that year. To Mr. and
Mrs. Kershaw have been born two children: Arthur C., who, as before
stated, is operating the home place; and Mary Bessie, the wife of E. J.
Cantonwine, of Walla Walla.

Both Mr. and Mrs. Kershaw hold membership in the Methodist Episcopal
church and in all the relations of life they conform their conduct to
the highest ethical standards. During the more than half a century that
Mr. Kershaw has resided in Walla Walla county he has at all times been
recognized as a man of sound judgment, of public spirit and of the
strictest integrity. He had a part in the hard task of developing a new
country and it is but fitting that he should now enjoy the fruits of
his labors. He finds pleasure not only in his individual prosperity but
also in the general development of the county and has always been glad
that in 1861 he elected to cast in his lot with that of this section.


HON. J. A. FONTAINE.

One of the most attractive homes of Dayton, known as Normandy, is the
property of Hon. J. A. Fontaine, a progressive business man and citizen
who has also left the impress of his individuality upon the political
records of Columbia county, which he has represented in the state
legislature. He has long been actively, successfully and extensively
identified with farming in this section of the state. He was born in
Maryland, August 9, 1850, and is a son of Charles G. and Susan W.
Fontaine, both of whom were natives of Maryland, where they spent their
entire lives. They reared a family of nine children, of whom four are
now living.

[Illustration: HON. J. A. FONTAINE]

J. A. Fontaine spent the period of his boyhood and youth in Maryland
and in 1870 came to Washington, where he has now lived for forty-seven
years. He made his way first to Walla Walla, where he was employed as
a hired hand for a year. He afterward worked with a pack train for
four years and later entered the employ of the Baker Railroad Company
as check agent at Wallula. In 1875 he engaged with General Cook as
a packer and spent three years in that connection. In the spring of
1878 he bought a ranch and turned his attention to the raising of live
stock, in which business he successfully engaged for eleven years. He
then sold out and bought a farm eight miles from Dayton, comprising
five hundred and sixteen acres of valuable land. Mr. Fontaine is also
a stockholder in the warehouse of Dayton and his home in the city is a
most beautiful residence property.

Mr. Fontaine married and had one daughter, Leota, who is now thirteen
years of age. Fraternally he is a prominent Mason, belonging to
the lodge in Dayton. His political endorsement is given to the
democratic party and he served for two terms as a member of the state
legislature, being first elected in 1911. He gave thoughtful and
earnest consideration to all vital political problems which came up for
settlement while he was a member of the house and did much to secure
the passage of wise legislative measures. He has many warm friends in
Dayton and this section of the state and his legislative service has
gained him the high regard of many of those who are most prominent in
Washington's political circles.


CLYDE LESTER.

Clyde Lester, a partner in the firm of Young & Lester, leading florists
and representative business men of Walla Walla, was born in Bloomfield,
Iowa, December 31, 1877. His parents, Franklin P. and Keturah (Hurless)
Lester, were also natives of Bloomfield, Iowa, their respective parents
having been among the pioneer settlers who reclaimed that section of
the state for the purposes of civilization in early pioneer times.
Franklin P. Lester was of the prominent farmers of Davis county, Iowa,
for many years. In 1885 he removed to western Kansas and subsequently
became a resident of Lincoln, Nebraska, where he resided until 1911,
when again he heard and heeded the call of the west and this time made
his way to Walla Walla, Washington. His wife passed away October 17,
1916, but Mr. Lester still remains a resident of Walla Walla and now
makes his home with his son Clyde.

In the district schools Clyde Lester began his education and says his
training also came to him between the handles of a plow, for at an
early age he began work in the fields and thus he divided his time
between farm labor and the acquirement of a district school education.
His parents removed to Lincoln, Nebraska, in 1896 and at that time he
entered upon an apprenticeship to the cigar maker's trade, in which he
continued for nine years. It was while residing in Lincoln, Nebraska,
that he was married on the 26th of June, 1907, and there he began
his domestic life. Two years later he came to Walla Walla, attracted
by the opportunities of the growing northwest, and here he has since
made his home. In 1913 he entered into partnership with Fred M. Young,
who was well established as a florist in this city, and under their
management they have built up a business of very large and gratifying
proportions. Their greenhouses, which are located on South Second
street, are extensive. They have eight and three-fourths acres of land
under cultivation, with twenty-five thousand square feet under glass.
They raise the most beautiful flowers of every kind and have a very
attractive salesroom at No. 19 East Main street, where are always to be
found many kinds of cut flowers and potted plants to supply the retail
trade.

Mr. and Mrs. Lester have become the parents of two daughters, Leah and
Edna. In his political views Mr. Lester is independent and does not
care to ally himself with any party nor bind himself by party ties
voting according to the dictates of his judgment. He and his wife are
consistent members of St. Paul's Episcopal church and in the social
circles of the city occupy an enviable position. Fraternally he is
connected with Walla Walla Lodge, No. 287, B. P. O. E.; Washington
Lodge, No. 19, I. O. O. F.; the Loyal Order of Moose; the Improved
Order of Red Men; the Woodmen of the World; and the Fraternal Order
of Eagles. The west has proven to him a profitable field of labor. He
recognized the opportunities here offered and has quickly utilized them
to his own advancement, while his business methods have at all times
measured up to the highest commercial standards, and thus he occupies
a most enviable position in the confidence and goodwill of those with
whom he has been associated.


MICHAEL KENNY.

Michael Kenny, of Walla Walla, is numbered among the pioneers of the
northwest and can relate many interesting incidents concerning the
early days and those events which constitute the pioneer history of
this section. He has passed the eighty-fifth milestone on life's
journey, his birth having occurred in Ireland, September 21, 1832. His
parents, Patrick and Sophia (Cody) Kenny, were also natives of the
Emerald isle, where they spent their entire lives, both having long
since passed away. In their family were seven children.

Michael Kenny, who is the only survivor of that family, was reared and
educated in Ireland and was less than twenty-one years of age when he
bade adieu to friends and native land and sailed for the United States.
He landed in New York, where he remained for about a year, and in
1854 he joined the regular army at Governor's Island for five years'
service. He was then sent to Jefferson Barracks, Missouri, where he
was stationed for a short time, after which he was transferred to Fort
Leavenworth, Kansas, remaining there for two months. In June, 1854, he
crossed the plains to Salt Lake City with the First Dragoon Cavalry
under command of Colonel Steptoe, spending the winter at that point. In
the spring the command was sent to Fort Lane, Jackson county, Oregon,
where he was stationed for a time with other companies, remaining there
through 1855 and 1856 during the Rogue River war. He was then with
C Troop and later was promoted to the rank of sergeant. The winter
of 1856 was spent in Yamhill county. In 1857 Mr. Kenny was sent to
Fort Walla Walla. He continued with the army throughout his term of
enlistment, covering five years, and was honorably discharged in 1859.
He had participated in some of the Indian warfare on the frontier and
had done excellent work to defend the interests of the white settlers
against the hostility of the red men, who resented the encroachment of
the pale faces upon what they regarded as their own "hunting grounds."

After leaving the army Mr. Kenny ran a pack train between Walla Walla
and Orofino, and in 1865, when on his way to Boise, the Indians
captured his train, taking his twenty-eight pack animals from him and
leaving him afoot without anything. He finally managed to make his way
back to Walla Walla and there he engaged in the saloon business, in
which he continued for seven years. On the expiration of that period he
sold out and began packing for the government, devoting some time to
that work. In 1878 he became associated with the police force of Walla
Walla and was one of its members for ten years.

In 1875 Mr. Kenny was united in marriage to Miss Jennie Johnston, a
native of Glasgow, Scotland. She was only an infant when brought by her
parents to this country, the family locating in Connecticut, where they
spent the winter of 1855. The following year they removed to Illinois
and in 1859 came to Walla Walla county, Washington, where Mr. Johnston
followed farming throughout the remainder of his life. Here both he
and his wife died. In 1865 Mr. Kenny erected his present residence at
No. 7 North Sixth street and has therefore witnessed almost the entire
development of the city, being one of the few remaining early pioneers.
He took part in all of the battles with the Indians in this part of the
country.

Mr. and Mrs. Kenny are members of the Catholic church and in politics
he is a democrat, having always voted the ticket since becoming a
naturalized American citizen. There is no phase of pioneer life in the
northwest with which he is not familiar. He can remember the time when
the Indians were more numerous than the white settlers, when the great
forests stood in their primeval strength, for the work of cutting the
timber had not then been begun. Streams were unbridged and on the sites
of many of the most prosperous and progressive cities of the northwest
there were found few if any buildings. Mr. Kenny has lived to see
remarkable changes, has borne his part in the work of development and
his memory forms a connecting link between the primitive past and the
progressive present.


HON. ALFRED L. RAY.

Hon. Alfred L. Ray, residing on section 26, township 10 north, range
35, is one of the large wheat raisers of Walla Walla county and is also
entitled to mention as a member of the state legislature. He was born
in Hamilton county, Illinois, October 12, 1875, a son of Alfred M. and
Rachel Ray. He grew to manhood and received his education in Illinois
and remained in the middle west until 1901, when he became a resident
of Columbia county, Washington. For eight years he engaged in farming
there and also taught school, but in 1909 he came to Walla Walla county
and took up his residence on his present home farm of three hundred
and twenty acres. He also operates rented land, cultivating in all
eighteen hundred acres. He specializes in the production of wheat and
is recognized as an authority upon wheat growing and marketing. He uses
the most up-to-date methods and implements and gives the same careful
attention to his affairs that a business man gives to the conduct of
his interests.

In 1896 Mr. Ray was united in marriage to Miss Rosa Malone, also a
native of Illinois and a daughter of George W. and Cynthia J. (Huff)
Malone, the former deceased but the latter still a resident of
Illinois. To Mr. and Mrs. Ray have been born nine children, namely:
Eugene D., Ernest T. and Hazel, all high school students; A. Melvin;
George W.; J. Wesley; Paul; Virginia; and Stanley S.

Mr. Ray is well known in democratic circles and is now serving as
representative in the state legislature from the twelfth district
and is making a record highly satisfactory to his constituents. He
and his wife belong to the Congregational church and seek to conform
their lives to its teachings. He is respected for his ability, honored
for his integrity and held in warm personal regard by reason of
his attractive social qualities. Fraternally he is a member of the
Independent Order of Odd Fellows at Prescott and the Modern Woodmen of
America.


ANDREW J. McCULLOUCH.

Andrew J. McCullouch is living retired in Waitsburg after many years
of active connection with farming interests. He was born in Mahaska,
Iowa, June 9, 1850, of the marriage of Andrew J. and Polly (Stark)
McCullouch. The father, who was born in West Virginia, removed to
Monmouth, Illinois, at an early day and later went to Iowa, whence
in 1850 he crossed the plains to California with an ox team and old
fashioned prairie schooner. After three years he returned to Iowa
by way of the Isthmus route and there he farmed until called by
death, which occurred July 19, 1900, when he had reached the age of
eighty-four years and seven months. His wife also passed away in that
state in February, 1854, at the age of thirty years. To them were born
four sons, of whom three survive.

Andrew J. McCullouch passed his boyhood and youth in Union county,
Iowa, and his education was acquired in the public schools there. When
twenty-five years old he went to Monona county, Iowa, where he was
married and where he farmed until 1883. In that year he cast in his lot
with the Pacific northwest, coming to Walla Walla county, Washington.
He took up three hundred and twenty acres of land, nine miles north of
Preston and that place remained his home until October 1903, when he
removed to Waitsburg, where he has since lived retired. He was very
successful as a farmer and, realizing that land would steadily increase
in value as the country became more thickly settled, he invested his
capital in additional land, now owning thirteen hundred and fifty-five
acres of fine wheat land. The financial independence which he has
gained is proof of his foresight, his sound judgment and his business
ability, for he is a self-made man, having depended solely upon his own
labors for advancement.

Mr. McCullouch was married on March 16, 1879, to Miss Rebecca
Broomfield and they have become the parents of nine children: Elsie
H., William, Josie, James A. and Walter, all of whom are deceased;
Jessie M., the wife of D. H. Harris; Bertha, at home; Ruby, the wife of
Wallace Heffron, and Chauncey L., who is on the home farm.

[Illustration: MRS. ANDREW J. McCULLOUCH]

[Illustration: ANDREW J. McCULLOUCH]

Mr. McCullouch is an adherent of the republican party and for fourteen
years was school director, his continuance in the office indicating the
acceptability of his services. In religious faith he is a Methodist
and he can be counted upon to give his support to all projects looking
toward the moral advancement of his community.


HENRY SCHNECKLOTH.

Henry Schneckloth, one of the well known pioneers and esteemed citizens
of Garfield county, is now the owner of eleven hundred acres of
valuable land and for the past thirty-six years has lived continuously
on his farm of three hundred and twenty acres on section 31, township
13 north, range 43 east. His birth occurred in Schleswig-Holstein,
Germany, on the 23rd of October, 1840, his parents being Joachim and
Catherine (Ewalt) Schneckloth, who emigrated to the United States in
1853 and made their way to Davenport, Iowa. The father devoted the
remainder of his life to farming in Scott county, that state, and there
passed away about 1893, while the mother was called to her final rest
in 1897.

Henry Schneckloth was largely educated in his native country, attending
the city schools of Davenport for but one year after his emigration to
the United States with his parents, at which time he was a youth of
thirteen. On reaching man's estate he began farming on his own account
and cultivated rented land in Scott county, Iowa, until 1881, when
he came west to Washington. Here he purchased his present home farm
of three hundred and twenty acres in Garfield county, for which he
paid four thousand dollars and on which he has remained continuously
throughout the intervening period of thirty-six years. As his financial
resources have increased, owing to his unremitting industry and capable
management, he has made additional purchase from time to time until
his holdings now embrace eleven hundred acres of productive land. His
success is well merited and he enjoys an enviable reputation as one of
the representative and wealthy agriculturists of the community.

In 1867, in Scott county, Iowa, Mr. Schneckloth was joined in wedlock
to Miss Margaret Kuhl, who was a native of Schleswig-Holstein, Germany,
and came to the United States in young womanhood. By her marriage she
became the mother of eight children, as follows: James H., who is
serving as postmaster at Pomeroy, Washington; Gustav P., a farmer of
Garfield county; William J., who is serving as sheriff of Garfield
county; Katie, who is the wife of A. L. Shelton, a farmer of Garfield
county; Herman O., who is deceased; Helen, the wife of W. H. Morrison,
of Walla Walla, Washington; Adolph J., who follows farming in Idaho;
and Emil R., who operates the home farm. The wife and mother passed
away on the 27th of July, 1915, and her demise was the occasion of deep
and widespread regret.

In his political views Mr. Schneckloth is independent, supporting men
and measures rather than party. His religious faith is that of the
Lutheran church, of which he is a loyal and devoted member. He also
belongs to the Farmers Union. His life has been upright and honorable
in every relation and his many sterling traits of character have
won him the warm regard and friendship of all with whom he has been
associated.


CHARLES F. DEMENT.

Charles F. Dement, who is serving for the second term as county auditor
of Walla Walla county, was born February 8, 1880, in the city of Walla
Walla, a son of Frank S. Dement, who is mentioned at length on another
page of this work and who ranks with the leading business men of the
northwest, being prominently connected with the milling business and
the grain trade.

The son pursued his common school education in Walla Walla and passed
through consecutive grades to the high school. Later he became a
student in the Shattuck Military Academy at Faribault, Minnesota,
where he remained for three years, and later he spent two years as
a student in Whitman College of this state. When his textbooks were
put aside he was appointed to the position of deputy state grain
inspector, in which capacity he served for a year. Later he was made
deputy county auditor and such was the excellent record which he made
in that position that he was nominated by the republican party for the
position of county auditor, was elected and has since been re-elected,
so that he is now serving for the second term. He has also been clerk
of the board of county commissioners, has been county sealer of weights
and measures and in all these offices has discharged his duties with
notable promptness, efficiency and fidelity. Over the record of his
public career there falls no shadow of wrong or suspicion of evil. He
is actuated by a public-spirited devotion to the general good and in
discharging his duties is thoroughly prompt and reliable.

Mr. Dement belongs to the Benevolent Protective Order of Elks and is
also a Blue Lodge Mason, while his name is likewise enrolled on the
membership list of the Knights of the Maccabees. He is well known in
Walla Walla, where his entire life has been passed, and such are his
salient characteristics that he has won wide personal popularity as
well as prominence in office.


SQUIRE T. PRATHER.

Squire T. Prather, bond agent and investment broker of Walla Walla,
where he has made his home since 1910, occupies a creditable position
in financial circles of the city and has made for himself an enviable
place in the field of business to which he directs his efforts. A
native of Missouri, he was born in Macon county, February 14, 1860,
his parents being B. F. and Martha (Holman) Prather, both of whom
were natives of that state, where they resided until 1874, when they
crossed the plains to California. They at first took up their abode in
Stockton, California, and the father engaged in farming. Subsequently
he turned his attention to the sheep industry, with which he was
connected until he was called to his final rest. His wife also died in
California. In their family were seven children, all of whom are yet
living.

Squire T. Prather was a lad of but fourteen years when the family came
to the west and in California he was reared and educated. He attended
the high school and afterward remained at home until he had attained
his majority. He then turned his attention to the real estate business,
in which he has been engaged from that time to the present. In 1910
he removed to Walla Walla and opened his present office, being now
well known as a bond and loan agent. His long experience enables him
to speak with authority upon real estate values and upon the value
of commercial paper as well and the integrity and enterprise of his
business methods have secured for him a most liberal clientage. In
addition to his business in Walla Walla he is the owner of eighty acres
of valuable fruit land in California which is now in bearing and he has
recently sold six hundred and forty acres of land in Walla Walla county.

In 1879 Mr. Prather was married to Miss Alice J. Potts, a native of
Canada. To them have been born four children: John, who is now engaged
in the real estate business in Fresno, California, in which enterprise
his father is also interested; Mattie, who is now the wife of Eugene
Freeland, of Seattle, Washington; Elmer T., who is with his father in
Walla Walla; and Lula, who is the wife of Clifford Crockett of Walla
Walla and who is a graduate nurse. There are also four grandchildren.
The wife of our subject, Dr. Alice J. Prather, was born in Canada
and received her early education in the common schools of Montreal.
Later she took up the study of medicine in San Francisco and in 1896
was graduated from the Naturopathic School of Healing at Los Angeles.
Later she engaged in practice at San Jose, California, and is now
following her profession in Walla Walla, being at the head of the Alice
J. Prather Naturopathic Sanatorium, where the patients are treated by
nature's remedies.

In politics Mr. Prather is a stalwart democrat, thoroughly informed
concerning the questions and issues of the day and giving to his party
stalwart allegiance because of his belief in its principles. Both
he and his wife are consistent members of the Methodist Episcopal
church South, and in social circles in Walla Walla occupy an enviable
position, being cordially received into the best homes where true worth
and intelligence are accepted as passports.


EDWARD J. HOFFMAN.

Edward J. Hoffman, who follows farming in Columbia county,
concentrating his attention upon the cultivation and further
development of four hundred and twenty-one acres of good land, was
born in Walla Walla, Washington, on the 22d of February, 1883. His
father, John Hoffman, was one of the early pioneers of Walla Walla
and became one of the most progressive and successful agriculturists
of southeastern Washington but is now living retired in Walla Walla.
He well deserves mention among the representative residents of this
section of the state and his record will be found on another page of
this work.

Edward J. Hoffman was reared upon the old home farm, early becoming
familiar with the best methods of tilling the soil and caring for
the crops. Liberal educational opportunities were accorded him, for
after attending the common schools of the neighborhood he benefited
by a course in the Empire Business College of Walla Walla. Through
the periods of vacation prior to this time he had become an active
assistant of his father in farm work and after his textbooks were put
aside he continued to follow farming in connection with his father
until 1910. In that year he was united in marriage to Miss Blanche E.
Hafner, a daughter of Charles G. Hafner, of Walla Walla, who was one
of the early pioneers of Umatilla county, Oregon, settling just across
the state line in Oregon upon his arrival in the west. He, too, was
identified with farming interests for a long period but is now enjoying
the fruits of his former toil in well earned rest in Walla Walla.

Following his marriage Edward J. Hoffman located on one of his father's
farms eight miles northeast of Starbuck and there engaged in the
operation of thirty-six hundred acres of land, a part of which was
grazing land. He remained upon that ranch for five years, at the end
of which time he removed to his present home, which is owned by his
father. He farms four hundred and twenty-one acres and is regarded
as one of the representative agriculturists of Whiskey creek. He
employs the most progressive methods in tilling the soil, practices
the rotation of crops and studies everything that has bearing upon the
production of the cereals best adapted to climatic conditions here.
His labors are being attended with excellent results and the neat and
thrifty appearance of his place indicates his careful supervision
and practical and progressive methods. He has made the farm one of
the attractive features of the landscape--a proof of what may be
accomplished along agricultural lines in this district, which at one
time was believed to be thoroughly unadapted to farming.

The home of Mr. and Mrs. Hoffman has been blessed with four children:
John E., Frances P., Bessie D. and Alfred A. In his political views
Mr. Hoffman is a republican, having given stalwart support to the
party since age conferred upon him the right of franchise. He has
never sought or desired office, preferring to give his undivided time
and attention to his business affairs, which are capably and wisely
directed. He is an energetic man and obstacles and difficulties in his
path seem to serve but as an impetus for renewed effort on his part.
He and his wife are widely and favorably known in this section of the
state and the hospitality of the best homes is freely accorded them.


GUSTAV E. BARTELL.

Gustav E. Bartell, an active factor in the business life of Dayton,
is proving successful in the conduct of a garage and a machine shop.
He was born in Pennsylvania, June 29, 1875, a son of G. P. and Julia
Anna Bartell, who were born in Germany but in 1874 became residents of
Pennsylvania. In 1890 they removed to The Dalles, Oregon, where the
father followed the saddler's trade. Four years after coming west,
however, he was called by death, but the mother survives and resides in
Portland.

[Illustration: GUSTAV E. BARTELL]

Gustav E. Bartell began his education in his native state but completed
it in the schools of The Dalles. As a youth he learned the machinist's
trade, which he has since followed, and in 1909 he came to Dayton,
purchasing the machine shop which he now conducts. He does all kinds of
work in that line and has gained an enviable reputation for accuracy
and also for the speed with which he turns out orders. He also has
a garage department and has likewise built up a good trade in that
connection.

Mr. Bartell was married in The Dalles, Oregon, to Miss May Elton, who
passed away three months later. In 1909 he was married in Dayton, to
Miss Letty Clark, a native of this town and a graduate nurse, having
completed the required course of training in the hospital at Walla
Walla. To their union has been born a son, Charles G.

Mr. Bartell gives his political allegiance to the republican party,
fraternally is identified with the Knights of Pythias and in religious
faith is a Congregationalist, to which church his wife also belongs.
His military record includes service as captain of Company D, Oregon
National Guard. He began his independent career with no capital but
with a thorough knowledge of his trade, and with that as a foundation
he steadily advanced until he is now in excellent circumstances, and he
is recognized as a prominent business man of Dayton.


FRED W. KASER.

Fred W. Kaser is the secretary and treasurer of the Davis-Kaser
Company, house furnishers, who control one of the leading business
enterprises of Walla Walla and of the northwest. He was born in Madison
county, Illinois, March 24, 1868, a son of Samuel and Magdalene (Kamm)
Kaser, both of whom were natives of Switzerland and came to the new
world in childhood with their respective parents. They were married in
Illinois and there resided until 1869, when they removed to western
Missouri.

Fred W. Kaser spent his youthful days under the parental roof and
acquired his education in the common schools of Missouri and also at
the Empire Business College in Walla Walla, Washington. He arrived
in this city in 1887, reaching his destination on the 20th of June.
He was then a youth of nineteen years--empty-handed but possessed of
an abundant amount of courage, determination and energy. He eagerly
embraced any opportunity that offered whereby he might earn a living.
He had been engaged in farm work when in the middle west and after
reaching Walla Walla he was first employed at hop picking. He was not
content with such a position save as an expedient to meet his momentary
expenses and was constantly on the outlook for something better. He
returned from the hop fields to the town and secured employment with
the gas company. There he worked until almost midnight and through
the school period he was busy with lessons, for he had come to a
realization of the fact that educational training was necessary toward
success in the business world. For two years he followed that course,
working for the gas company and also in the Gilbert Hunt machine shop.
He next turned his attention to commercial pursuits and secured a
clerkship in the Schwabacher store. In the meantime he had pursued
his course in business college and such was the thoroughness with
which he did his work that the college sought his co-operation after
his graduation and for one term he engaged in teaching there. He also
correctly applied the knowledge that he had gained to his duties in
the Schwabacher store and later he accepted the position of bookkeeper
with G. H. Sutherland, with whom he remained for three years. In 1894
he embarked in business on his own account, becoming connected with
John A. Davis in the purchase of a furniture store. They began business
under the name of the Davis-Kaser Company in handling furniture and
all kinds of house furnishings and after a year the business was
incorporated under the present style, Mr. Davis becoming the president
of the company, with Mr. Kaser as the secretary, treasurer and general
manager. Their business has grown from a small concern with a stock
valued at less than three thousand dollars until it is one of the
largest mercantile institutions of Walla Walla.

On the 21st of October, 1894, Mr. Kaser was married to Miss Laura
E. Davis, a daughter of John A. Davis, who was the president of the
Davis-Kaser Company but is now deceased. Mrs. Kaser is a native of
Walla Walla county, where she was reared and educated, and is an active
worker in the Presbyterian church, to which she belongs. She is also a
prominent member of the Women's Park Club of Walla Walla, the Sunshine
Club and other similar organizations.

Mr. Kaser has always taken the deepest interest in community welfare
and has done most efficient work for Walla Walla as president of the
Commercial Club. He is a member of Trinity Lodge, No. 121, I. O. O.
F.; also of Blue Mountain Lodge, No. 13, A. F. & A. M.; Walla Walla
Chapter, No. 1, R. A. M.; Washington Commandery, No. 2, K. T., of Walla
Walla; and El Katif Temple A. A. O. N. M. S., of Spokane. He is also
connected with Walla Walla Lodge, No. 287, B. P. O. E.


EDWARD G. KNOTT.

Edward G. Knott, who is giving his entire time and attention to the
operation of an excellent farm of twelve hundred acres in Columbia
county, is a western man by birth as well as preference, being a native
of Walla Walla. He was born May 12, 1883, a son of James and Josephine
(Ulberg) Knott, who were natives respectively of England and Sweden,
but were married in California. In the '70s they removed to the city
of Walla Walla, where they still reside. For many years the father was
actively engaged in the construction business, taking contracts for
masonry.

Edward G. Knott is one of seven living children in a family of nine.
He was reared at home and is indebted for his education to the public
schools of Walla Walla. On attaining his majority he turned his
attention to farming, recognizing the value of the fine land in this
section, and after operating rented farms for ten years he bought
twelve hundred acres, the greater part of which is fine wheat land in
Columbia county and took up his residence on that place. He gives to
his affairs the same careful attention that a business man gives to
his interests and his work is conducted in a most systematic manner.
He ranks among the most progressive and successful agriculturists of
Columbia county and receives a gratifying profit from his land.

[Illustration: MRS. AND MR. EDWARD G. KNOTT]

In 1908 Mr. Knott was married to Miss Della Richmond, also a native of
Walla Walla county, and they are the parents of three children, Harold
R., Robert E. and Arnold F. Mr. Knott casts his ballot in support of
the democratic party but his participation in public affairs has been
confined to the exercise of the right of franchise. However, he is
deeply interested in the welfare of the public schools and has served
with credit to himself as a member of the school board. He has a wide
acquaintance in Columbia and Walla Walla counties, and his genuine
worth is attested by the fact that those who have been most intimately
associated with him since his boyhood are his stanchest friends.


OSCAR M. SHELTON.

Oscar M. Shelton, a prosperous and energetic young farmer residing on
section 6, Russell Creek township, Walla Walla county, was born August
20, 1883, upon the farm which he is now operating. His parents, Frank
M. and Nancy M. (Guinn) Shelton, came to the county in early days, the
former in 1863 and the latter in 1864. They were married following
their arrival here and took a quitclaim on a homestead which in time
became their property. The father was successful as an agriculturist
and at the time of his death in 1908 held title to four hundred and
eighty acres of fine wheat land. The mother died in 1897.

Oscar M. Shelton was reared upon the home farm and received his
education in the district schools. The year following his father's
death he and his brothers operated the farm in partnership, but at the
end of that time the estate was settled and he received eighty acres of
the home place as his share. He has subsequently purchased an adjoining
eighty acres, so that he now owns a quarter section of excellent land.
He annually harvests large crops of wheat and as he manages his affairs
in a businesslike manner he receives a good profit from his labors.

In 1910 Mr. Shelton was married to Miss Bessie McKay, a daughter of
Angus McKay, who came to this country in 1861. The children born to Mr.
and Mrs. Shelton are three in number, Bethine, Arline and Ibbie Lillian.

Mr. Shelton votes independently and gives careful study to the
questions and issues of the day. He and his wife are devoted members of
the Presbyterian church. He is thoroughly western in spirit, and his
enterprise and progressiveness have enabled him to take rank among the
successful men of his township.


ALFRED L. SHELTON.

Alfred L. Shelton, who is extensively engaged in stock and wheat
raising, with residence on section 5, township 12 north, range 43 east,
Garfield county, was born in Yamhill county, Oregon, July 1, 1869.
His parents, John W. and Mary (Burford) Shelton, were both natives
of Missouri and in 1853 made the long and tedious journey across
the plains to the Pacific coast country, settling in Yamhill county,
Oregon, where the mother passed away. The father survives at the age
of eighty-five years and is now a resident of Portland. Ten of the
thirteen children born to their union are still living.

Alfred L. Shelton was reared at home and his education was that
afforded by the district schools of Oregon. In 1887, when about
eighteen years old, he came to Garfield county, Washington, and
purchased land, on which he has since resided. His systematic and
practical labors have year by year been rewarded by large crops. He has
also been successful as a stock raiser and his holdings now comprise
eleven hundred and ninety-two acres, of which six hundred acres is
devoted to the raising of wheat, while the remainder is fine pasture
land. He keeps in close touch with the advancement that is continually
being made along agricultural lines and justly ranks as one of the
leading farmers of his section.

Mr. Shelton was married in 1894 to Miss Catherine Schnekloth, a native
of Iowa and a daughter of Henry and Margaret Schnekloth, an account of
whose lives appears elsewhere in this work. Nine children have been
born to Mr. and Mrs. Shelton, namely, Arthur M., Wilber W., Henry E.,
Alma, Elmer, Herman, Dale, Hazel and Doris, all of whom are yet at home.

Mr. Shelton belongs to Harmony Lodge, No. 116, I. O. O. F., of Pomeroy,
to the Woodmen of the World, to the Grange and the Farmers' Union. His
political allegiance is given to the republican party and he has served
for some time on the school board. He is a man of unusual energy,
finding the opportunity to take part in public affairs in addition to
looking after his extensive farming interests. He is manager of the
No. 2 telephone line and in that capacity has made an excellent record
for the fine service rendered patrons. He is distinctly a western
man, possessing the self-reliance, resourcefulness and enterprise
characteristic of this section.


MRS. IDA MAY WOLFE.

Mrs. Ida May Wolfe, widely and favorably known in Walla Walla county,
is a representative of one of the oldest pioneer families. She resides
on section 35, township 8 north, range 36 east, where she owns a
valuable farming property. She was born on the site of the present
city of Dayton and is a daughter of Oliver C. and Mary E. (Mealey)
Gallaher. Her mother was a daughter of Dr. Mealey, who was one of the
noted men of his day. Her father crossed the plains in 1845, when few
white men had penetrated into the vast wilderness of the northwest. He
drove across the hot stretches of sand over the mountain passes and
at length reached the Willamette valley of Oregon, where he took up a
donation claim. At that time the city of Portland had no existence and
the work of progress and improvement had scarcely been begun in all the
vast northwest. He resided in the Willamette valley until the spring
of 1862, when he came to Walla Walla county and took up his abode in
the Walla Walla valley, where he resided until the time of his death.
His entire life was devoted to farming and he contributed much to the
early agricultural development of this section of the country. His
efforts were an important factor in promoting progress and improvement
in the Inland Empire and he was among those who laid broad and deep the
foundation upon which is built the present prosperity and progress of
the county. His political allegiance was always given to the republican
party and he took an active and helpful interest in politics,
recognizing the duties and obligations as well as the privileges of
citizenship. In a word, he left the impress of his individualuty for
good upon the developmen of this section of the state and his memory is
yet revered and honored by many who knew him in the early days. In his
family were six children, three of whom are now living.

His daughter, Mrs. Wolfe, was reared and educated in Walla Walla county
and is familiar with many phases of pioneer life here. In 1883 she
became the wife of W. H. Buroker, a pioneer of this county, having come
here in 1864. Through their united thrift and industry they acquired a
large and valuable property, which at the death of Mr. Buroker in 1902
was equally divided among the legal heirs. To Mr. and Mrs. Buroker were
born five children: Zenna, the wife of L. O. McInroe; Ina J., the wife
of Frank McInroe, of Walla Walla county; Forrest L., who is a resident
farmer of Walla Walla county; one who is deceased; and Mary E., the
wife of R. W. Rigsby. Several years after the death of her first
husband Mrs. Buroker became the wife of L. R. Wolfe in 1906. Her father
died on the 29th of May, 1916, having long survived his wife, who
passed away about thirty-nine years ago. They were both laid to rest in
this county.

Mrs. Wolfe is now the owner of several hundred acres of fine land which
has been brought under a high state of cultivation and returns splendid
crops annually, thus providing the family with a very substantial
income. Mr. Wolfe belongs to the Independent Order of Odd Fellows
and to the Knights of Pythias and Mrs. Wolfe is connected with the
Rebekah lodge, the ladies' auxiliary of the Odd Fellows. She is also
a consistent and faithful member of the Methodist Episcopal church
and takes a very active and helpful part in church work, contributing
generously to its support. Her entire life has been passed in this
county, where she is most widely known, and she has a very extensive
circle of warm friends, who enjoy her companionship and entertain for
her the highest regard.


JOHN F. ABBOTT.

John F. Abbott, of Walla Walla, is one of the pioneers of eastern
Washington, arriving here in 1859, and for many years he was
prominently connected with transportation interests as the owner of a
stage line from Walla Walla to Boise, Idaho. Later, when the country
became more settled, he turned his attention to farming and was also
successful in that connection. His birth occurred in Rome, New York,
March 25, 1823, and he remained in that state until he was thirteen
years old. He then went to work and for the next few years was employed
in various states. On removing to Wisconsin he became connected with
a stage line and so continued until 1849, when he, like so many
others, made the long and dangerous journey across the plains to the
California gold fields. He devoted two years to mining and then went
to La Fayette, Oregon, where he established a stage line between that
point and Portland and another between Jacksonville and Sterlingville.
He operated the two lines until 1859, when he came to Walla Walla,
Washington, and at once became a factor in the business life of the
town as the proprietor of a stage line from Walla Walla to Wallula.
He also engaged in the livery business and later, in connection with
Thomas & Ruckle, established a stage line from Walla Walla over the
Blue mountains to Boise, Idaho. At that early day stage coaches
furnished practically the only means of communication from one part
of the western country to another and stage lines were as important
to the development of the section as railroads are today. In 1873 Mr.
Abbott sold his interests in that business and began farming and stock
raising. He met with unusual success as an agriculturist and at the
time of his death had extensive farm holdings in Walla Walla county and
also held title to valuable city properties.

Mr. Abbott was married in Oregon, April 24, 1853, to Mrs. Susan
(Snyder) Creighton, a native of Ohio, and they became the parents of
three children: John H., who is one of the prominent farmers of Walla
Walla county; Belle, the wife of H. G. Mauzey, of Walla Walla; and Anna
A., who is the widow of Colonel W. H. Miller and is caring for her aged
mother. Mrs. Abbott was born in New Lisbon, Ohio, October 22, 1824, and
is a daughter of Stephen Snyder. She lost her parents when quite small
and in 1845 came west with her aunt, Amelia Risley. They traveled by ox
teams across the plains and settled in Yamhill county, Oregon. At the
age of twenty years Susan Snyder was united in marriage to Nathaniel
Creighton, by whom she had one child, Minnie, who married D. B. Day,
of Walla Walla, but is now deceased. Mr. Creighton died in 1849 and
his widow subsequently became the wife of John F. Abbott. In 1859, in
company with their four children, they came to Walla Walla, and here
Mrs. Abbott has since made her home. She is still alert of mind and
active of body.

Mr. Abbott was prominent in the work of the Independent Order of
Odd Fellows and was generous to a fault, contributing liberally to
all deserving enterprises and charities. He was progressive and
public-spirited and did all within his power to further the advancement
of his community. His death, which occurred March 14, 1896, occasioned
widespread regret, as it was generally recognized that his energy,
sound judgment and civic spirit were valuable assets of Walla Walla.


JOHN K. RAINWATER.

The history of Dayton is to John K. Rainwater a matter of personal
experience, as he settled upon the site of Dayton when it was
government land as yet untouched by the hand of man. For years he
engaged in farming but has now disposed of the greater part of his
land, which is included within the city of Dayton, although he retains
the ownership of seven acres, upon which he resides. His birth occurred
in eastern Tennessee, January 3, 1834, and he is a son of James and
Dalila (Keifer) Rainwater, natives of that state. The family removed
to Arkansas, where the mother passed away, and subsequently the father
went with his children to Missouri. His last years, however, were
passed in Dayton, Washington, and here his death occurred. Four of his
five children survive.

[Illustration: JOHN K. RAINWATER]

John K. Rainwater grew to manhood in Arkansas and acquired his
education in the public schools there. In early manhood he decided to
try his fortune in the west and in 1861 made the long journey overland
by ox team to Albany, Oregon. He rented a farm in that locality but
in 1869 removed to Old Walla Walla county, Washington, settling on
a farm now within the city limits of Dayton. He has now disposed of
all of his land save seven acres but for a considerable period he was
actively engaged in the operation of his farm and proved successful
as an agriculturist. It has been a great pleasure to him to witness
the steady and rapid development of this section and especially of
Dayton and he has gladly given his aid to all projects seeking the
public welfare. He is now living retired after a life of well directed
industry and he is deservedly held in high esteem by his fellow
townsmen.

Mr. Rainwater was married in 1854 to Miss Mary Sparks, also a native
of Tennessee, and to them were born six daughters and one son: Dalila,
the wife of George Munsey; Susan J., who married O. C. White, now of
Olympia, Washington; Alice, the wife of Colonel F. Green, a resident
of California; Ellen, who married William Robinson; Arthur L., who is
living in Montana; Elizabeth, the deceased wife of Charles Door; and
Nancy, the wife of Frank Desersy, of Seattle. The wife and mother was
called to her reward December 30, 1889, and was laid to rest in the
Dayton cemetery.

Mr. Rainwater is a stanch republican in politics and served ably as
member of the city council of Dayton and for a number of years was
a member of the school board. Fraternally he belongs to the Masonic
order and is also affiliated with the Mystic Shrine. He has filled
most of the chairs and is well known as a Mason who exemplifies in his
life the beneficent teachings of the craft. For fifty-six years he
has resided in this locality and his record has always been that of a
public-spirited citizen, willing at all times to subordinate personal
interests to the good of his community, county or state. The success
which he gained and which enables him to enjoy the comforts of life
was the direct result of his hard work and good management, and he is
entitled to the praise that is given a self-made man.


ADAM FUDGE.

For almost thirty years Adam Fudge was identified with the agricultural
interests of Walla Walla county and took a prominent part in its
development. The greater part of his life was passed on the Pacific
coast and he was thoroughly familiar with pioneer conditions in this
section of the country. He was born in Illinois, May 26, 1845, a son
of Adam and Catherine Fudge, who were natives of Virginia and early
settlers of Illinois. In 1847 the family crossed the continent to Polk
county, Oregon, where the father secured a farm and engaged in its
operation for some years. His death occurred in Astoria, Oregon, and
his wife died in Independence, that state.

Mr. Fudge, of this review, grew to manhood in Oregon and was indebted
to the early schools of that state for the educational advantages
he had. In 1872 he came to Walla Walla, where he continued to make
his home throughout the remainder of his life. For five years he was
engaged in the butcher business in Waitsburg and then purchased a ranch
in Whitman county. He made his home in Waitsburg until coming to Walla
Walla. His death occurred in May, 1901, his remains being interred in
the Odd Fellows cemetery at Waitsburg. In his farming operations he
met with good success and left to his widow a valuable tract of eight
hundred acres of land in Whitman county, which she still owns.

In 1872 Mr. Fudge was united in marriage to Miss Mary M. Perkins,
who was born in Marshall county, Illinois, and is a daughter of Joel
B. and Margaret (Burt) Perkins, both natives of Kentucky. In that
state the Perkins family lived about ten miles from Mammoth Cave.
They removed to Oregon in 1852 and located on a farm near Portland,
where they made their home until coming to Walla Walla in 1862. The
parents both died at Waitsburg and two of their nine children have also
passed away. Those living are: James A., for many years a banker of
Colfax, Washington, but now engaged in the real estate business Mary;
Mattie, the wife of Alfred Miller, of Lacrosse, Washington; T. J.,
of Spokane; Frank B., of the Big Bend country; E. L., of Harrington,
Washington; and Garfield, of Spokane. To Mr. and Mrs. Fudge were born
three children, namely: Grace, deceased; Adna, the wife of Samuel B.
Sweeney; and Will C., assistant cashier of the Colfax National Bank.
Mrs. Fudge rents the ranch and she and her daughter are now residing in
Walla Walla, where they own a fine residence. She is a member of the
Christian church and is a most estimable lady, who has a host of warm
friends.

Mr. Fudge took a very active part in the Odd Fellows lodge to which he
belonged and was a stanch supporter of the republican party. He was a
man of good business and executive ability, who usually carried forward
to successful completion whatever he undertook, and his course in life
was ever such as to commend him to the confidence and regard of all
with whom he came in contact. He was one of the representative pioneers
of the Pacific northwest and to such men is due the present development
and prosperity of this region.


EMERSON LEE WHEELER.

Emerson Lee Wheeler, owner and publisher of the Waitsburg Times, of
which his father had long been the editor, is not only widely known in
journalistic circles but is regarded as one of the most prominent and
influential residents of his section of the state, a fact which finds
its verification in his long continued service as mayor of his city.
He was born in Waitsburg, March 22, 1878, a son of Charles and Alice
Wheeler. The father was born in Cass county, Missouri, February 19,
1852, and was one of a family of ten children. After reaching manhood
he wedded Alice Reavis, a daughter of Judge D. B. Reavis, the wedding
being celebrated in 1877, and not long afterward they started for the
west, making the journey by mule team across the plains. Arriving at
Waitsburg, Mr. Wheeler learned that the village school was without a
principal and applied for and secured the position. After a year spent
as teacher he was nominated for the position of county superintendent
of schools at the hands of the republican convention and was elected
and re-elected in 1880. In the following year he was appointed by the
governor as territorial superintendent of schools and during his five
years' incumbency in that office did splendid work in organizing the
schools, in promoting their standards and advancing their efficiency.
On the expiration of that period he acquired a lease on the Waitsburg
Times and afterward purchased the plant. He then successfully edited
and conducted the paper until 1896, when he leased the plant to his
son, Emerson L., who afterward purchased the paper and has since
successfully conducted it. For about seven years Charles W. Wheeler
was lecturer for the Woodmen of the World and gained an enviable
reputation as a public speaker by reason of his eloquence and his clear
presentation of every question which he handled. He died May 19, 1917,
at the age of sixty-five years, respected by those who knew him and
most of all by those who knew him best.

[Illustration: EMERSON L. WHEELER]

Emerson L. Wheeler, spending his boyhood and youth in Waitsburg,
acquired his education in its public schools and in the Waitsburg
Academy. He, too, took up the profession of teaching, which he followed
for a year, and he then leased the Waitsburg Times from his father and
still continues its publication. He was practically raised in the print
shop, being, as it were, "To the manner born." He had spent most of his
vacations in the printing office up to the time when he assumed its
active management. He has since given his undivided attention to the
publication of the paper, which is a representative of high standards
of journalism. Its columns have been used in large measure to further
the interests and welfare of town and county and he has made the Times
both the mirror and the moulder of public opinion.

In his home town on the 5th of June, 1900, Mr. Wheeler was united
in marriage to Miss Myrtie V. Duncan, a native of California and a
daughter of Mr. and Mrs. W. J. Duncan, who were pioneers of the Walla
Walla valley.

Mr. Wheeler has an interesting military record. For four years he
served as a member of Company D, First Infantry, of the National Guard
of Washington, occupying that position until 1898, when the National
Guard was mustered into the national service as Company K for active
duty in the Philippines. He was, however, rejected on account of
defective eyesight, so that he could not go to the orient. In politics
he has always been a republican, giving stalwart support to the party
since age conferred upon him the right of franchise. That he is one
of the leaders of the party is indicated in the fact that he is the
present mayor of Waitsburg and with the exception of one year he has
continued in the office for the past decade. Previously he had been a
member of the city council for several years and his official record
is one over which there falls no shadow of wrong or suspicion of evil.
He has always been active in the Commercial Club and is at the present
time secretary of the Waitsburg Commercial Club, having been called to
that position on its incorporation in 1911.

Fraternally Mr. Wheeler is connected with Delta Lodge, No. 70, K. P.,
in which organization he has always taken a very active part. He is
likewise a member of Waitsburg Lodge, No. 16, F. & A. M.; of Occidental
Lodge, No. 11, A. O. U. W.; and of Waitsburg Camp, No. 72, W. O. W.
In all these organizations he is loyal to the purposes and teachings
of the different societies. His standards of life are high and he
never deviates from what he believes to be right between himself and
his fellowmen. He is actuated by a spirit of progress in all that he
undertakes in a business way or in relation to the public welfare and
as an official of Waitsburg he has done splendid service in its behalf,
looking ever to the benefit and upbuilding of the city.


A. HERBERT GRAVES.

A. Herbert Graves, appointed by President Wilson in January, 1916,
to the position of postmaster of Asotin, was born December 2, 1871,
in Shelbyville, Shelby county, Missouri, a son of Edmond and Sarah
(Tuttle) Graves. He acquired a public school education in his native
city and continued his studies at Macon, Missouri. On completing his
course he took up the drug business, which he followed in Missouri
for six years, and then went upon the road as a traveling salesman,
representing a wholesale drug house, in which line of business he
continued for about two years. He then became connected with the
telephone business and on the 5th of April, 1913, he arrived in Asotin,
Washington, where he bought out the Asotin Telephone Company, which at
that time had but sixty-five patrons. The business is now conducted
under the name of the Asotin Telephone Exchange and Mr. Graves is the
sole owner. He gives service at the present time to three hundred
patrons all over Asotin county and the adjoining territory. He has
built up the business along substantial lines and he is accorded a
gratifying patronage.

On the 14th of September, 1899, Mr. Graves was united in marriage to
Miss Ida Algena Watson, a native of New York, and to them have been
born three children: June Irene, who is a student in the Asotin high
school; Herbert, a student in the eighth grade of the public schools;
and Edward, now three years of age.

Mr. Graves and his wife are communicants of the Episcopal church and he
belongs to the Masonic fraternity. His political allegiance is given to
the democratic party and in January, 1916, by presidential appointment,
he became postmaster of Asotin, in which connection he is now serving,
discharging the duties of the office in a prompt and capable manner
and at the same time conducting his telephone business. He is a
progressive, energetic and farsighted business man and is meeting with
well merited success.


J. BURRES HERROLD.

J. Burres Herrold, a well known farmer residing in Walla Walla, from
which point he directs the operation of his extensive holdings, was
born in Knox county, Illinois, November 14, 1858, a son of Bishop A.
and Harriett (Cullison) Herrold, natives respectively of Indiana and
Ohio. They were married, however, in Illinois, to which state they
removed as children with their parents. In 1871 they came to the
Pacific coast and for seven years lived in the Willamette valley of
Oregon, after which they came to Washington, settling in Palouse,
Whitman county. Seven years later they took up their residence on a
farm on Eureka flats, Walla Walla county, and there the mother died in
March, 1893. The father, a sketch of whom appears elsewhere in this
work, is still living and makes his home with a son residing near
Waitsburg.

J. Burres Herrold was reared at home and acquired his education in the
common schools of Illinois. At the time of the arrival of the family
in the Willamette valley he was thirteen years of age. A year after
their removal to Washington, in June, 1878, he left home and began his
independent career. In 1882 he filed on a homestead on Eureka flats,
Walla Walla county, and retained the ownership of that place until
1907, when he disposed of it and purchased four hundred and thirty-four
acres in Columbia county two and a half miles east of Waitsburg.
He resided upon that place until 1915, when he removed to Walla
Walla, where he now lives. He still, however, gives close attention
to supervising the work of the farm and his progressive methods
and excellent business judgment have enabled him to gain financial
independence.

On the 8th of January, 1915, Mr. Herrold was united in marriage to
Miss Nellie Perrigo, a daughter of Harlow and Ida (Daniels) Perrigo.
Her father died in Wisconsin, and in 1909 her mother came to Walla
Walla, where she now lives. Mrs. Herrold was for eight years prior to
her marriage a teacher in the Walla Walla schools and is a woman of
excellent education and good executive ability.

Mr. Herrold supports the republican party at the polls but is without
ambition for office. He is connected with Touchet Lodge, No. 5, I. O.
O. F., and with Coppei Encampment, No. 73. He is loyal to the order
and to its teachings of mutual helpfulness and fraternity, and the
principles which govern his life are further indicated in the fact that
he is a member of the Christian church, to which his wife also belongs.
They are progressive in spirit and willingly support all movements
looking toward the advancement of the interests of their community.


HERBERT L. WILSON.

Herbert L. Wilson has devoted the greater part of his life to
engineering work and is now a leader in his profession in southeastern
Washington, being especially prominent in connection with the
construction of state highways and bridges and the paving of city
streets. He was born in Henry county, Iowa, June 25, 1877, a son of
Jonah and Mary (Graham) Wilson, both of whom were born in Ohio, where
they were reared. Soon after their marriage they left that state and
removed to Henry county, Iowa, which was then just being settled. The
father filed on a homestead and both he and the mother still reside on
that place. His holdings now comprise four hundred and eighty acres
and he is recognized as one of the most successful farmers and stock
raisers of Henry county.

Herbert L. Wilson was educated in the public schools of Henry county
and in Drake University of Des Moines, from which he received the
degree of civil engineer in the class of 1899. Following his graduation
he devoted some time to farming in his native county, but in 1904 came
to the Pacific coast. For about a year he was employed on construction
work in Portland and then came to Walla Walla. He remained in this city
only a short time, however, and then took up a homestead in Franklin
county, Washington. Later he commuted the homestead and proved up on
his claim in less time that it would have taken to do so under the
homestead law. He was instrumental in securing the establishment of a
postoffice at Ringgold, and for a year and a half served as postmaster.
After securing the title to his land he was employed in the engineering
department of the North Coast Railroad Company, which has since become
a part of the Union Pacific system, and while in that connection he
worked on the construction of the road for two and a half years. In
1908 he went to Twin Falls, Idaho, where he developed a farm under
the newly installed irrigation project, but after remaining upon the
place for about a year he went to North Yakima, Washington, where he
went into business on his own account as construction engineer. During
the following two and a half years he completed a number of important
projects and in 1912 came to Walla Walla, where he has since gained an
enviable reputation as a capable engineer. He has given his attention
largely to state highway construction and has also done a great deal of
street paving in Walla Walla and has erected a large number of bridges.
He has handled some of the largest jobs in these lines in this section
of the state and has not only gained high professional standing but has
won material success.

Mr. Wilson was married in 1908 to Miss Stella Nixon, a daughter of E.
H. Nixon, a sketch of whom appears elsewhere in this work. To Mr. and
Mrs. Wilson has been born a daughter, Mary Lavelle.

Mr. Wilson is an advocate of republican principles and supports the
candidates of that party at the polls. He is connected fraternally with
Blue Mountain Lodge, No. 13, F. & A. M., and with Walla Walla Chapter,
No. 1, R. A. M., and is likewise a member of the Walla Walla Commercial
Club. In religious faith he is a Presbyterian and his life has at all
times been actuated by high moral principles.


JEREMIAH M. CAMP.

Jeremiah M. Camp, one of the prosperous and highly esteemed residents
of Walla Walla, was for many years actively engaged in farming in
Whitman county, where he still owns a large tract of valuable land,
but is now living retired. A native of Ohio, he was born May 10, 1837,
and is a son of John and Deborah (Martin) Camp, both of whom were born
in Connecticut, the former in 1801. The parents removed to Ohio at an
early day in the development of that state and there the mother passed
away in 1856. Two years later the father removed with his family to
Knox county, Illinois, and devoted the remainder of his life to the
operation of a farm there. He died suddenly in 1865. There were five
sons in the family but only three are now living.

[Illustration: JEREMIAH M. CAMP]

[Illustration: MRS. JEREMIAH M. CAMP]

Jeremiah M. Camp passed the days of his boyhood and youth in his
native state and is indebted for his education to its public schools.
Following his marriage, February 12, 1858, at the age of twenty years,
he became a resident of Knox County, Illinois. In 1862 he enlisted
there in Company I, Eighty-third Illinois Volunteer Infantry, and
served at the front until the close of the Civil war in 1865. Although
he took part in a great deal of hard fighting he was never wounded nor
imprisoned. After being mustered out at Chicago he returned to Ohio,
where his wife was then residing, and they continued to make their home
in that state until 1867, when they went to the vicinity of Washington,
Iowa, where Mr. Camp engaged in farming for three years. In 1870 he
went to Kansas and in 1883 came to Washington. After staying for a time
in Walla Walla county he removed to Whitman county, where he took up a
homestead. He at once gave his entire time and attention to the task
of developing that farm and as the years passed made many improvements
thereon. In 1904 he retired and took up his residence in Walla Walla,
where he now lives. He still owns sixteen hundred and sixty acres of
land in Whitman county, all in a high state of cultivation, and derives
therefrom a gratifying income. The success which he has gained is
doubly creditable in that it is due to his quickness to see and take
advantage of opportunities, his good management and his hard work.

On the 12th of February, 1858, Mr. Camp was united in marriage to
Miss Lucy Ann Merritt, also a native of Vinton county, Ohio, and they
traveled life's journey together for fifty-two years, Mrs. Camp dying
in Walla Walla on the 8th of October, 1911. They became the parents
of nine children, as follows: Louis and Ida, both deceased; Hattie,
the wife of William Barber, of Anthony, Kansas; A. I. and George, both
residents of Whitman county, Washington; May, the wife of Theodore
Harris, of Oklahoma; Sadie, the wife of Charles Pryor, of Dayton,
Washington; and Archibald and Ira, both residents of Whitman county.
The wife and mother was a consistent and faithful member of the
Methodist Episcopal church.

Mr. Camp has voted the republican ticket since he cast his first vote
for Abraham Lincoln. He has never been active in public affairs,
preferring to concentrate his efforts upon his farm work, and in
so doing he has not only won financial independence but has also
contributed to the development of this district along agricultural
lines. Through his membership in the local Grand Army post he keeps in
touch with the other veterans of the war and finds great pleasure in
recalling the experiences of those days.


JAMES A. YEEND.

James A. Yeend is a self-made man who is now the owner of three hundred
and eighty acres, constituting a valuable farm property on section 20,
township 8 north, range 36 east, Walla Walla county. He was born in
Gloucestershire, England, on the 8th of March, 1856, and is a son of
William and Ellen (Surman) Yeend, who were natives of England, whence
they crossed the Atlantic to the new world in December, 1870. They
settled on a farm in section 20, township 8 north, range 36 east, Walla
Walla county, and here the father passed away, while the mother later
became a resident of Walla Walla and died in that city. They were the
parents of sixteen children, seven of whom survive.

James A. Yeend was a lad of fourteen years when he crossed the
Atlantic to the United States in company with his parents. He had
acquired his education in England and remained under the parental roof
until twenty-one years of age, when he started out in life for himself.
Two years later he took up a preemption claim of one hundred and
twenty acres and bought one hundred and sixty acres of railroad land
in Walla Walla county but in 1883 sold this property to his father.
He then removed to Whitman county, Washington, where he took up a
homestead and timber claim, upon which he lived for twelve years and
through that period wrought a marked transformation in the appearance
of his property, for he brought much of the land under a high state of
cultivation. In 1896 he sold that place and came to Walla Walla county,
where he now resides. Here he owns three hundred and eighty-four acres
of rich and productive land, upon which he has placed many modern
improvements, including an attractive home and substantial buildings
that furnish ample shelter for grain and stock. He is an energetic and
progressive farmer and his place presents a most attractive appearance,
indicative of the care and labor which he bestows upon his fields
and also indicative of the careful supervision which he gives to all
branches of the farm work.

On the 15th of December, 1883, Mr. Yeend was united in marriage to
Miss Lydia Chandler, also a native of Gloucestershire, England, and
a daughter of Joseph and Eliza (Surman) Chandler. Her father died in
that country and her mother came to America in October, 1882, locating
in Whitman county, Washington, where she took up a homestead claim and
spent the remainder of her life. To Mr. and Mrs. Yeend have been born
eight children, namely: Ernest E., Edith M., Fred S. and Frank J.,
twins; Flora E., William A., Olive and Esther A.

Mr. and Mrs. Yeend are devoted members of the Methodist Episcopal
church, in the work of which they take an active and helpful interest,
Mr. Yeend serving now as one of the trustees. His political support
is given to the republican party and he has served for sixteen years
as a member of the school board. Fraternally he is connected with the
Ancient Order of United Workmen. As the architect of his own fortunes
he has builded wisely and well and is not only one of the self-made men
of Walla Walla county but is also one of its most progressive farmers
and in all that he does holds to the highest standards of agricultural
development and activity.


SURMAN N. YEEND.

Surman N. Yeend, one of the leading wheat raisers of the Walla Walla
valley, residing at Valley Grove, was born in England, May 21, 1866,
a son of William and Ellen Yeend, who are mentioned elsewhere in this
work in connection with the sketch of their son James.

Surman N. Yeend was reared and educated in Walla Walla county, having
been but a young lad when brought by his parents to the new world.
The family home was established in the northwest and he has since
been familiar with the upbuilding and progress of this section of
the country. His youthful days were spent in the usual manner of
the farmbred boy who divides his time between the duties of the
schoolroom, the pleasures of the playground and the work of the fields,
and his early training in farm work well qualified him to take up work
of that character on his own account after he had reached man's estate.
He located on the place which is now his home and which comprises seven
hundred acres of rich and productive land, all under cultivation. He
makes a specialty of the growing of wheat and his broad fields present
a most pleasing picture, giving indication of abundant harvests. He is
also successfully engaged in stock raising and keeps upon his farm high
grades of cattle, horses and hogs. In all of his business affairs he
displays a progressive spirit and keeps in touch with every improvement
that has to do with farm life.

Mr. Yeend has been married twice. He first wedded Miss Anna M. Harper
and to them were born two children: Charles E.; and Helen, the wife of
Arthur Anderson. The wife and mother passed away and in 1901 Mr. Yeend
was again married, his second union being with Miss Mary Loland, a
native of Washington. They have become parents of six children: Cleola
M., Roland A., Allen C., Wilbur H., Lowell W. and Howard S.

Mr. and Mrs. Yeend are members of the Nazarene church. Mr. Yeend votes
with the republican party and has served on the census board, filling
that position in 1900. He is not active in politics, however, preferred
to concentrate his time and energies upon his farming interests, and by
his close application in business affairs and his unremitting industry
he has won a very gratifying measure of success, being now numbered
among the substantial and prosperous agriculturists of Walla Walla
county.


WILLIS RESER.

Willis Reser is engaged in general farming and stock raising on section
5, township 6 north, range 35 east, Walla Walla county. He has been a
resident of the Walla Walla valley since 1863 and in the intervening
period, covering fifty-four years, has been closely and prominently
identified with its agricultural development.

He was born in Davis county, Iowa, December 29, 1856, and is a son of
George and Mary (Waterman) Reser, who are mentioned in connection with
the sketch of their son, William Reser, on another page of this work.
The family arrived in the Walla Walla valley in 1863, so that Willis
Reser was here reared and educated. He became familiar with every
phase of pioneer life and with the arduous task of developing a new
farm. When he had attained his majority he began farming on his own
account and later purchased the property upon which he now resides, a
tract of one hundred and sixty acres which constituted his father's
old homestead. Upon this place he has since lived and he also has a
residence in Walla Walla, which he occupies a part of the time. He
carries on general agricultural pursuits and stock raising and he has
brought his fields under a high state of cultivation. In his pastures
are found good grades of stock and everything about his place indicates
the owner to be a man of progressive spirit and one who is thoroughly
familiar with the line of work in which he engages. He has closely
studied the soil and climatic conditions in relation to the production
of crops and he has made an equally close study of the best methods of
stock raising. Success is therefore attending his efforts and he is
numbered among the substantial farmers of this section of the state.

In May, 1884, Mr. Reser was united in marriage to Miss Mima Kirkland,
who was born in Oregon, a daughter of Joseph E. and Mary (Standefer)
Kirkland. The father was a native of Illinois but was reared
principally in Arkansas and crossed the plains in the '50s. The journey
was made with teams over the long, hot stretches of sand and across
the mountain passes until ultimately he reached Oregon. Still later
he removed to Walla Walla county and settled upon a farm. Joseph E.
Kirkland was an attorney by profession and engaged in the practice of
law for several years in addition to the conduct of his agricultural
interests. To Mr. and Mrs. Reser have been born four children: George,
who is now located in Detroit, Michigan; Joseph, deceased; one who died
in infancy; and Willis H., who is still at home.

Mrs. Reser is a member of the Congregational church and is a lady of
many admirable traits of character who enjoys the warm regard of a
large circle of friends. Politically Mr. Reser gives his support to
the democratic party. He served for some years as a member of the
school board but has always preferred that his public service should be
done as a private citizen rather than as an office holder. He stands
loyally, however, for what he believes to be for the best interests
of the community and through the long years of his residence in this
county he has given his aid and influence in behalf of those projects
and measures which he has believed would prove of greatest benefit
to the section. The county to which he came in 1863 bore little
resemblance to the highly developed district which is here seen today.
He has witnessed all of the changes which have occurred in the interim
and can speak with authority upon many events which have shaped the
history of Walla Walla county.


GILBERT HUNT.

Gilbert Hunt solely through his own efforts gained a place among the
industrial leaders of Walla Walla, being the head of a company known
as the largest manufacturers of farm machinery in the northwest, and
he was equally prominent in civic affairs, serving for three terms as
mayor. He was born in Ryegate, Vermont, January 27, 1855, a son of
Solomon Sherman and Katherine Hunt. He was reared in a home where as
he studied he was taught to work hard, think deeply and live simply,
and his life was characterized by the "plain living and high thinking"
characteristic of New England. The family were in limited financial
circumstances and he early began to do his part toward providing for
his own support. The first work that he performed for others was
pasturing the cattle of the villagers, driving them to pasture in the
early morning and returning with them in the evening. Later he worked
his way through the academy at Peacham and each week end walked home, a
distance of ten miles, in order to give his father the benefit of his
labor on Saturday.

[Illustration: GILBERT HUNT]

In early manhood Mr. Hunt was employed for some time as a millwright,
later engaged in the manufacture of washboards, and he was also for
a time a furniture painter and an organ tuner. During these early
years he had to contend not only against poverty but also against
ill health and at length it became necessary that he have outdoor
employment and accordingly he peddled tinware through the country. At
length, having received very favorable reports of Walla Walla from the
Rev. Cobleigh, pastor of the Congregational church here and formerly
pastor of the church in McIndoes, Vermont, Mr. Hunt decided to try his
fortune in this new western country. After a journey of three weeks he
reached this city and found work in the Glasford planing mill, which,
however, shut down in the autumn. Although somewhat discouraged, he
was dissuaded from carrying out his determination of going elsewhere
by a merchant of the city and gradually he gained a foothold and in
time became the head of the Gilbert Hunt Company, one of the largest
industrial concerns of the entire northwest and the largest producers
of farm machinery in this section. Mr. Hunt not only proved himself
an executive of great force but also a successful inventor and was
the originator of the Pride of Washington thresher. The memory of his
early struggles remained with him and when boys applied for work in the
"Hunt shops" and the foreman said that they had no vacancies Mr. Hunt
gave orders that work be found in some way in order to give the boys a
chance.

This desire to be of assistance found expression in many ways and
there was no project for the advancement of his city that failed to
receive his hearty support. In many instances Mr. Hunt initiated and
carried to successful completion movements for public improvements,
such as the paving of the center business district, the extension of
the water system providing for the present intake twelve miles above
the city, the betterment of the sewage system, the securing of the
Carnegie library and the establishment of public parks. He was one of
the most effective workers for well advised publicity for Walla Walla
and its surrounding territory and recognized the value of building up a
reputation for Walla Walla as a good convention city. For three terms
he served as mayor and one who knew him for thirty years said of him
in that connection: "Gilbert Hunt brought to the office of mayor long
training and experience in large business affairs and great executive
and administrative ability. He was a man of fine presence, meeting
people easily and agreeably, was informed as to his official duties,
had a clear idea of the things to be done, and inspired confidence in
his ability to do them."

Mr. Hunt was married in McIndoes, Vermont, June 10, 1876, to Miss
Hopie M. Osgood, who is descended from Revolutionary ancestry. To this
marriage were born four children, of whom three survive: Mabelle H.,
the wife of Wilbur A. Toner, an attorney of Walla Walla; Eugene A., who
married Jessie M. Babcock, a daughter of W. H. Babcock, of Walla Walla,
and is now living in Hong-kong, China, engaged in the exporting and
importing business; and Marguerite A., the wife of Gus Meese, Jr., of
Spokane, Washington.

Mr. Hunt was a prominent Mason and was devoted to the order, which he
recognized as a great force for good. He was master of Walla Walla
Lodge, No. 7, F. & A. M., for seven years, was a Knight Templar and was
also connected with the Mystic Shrine. In early manhood he belonged to
the Congregational church but later was one of the organizers and the
first president of the Christian Science church of Walla Walla. He
manifested the keenest interest in educational matters and for eight
years served on the board of education, during which time the High and
Green Park school buildings were erected, and he was also connected in
an official capacity with Whitman College, being a member of its board
of trustees at the time of his death. He passed away December 15, 1914,
and the grief felt by his many friends found expression in words of
love and admiration for his splendid qualities. An editorial writer in
the Portland Journal said: "Not alone in public service did his great
heart beat, but the life of many an individual was made brighter by
a helpful word and a charitable hand." A well known educator who had
known him for twenty-five years wrote as follows: "I always found his
wit, his geniality, his ready sympathy, his practical sagacity, his
helpfulness, sources of strength and encouragement. In the great loss
which his family, his friends, the community has suffered in his death
we may assuredly find solace in the hope that those qualities which we
loved in him are enduring."


PHILIP J. PENTECOST.

Philip J. Pentecost is now living retired in Walla Walla but for many
years was actively and successfully identified with farming interests.
He was born in Dodge county, Wisconsin, December 13, 1856, a son of
William C. and Jemima (Wilcox) Pentecost, the former a native of
Somersetshire, England, while the latter was born near Utica, New York.
The father came to the United States when a lad of fourteen years in
company with his parents and settled in New York, where he afterward
married. Two children were born to him and his wife in the Empire
state. Later he removed to Dodge county, Wisconsin, and in the spring
of 1875 became a resident of Seattle, Washington. Soon afterward he
went to Portland, Oregon, and still later to Albany, where he and his
wife spent the summer. In the following fall they came northward to
Walla Walla, looking for a suitable location, and soon after reaching
this place the father and his son, Philip J., went up to Spokane,
leaving the family in Walla Walla. They returned just before Christmas
and spent the winter in this city. The following spring, however, they
returned to Seattle, where they remained for a few weeks and thence
removed to Forest Grove, Oregon. During their roamings they managed
through their work to get together a spike team, consisting of three
horses, one leading other two, and after spending the summer in Forest
Grove they again came to Walla Walla, driving through by team. After
passing through the Indian reservation they reached the Walla Walla
valley. The mother was riding in the back of the wagon with the front
cover drawn, but just before reaching the valley she had raised the
cover to look out and soon remarked, "I should think all the children
could find homes here," and a few moments later one of the sons said to
her that they had reached their camping place. She did not reply and
they found that she was dead, having expired from heart disease in the
few moments after speaking to them. The family brought the body on to
Walla Walla for interment. They spent the winter in the town and in the
spring of 1877 Mr. Pentecost purchased a tract of four hundred acres of
choice land located in Spring Valley, about eight miles northeast of
the city, on the Waitsburg road. He contracted for this land at a basis
of seven dollars per acre, to be paid for with wheat at fifty cents per
bushel.

[Illustration: PHILIP J. PENTECOST]

[Illustration: MRS. PHILIP J. PENTECOST]

This land was afterward paid for by Philip J. Pentecost and an older
brother, Charles N., and thus came into their possession. For thirty
years the two brothers cooperated in their farming enterprise and
in the meantime added to their holdings until the place comprised a
thousand acres. Charles N. Pentecost afterward acquired extensive land
holdings elsewhere and Philip J. Pentecost purchased his interest in
the Walla Walla county farm, which he still owns independently. He also
has four hundred acres on Blue Creek which is largely grazing land
and on which he runs as high as a hundred head of cattle at a time.
About 1901 he left the farm and took up his abode in the city in order
to give his children better educational opportunities and since then
has resided in Walla Walla, having a handsome residence at 603 Cherry
street. He also owns four other city residences. For the past seven
years he has rented his farm lands and has practically lived retired.

On the 29th of June, 1889, Mr. Pentecost was united in marriage to Mrs.
Joseph Maul, who bore the maiden name of Nellie Wolfe and is a daughter
of Harry Wolfe, who crossed the plains to Washington with a horse team
in 1888. By her first husband Mrs. Pentecost had a daughter, Catherine
Z. M., now Mrs. Stanley Sleeper of Lewiston, Idaho, and to Mr. and Mrs.
Pentecost has also been born a daughter, Sadie R., who is the wife of
A. E. Page, of Walla Walla.

Mr. Pentecost gives his political allegiance to the republican party,
while fraternally he is identified with Trinity Lodge, I. O. O. F. and
with Walla Walla Camp, No. 96, W. O. W. He and his wife and daughter
are members of the Baptist church, of which he was a deacon for years
and is now one of the trustees. The family is one of prominence in
Walla Walla and the hospitality of the best homes of the city is freely
accorded them. Mr. Pentecost has made for himself a very creditable
position in business circles, ranking for many years as one of the
leading wheat growers of this section of the state, and his life record
constitutes an example well worthy of emulation.


GEORGE BENSON KUYKENDALL, M. D.

Dr. George Benson Kuykendall, one of the foremost physicians of eastern
Washington, practicing at Pomeroy, was born near Terre Haute, Indiana,
January 22, 1843, a son of John and Malinda (Stark) Kuykendall. The
early family history is found in the New York Dutch Church or Dutch
Reformed Baptismal records and in the county records of New York
county. The family comes of Holland Dutch ancestry, the home being
originally near Wageningen, in the Gelderland province, from which came
the ancestors of Theodore Roosevelt. The first of the name in America
was Jacob Luursen Van Kuykendael, who came to America on the ship de
Princess from Holland in 1646 and landed at New Amsterdam, now New
York. The Van in the family name was retained until about 1730. The
ancestors were with the Van Rensselaer colony at old Fort Orange and
afterward removed to Esopus, New York. Later the sons and daughters of
that generation went to the Minisink region, on the Delaware, about
1700, and subsequently the branch of the family of which Dr. Kuykendall
is a representative was founded in Virginia between 1743 and 1748,
probably in the latter year. His mother came from the same ancestry as
General John Stark of Revolutionary war fame, and their progenitors
were originally from near Essen, Germany.

The father of Dr. Kuykendall, who was a mechanic, removed westward with
his family when his son George was three years of age, residing in
Wisconsin until 1852, when he crossed the plains to the Pacific slope.
That was the memorable year of the cholera, smallpox and pestilence
and they were delayed en route by illness and many difficulties. They
found themselves far back in the rear part of the emigration. Their
days were full of toil and anxiety and their nights were spent much of
the time in vigils over the sick and dying or in warding against the
prowling savages of the plains. When their train reached Snake river,
their stock were almost famished and they crossed the river in the hope
of finding better grass. From there they made their way over country
never before traversed by wagons. At the crossing of the river the
father became ill with mountain fever and a little daughter had already
suffered from measles and was apparently growing worse. For weeks
these helpless ones were dragged over the sagebrush and sand plains of
southern Idaho in a rough emigrant wagon. Finally, when nearly all the
stock had died, they abandoned their wagon, and the few household goods
they could carry were put into the wagon belonging to a brother who was
traveling in the same company. After almost incredible hardships and
discouragements they reached The Dalles, Oregon, where they shipped
their wagon and the household goods that remained upon an open barge
and started to float down the Columbia. The father was still ill and
the little sister at the point of death. That night the barge tied up
on the Oregon side of the river and during the hours of darkness the
mother kept tearful watch over the sick and wasted form of the father
and her dying little girl, who about midnight passed away. Early in the
morning a rude, improvised pine box was made ready and the little one
was buried on the banks of Columbia, where the trade winds sweeping
up from the ocean and the murmur of the river's flow are her eternal
requiem. The pressing demands of the hour would not permit them to
linger over the grave, but all had to press on, for they were far from
their homeland and had no home or shelter for the coming winter. They
reached the Cascades, passed over the portage and took a boat below,
reaching the banks of the Willamette, where East Portland now stands,
on the 19th of October, 1852.

The family spent their first winter at Milwaukee, above Portland, and
in the fall of 1853 went to southern Oregon, locating near Roseburg.
At a very early age Dr. Kuykendall manifested a taste for reading,
which was encouraged by his father, who also found great delight in
books. Dr. Kuykendall read with pleasure works on travel and discovery,
exploration, history, biography and whatever he could find and as he
approached manhood became very fond of metaphysical reading, delighting
in poring over such writings as Kant, Abercrombie, Dugald Stewart and
also reading works on mental philosophy. All this time he was pursuing
the advanced studies of an academic and collegiate course and later
took up the study of materia medica and medicine. About that time
his father had a dangerous illness and reached the point where the
attending physicians gave up the case. Dr. Kuykendall was not willing
that his father should die, however, and said to the family: "We will
go on and try still further--he may yet recover." This was before
the son had become a student in medical college. He devoted himself
assiduously to the study of his father's symptoms, scarcely leaving the
bedside to eat or sleep for a week. The father recovered and enjoyed
many years of later usefulness. The attending physicians, recognizing
what the young son had accomplished, said: "Young man, it is clear what
you ought to do in life. You should study and practice medicine."

A few years later, therefore, George Benson Kuykendall became a student
in Willamette University and was graduated at the head of his class,
in the medical department, and at once entered upon active medical
practice. Within a few months he was appointed to the position of
government physician at Fort Simcoe, Washington, where he enjoyed a
large practice in addition to the government work. He there took up
the special study of microscopy and chemical research, particularly as
related to toxicology and medical jurisprudence. He also did much work
in Micro-photography to aid in differentiation of tissues, cells and
blood corpuscles and while thus engaged he made a fine collection of
mounted specimens, both physiological and pathological.

While at Fort Simcoe he was requested by Professor J. W. Powell of the
Smithsonian Institute of Washington, D. C., to make a study of the
ethnology of the native Indians of the Pacific northwest--a line which
he followed up as his time would permit. He collected many traditions,
myths, ancient laws and customs of the Indian tribes and wrote an
account of these for preservation. In this work all traditions and
myths were obtained at first hand from the Indians themselves. Later he
wrote a series of papers on the subject for The West Shore, a magazine
then published in Portland, Oregon. After ten years with the government
at Fort Simcoe, the Doctor found his family growing and needing better
facilities for education and social culture and accordingly resigned
his position and located at Pomeroy, Washington.

It was in 1868 that Dr. Kuykendall married Miss E. J. Butler, a
daughter of Judge Benjamin Butler, of Douglas county, Oregon, who later
removed to Pomeroy, where he was judge of probate for many years. The
Doctor has an interesting and intelligent family of five sons and three
daughters. In his marriage he was peculiarly fortunate, Mrs. Kuykendall
being a lady of marked intelligence and practical good judgment. His
eldest son, Chester Ernest, is a druggist and dealer in books, musical
instruments and fancy holiday goods. He is a popular man who for years
has been closely identified with the interests of Pomeroy as one of the
leaders in educational work, being a member of the board of directors
of the Pomeroy high school and also mayor of the city. He belongs to
the Methodist Episcopal church and has been church organist for years.
Elgin Victor, the next son, is a prominent attorney and was elected to
the state senate from the counties of Garfield, Columbia and Asotin by
a large majority. George Vivian, the third son, is chief operator in
the offices of the Oregon Railway & Navigation Company. William B. is
engaged in the real estate and insurance business and is now reading
law preparatory to practice. Hubert John is in the drug store with his
brother Chester. All these sons are married and with the exception of
George all are residents of Pomeroy. Minnie Pearl and Grace Orlean,
are the elder daughters. The former is the wife of R. B. Spencer,
of Hermiston, Oregon, and the younger is the wife of G. C. Start,
of Sunnyside, Washington. Both have decided talent for painting and
Mrs. Spencer taught oil Painting in Pomeroy for years. The youngest
daughter, Bessie, is at home with her parents.

Dr. Kuykendall has had an extensive acquaintance among the prominent
pioneer settlers of Oregon, including Rev. J. H. Wilbur, pioneer
missionary minister, Hon. Binger Herman, Judges J. F. Watson, E. B.
Watson and P. L. Willis, who were early friends in southern Oregon,
Judge M. P. Deady and General Joseph Lane, Delazon Smith, Colonel
Hooker, Governor Chadwick and others. In addition to his professional
attainments Dr. Kuykendall has an enviable reputation as a writer. He
has written much for the press and has always been very industrious in
gathering up material for use in future writings. He has completed a
history of the Kuykendall family for the past three hundred years, the
family being of the old Knickerbocker stock of New York and New Jersey,
whence they have gone as pioneers across the country from the Atlantic
to the Pacific. The family has been represented in every war of note
since early colonial days. Dr. Kuykendall has retired from the active
practice of medicine and spends his leisure in reading and writing. He
has a collection of data pertaining to Indian mythology, ethnology and
customs which he hopes yet to be able to publish, besides other matter
written during the passing years.

Dr. Kuykendall has been a member of the Methodist Episcopal church for
many years, actively connected with its social and moral endeavors for
the benefit of the community. He has always made it a point to support
every movement for the good of the community with his money as well
as with his personal aid. He has been too busy to give much attention
to money making but has prospered sufficiently to have gained a good
competence. His father was liberal to a fault and when he gave, as the
Doctor thought, too liberally of his means the Doctor always helped
him out. The latter has always been glad to remember this generosity
of his father and has been stimulated by his example to think more of
"the other fellow." Since its organization he has been a member of the
Garfield County Pioneer Association and for some years has been its
secretary. He is a member of the Oregon Historical Society and the
Holland Society of New York city. To belong to this society one must be
able to show documentary evidence of having come from an ancestor born
of a forefather who came from Holland to America before 1675.


WALLACE LEROY WHITMORE.

Few men of the northwest have been more widely known than Wallace
Leroy Whitmore, now deceased. He resided on section 21, township 13
north, range 42 east, Garfield county, but for more than forty years
he traveled extensively over this country as a commercial salesman
and he was also known throughout the Pacific coast states as a
breeder of fast horses. He had those special qualities which make for
personal popularity and wherever he went he made friends. He was born
in Oakland, Oregon, June 8, 1857, and was a son of George and Mary
(Vaughn) Whitmore, both of whom were natives of Wisconsin. They crossed
the plains to Oregon in 1852 and in 1867 removed to San Francisco,
California, where they made their home for a number of years. The
mother made her home with Wallace Leroy Whitmore most of her life, his
filial care and attention rewarding her for the love which she had
bestowed upon him in his boyhood days.

[Illustration: W. L. WHITMORE]

Wallace Leroy Whitmore was little more than a boy when he was sent
out on the road by a wholesale clothing house of San Francisco. This,
however, was not his initial experience in the business world, for
through two years he had been employed as a messenger boy. For forty
years he remained upon the road as a traveling salesman, representing
two San Francisco houses--a wonderful record characterized by the
utmost fidelity and loyalty as well as capability. He won for the
houses which he represented a very liberal patronage, for he was
thoroughly reliable in business affairs and men came to know that
whatever he said was to be depended upon. After four decades devoted to
travel he left the road in order to give his entire time to his stock
and landed interests. In the meantime he had purchased property until
he owned twenty-seven hundred acres in Garfield county. He was a lover
of the thoroughbred horse and was a pioneer in the breeding of standard
and thoroughbred horses in Garfield county, raising them more for
pleasure than for profit. His blooded stock, of which Coloma, the noted
sire, was the head, became known wherever racing was popular. In fact
Mr. Whitmore's reputation in this regard spread wherever there was to
be found anyone who desired a fast horse for pleasure driving. In his
three-year-old form Coloma took every Derby in Montana and his owner
refused ten thousand dollars for him. Bill Frazier, who was taken east
from Portland, has a pacing mark of 2:12; Minnie Mann was also a horse
with a notable record and Ken West at one time could step the quarter
in thirty seconds, while Hallie Hinges, Daybreak, Sallie Goodwin and a
long list of other running and pacing horses became well known on the
circuit. Swiftsure, Coloma's first colt, sold for five thousand dollars
at two years old and many others brought the breeder record prices,
but despite this fact it was said that Mr. Whitmore put more money
into race horse breeding than he ever got out of it. He was a very
progressive man and his farm was one of the best improved properties in
the county. He erected thereon good buildings, kept them painted and
in good condition at all times, installed an electric light system and
equipped his home and buildings with the most modern improvements.

On the 2d of December, 1889, Mr. Whitmore was united in marriage
to Miss Minnie Williams, of San Francisco, who is a native of New
York. Her father was Arthur Williams, a member of the One Hundred
and Fiftieth New York Engineering Corps during the Civil war, who
re-enlisted in the field after his discharge and was given a large
bounty. Mrs. Whitmore's mother prior to her marriage was Miss Hannah
E. Poorman. After the close of the Civil war she brought her two
children to the Pacific coast, making the journey by sailing vessel
around Cape Horn. She took up her abode in San Francisco and afterward
became the wife of Horace Eldred, proprietor of the State House Hotel
of Sacramento. Several years later Mr. Eldred's death occurred and his
widow afterward lived in southern California until her death, which
occurred in Portland, Oregon, in 1901.

Mrs. Whitmore is an accomplished woman of marked business ability as
well as of many social graces. She manages her extensive property
holdings with keen sagacity, displaying unfaltering enterprise, and her
labors are attended with excellent results. The death of Mr. Whitmore
occurred September 8, 1916, and was the occasion of deep and widespread
regret to many friends. He was a man of genial, kindly nature, always
approachable and at all times he held friendship inviolable. His well
managed business affairs and investments enabled him to leave Mrs.
Whitmore in very comfortable financial circumstances and she is today
the owner of one of the valuable farm properties of Garfield county.
Like her husband, she is widely and favorably known and her friends are
legion.


W. E. AYRES.

W. E. Ayres, while actively engaged in agricultural pursuits, managed
his affairs so ably that he attained financial independence and is
now living retired upon his home farm in Columbia county. He was born
in Adams county, Illinois, February 8, 1841, a son of Eli L. and Ruth
(Stevens) Ayres, natives respectively of England and Canada. Following
their marriage in the Dominion the parents removed to Illinois in the
latter '30s and resided there for a few years but in 1842 went to
Appanoose county, Iowa. There the father acquired title to land and
engaged in farming until called by death, although he was by profession
a physician and Baptist minister. Subsequently the mother removed with
her family to Linn county, Oregon, reaching there in 1864, when the
Pacific northwest was still largely undeveloped. Eventually she became
a resident of Walla Walla county, Washington, and there passed away.

W. E. Ayres, who is one of four living children in a family of
six, grew to manhood in Iowa and there obtained his education. He
accompanied his mother to Oregon and for seven years was resident
of that state but at the end of that time took up a homestead in
Old Walla Walla county, Washington, his farm being located in what
is now Columbia county. His first residence was a log cabin and
his experiences for a few years were those of all pioneers. At
length, however, his land was brought under cultivation, substantial
improvements were made thereon and adequate facilities for
transportation and communication with other parts of the country were
secured. He found farming both profitable and congenial and continued
to engage in stock and wheat raising until he retired. He still owns
960 acres of fine land.

In 1868 Mr. Ayres was married to Miss Martha S. Redford, of Henry
county, Missouri, a daughter of Walker P. and Nancy (Davis) Redford,
the former born in Virginia and the latter in Kentucky. In the '30s
Mr. and Mrs. Redford removed to Missouri and there the father died in
1861. Three years later the mother, with her children, made the long
journey across the plains by ox team. For three years they resided in
Union county, Oregon, and then went to Linn county, when they came
to Washington, where the mother passed away. Mr. and Mrs. Ayres have
become the parents of eleven children: Eudora, the widow of W. J.
Beal and a resident of Pomeroy, Washington; Willie and Robert, both
deceased; James P., who is also living in Pomeroy; Anna; William S.,
a resident of Pineville, Oregon; Nancy, deceased; Mary C., a home
missionary stationed in western Oregon; Palmer, a farmer; Sarah, the
wife of Sanford Skillman, who is farming the home place; and Albert E.,
an agriculturist of Pomeroy.

[Illustration: W. E. AYRES AND FAMILY]

Mr. Ayres is a democrat in politics and has served as county treasurer,
as county commissioner and as a member of the school board, which
office he held for years. His record as a public official is highly
creditable both to his ability and his devotion to the general good,
and as a private citizen he has given his support to movements
calculated to advance the interests of his community. He takes
justifiable pride in the fact that he has had a part in the development
of this section and believes that nowhere can the agriculturist find
better opportunities.


LOUIS NEACE.

On the pages of Walla Walla county's pioneer history appears the name
of Louis Neace, who took up his abode in the city of Walla Walla
when it was a mere military post. As the years passed on he became
prominently identified with agricultural interests in this section of
the state and ranked with the foremost business men. He was born near
Frankfort, Germany, September 27, 1835, and was but twelve years of age
when he came to the United States with an uncle, who was a resident
of Newark, New Jersey. From that time forward Louis Neace never saw
his family nor his native country. His father had been a member of the
forestry department in Germany, an official position to which only men
who were scholars and had special training in the science of forestry
were eligible.

Becoming a resident of Orange, New Jersey, Louis Neace was there
employed in a sash and blind factory, in which he served a four years'
apprenticeship, thereby gaining thorough and comprehensive knowledge
of the work. In the meantime, however, he spent one winter in Florida,
where he was employed in driving a mule team for the owner of a lumber
mill on the St. Mary's river. When his apprenticeship was ended he
removed to the middle west and at the recommendation of friends in
Orange, New Jersey, he secured a position in a sash and blind factory
at Fulton, Illinois.

The west, however, still lured him on and afterward he made a tour of
Kansas, at which time the state was the battleground of the parties
who were contending whether it should be admitted as a free or a
slave state. Not desiring to become a landowner in Kansas under such
conditions, Mr. Neace joined a construction crew at Independence,
Missouri, and started across the country for Harney Lake, Oregon, the
crew being engaged to lay out a road in that section. The Mormons were
at that time a menace to all travelers through Utah and the crew was
placed under military protection, spending the winter of 1856-7 at Fort
Bridger, Wyoming. The Mormons destroyed several of the supply wagon
trains of the fort and their rations were reduced for a period to two
small biscuits per day. Hardly any salt was obtainable throughout the
entire winter and the first that was brought in sold at a dollar per
pound. In 1857 Mr. Neace became a resident of Los Angeles, California,
which was then a tiny village, and from that point, he continued his
journey northward to San Francisco, where he became a passenger on
the steamer Columbia. A northward trip brought him to the mouth of the
Umpqua river, where he disembarked and spent the winter, reaching The
Dalles, Oregon, in the spring of 1858.

From that point Mr. Neace came to Walla Walla as an employe of
Lieutenant Mullan, who was in charge of the construction of a military
road from Fort Walla Walla to Fort Benton, Montana, which is still
known as the Mullan road. After completing the work the crew spent
the winter in Fort Benton and in the following year Major Blake
arrived from St. Louis with troops on his way to Fort Walla Walla and
Mr. Neace returned with him, after which he remained a resident of
eastern Washington. When he first visited Walla Walla there was only a
cantonment built by Colonel Steptoe in the fall of 1856. It consisted
of a few rude log huts along what is now East Main street, west of
Palouse, these huts constituting the winter quarters for the military
troops who were here stationed as a protection to the few settlers who
had penetrated into this region. In 1861 Mr. Neace took up his abode on
the Tucannon river, at the present site of Starbuck, for the purpose
of engaging in the cattle business there. The most severe winter ever
known in the Pacific northwest followed. He was at the time a young
man of but twenty-six. Undiscouraged by the severity of the winter,
he bought a right to a place on the Pataha river, a tributary of the
Tucanon, and continued in the live stock business, there remaining
until 1870, when he removed to the Lock & Long mill near Dayton.
A little later he took up his abode on a farm north of Waitsburg
and the place has since been known as the Neace farm. He afterward
purchased what was known as the Anderson Cox residence in Waitsburg
and the family home was there established. As the years passed on
Mr. Neace added to his holdings from time to time as his financial
resources increased and became one of the most extensive landowners of
Washington. When asked how great were his possessions he replied: "I do
not know." In addition to his Washington holdings he had considerable
land in Montana. Possessing sound judgment and keen sagacity, his
investments were most judiciously made and with the settlement and
development of the county his land rose constantly in value, making his
estate a most substantial one.

On the 6th of October, 1864, Mr. Neace was united in marriage to Miss
Elizabeth Harrington, of Walla Walla, and they became the parents
of nine children, all of whom are living, namely: Mrs. D. C. Eaton;
Mrs. S. F. Patton; Frank and Charles, of Waitsburg; John and Louis,
of Millstone, Montana; Mrs. Ellen Hauber, of Portland; and James and
Isaac, of Endicott.

Aside from his extensive connection with farming interests Mr. Neace
had for a number of years been president of the First National Bank
of Waitsburg. For more than forty years he was member of the Masonic
fraternity exemplifying in his life the beneficent spirit of the craft
which is based upon a recognition of the brotherhood of man and the
obligations thereby imposed. He was a member of the constitutional
convention of Washington and thus in many ways left the impress of
his individuality upon the history of the state. His philanthropy was
ever a salient factor in his life. He aided generously many benevolent
institutions and gave freely to individuals. He never believed in that
indiscriminate giving which fosters vagrancy and idleness, but wherever
possible to extend a helping hand to assist a traveler, making earnest
effort to progress on life's journey, he did not hesitate to do so.
His life, honorable and upright in act and purpose, gained for him the
high esteem of all with whom he was brought in contact, and what he did
for the county in the way of its agricultural development and in other
connections entitles him to prominent mention among the builders of the
great Inland Empire. He died January 12, 1916.


ADOLPH SCHWARZ.

Adolph Schwarz, who is conducting a pool and billiard hall in Walla
Walla, was born in Germany, December 24, 1853, son of John Joseph
and Theresa (Rieder) Schwarz, who passed their entire lives in the
fatherland. Mr. Schwarz of this review attended the public schools
of Germany in the acquirement of his education and remained with his
parents until he was sixteen years old. At that age he emigrated to
America and for a year resided in New York, after which he spent a
similar length of time in Pennsylvania. He then went to California but
in 1876 went to Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and later to New York.
He spent the winter in the east but in the following spring he again
came west and for about a year was employed on a boat running on the
Columbia river. In October, 1877, he arrived in Walla Walla county,
Washington, and for three years was in the employ of others. In 1880,
however, he established a pool and billiard hall in the city of Walla
Walla and has since conducted that business. His place is well equipped
and is managed on such a high plane that it receives the support of
the best class of people. He was also one of the organizers of the
local brewing company and had an active part in the management of
the business until the brewery closed down. The company is still in
existence, however, and still owns the plant.

In 1894 Mr. Schwarz was united in marriage to Miss Lula Stahl, a
daughter of J. H. Stahl, and to them have been born four children:
Lillian E., a graduate of the local high school; Ruth and Adolph, both
high school students; and Catherine.

Mr. Schwarz is independent in politics, believing the qualifications of
a candidate to be of far greater importance than his party affiliation.
Fraternally he is identified with the Eagles, the Red Men and the
Foresters of the World. Both he and his wife belong to the Episcopal
church and Mrs. Schwarz is active in its work.


FREDERICK P. YENNEY.

Frederick P. Yenney, a retired farmer residing in Walla Walla, was born
in Baden, Germany, February 27, 1852, a son of Frederick and Susanna
(Swigard) Yenney, both natives of that country, where they passed their
entire lives. Frederick P. Yenney, who is the only son in a family of
seven children, and the only one in America, grew to manhood in his
native country and there acquired his education. In 1881 he came to
the United States and after living for six years in Kankakee county,
Illinois, removed to Minnesota, where he spent two years. In 1889 he
came to Walla Walla county, Washington, but after residing here for one
summer went to Lincoln county this state, and purchased a farm, which
he operated until 1905. He then retired from active life and removed to
Walla Walla, trading his farm in Lincoln county for land in Walla Walla
county and now has four hundred and eighty-five acres of improved land
near Walla Walla. He owns his fine residence at No. 350 South Third
street.

Mr. Yenney was married in 1875, in Germany, to Miss Catharine Lavber
and they have four children, namely: Conrad, John W. and Emil, all
of whom are farmers; and Matilda, the wife of George C. Raymond, a
resident of Fresno, California.

Mr. Yenney is a stanch supporter of the republican party but has never
had the time nor inclination to seek office. Both he and his wife hold
membership in the German Methodist Episcopal church of Walla Walla.


BENJAMIN FRANKLIN FLATHERS.

Benjamin Franklin Flathers, deceased, was one of the old and honored
residents of Walla Walla, where he made his home for almost half a
century. He was born near Louisville, Kentucky, on the 20th of August,
1836, and was a son of John and Julia Flathers. During his boyhood he
received a limited education in the country schools near his home.
He was only a small boy when the family removed to Iowa and located
on a farm. When still quite young he sought new and more favorable
conditions of life and left home, roughing it in various parts of the
United States for some time. He finally arrived in New York city,
where he mustered on a freight ship, and made the long voyage around
the Horn, landing in San Francisco, after having experienced some very
rough weather.

Throughout his business career Mr. Flathers was variously employed.
When a young man he engaged in firing on a railroad for a short time
and on reaching California in 1854 became a packer, operating a train
along the coast. He remained a resident of the Golden state until
1861 and from there removed to The Dalles, Oregon, whence he came to
Walla Walla, Washington. He continued to operate a pack train until
1869, traveling from Montana to Arizona, but in that year he sold his
outfit to the government while in the latter state. In 1870 he located
on a homestead in Walla Walla county, where for years he conducted a
forage station, furnishing accommodations for travelers over the old
Mullen trail from Walla Walla. He gradually worked into agriculture
and continued to follow farming for thirty years with good success
but at the end of that time retired from active labor and divided his
magnificent farm among his children. With a comfortable fortune he
then removed to Walla Walla, where his last days were spent in ease
and quiet. There he passed away on May 10, 1910, leaving his immediate
family as well as many friends to mourn his loss.

[Illustration: MRS. BENJAMIN F. FLATHERS]

[Illustration: BENJAMIN F. FLATHERS
At the age of about fifty]

On the 1st of January, 1869, Mr. Flathers was united in marriage
to Mrs. Malinda (McQuown) Harris, who was born in Russell county,
Virginia, May 3, 1836, and in 1841 accompanied her parents, Patrick
and Mary McQuown, on their removal to Sullivan county, Missouri, where
she was reared and educated. In 1856 she married Mack F. Harris and
on the 6th of May, 1863, they and their two small sons started across
the plains by ox team. This was a very hazardous journey owing to the
Indian troubles which they daily encountered but no consequences of a
serious nature resulted. They finally landed in Idaho City in December
of the same year and remained there until the spring of 1864, when
they proceeded to Walla Walla, arriving in June. In 1865 Mr. Harris
died leaving one son, the two children, born before they crossed the
plains, having died in Idaho City. Mrs. Harris and her son continued to
live near Walla Walla until 1869, when she became the wife of Benjamin
F. Flathers, and they located on a farm on Touchet River belonging
to H. H. Spaulding. The following year, however, they purchased of
Mr. Spaulding the farm, which they continued to own throughout the
remainder of their lives. To Mr. and Mrs. Flathers were born five
children, as follows: Julia M., John Taylor, Emery, Charley F. and
Harry J.

Mr. Flathers was reared in the Baptist faith and although he did not
hold membership in any church he contributed to the support of all
denominations when called upon to do so. He was an honored member
of the Independent Order of Odd Fellows, the Masonic fraternity and
the Elks, and for several years his wife was also identified with
Clematis Rebekah Lodge, No. 30, of Prescott, but after removing to
Walla Walla gave up lodge work. In early life she was a member of the
Methodist Episcopal church, South, but later became a member of the
Congregational church of Walla Walla, with which she was connected at
the time of her death which occurred April 21, 1917. She was an earnest
and consistent Christian and both she and her husband were held in the
highest regard by all who knew them.


WALTER CLARENCE MINNICK.

Walter Clarence Minnick, who is carrying on extensive farming
operations although a resident of Walla Walla, is a western man by
birth as well as preference, as he was born in Old Walla Walla county,
August 19, 1873. He is a son of Adam and Amanda (Davis) Minnick, the
former of whom was born March 9, 1830, in Pennsylvania, whence he
accompanied his parents to Dayton, Ohio, at the age of five years.
Later, while he was still a youth, the family removed to Davis county,
Iowa, and there he resided until 1852. He then went to California by
ox team in Dr. Udell's train. In addition to the hardships of the road
the Indians gave considerable trouble and cholera broke out, causing
the death of many. In November, however, they reached the Sacramento
valley of California and Mr. Minnick spent the next two years mining in
different parts of that state. He then decided to return to Iowa and
on the 1st of October, 1854, sailed from San Francisco on the steamer
Yankee Blade. Unfortunately the ship was wrecked after being at sea
only twenty-four hours, being wedged among the rocks, with one part
broken off. The twelve hundred passengers remained on the ship for
about twenty-four hours, at the end of which time they were rescued
by a passing vessel, which landed them at San Diego. As he had lost
his earnings on the wrecked ship Mr. Minnick decided to return to San
Francisco, where he lived for two more years. In the year 1856 he
again embarked for home and this time the voyage was uneventful and he
reached New York in safety. He then went by rail to Iowa, where he was
married. In 1872 Mr. Minnick again came to the Pacific coast and on
landing at San Francisco, proceeded by boat to Portland, whence he came
to Walla Walla county with his family by railroad. He preempted land
on the Pataha prairie and resided there until 1876. He then removed
to Spring valley, six miles south of Waitsburg, where he engaged in
farming until 1900, when he retired and took up his residence on Park
street, Walla Walla. In 1906 he removed to Los Angeles, California, in
the hope of benefiting his health and there he lived until his death
on the 9th of May, 1911. His remains were brought back to Walla Walla,
Washington, and were interred in the Mountain View cemetery. He is
survived by his widow, who bore the maiden name of Amanda Davis. She
is a daughter of Dr. Moss Davis, for many years a prominent physician
of Davis and Wapello counties, Iowa. She makes her home in Walla Walla
and owns between eight and nine hundred acres of land, left her by her
husband. To them were born the following children: Mrs. Mary Minnetta
Hubbard, a resident of Waitsburg; George D. and John H., who are living
in Walla Walla; Mrs. Anna Shepherd Crook, of Spokane, Washington;
Walter Clarence, a resident of Walla Walla; Mrs. Ella Elisabeth Price,
who is living in Waitsburg; and Chester Clifford, who is operating his
mother's land but resides in Walla Walla.

Walter C. Minnick received his education in the district schools,
the Waitsburg High School, the Waitsburg Academy, from which he was
graduated in 1902, and Professor Walton's School of Expression of
Spokane, which he attended during the four winters after leaving the
academy. When about nineteen years of age he began farming on his own
account and has continued to follow that occupation to the present
time. He is now the owner of extensive tracts of land and is one of
the large wheat growers of Walla Walla and Columbia counties. The fact
that he can successfully manage such large interests is proof of his
enterprise, keen business judgment and executive ability. He was one
of the organizers of the Exchange Bank of Waitsburg, of which he was
elected vice president at the time of its reorganization, and for seven
or eight years he held that office, but has recently disposed of his
bank holdings.

On the 23d of December, 1908, Mr. Minnick was married to Miss Amy Jane
McCown, of Waitsburg, a daughter of Frank and Laura (Walker) McCown,
both natives of this region. Her grandparents came west in 1852 by ox
team and located in Oregon and both parents were born on the Pacific
coast. Mrs. Minnick was born in Waitsburg, June 3, 1885, and was
graduated from the Waitsburg high school and the organ department of
Whitman Conservatory of Music. She also spent one year in study at
Oberlin College, Oberlin, Ohio. To Mr. and Mrs. Minnick have been born
three children, Walter Lawrence, Erma Helen and Virginia Pauline.

Mr. Minnick endorses the basic principles of the democratic party but
on occasion votes independently, believing that the general welfare
is of far more importance than party success. For four years he was
state democratic committeeman from this district and his influence was
strongly felt on the side of progress and clean government. He belongs
to the United Artisans, and both he and his wife hold membership in
the Christian church. Following his marriage he maintained his home in
Waitsburg until 1914, when he removed to Walla Walla, where he has a
residence at No. 216 Fulton street. For several years past he and his
family have spent the winters in Los Angeles, California. He is one
of the substantial men of Walla Walla and such is his efficiency and
ability that he is able to keep all of his business affairs well in
hand and yet find time to enjoy the worth-while pleasures of life. He
has been a factor in the advancement of his community, being always
ready to give not only of his means but also of his thought and time to
the promotion of projects for the public good.


JOHN FORGEY.

John Forgey is numbered among the pioneer settlers of Asotin county
who have contributed in marked measure to its material development
and upbuilding and also to its progress and improvement along social,
political and moral lines. He was born near Albany, Linn county,
Oregon, August 9, 1865, a son of George and Martha (Shear) Forgey. The
father, a native of Indiana, came to the west with an uncle when eleven
years of age and settled in the Willamette valley, where he followed
farming. He and his wife are now living with a daughter, Mrs. Phoebe
Ramsey, in Linn county, Oregon, Mr. Forgey having retired from active
business. In their family were the following children: Bellzena, who
married James Newman, of Linn county, Oregon; Grover, who married Miss
Margaret Milsaps and resides in Astoria, Oregon; Emma, the deceased
wife of W. G. Dagget; two who died infancy; Phoebe, the wife of
Alvin Ramsey; and Fred, who died at the age of eighteen years, being
accidentally shot while hunting.

John Forgey of this review was but six years of age when brought by his
parents to Washington, the family home being established in Ellensburg,
where they lived for twelve years. In 1882 they came to Asotin county,
where they took up their abode upon a homestead claim. John Forgey
obtained his education in one of the old-time log schoolhouses and in
the schools of Asotin. When twenty-one years of age he began farming
independently and previous experience well qualified him for the work
which he undertook. He first secured a preemption claim of one hundred
and sixty acres but did not prove up on it. Later he bought three
hundred and twenty acres, which he developed, bringing his land under
a high state of cultivation, and afterward he bought another tract of
one hundred and sixty acres, which he still owns. It is eleven miles
south of Asotin and is largely devoted to wheat raising, extensive
crops being annually gathered. Mr. Forgey makes his home in the city of
Asotin during the winter months and in the summer resides upon the farm
and manages his property.

On the 10th of October, 1886, Mr. Forgey was married to Miss Sadie
Milsaps, a daughter of Robert and Holly (Carpenter) Milsaps, of a
prominent old family of Asotin county, to which they removed from
Missouri. Mrs. Forgey crossed the plains with her parents by mule team
in 1885, the trip taking three months and eleven days. They arrived
in Asotin county on the 31st of August of the same year and camped
at what is known as the old Wamsley place on Ten Mile creek until
October 1, moving from there to Asotin Flat, where they settled on a
homestead, Mrs. Forgey residing there until married in 1886. Mr. and
Mrs. Forgey have become the parents of the following named: Bellzena,
who is the wife of Ben Moody, a farmer of Asotin county; Alva, who died
in infancy; Joe, who was married in 1914 to Esther Hardy and follows
farming in Montana; Jessie, who died in infancy; and Dell, who was a
volunteer in the National Guard and then was transferred to the regular
army, now serving in Company E, One Hundred and Sixteenth United States
Engineers, in France.

Mr. Forgey and his family are members of the Christian church and
are loyal adherents of its teachings. In politics he is a republican
where national issues are involved, but casts an independent local
ballot, supporting men and measures rather than party. Fraternally he
is connected with the Woodmen of the World. He has been a resident of
Asotin county for thirty-five years, having arrived when the work of
development seemed scarcely begun in this section of the state. He has
seen the little village grow to a nice town and has assisted largely
in its upbuilding and progress. He now has an attractive home on Main
street, in which he spends the winter months. He is a substantial
citizen, loyal at all times to the best interests of community and of
state, and as a business man he has a record for thorough reliability
and enterprise, his success being attributable entirely to his
persistency of purpose and his indefatigable energy intelligently
directed.


L. C. CORBETT.

L. C. Corbett, who is well known as a dealer in grain and fuel and
a fire insurance agent of Huntsville, Columbia county, was born in
Canada, October 19, 1851. An account of the lives of his parents,
John and Jane (Lewis) Corbett, is found elsewhere in this work. Our
subject was reared in the Dominion and received excellent educational
opportunities, graduating from Toronto University. For five years he
was engaged in public school work, and for twenty years he taught in
high schools and collegiate institutes in Canada as instructor in
modern languages. In 1904 he came to Columbia county, Washington, and
became bookkeeper and secretary for Corbett Brothers, at Huntsville.
In 1907 he was joined by his family and has since made his home in
Huntsville. He was in partnership with his brother until 1915, when
their business connections were severed and Mr. Corbett of this review
took over the warehouse which he now owns. He enjoys a large patronage
as a dealer in grain and fuel, and has also built up a good insurance
business. He owns an attractive residence surrounded by beautiful
grounds, and is recognized as one of the substantial men of Huntsville.

[Illustration: L. C. CORBETT.]

Mr. Corbett was married in Canada to Miss Sarah Kirk, a native of
England and a daughter of Robert and Fannie (Holland) Kirk, both of
whom were born in Ireland and were married in Canada. The father,
who was in the English army, subsequently was stationed in England
for some time but at length went to Canada and there both he and his
wife passed away. They were the parents of ten children, of whom five
survive. To Mr. and Mrs. Corbett have been born five children: Lewis
H., a graduate of Toronto University, in which he was an instructor
for four years and is now teaching modern languages in Harbord-Street
Collegiate-Institute, Toronto, Canada; Edith, the wife of Wade
H. Wolfe. who is associated with Mr. Corbett in business; Sarah
Christabel, a graduate of the Ellensburg, Washington, normal school,
who for three years followed the teacher's profession but is now taking
training at Berkeley, California, for deaconess work; Alice Kathleen,
also a graduate of the Ellensburg normal school, now teaching in Walla
Walla County; and Frances Enid, a high school student, at home.

Mr. Corbett takes the interest of a good citizen in public affairs
but has never sought office. He is well known fraternally, belonging
to the Masonic order, and to the Foresters. Both he and his wife are
members of the Protestant Episcopal church, in which he holds official
position, and both are always willing to give of their time and
means in the furtherance of its work. Although they have resided in
Huntsville for only a few years they have already won the unqualified
respect of their fellow townsmen and have made many warm friends.


BISHOP A. HERROLD.

Bishop A. Herrold, an honored old settler of Walla Walla county,
residing on section 7, township 9 north, range 38 east, was born in
Hamilton county, Indiana, May 5, 1836. His parents, Daniel and Frances
(Fierce) Herrold, were both born in Westmoreland county, Pennsylvania,
but were married in Athens county, Ohio. They resided there for a
number of years and five of their children were born in that county.
At length, however, the family removed to Indiana and in 1849 migrated
still farther west, settling in Knox county, Illinois, which was then
only partly settled. They continued to reside there until death, the
father dying at the age of eighty-four years and the mother when eighty
years old.

Bishop A. Herrold received a district school education and, through
assisting his father with the farm work, gained practical training
in the occupation to which he devoted his active life. On reaching
mature years he began farming on his own account in Illinois and in
1870 removed to Jefferson, Oregon. For seven years he was a resident
of that state, most of the time being spent in Linn county. In 1877 he
took up his abode in Palouse, Whitman county, Washington, and preempted
one hundred and sixty acres, on which he lived for six or seven years.
He next came to Walla Walla county and took up a homestead on Eureka
flats. He was successful as a farmer, his well directed labors being
rewarded by good crops, and at length he felt that he had accumulated
sufficient capital to enable him to retire and he took up his abode in
Waitsburg, where he lived until the death of his wife, April 19, 1907.
Since then he has made his home with his son on section 7, township 9
north, range 38 east, Walla Walla county.

Mr. Herrold was married May 29, 1856, to Miss Harriett Cullison, a
native of Knox county, Illinois, and they became the parents of six
children, of whom three survive: Jeremiah Burres; Hattie B., who is
the widow of William Baim and resides with her brothers; and Morton C.
The brothers are operating in partnership four hundred and thirty-four
acres of excellent land, Morton C. residing upon the place, while J. B.
lives in Walla Walla.

Mr. Herrold is an adherent of the republican party and loyally supports
its candidates and measures at the polls. Fraternally he belongs
to Waitsburg Lodge, No. 16, F. & A. M., and his religious faith is
indicated by his membership in the Methodist church. He is widely known
throughout the county and has gained the warm personal friendship of
many.


ABRAHAM C. DICKINSON.

Abraham C. Dickinson, in whose death Walla Walla county lost one of its
valued and representative citizens, was for a long period actively and
prominently connected with agricultural interests. He lived for many
years upon his farm and in his later years made his home in Waitsburg,
where he passed away in 1911. He was born in Bartholomew county,
Indiana, May 15, 1830. His father, Harvey Dickinson, was a native of
Oneida county, New York, born in 1799, and on reaching young manhood
he emigrated westward to Indiana, which was then a frontier state.
There he wedded Miss Mary Finley and they began their domestic life
in Indiana, where Abraham C. Dickinson was born, reared and educated.
On attaining his majority he wedded Miss Abbie C. Carter, the wedding
being celebrated on the 2d of February, 1854. Two years later they
removed to Missouri accompanied by his father, his mother having passed
away in November, 1847. They established their home in Linn county,
where they prospered until the outbreak of the Civil war, when their
competence was swept away.

In 1863, with a yoke of oxen hitched to a small wagon, Mr. Dickinson
started across the plains with his family for the golden west and
arrived in Walla Walla county, Washington, where he ever afterward made
his home. He filed on a homestead in Spring Valley, four and one-half
miles southwest of Waitsburg, and there built a one-room log cabin
with clapboard roof. He occupied that primitive home for five years,
after which he was able to replace it by a more commodious and modern
frame dwelling. Thrift and industry at length brought him a substantial
measure of prosperity and from time to time he added to his landed
possessions until he became the owner of a thousand acres of valuable
farm land, six hundred and eighty acres of which comprised the Spring
Valley Home. In subsequent years he sold all of his holdings except
one hundred and twenty acres, which his widow still retains. In 1882
he removed to Waitsburg, where he erected a comfortable residence and
there he spent his remaining days, enjoying many of life's comforts and
some of its luxuries. He well deserved the success which came to him,
for his life was a busy and useful one, his industry was unfaltering
and his energy untiring. Moreover, in all of his business affairs he
was thoroughly reliable, honorable and upright and his word came to be
recognized as good as any bond solemnized by signature or seal. When
he came to Washington territory he brought with him his wife and six
children but no money. He faced the necessity of at once providing
for their support and by hard work and good management he overcame
all difficulties and obstacles in his path and in the course of years
gained a very substantial competence.

[Illustration: MR. AND MRS. ABRAHAM C. DICKINSON]

To Mr. and Mrs. Dickinson were born eleven children, five of whom still
survive, as follows: Mary M., who is the wife of E. D. Mills; Ella L.,
who gave her hand in marriage to Charles O. Cram; Cora B., the wife of
F. T. Keiser; Lydia F., who is the wife of O. Conover; and Albert S.,
who is one of the prominent citizens of Waitsburg.

The family circle was again broken by the hand of death when in 1911
Mr. Dickinson passed away. He was a man of sterling character and
a conscientious Christian, a devoted husband and loving father and
a man highly esteemed as a friend and as a citizen. He long held
membership in the Christian church, to which Mrs. Dickinson still
belongs. She is now nearing her eighty-third year but is yet hale and
hearty and occupies the old home in Waitsburg. She, too, has been a
most consistent Christian and one whose life has been fraught with
good deeds, as she has continually extended a helping hand where aid,
counsel or sympathy were needed.


H. E. ANGERMANN

H. E. Angermann, the president and treasurer of the Model Bakery and
Confectionery, Incorporated, at Walla Walla, has been a resident of
this city since 1906 and progressive business methods have brought him
to a place in the front ranks among the representative merchants. He
has ever been actuated by laudable ambition and persistency of purpose
has constituted one of the foundation stones on which he has built his
success.

He was born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, on the 21st of June, 1865,
and is a son of Traugott and Johanna (Kupke) Angermann, both of whom
were natives of Germany and came to the United States when they were
in the twenties. The father was a tailor by trade and followed that
pursuit throughout his entire life. After living for some time in
Pennsylvania he removed to New Jersey, where both he and his wife
passed away. In their family were twelve children, nine of whom are
living, five sons and four daughters.

H. E. Angermann, whose name introduces this record, was reared and
educated in New Jersey, where he learned the trade of cigar making
and followed that pursuit for twenty-three years in different
states. Subsequently he took up carpentering and was thus employed
for six years. In 1906 he arrived in Walla Walla and since 1911 has
been engaged in the bakery and confectionery business, forming a
partnership with Charles Retzer under the name of the Model Bakery and
Confectionery, Incorporated. He has been continuously engaged in this
business through the intervening period of six years and his patronage
has steadily grown, for he has given to the public goods of the highest
quality, and, moreover, his business methods are such as will bear the
closest investigation and scrutiny. The Model Bakery and Confectionery
is today one of the leading establishments of this kind in the Inland
Empire and its patronage has reached most gratifying proportions. The
building in which the business is carried on is a handsome structure
and is the property of Mr. Angermann and Charles Retzer. Mr. Angermann
is also the owner of an attractive residence in Walla Walla.

In 1890 Mr. Angermann was united in marriage to Miss Christina
Wittmann, a native of Germany and a daughter of Carl and Katherine
(Retzer) Wittmann. She came to America when sixteen years of age.
Her mother had died in Germany and the father afterward crossed the
Atlantic to the new world, becoming a resident of Walla Walla. To Mr.
and Mrs. Angermann have been born five children; Arthur W.; Herman
C.; Carrie W., deceased; Minnie C. and Martha K. The children are all
assisting their father in the business.

The parents are members of the Lutheran church and are loyal to
its teachings. Mr. Angermann gives his political allegiance to the
republican party but does not seek office as a reward for party fealty.
Fraternally he is connected with the Independent Order of Odd Fellows
and also with the Improved Order of Red Men and the Sons of Hermann.
Attracted to the west by its almost limitless opportunities, he has
here made steady progress in his business career and, advancing step by
step, now occupies an enviable position among its more successful men.


A. W. CLAXON.

Business enterprise in Walla Walla finds a worthy representative in
A. W. Claxon, who is conducting a real estate and insurance agency.
It is a well known fact that his plans are always carefully made and
promptly executed and that his course at all times measures up to high
business standards. He came to the new world actuated by the laudable
purpose of finding opportunities here that would lead to advancement
and success. He was born in the county of Durham, England, March 1,
1875, a son of William and Georgina (Croft) Claxon, both of whom were
natives of England, where they spent their entire lives. The father was
a huntsman, hunting with the South Durham hounds for thirty-four years.
He was also well known as a farmer and his business activities were
wisely and carefully directed.

A. W. Claxon began his education in the public schools and afterward
had the benefit of high school instruction in his native country. He
was a youth of seventeen years when in 1892 he bade adieu to friends
and native land and sailed for the United States, coming to the new
world with a cargo of horses. For some time he devoted his attention to
such work, making several trips with horses between England and this
country. He also made two trips to Japan, taking one cargo of horses
from America to that country and another from England to the little
flowery kingdom. The latter cargo was one of thoroughbreds imported
to improve the grade of horses raised in Japan. They were imported
by the Japanese government. While Mr. Claxon was in that country he
was offered a very remunerative position by the government, but was
required to reside in the country for at least twenty-five years and
became a naturalized citizen. This plan was not altogether pleasing
and the position was therefore not accepted. At the breaking out of
the Boer war Mr. Claxon enlisted for service in South Africa, going
to that country, where he was on active duty during the uprising them.
Since his first trip to the United States he has crossed the ocean
thirty-four times and has visited every important city in the world,
gaining broad knowledge and experience from his wide travels and
storing his mind with much interesting information and many amusing
incidents.

In 1902 he located in New Jersey and engaged in the raising of
thoroughbred race horses. When racing was abolished in the east by
legislation he went to Canada, where he spent one year, and in 1908
he came to the Pacific coast. In Spokane he met a Mr. Harding and
a Mr. Rutter of the Western Union Life Insurance Company, and Mr.
Claxon accepted an agency with them and was sent to Walla Walla. Later
he became associated with Gilbert Hunt, a manufacturer of threshing
machines, whose business he represented upon the road for about six
years, covering the states of Oregon, Washington and Idaho. In 1913
he engaged in the real estate and insurance business in partnership
with O. Z. Skinner and is now active in that field. He is thoroughly
conversant with realty values and has negotiated many important
property transfers. He is constantly watchful of opportunities for
judicious investment for himself or his clients and has become one of
the well known real estate men of Walla Walla. In insurance circles,
too, he has built up a business of considerable proportions, that
department becoming a profitable branch of his interests.

On the 22d of August, 1905, Mr. Claxon was united in marriage to Miss
Bethene Crayne, of Walla Walla, a daughter of Dr. W. H. and Anna Z.
Crayne, the former for many years affiliated with Whitman College. Mrs.
Claxon is a graduate of Whitman College of the class of 1903 and is an
accomplished vocalist, having studied under Madam Riccardo of Berlin.
Her splendid musical talent adds much to the interest in musical events
in Walla Walla. By her marriage she has become the mother of two
children, Colin C. and Catherine B.

Both Mr. and Mrs. Claxon hold membership in the Episcopal church and
his political endorsement is given to the republican party, but while
well informed on the questions and issues of the day, he has never been
an office seeker. In social circles he and his wife occupy an enviable
position, the hospitality of the best homes being freely accorded them.
They occupy an attractive residence in Walla Walla and, in addition to
his home and his business interests, Mr. Claxon owns a valuable farm of
three hundred and twenty acres in Walla Walla county. He has never had
occasion to regret his determination to come to the new world, for here
he has found the business opportunities which he sought and in their
utilization has steadily advanced, reaching a prominent place among the
successful men of the northwest.


ARTHUR MAYNE McCOY.

Arthur Mayne McCoy has engaged in the lumber business in Waitsburg,
Washington, since 1900 and also maintains a chop mill, planing mill
and elevator, his combined interests making up an important part of
Waitsburg's industrial enterprises. He was born in Dayton, Green
county, Wisconsin, November 4, 1867. His parents, James and Margaret
McCoy, emigrated from the northern part of Ireland in 1848 and settled
on government land in Green county, Wisconsin, where they established
their home and reared a family of eleven children, six of whom are
still living.

Arthur M. McCoy began his education in the district schools and in 1887
was graduated from the high school of Evansville, Wisconsin. In 1891 he
completed his course by graduating from the State University at Madison
with the degree of B. L. After leaving the university he came west
and was first engaged in the lumber business in Portland, Oregon. The
following year he had occasion to pass through the Walla Walla valley
and decided that the climate and location here were desirable and
that he would make this section his future home. He has always allied
himself with the lumber industry and in 1900 purchased the business and
plant that he now owns from B. M. Kent & Sons in Waitsburg. In 1904
the entire plans and lumberyard were destroyed by fire but fortunately
his trade was such as to encourage him to rebuild. In doing so Mr.
McCoy materially increased the capacity of his plant and today it is
a valuable asset to Waitsburg and vicinity. He is always anxious to
please his customers and together with square dealing, energy and push
has made a success of his line of business.

In 1900 Mr. McCoy was united in marriage to Miss Lizzie Twiss, of
Iola, Kansas, and two children, Julius Mayne and Effie Elizabeth, were
born to this union. In August, 1906, the wife and mother passed to the
great beyond and in 1909 Mr. McCoy and Miss Margaret Hays, of Saratoga
Springs, New York, were married. By the second union there are also two
children, Arthur Hays and Robert Holmes McCoy. All of the children are
now attending school.

Mrs. McCoy is very active in the social and educational life of the
city of Waitsburg; holds official positions in several organizations;
and is intensely interested in all charitable undertakings. Both
Mr. and Mrs. McCoy are members of the First Presbyterian church of
Waitsburg and he has been an elder and trustee of the society since
coming to the city. In politics he has always been a republican but has
never sought nor desired office.


JOHN M. GLOVER.

John M. Glover is the owner of an excellent farm property of three
hundred acres situated on section 10, township 7, range 36 east, in
Walla Walla county, about three miles from the city of Walla Walla. It
is one of the finest farms to be found in this section of the state
and for many years Mr. Glover was actively engaged in its further
development and improvement, but he is now leaving the active work of
the fields to his son and is enjoying a rest which he has truly earned
and richly deserves. He was born in Preston county, West Virginia,
on the 25th of September, 1854, a son of George W. and Nancy (Teats)
Glover, both of whom were natives of the same county. They spent their
entire lives in West Virginia, both having now passed away.

[Illustration: JAMES M. GLOVER AND FAMILY]

[Illustration: DAUGHTER OF E. W. GLOVER]

John M. Glover was reared under the parental roof and acquired his
education in the district schools. On attaining his majority, in the
fall of 1875, he left home to start out upon an independent career
and went to Ohio. He took up his abode in Muskingum county and there
he was married on the 24th of October, 1878, to Miss Laura E. Sniff,
a native of Muskingum county, where they remained until 1881. In that
year they left the middle west for the Pacific coast, making their way
to Walla Walla county, Washington. They journeyed over the Southern
Pacific Railroad, Mr. Glover purchasing the first through tickets
sold over this road after its completion. On reaching his destination
he located in the foothills on the headwaters of Blue Creek, where
he later acquired five hundred acres of land. He occupied that farm
for twenty-four years and brought his fields under a high state of
cultivation, utilizing the most progressive methods of agriculture in
developing his place. In 1905 he removed to his present home farm,
which is most pleasantly and conveniently situated about three miles
northeast of Walla Walla. It is a tract of land of three hundred acres,
and no better land can be found in all the valley. It is naturally rich
and productive and responds readily to the care and labor that are
bestowed upon it. Mr. Glover continued to successfully operate that
farm until the fall of 1916, when he turned its business management and
care over to his son, Erra W., who is now operating it, while Mr. and
Mrs. Glover spend their winter months in California, returning to the
farm to pass the summer months with their son.

To Mr. and Mrs. Glover have been born five children, two sons and three
daughters, namely: Erra W., previously mentioned; Maud Estella; who
became the wife of Clyde Fields and died leaving three children; Lorena
E., who married Frank Phillips and died leaving one child; and Iva
Bernice and Dorsey K., who are at home.

Politically Mr. Glover is a republican and is conversant with the
leading questions and issues of the day, but while he has been a loyal
supporter of his party, he has never sought nor desired public office.
He and his wife are members of the Methodist Episcopal church and guide
their lives according to its teachings. Their sterling worth has won
wide recognition and they are held in the highest esteem by all who
know them. They have never had occasion to regret their determination
to leave the Atlantic coast and make their way to the Pacific seaboard.
On the contrary they are greatly in love with the state of their
adoption and are most loyal to it. Imbued by the spirit of western
enterprise and progress, Mr. Glover carefully and wisely directed his
business affairs and is now the possessor of a handsome competence as
the result of his carefully managed interests.


CHARLES M. BERRYMAN.

Charles M. Berryman, residing on section 3, township 8 north, range
35 east, devotes his time and energies to the operation of a farm of
seven hundred acres and is well known as one of the enterprising and
successful young agriculturists of Walla Walla county. He is, moreover,
one of its native sons, his birth having occurred in Walla Walla on the
29th of June, 1881. Extended mention of his father, James E. Berryman,
is made on another page of this work.

Charles M. Berryman obtained his education in the Berryman school and
also pursued a commercial course in the Walla Walla Business College.
He worked on the home farm until the time of his marriage and then
built his present residence on a part of his father's estate, where
he has since resided, devoting his attention to the cultivation of
seven hundred acres of land. In the conduct of his agricultural
interests he has won a gratifying measure of success, his efforts being
characterized by industry, enterprise and sound judgment.

On the 16th of January, 1907, Mr. Berryman was united in marriage to
Miss Nellie D. Morrow, of Douds, Iowa, a daughter of Jeremiah and Alice
(Chalfant) Morrow, who are natives of Ohio but have made their home
in Iowa for many years. In early life the father followed mercantile
pursuits but is now living retired. Mr. and Mrs. Berryman have a
daughter, Mary Alice.

Politically Mr. Berryman is a stalwart republican and is now serving as
a member of the school board, while for the past ten or twelve years
he has been precinct committeeman, succeeding his father, who has the
distinction of having worn the first street commissioner's badge issued
in Walla Walla. Mrs. Berryman is a consistent and devoted member of the
Methodist church, in the work of which she takes an active interest.
In the community where his entire life has been spent Mr. Berryman is
widely and favorably known, and his salient characteristics are such as
in every land and clime awaken confidence and regard.


HON. WILLIAM FUDGE.

Hon. William Fudge, deceased, left the impress of his individuality
upon the public life of Walla Walla and southeastern Washington in
large and helpful measure. He was one of the foremost citizens of the
county and one of its earliest pioneers. He was born in Illinois, April
27, 1838, and when a lad of but nine years crossed the plains with his
parents to Polk county, Oregon, where he arrived in 1847. During the
California gold excitement of 1849 his father went to the mines and
died on the steamer on his return journey home. The following year the
mother with her children settled upon a farm and William Fudge remained
at home, assisting in the labors of the fields for nine years. In
1859, having attained his majority, he removed to Walla Walla county
to start in the business world independently, settling on the present
site of Huntsville, where he successfully engaged in farming and in the
raising of live stock until 1884. He then removed to Whitman county,
where he purchased a place three miles north of Hay and there carried
on general agricultural pursuits for sixteen years. His success as
a cattle man and a farmer continued and he acquired fifteen hundred
acres of valuable land. In 1900 he left the ranch and returned to
Walla Walla county, purchasing a home just outside Waitsburg, where
he lived in practical retirement from active business for fourteen
years or until his removal to Walla Walla in 1914. He then purchased a
handsome city residence at 535 East Alder street, where his widow now
resides. As a business man he was most energetic and progressive and
his intelligently directed efforts brought splendid results.

[Illustration: HON. WILLIAM FUDGE]

On the 10th of September, 1862, Mr. Fudge was united in marriage to
Miss Elizabeth Billups, a native of Iowa, who crossed the plains with
her parents to Oregon in 1859, locating in Polk county, that state.
In 1862 the family came to Washington, taking up their abode on a
homestead in Walla Walla county, near Waitsburg.

Mr. Fudge was one of the most conspicuous figures in the early period
of Walla Walla county's development and also left his impress upon
the annals of the territory. He was a member of the territorial
legislature, being a colleague of H. P. Isaacs. To Mr. Fudge belonged
the distinction of having drafted the first railway freight bill ever
presented to the territorial legislature and to him and Mr. Isaacs
belonged the credit of having secured the location of the state
penitentiary in Walla Walla. He was a most public-spirited citizen,
giving of his time and of his means for any movement for the general
good, and his labors resulted greatly not only in the benefit to the
community but to the state at large. He held membership in the Masonic
lodge of Waitsburg and was a loyal adherent of the organization,
exemplifying in his life the beneficent spirit of the craft. Death
called him January 30, 1917, and thus was ended a life of great
usefulness and activity, covering seventy-eight years. It was a life of
honor and of high purpose and the world is better by reason of the fact
that he lived. He contributed much to the development of this section
of the country and he held to the highest ideals of civic virtue, while
the qualities he displayed in social relations endeared him to all with
whom he came in contact.


FRANK W. TIERNEY.

Frank W. Tierney, of the firm of Tierney & Toner, dealers in
automobiles and agricultural implements at Walla Walla, has built up a
business of extensive proportions through well directed energy. He was
born in Reedsburg, Wisconsin, January 20, 1874, a son of Patrick and
Margaret (Hannon) Tierney. The father was a native of Ireland and came
to the United States as an infant of but two years. The mother was born
in Wisconsin, where the parents of the father settled. There he was
reared and married and in that state he learned the wagonmaker's trade,
with which he was identified for a number of years. Later he removed
westward to South Dakota, taking up a homestead claim in Lake county,
where he resided until about 1907. He then retired from active business
life and came to the Pacific coast, locating in Portland, Oregon, where
his death occurred in 1915. His widow survives and is still a resident
of Portland.

Their son, Frank W. Tierney, was educated in the public schools of
Madison, South Dakota, graduating from the high school with the class
of 1894. He taught school and also engaged in selling books in order to
meet the expenses of his high school course. This was indicative of the
elemental strength of his character. He has ever recognized the fact
that where there is a will there is a way and by persistent energy and
intelligently directed effort he has accomplished his purposes. His
experience as a book agent taught him salesmanship and also brought
him keen knowledge of human nature and in 1896 he determined to become
identified with the business interests of the growing west. Making his
way to Washington, he settled in Walla Walla, where he entered the
employ of John Smith, who was engaged in the implement business. For
some years he was identified with that undertaking, after which he
purchased the Nissin implement business, which was a small concern. His
cash capital at that time consisted of but two hundred dollars and he
borrowed a thousand dollars in order to establish himself in business.
His activities were carefully directed and he watched every indication
pointing to success. From the beginning the enterprise prospered and
after three years he organized the Tierney-Toner Company, which was the
foundation of the present extensive business. Today their firm ranks
among the foremost in the city and conducts a very large business as
automobile dealers and dealers in agricultural implements, their sales
amounting to a most gratifying figure annually.

In 1904 Mr. Tierney was united in marriage to Miss Nellie Fitzgerald,
of Ottumwa, Iowa, and they have become the parents of three children,
Gerald F., Leonard J. and Patronilla M.

Mr. Tierney is identified with Walla Walla Lodge, No. 287, B. P. O.
E., and also has membership with the Knights of Columbus, a fact
which indicates that his religious faith is that of the Catholic
church, to which both he and his wife belong. He is also a member of
the Commercial Club and cooperates in all of its well defined plans
and projects for the upbuilding and development of the city, for
the extension of its trade relations and the upholding of its civic
standards. Mr. Tierney certainly deserves great credit for what he has
accomplished in life, for he started out practically empty handed,
and when he arrived in Walla Walla he had but twenty dollars in cash,
and this was borrowed. Resolute purpose, however, has enabled him to
overcome obstacles and difficulties and persistent energy has brought
him steadily forward until he now occupies a most enviable position
among the merchants of Walla Walla. Success has come to him as the
reward of his persistent, earnest labor and his straightforward
dealings.


HARLEY B. STALLCOP.

Harley B. Stallcop is one of the younger farmers of Garfield county
and already is numbered among the most successful. He was born on
the farm which he is now operating July 3, 1881, a son of George and
Sarah (Edwards) Stallcop, who are residents of Pomeroy. His education
was acquired in the common schools, in the high school at Pomeroy and
in the Northwestern Business College at Spokane, where he spent two
years as a student. In 1904 he rented the homestead, and his time
and attention have since been devoted to its operation and further
improvement. He raises wheat and stock and derives a good profit from
each branch of his business. His farm comprises nine hundred and fifty
acres of excellent land and is one of the best properties in the
township.

Mr. Stallcop was married September 27, 1905, to Miss Elizabeth Gustin,
a native of Oregon, and they have five children, Fern L., Harley W.,
George A., Raymond C. and Gilbert E.

Mr. Stallcop is a republican in his political belief but has never been
an aspirant for office. His fraternal connections are with the Knights
of Pythias and the Foresters. The high esteem in which he is held by
those who have known him well since boyhood, is the best proof of his
genuine worth and attractive personal qualities.


FRED GLAFKE.

The upbuilding of the west is one of the wonders of the world.
Those who travel to that section of the country are astounded by
the beauty of the cities, well laid out with wide streets, equipped
with every modern convenience and holding to the highest standards
of progressiveness. This is due to the ability and enterprise of the
men who have concentrated their business interests in that section of
the country. Prominent among this class of men in Walla Walla is Fred
Glafke, the manager and treasurer of the Interior Grocery Company,
conducting a wholesale grocery business.

He was born in the state of New York, May 24, 1856, a son of Fred and
Catherine (Brusher) Glafke, both of whom were natives of Germany. They
came to the United States in young manhood and womanhood respectively
and settled in Wayne county, New York, where they were later married.
The father was a wagon maker by trade and conducted a shop in Wayne
county until 1865, when he removed to Mendon, Michigan, where he
carried on business as a wagon maker for many years. At length he
removed to Portland, Oregon, in 1892 and there lived retired until
his death, which occurred in 1914. He had long survived his wife, who
passed away in 1905.

Fred Glafke was reared at home and acquired his education in the
village and high schools of Mendon, Michigan, and in the Valparaiso
(Ind.) Normal School. He began teaching in the Mendon graded schools
in 1878 and was made principal of the schools of Mendon in 1882,
continuing to serve in that capacity for six years. He proved a capable
educator, imparting clearly and readily to others the knowledge which
he had acquired. In 1888 he took charge of the schools of Centerville,
the county seat of St. Joseph county, and continued as principal
there until 1890, when he came to the Pacific coast, making his way
to Portland, Oregon. There he was prominent in educational work for
eleven years, having charge of the Holladay school, the Stephens
school, the Atkinson school and afterward the Harrison school, which
was the largest grammar school in that city. He did much to develop the
educational activities and interests of Portland and the value of his
work is still finding fruition in the public school system there today.
In 1901 he resigned the position of principal and became connected
with the Pacific Coast Biscuit Company of Portland, being placed in
charge of the general books. He remained with that company in the
office until 1904, at which time he came to Walla Walla, and entered
into partnership with his brother, W. B. Glafke, in establishing a
wholesale grocery business known as the W. B. Glafke Company. Their
interests were conducted under that name until 1907, when the business
was reorganized and incorporated under the name of the Interior
Grocery Company, of which Fred Glafke became treasurer and manager.
This business has been developed into one of the leading commercial
enterprises of Walla Walla. They carry an extensive stock and their
ramifying trade interests cover a broad territory. The house enjoys
a most enviable reputation for progressiveness and reliability, for
promptness and efficiency. The partners are men of well known business
ability and executive force who are thoroughly acquainted with the
trade and whose well directed efforts are producing most substantial
results.

On the 23d of December, 1879, Mr. Glafke was united in marriage to Miss
Nettie Hazen, of Colon, Michigan, and they have become the parents
of three sons: Ransom F., who is living in Walla Walla; Dr. William
Harley, a physician and surgeon of New York city; and Ralph H., whose
home remains in Walla Walla. The oldest and the youngest are associated
with the father in business and are representative and wide-awake young
merchants of the city.

In his political views Mr. Glafke is a stalwart republican and he
has served for many years as a member of the board of education of
Walla Walla but does not seek office along strictly political lines.
He stands for everything that tends to advance the public welfare,
however, and his aid and co-operation can always be counted upon to
further measures and movements for the general good. He has indeed been
a stalwart supporter of the public school system and he does everything
in his power to advance the material, intellectual, social and moral
interests of the state. He belongs to Blue Mountain Lodge, No. 13, F.
& A. M., and he and his wife are active members of the Presbyterian
church, in which he is serving on the board of trustees. He belongs
also to the Walla Walla Commercial Club and is one of its directors.
Interested in the horticultural development of this section of the
country, he has become the owner of a splendidly developed orchard in
Umatilla county, Oregon.

It is to such men as he that the west owes her splendid development,
men who have had the insight to recognize the natural resources of the
country and its possibilities, who have foreseen something of what the
future had in store and who have found justification for their faith
and judgment in the results that have been attained.


GEORGE COCHRAN.

George Cochran, one of the substantial and valued farmers of Walla
Walla county, living on section 27, township 8 north, range 37 east,
was born December 2, 1873, in the township where he still makes his
home, his parents being James W. and Cynthia A. (Angel) Cochran, both
of whom were natives of Missouri, where they were reared and married.
In 1864 they determined to try their fortune in the west and made their
way to Walla Walla county, Washington, crossing the plains with ox
teams in a wagon train of forty wagons. While en route they endured all
the hardships and privations incident to the trip and after coming to
this state they experienced all those things which constitute features
in pioneer life. They took up their abode on Russell creek but in 1866
or 1867 removed to the Willamette valley of Oregon, where they remained
until called to their final rest. The father died December 8, 1915,
having for a considerable period survived his wife, who passed away May
9, 1904.

[Illustration: GEORGE COCHRAN]

[Illustration: MRS. GEORGE COCHRAN]

George Cochran was reared at home, acquiring his education in the
public schools, and after his textbooks were put aside he continued to
work upon the homestead farm, being thus engaged up to the time of his
marriage, which occurred November 10, 1901, Miss Grace W. Meiners, a
daughter of Martin Meiners, becoming his wife. Her father removed to
this county from Illinois in 1882 or 1883 and is now living retired in
the city of Walla Walla. The old homestead farm of the Cochran family
was deeded to George Cochran and his two brothers some years before
the marriage of the former and upon that event was taken over entirely
by George Cochran, who purchased the interests of his brothers in the
place. He has since owned this property, comprising two hundred and
eighty-five acres of rich and arable land. He has brought his fields to
a high state of cultivation and annually gathers large crops. He raises
the cereals best adapted to climatic conditions here and he studies the
needs of the soil, keeping his land at all times in good condition by
the judicious use of fertilizer and by the rotation of crops.

To Mr. and Mrs. Cochran have been born six children, of whom five
survive, namely, Cynthia W., Kay M., Ena G., Ira J. and George Allen.
In religious faith Mrs. Cochran is a Lutheran. Mr. Cochran belongs
to Welcome Lodge, No. 117, I. O. O. F., of Dixie. His political
allegiance is given to the democratic party, and while he has never
sought nor desired office he has served as a member of the school
board and loyally defends all those interests and activities which he
believes will prove of benefit to the community. As a business man he
is thoroughly progressive and reliable and wherever he is known he is
spoken of in terms of warm regard.


CHARLES RETZER.

For a quarter of a century Charles Retzer has been a resident of Walla
Walla and throughout the entire period has been connected with the
bakery business. He has prospered in his undertakings, and working his
way steadily upward, has become vice president and manager of a large
and profitable business conducted under the name of the Model Bakery
and Confectionery, Incorporated. He was born in Waldangelloch, Baden,
Germany, on the 30th of March, 1871, and is a son of George and Carrie
(Niebergall) Retzer, both of whom were natives of Germany. They came to
America in 1897 and located in Walla Walla, where their remaining days
were passed. They had a family of eleven children, six of whom survive.

Charles Retzer acquired his education in his native country and there
learned the baker's trade. When he was fifteen years of age, however,
he bade adieu to friends and native land and sailed for the new world.
He became a resident of Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, where he was
employed at his trade for five years, after which he heard and heeded
the call of the west and in 1892 arrived in Walla Walla, where he has
since made his home. He immediately sought employment at the baker's
trade and secured work, spending six years in the service of others.
He was ambitious, however, to engage in business on his own account
and carefully saved his earnings until his industry and economy had
brought him sufficient capital to establish a bakery of his own. He
formed a partnership with his brother William and the association was
maintained for a year and a half after which he purchased his brother's
interest. He was then alone in business for some time and afterward
he sold a half interest to his brother-in-law, H. E. Angermann. They
are now conducting their interests under the name of the Model Bakery
and Confectionery, Incorporated, and they have a splendidly equipped
establishment, in which are found all of the latest improved machines
that are used in connection with the mixing of bread, cakes and other
bakery goods. The most sanitary conditions prevail in the establishment
and the excellence of the product is such as insures a very gratifying
patronage.

Mr. Retzer has been married twice. In 1896 he wedded Miss Matilda
Shellberg and to them was born a daughter, Carrie. In November, 1913,
Mr. Retzer was again married, his second union being with Mrs. Stella
M. Hawley. By her first marriage she had three children: Philip, a
member of Sixth Field Artillery, who volunteered before the draft and
is now somewhere in France in the service; and William and Catherine,
at home.

The family occupy an attractive residence which is owned by Mr. Retzer,
and he and his partner are owners of the building in which they conduct
the bakery. In politics Mr. Retzer is a republican but has never been
an office seeker. He is not neglectful of the duties of citizenship,
however, but cooperates in many well defined plans and measures for the
general good. He is a stalwart Mason, belonging to Walla Walla Lodge,
No. 8, F. & A. M., and he is also identified with the Odd Fellows
lodge. He is likewise a member of the Commercial Club and is in deep
sympathy with its efforts to promote the upbuilding of the city, to
extend its trade connections and to uphold its civic standards. His has
been a busy and useful life and illustrates what may be accomplished
when energy and determination mark the way. He started out empty handed
but early realized the eternal principle that industry wins and he
has therefore led a most industrious life which has gained for him a
position among the substantial business men of Walla Walla.


WESLEY A. LLOYD.

Wesley A. Lloyd has resided for forty-seven years upon the farm on
section 9, township 9 north, range 37 east, which he is now operating,
and his birth occurred upon that place May 23, 1871. His parents,
Albert G. and Lois H. (Jasper) Lloyd, are mentioned at length elsewhere
in this work.

Wesley A. Lloyd attended the Waitsburg public schools in the
acquirement of his education and, on reaching manhood, was taken into
partnership by his father, who farmed on an extensive scale. This
relation continued until after 1907, when the son took entire charge of
the homestead, which he has since operated independently in addition to
cultivating six hundred acres, which he owns, and four hundred acres
of rented land, operating in all twelve hundred acres. The management
of such extensive farming interests demands marked executive ability
and thorough knowledge of the principles underlying all branches and
familiarity with the most improved methods of farming. Mr. Lloyd
possesses all these qualifications and his land makes a gratifying
return on the capital invested therein.

[Illustration: MR. AND MRS. JAMES W. COCHRAN]

[Illustration: MR. AND MRS. MARTIN MEINERS]

In 1910 Mr. Lloyd was married to Miss Ina Boynton, of Waitsburg, by
whom he has had two children, of whom one, a son, Tony B., survives.

Mr. Lloyd belongs to Waitsburg Lodge, No. 16, F. & A. M.; Dayton
Chapter No. 5, R. A. M.; Washington Commandery No. 1, K. T., of Walla
Walla; and El Katif Shrine, A. A. O. N. M. S., of Spokane. His wife
holds membership in the Christian church and its work profits from her
co-operation. In politics Mr. Lloyd is a stanch democrat, but he has
never been an aspirant for office. He ranks among the influential men
of Walla Walla county and his personal qualities are such that his
friends are legion.


MRS. MARY LONG.

Mrs. Mary Long, living on section 33, township 11 north, range 42 east,
Garfield county, has very successfully managed her property interests
and is recognized as a woman of marked business ability. She was born
in Illinois on the 7th of February, 1847, a daughter of Job and Mary
(Harper) Tatlow, the former a native of Virginia, while the latter
was born in Ohio, in which state their marriage was celebrated. Soon
afterward they removed to Illinois and in 1856 they removed to Garden
Grove, Decatur county, Iowa, where they lived for two years. On the
expiration of that period they removed to Nemaha county, Kansas, where
they resided until called to their final rest.

Their daughter Mary accompanied her parents on their various removals
and spent her girlhood under the parental roof until on the 10th of
December, 1865, in Kansas, she gave her hand in marriage to Newell
S. Patterson. They began their domestic life in the Sunflower state,
but in 1867 crossed the plains, making the journey with horse team
and wagon to Oregon. They were four months in completing the trip,
which was fraught with various hardships and difficulties, but with
stout hearts they pushed on their way and at length left behind them
the long stretches of hot sand and the steep mountain ranges which
had separated them from their destination. It was on the 14th of May
that they bade adieu to their Kansas home and on the 14th of September
they reached Oregon City. For five years they were residents of
Clackamas county, Oregon, and in 1872 they made their way northward to
Washington, settling near Dayton in what is now Columbia county. There
Mr. Patterson took up a homestead, on which they lived for five years
and during that period his labors wrought marked transformation in the
appearance of the place, for his earnest toil brought a considerable
portion of the land under cultivation. He then traded that property for
the home farm near Pomeroy, upon which Mrs. Long has since resided.
Mr. Patterson purchased two hundred acres adjoining his homestead
and thus extended the boundaries of his farm until it included three
hundred and sixty acres of excellent land. He was an energetic man,
industrious, alert and enterprising, and his farm work was carefully
and successfully conducted. He passed away January 9, 1885, and his
death was the occasion of deep and widespread regret, for he had made
for himself a creditable position in the regard of all with whom he had
been brought in contact.

To Mr. and Mrs. Patterson were born nine children, all of whom are
yet living, as follows: Frank H., who is a resident of Jerome, Idaho;
Viola, who gave her hand in marriage to B. W. Yeoman, of Asotin
county, Washington; William H., an agriculturist of Garfield county,
Washington; Alice, who is the wife of J. T. Rhodes, of Garfield county;
John T., who operates his mother's farm; George S., living in Butte,
Montana; Mary, the wife of C. L. Williams, of Pomeroy; James, also a
resident of Pomeroy; and Edgar A., a farmer of Garfield county. On the
22d of June, 1895, Mrs. Patterson was united in marriage to J. M. Long,
a native of Illinois, who crossed the plains at an early day, settling
in Oregon, and in 1872 he came to Washington but in subsequent years
made several removals.

During the period of the Civil war Mr. Patterson had served as a member
of Company A, Seventh Kansas Cavalry, being identified with the army
for four years, during which he gave valuable aid to the Union cause.
He was a member of the Masonic fraternity and was one of the well known
and prominent farmers of Garfield county, respected by all with whom he
was associated by reason of his genuine worth and his fidelity to high
and honorable principles. Mrs. Long is a member of the Presbyterian
church and a lady of many excellent qualities, possessing the truly
womanly traits of character in addition to the business ability which
she has displayed in the management of her interests. She owns a
valuable farm property, which she carefully and systematically manages
and in its control shows sound business judgment and keen sagacity.


WILLIAM HENRY HEDGES FOUTS.

William Henry Hedges Fouts, who is engaged in the general practice
of law in Dayton, comes from an ancestry which in its lineal and
collateral branches has been distinctively American for many
generations. His parents were William Henry Harrison and Sarah Emily
(Hedges) Fouts, who became pioneer settlers of Oregon, and William H.
H. Fouts was born at Canemah, Oregon, on the 11th of July, 1869. He
was a youth of about fourteen years when in 1883 his parents removed
to Dayton and in the public schools of that city he completed his
education, being one of the first graduates. He decided upon the
practice of law as a life work and with that end in view he began
reading under the direction of M. A. Baker. His reading was also
directed by W. K. Rogers and R. F. Sturdevant and in September, 1890,
he passed the required examination that secured him admission to the
bar. Immediately afterward he opened an office in Dayton, where he
engaged in practice for twenty years, making steady progress along
professional lines. He then removed to Spokane, where he followed his
profession for two years, but in 1914 he returned to Dayton, where he
again opened an office. He now has a large general practice and is
very successful in handling his cases, which he prepares with great
thoroughness and care. He has tried cases in the state courts of
Washington, Oregon and Idaho and also in the United States circuit
court. He seems never at fault in the application of a legal principle
nor in citing a precedent and his devotion to his clients' interests
has become proverbial.

[Illustration: WILLIAM HENRY HEDGES FOUTS]

In 1894 Mr. Fouts was united in marriage to Miss Clara Kribs and they
have two children who are yet living, namely: William and Rodney H. The
wife and mother passed away on April 20, 1916, greatly mourned by all
who knew her.

In fraternal circles Mr. Fouts is widely and prominently known, being
a stalwart member of the Masonic lodge, the Knights of Pythias and the
Woodmen of the World. His political support is given to the republican
party and he has been called upon to fill several positions of public
honor and trust. He was elected prosecuting attorney in 1892, again in
1894 and once more in 1898, and he has also held the office of city
attorney and city clerk. His duties have been discharged with marked
promptness and fidelity and his re-election is proof of the confidence
reposed in him by his fellow townsmen. That his has been a well-spent
life is indicated by the fact that many of his stanchest friends are
those who have known him from his boyhood to the present time.


THOMAS J. HOLLOWELL.

Thomas J. Hollowell was at the time of his death a retired farmer
residing in Waitsburg. Nature seems to have intended that man in the
evening of life shall enjoy a period of rest. In youth he possesses
enthusiasm and energy, which in later years benefits by the wise
direction of a more mature mind. Therefore if one wisely utilizes his
time, his talents and his opportunities, he will progress along the
line of prosperity and will have accumulated a substantial competence
by the time the evening of life is reached. Such had been the record
of Thomas J. Hollowell, who was born in Orange county, Indiana, May
26, 1837, and had therefore passed the eightieth milestone on life's
journey when called to his final rest October 8, 1917. His parents were
Jonathan and Hannah (Copple) Hollowell, who were reared and married in
Orange county, where their respective parents had located at a very
early period in the development of that section of the country. Both
the father and mother of Thomas J. Hollowell passed away in Orange
county.

That district was still largely a frontier region during the period
of Thomas J. Hollowell's boyhood and youth. He remained upon the home
farm until his nineteenth year and received but limited educational
privileges, although to some extent he attended the district schools.
The home place, however, was heavily timbered and it was necessary
that he aid in the arduous task of clearing the land and developing
the farm. He therefore early became familiar with the work of cutting
down the trees, grubbing up the stumps and clearing away the brush in
order that the land might be tilled. In 1856 he left home and went to
southern Illinois, residing in Jefferson county for nine years, during
which period he purchased a small farm that he continued to cultivate
and further develop until the spring of 1865. He then sold that
property and joined the long procession that was wending its way across
the plains with horses and mule teams, attracted by the opportunities
of the northwest. Eventually he arrived in Walla Walla county about the
last of October. Half of the emigrant train went on to Oregon, while
Mr. Hollowell and his brother-in-law, Alexander Bundy, and others with
their families stopped near the present site of Waitsburg and there
camped. The land had not yet been surveyed for homestead entry, but Mr.
Hollowell squatted on a quarter section that was not surveyed until six
years later. In the meantime congress had passed the railroad bill,
cutting the homestead down to eighty acres. Therefore he changed the
homestead to a preemption, paying one dollar and a quarter per acre.
Afterward he homesteaded eighty acres adjoining his first location,
which was six miles southeast of Waitsburg. There he lived for a
number of years but in the meantime erected a town house in Waitsburg,
where he spent the winters in order that his children might have the
opportunity of attending the city schools. During his last years he
lived retired and spent all of his time in Waitsburg. He sold the old
home farm but owned another tract of land of four hundred acres three
miles from Waitsburg, which is operated by his son Albert.

On the 1st of April, 1858, Mr. Hollowell was united in marriage to Miss
Sarah H. Bundy, of Washington county, Illinois, and they became the
parents of twelve children, but only two are now living, Lilly May and
Albert S.

While Mr. Hollowell was not actively connected with any business
enterprise, he served as one of the directors of the First National
Bank of Waitsburg, which he assisted in organizing. He gave his
political allegiance to the democratic party, and while he was a
believer in its principles he was never an aspirant for office. He
and his wife held membership in the Christian church, in which for
more than forty years he held office, being one of the elders at the
time of his death. He served for two terms as mayor of Waitsburg and
for several years as a member of the town council, but whether in
office or out of it, he was always loyal to the best interests of the
community and cooperated largely in plans and measures for the general
good. He never had occasion to regret his determination to come to the
northwest, for here he found the opportunities which he sought and in
their utilization gained a place among the substantial and prosperous
business men of his adopted state. While he traveled far on life's
journey, he was a well preserved man and in spirit and interests seemed
yet in his prime, keeping in touch with the trend of modern thought,
development and progress.


OSCAR F. CANFIELD.

Oscar F. Canfield is one of the venerable and honored citizens of
Washington, living in Clarkston. Moreover, no history of the state
would be complete without extended reference to him, for he was one
of the survivors of the Whitman massacre of 1847 and every phase of
the state's development and progress from that time to the present
is familiar to him. He has passed the eightieth milestone on life's
journey, his birth having occurred in Pennsylvania on the 8th of March,
1838. His parents were W. D. and Sally Ann (Lee) Canfield, both of whom
were natives of Bennington county, Vermont. The father was a blacksmith
by trade and followed that pursuit in early manhood but afterward
took up the business of farming and stock raising and also engaged in
mining. In 1847 the father was one of those wounded and left for dead
in the Whitman massacre, but life had not departed and he made his
escape to Lapwai to the mission of Mr. Spalding. A courier was sent to
Vancouver with dispatches for Peter Skeen Ogden, then chief factor of
the Hudson's Bay Company at Vancouver. Mr. Ogden immediately manned
three batteaus and came to Fort Walla Walla on the Columbia, where he
bought seven women and thirty-two children from the Indians, paying for
them on delivery, thus freeing those who had been captured by the red
men.

On New Year's day of 1848 the Canfield family embarked for Vancouver
in charge of the Hudson's Bay Company and were turned over to Governor
Abernethy at Oregon City. They lived in Polk county, Oregon, until
March, 1849, and then went to California in the gold stampede. They
mined in Nevada that summer but afterward returned to Sonoma county.
The mines were very rich at that period, but Mr. Canfield did not know
how to mine, nor had he anything to mine with.

Oscar F. Canfield took up the occupation of mining with the removal
of the family to Sonoma county, California, although a boy of but
eleven years, and as he remarks, if he then knew what he now knows
about mines and mining, he would have been many times a millionaire.
In 1862 he started with Captain Gilliam's company for the Florence
stampede in Idaho. Captain Gilliam was a brother of General Cornelius
Gilliam, who distinguished himself in the Seminole war in Florida and
was accidentally shot in 1848 in the Cayuse war. His death was a great
loss to Oregon, as he was an experienced Indian fighter. He had several
children, living in and around Walla Walla. The party with which Mr.
Canfield traveled did not get to Florence, Idaho. They struck gold
at Canyon City, Oregon, and Mr. Canfield held the pan while Captain
Gilliam filled it. He then panned out the gold and there seemed to be
fine prospects there. They reached Canyon City on the 9th of June,
1862, and that district afterward proved to be a very rich camp. The
first gold discovered on Prichard creek was found by Jim Prichard, Bill
Gerard and Oscar F. Canfield. The gold which they found, when weighed,
was equal to a dollar and seventy-five cents. It was this which started
the Coeur d'Alene stampede. It was Bill Sutherland and Charley Toole
who discovered the Galena ore in the Sunset mountain and it was Mr.
Canfield who grubstaked them. In 1862 Mr. Canfield was one of a company
of thirty-five men who made their way northward from California to
Florence, Idaho, where there was great excitement concerning gold
discoveries. In the party were several noted early pioneers, including
Mr. McGruder, who was afterward ambushed and murdered. To the party
also belonged Captain Gilliam, who was subsequently killed in the
Cayuse Indian war and left a number of descendants in Old Walla Walla.
It was at Florence, Idaho, that Mr. Canfield found the first gold
there discovered. There were several companies of men who came up
from California at that time, including the following captains with
their companies: Captain Killgore, Joel Walker and Charles Hooper. Mr.
Canfield lived in the Snake River and in the Salmon River country for
a number of years and later at Canfield, Idaho, a town named in his
honor. He there followed mining, ranching and stock raising and thus in
various localities was closely and prominently identified with pioneer
development.

In November, 1861, in California, Mr. Canfield was united in marriage
to Miss Ann Maple, a native of Ohio, and to them were born seven
children: Augusta, who married Isaac Cooper; Sherman, who died in 1914;
Mary, who became the wife of William Farrell; Bert, a stock man of
Big Hole Basin of Montana; Oliver, deceased; Joseph, who is with his
brother in Big Hole Basin, Montana; and Mrs. Lottie Jasper, who lives
in Los Angeles, California.

In politics, in early manhood, Mr. Canfield was identified with the
know knothing party. This was before the republican party had been
organized or the present democratic party had formulated its platform.
The basic principle of the know knothing party was that a foreigner
must live here for twenty-one years before he could become a citizen
and enjoy the voting benefits and privileges of an American-born
citizen. He is proud of his political affiliation with that party and
says he is still an advocate thereof. Mr. Canfield was on one occasion
connected with an Indian ring hunt which took place in 1878 at Hayden
Lake, near Coeur d'Alene. He was with a party of Indians who gathered
in a horseshoe circle, the chief at one end and a noted Indian runner
of that day, named Fleetfoot, on the other end of the horseshoe circle,
their purpose being to hunt deer. They started one morning at eight
o'clock and finished at three in the afternoon. One leader was on the
canyon side of the circle and the other on the lake side. They would
run the deer, drawing them into their circle. They ran hundreds in
that way and killed one hundred and forty on that hunt or on the one
drive, as it was called. Mr. Canfield can relate many most interesting
incidents of the pioneer times, his memory forming a connecting
link between the primitive past and the progressive present. He has
contributed much to the development of the west through his business
activity and enterprise and at all times he has stood for progress and
advancement.


FRANK T. KEISER.

Frank T. Keiser, of Waitsburg, is one of the most prominent,
progressive and extensive farmers of Walla Walla county, owning
seventeen hundred and seventy acres of the finest wheat land to be
found in this section of the state. In addition he leases and controls
one thousand acres and thus his agricultural interests are most
important. He was born in Clackamas county, Oregon, September 3, 1856,
and is a son of William and Roxcie (Ingalls) Keiser, who are mentioned
elsewhere in this work.

The public schools of Walla Walla and Clackamas counties afforded
him his educational privileges, as at the age of sixteen years he
accompanied his parents on their removal from Oregon to Walla Walla
county, Washington. He remained at home through the period of his
boyhood and youth, assisting in the work of the farm, and was thus
engaged up to the time of his marriage, which was celebrated January 1,
1880, when Miss Cora B. Dickinson, a daughter of Abraham C. Dickinson,
became his wife. She was born at Fort Bridger, Wyoming, while her
parents were crossing the plains, in 1863. Following his marriage Mr.
Keiser began farming on a homestead in Spring Valley which he had
previously filed on. He had also filed and proved up on a preemption
and had filed on a timber claim. He continued to live upon his farm
for seven or eight years, after which he removed to Waitsburg, where
he has since made his home. For several years he has operated farm
lands from this point and his holdings are now very extensive, for he
owns seventeen hundred and seventy acres of the finest wheat land in
the county and has leased and cultivated another tract of one thousand
acres. He is thus most extensively engaged in farming and the magnitude
of his operations is an indication of the nature of his success. He is
familiar with every phase of wheat culture in the Inland Empire and
his wise and careful management of his business affairs has brought
splendid results. In addition to his other interests Mr. Keiser is a
stockholder in the Exchange Bank of Waitsburg.

[Illustration: MRS. FRANK T. KEISER]

[Illustration: FRANK T. KEISER]

To Mr. and Mrs. Keiser have been born nine children, eight of whom are
yet living, namely: Mabel, the wife of H. A. Woodruff, of Waitsburg;
Chester A., who is operating one of his father's farms; Hazel, the wife
of Z. O. Atkinson, who is connected with the Farmers' Union and resides
at Waitsburg; and Verl D. and Velma, twins, and Helen, Donald and
Gordon J., all at home.

Mr. Keiser votes with the democratic party and has served as a member
of the city council of Waitsburg. He stands for all that is progressive
in public affairs and cooperates in many well defined plans and
measures for the general good. He belongs to Touchet Lodge, No. 5, I.
O. O. F., of Waitsburg, also to Coppei Encampment, No. 73, and to the
Woodmen of the World. He is likewise connected with the Patriotic Order
of the Sons of America. He and his wife attend the Christian church and
they are generous supporters of many movements that seek to advance the
material, intellectual and moral progress of the community. Mr. Keiser
is a typical citizen of the west. His entire life has been actuated
by a spirit of enterprise that recognizes and utilizes opportunities.
His words and actions spell progress. He has continually taken a
forward step and his efforts have contributed in large measure to the
upbuilding and development of the section with which he is connected.


JENS ANDERSON.

Jens Anderson, a well known representative of industrial activity in
Walla Walla, where he is now successfully conducting a wagon making
shop, was born in Denmark, January 5, 1856, and is a son of Anders
and Anna C. (Christenson) Jenson, both of whom were natives of that
land, where they spent their entire lives. In their family were four
children, of whom three are now living. These are Jens Anderson, of
this review; Christ Anderson, a resident of Idaho; and Anne Sophie, who
is still living in Denmark.

Jens Anderson was reared and educated in his native country and there
learned the carriage and wagon making trade. Favorable reports reached
him concerning the opportunities of the new world and in 1878, when
a young man of twenty-two years, he bade adieu to friends and native
country and sailed for the United States. He was located for a time
in New Jersey and then continued on his westward way to Missouri,
where he remained for eight years. On the expiration of that period
he removed to Moscow, Idaho, where he resided until 1895. Throughout
all this time he continued active in the wagon maker's trade and when
he came to Walla Walla he started in business along the same line on
his own account. He now has a splendidly equipped wagon shop and is
doing a business of gratifying proportions. He is very energetic, is a
man of persistent purpose, and his indefatigable effort has been the
foundation on which he has built his success.

In 1882 Mr. Anderson was united in marriage to Miss Phoebe J. Davis,
who was born in Missouri. They have become the parents of three
children, Charles C., Nellie and Clarence D. That Mr. Anderson has
prospered as the years have gone by is indicated in the fact that he
is now the owner of an attractive residence and a substantial shop in
Walla Walla, where he is living. He is highly respected as a man of
genuine personal worth and one who in all matters of citizenship is
loyal and progressive. In politics he is a republican.


GREEN SWINNEY.

Green Swinney is a retired farmer making his home in Pomeroy. A native
of Indiana, he was born on Christmas day of 1841, his parents being
Elijah and Hannah (Starks) Swinney. The father was a native of Virginia
and in his boyhood removed with his parents to Indiana, where he
attained his majority and was married. Later he became one of the early
pioneers of Davis county, Iowa, his removal to that state occurring
when his son Green was but an infant in arms. The father remained
in Davis county until 1864 and then disposed of his property there,
after which he crossed the plains with ox teams and wagon to Oregon,
establishing his home in Lane county. There he spent eleven years
and in 1875 made his way northward to what is now Garfield county,
Washington. Within the borders of that county he took up a homestead,
which he later turned over to his son James, who proved up on the
property. The father resided upon that farm until his death and was
widely known among the leading early settlers of his section of the
state.

Green Swinney was reared and educated in Iowa, pursuing his studies in
the public schools of that state. He was a young man of twenty-three
years when he crossed the plains, driving one of the ox teams and thus
making his way to a country which was to give him his opportunity. His
school training had been limited to a few months' attendance in one
of the old-time log schoolhouses of Iowa with its puncheon floor and
slab benches, the methods of instruction being as primitive as were
the furnishings. Upon his arrival in Oregon he began work as a farm
hand and continued to work for wages until his removal to Washington in
1875. At that date he purchased a tract of railroad land in Columbia
county, near Dayton, and four years later he disposed of that property
and removed into what is now Garfield county, where he took up a
preemption of one hundred and sixty-five acres eight miles east of
Pomeroy. He resided upon that tract for a quarter of a century and
his labors wrought a marked transformation in the appearance of the
place, for he brought his land under high cultivation and divided it
into fields of convenient size, annually gathering good crops. Year by
year he carefully tilled the soil and became recognized as one of the
representative farmers of his part of the state. In 1904 he left the
farm and removed to Pomeroy, where he has since made his home, enjoying
the fruits of former toil in a well earned rest.

[Illustration: RESIDENCE OF GREEN SWINNEY]

On the 1st of July, 1877, Mr. Swinney was united in marriage to Miss
Catherine Smith, a daughter of Joseph Smith, who left his Ohio home
as a boy of seventeen years, and after spending a short time in Iowa,
he crossed the plains in 1846. On the journey he contracted mountain
fever and when the train with which he was traveling reached Walla
Walla, he was left with Dr. Whitman, who nursed him back to health. He
spent the following winter and the next spring with Dr. Whitman, for
whom he worked at splitting rails and also planted some small tracts to
grain. In the summer of 1847, prior to Dr. Whitman's murder, he went to
Oregon, settling in Lane county, where he was afterward married. There
he lived until 1861, when he came to Washington and spent the summer in
the Orofino mines. During the hard winter of 1861-2--a winter memorable
in the history of the state--he was in Columbia county, living near
Dayton. There he acquired land and later made that place his home.
During the latter years of his life, however, he resided with Mr. and
Mrs. Swinney, reaching the ripe old age of eighty-one years.

In politics Mr. Swinney has always been an advocate of democratic
principles but has never been an office seeker. He and his wife are
members of the Christian church and are most worthy people, honored and
respected by all who know them and most of all by those who have known
them longest and best--a fact which indicates that their strongest
traits of character are those which ever command confidence and respect.


CLAUDE R. WILLIAMS

Claude R. Williams, one of the progressive agriculturists of the Walla
Walla valley, was born July 8, 1888, upon the farm which is still
his home, situated on section 26, township 8 north, range 36 east,
Walla Walla county. Throughout his entire life he has been connected
with farming interests and the careful management of his business
affairs since he started out in life independently is bringing to him
a gratifying measure of success. He is a son of Samuel C. and Ellen
E. (Buroker) Williams, who are natives of Illinois. They came to the
northwest at an early period in its development and are still living
here, their home being at No. 522 East Sumach street, in Walla Walla.

Claude R. Williams was reared and educated in Walla Walla county,
attending its common schools, while in the summer months he assisted
in the work of the home farm. He continued to aid his father until he
attained his majority, when he took charge of the old homestead, which
he now cultivates. It comprises three hundred acres of valuable wheat
land, splendidly adapted to the cultivation of that crop. His efforts
have been an element in winning for Walla Walla county its well earned
reputation as a wheat growing section. He is alert and enterprising in
all that he does and follows most progressive methods of farming. He
studies crop production from a scientific standpoint, keeps his fields
in excellent condition and therefore when his crops are sent to market
he receives a substantial reward for his labor.

On the 17th of April, 1913, Mr. Williams was united in marriage to Miss
Goldie Fullerton, who was born in Carter, Illinois, and is a daughter
of Washington Lawrance and Alice (Fyke) Fullerton. His father was a
native of Tennessee, but the birth of her mother occurred in Illinois.
In 1900 they came to Walla Walla county and settled on a farm near
Dayton but now reside at Hadley, Washington. To Mr. and Mrs. Williams
has been born a daughter, Lovetta May, whose birth occurred on the 15th
of February, 1914.

Mr. Williams is connected fraternally with the Modern Woodmen of
America, while politically he gives his allegiance to the republican
party. He has no interest in politics as an office seeker although
he keeps well informed on the questions and issues of the day and in
matters of citizenship he stands for those interests which further
progress and improvement along lines of general benefit. His own
activities are concentrated upon his farming interests and the careful
direction of his business affairs is bringing to him creditable and
deserved prosperity.


HERBERT A. GARDNER.

Indefatigable enterprise and concentration of purpose have been salient
features in winning for Herbert A. Gardner the creditable and honorable
position which he occupies in business circles of Walla Walla and the
Inland Empire. He has long been active in the conduct of the mercantile
house now conducted under the name of Gardner & Company, Incorporated.
This is one of the largest and finest commercial interests of
Washington and is largely a monument to the business enterprise and
progressive methods of him whose name introduces this review.

Mr. Gardner was born in Charlotte, Maine, June 6, 1860, so that the
width of the continent separates him from his birthplace. He brought
eastern enterprise and ingenuity to the west with its limitless
resources, and the combination has wrought splendid results. His
parents, Amos A. and Louisa M. (Jackman) Gardner, were also natives of
the Pine Tree state and descendants of Stephen Gardner, who was one
of the founders of Hingham, Massachusetts, and who later served his
country in the Revolutionary war. The father, who was a farmer and
shipbuilder, devoting his life to those two pursuits, died in Illinois,
while the mother departed this life in Maine. In their family were
eight children, of whom four are living, three being residents of
Seattle, namely Mrs. L. M. Kent, Amy B. and Mrs. P. Pitt Shaw.

Herbert A. Gardner is indebted to the public school system of his
native state for the educational opportunities which he enjoyed in
youth and which prepared him for life's practical and responsible
duties. He has always devoted his attention to mercantile pursuits
and this concentration of purpose has undoubtedly been one of the
strong elements in his growing success. He has not dissipated his
energies over a wide field but has thoroughly mastered whatever he has
undertaken, and long experience, well developed powers and unfaltering
energy have brought to him notable success. For twenty-five years
he was associated with the Schwabacher Company of Walla Walla and
at length, in connection with others, he purchased the business,
which has since been reorganized under the name of Gardner &
Company, Incorporated. They own and control one of the largest and
finest mercantile houses in the section of the country which covers
southeastern Washington and northeastern Oregon. Mr. Gardner has been
president of the company since its incorporation. His long experience
in mercantile lines has splendidly qualified him for the duties and
responsibilities which devolve upon him in this connection. He has
not only become familiar with the best methods of purchase and of
sale but also closely studies the market in every particular bearing
upon his trade and he is now bending his efforts to administrative
direction with the result that the business of the house has steadily
increased. He has always been careful to surround himself with a corps
of efficient assistants in the office and he has held to the highest
standards in the personnel of the house, in the character of goods
carried and in the business methods followed. In a word, he has made
the firm name a synonym of progressiveness and of honorable dealing.

On the 28th of September, 1886, Mr. Gardner was married to Elizabeth
Hungate, who died February 25, 1896. She was a native of California
and a daughter of Harrison H. and Mary (Duncan) Hungate, the former
deceased, while the mother is still living, making her home in Walla
Walla. To Mr. and Mrs. Gardner were born three children: Geneva
Hungate, who is the wife of W. J. Steele, of Walla Walla; Ward H.,
who married Irma Coleman and has one child, Shirley Elizabeth; and
Elizabeth, at home. On the 23d of May, 1906, Mr. Gardner was again
married, his second union being with Miss Anna M. Siler, who was born
in Simcoe, Canada.

Fraternally Mr. Gardner is identified with the Masons, the Elks and
the Odd Fellows and in his life exemplifies the basic principles
which underlie those organizations. He is also identified with the
Commercial Club. His political allegiance is given to the democratic
party and for fifteen years he has served as a member of the board of
education. While a most active and progressive business man, he has
ever recognized his duties and obligations as well his privileges of
citizenship and has cooperated in many well defined plans and measures
for the public good, standing at all times for progress and improvement
in relation to civic affairs and the welfare of the commonwealth.


L. NEACE.

L. Neace, deceased, was an early settler of Walla Walla county and was
for years one of its leading stock raisers. He was born in Germany,
September 27, 1835, and there received his education. When only twelve
years old, however, he came to America and settled in Pennsylvania.
For some time he worked in a sash and door factory in that state and
later removed to Kansas City, Missouri, whence in 1857 he went to
Oregon, crossing the plains by ox team. After remaining in Oregon for
one winter he went to California and a few months later went to Fort
Benton. In the latter part of 1859 he came to Waitsburg, Washington,
and turned his attention to stock raising, as Walla Walla county was
then chiefly devoted to that business. He owned a large tract of land
and was very successful in the management of his affairs, gaining
financial independence. He was a factor in banking circles, being for
thirty years president of the National Bank of Waitsburg, which under
his direction enjoyed the entire confidence of the community and a
steady increase in deposits.

In 1864 Mr. Neace was united in marriage to Mrs. Elizabeth (Harrington)
Sickler, widow of Daniel Sickler, who was a native of Pennsylvania and
died in Walla Walla county, Washington, in 1863. To her first marriage
one daughter was born, Minnie, now the wife of D. C. Eaton. Mr. and
Mrs. Neace became the parents of the following children: John, Lewis
and Isaac, all of whom are farming; Ellen, the wife of C. A. Hauber, of
Portland, Oregon; Frank and James K., both of whom are farming; Sarah
D., the wife of S. F. Patton, postmaster of Waitsburg, and the mother
of two children, Serita F. and J. Lewis; and Charles, who is farming.

Mr. Neace was a democrat and was quite prominent in local political
circles. He passed away January 12, 1916, and there were many who felt
a personal sorrow at his demise, for during the more than half-century
that he resided in Walla Walla county he had gained a large number of
friends. When he came here he was without capital but possessed great
energy and an unshakable determination to succeed and as the years
passed his resources steadily increased. His widow still has large land
holdings and personally supervises her business interests and is also
one of the directors of the First National Bank, of which she is a
large stockholder. She, too, is widely and favorably known throughout
the county.


JOHN R. BLIZE.

Among the energetic and alert farmers who have made Columbia county the
excellent agricultural region it is may be mentioned John R. Blize.
His birth occurred in Missouri, October 4, 1869, and he was a son of
James T. and Nancy (Beard) Blize, who passed their entire lives in that
state. To them were born ten children, of whom four are now living.

John R. Blize was reared in Missouri and during his boyhood and youth
attended the public schools there. In 1889, when about twenty years
old, he made his way to Washington and for a number of years was
employed as a laborer. In 1893 he rented land and engaged in farming
on his own account. Although this was a marked step forward he was
not satisfied to remain a renter and carefully saved his money with
the object of purchasing a farm. At length he bought a tract of land
on section 5, township 9 north, range 38 east, Columbia county, and
resided thereon until his death, November 1, 1917. His practical
methods and his close attention to all phases of farm work enabled him
to harvest large crops, and from time to time he invested his capital
in additional land so that he owned at his death four hundred and
ninety-four acres, the value of which is enhanced by the excellent
buildings thereon. He also operated rented land and altogether had
about one thousand acres in wheat. He owned his own warehouse and was
thoroughly equipped for taking care of the grain which he harvested.

On the 1st of October, 1894, Mr. Blize was married to Miss Hattie B.
Chapman, a resident of Dallas county, Iowa. To them were born seven
children, namely: James O., who is now in Battery D, Field Artillery,
Washington National Guard; Ica T., deceased; Mildred C., now in high
school; Clarence A.; Harold T.; John W.; and Roy E.

[Illustration: JOHN R. BLIZE]

Mr. Blize was an advocate of republican principles and was loyal in his
support of its candidates and measures. He served on the school board
for a considerable period and was also county commissioner, in which
connection he made an excellent record. He belonged to the Masonic
lodge, the Knights of Pythias and the Woodmen of the World, and was
well known in local fraternal circles. The signal measure of success
which he gained is double creditable in that he made his own way from
the early age of ten years. He thoroughly identified his interests with
those of this section and was always glad that he decided to make his
home here, for he believed that the opportunities for advancement are
greater in the Pacific northwest than in other sections of the country.


GEORGE H. SNELL.

George H. Snell, president of the Walla Walla Construction Company,
manufacturers of brick and tile, and also the second vice president
of the Farmers Savings Bank, has through his important business
connections contributed in substantial measure to the development,
progress and upbuilding of the city in which he makes his home.

He was born in Niles, Cook county, Illinois, December 8, 1853, and is a
son of Hamlet B. and Clarissa A. (Odell) Snell, the former a native of
Syracuse, New York, while the latter was born in Cook county, Illinois,
where they were married, the father having removed westward to Chicago
with his parents when a lad of eight years. After his marriage he
engaged in farming in Cook county, Illinois, and subsequently in Lake
county, Indiana, about fifty miles from Chicago. He devoted many
years to general agricultural pursuits with good success, winning a
competence that enabled him at length to live retired. He then removed
to Chicago, where his death occurred in 1913, when he had reached the
age of eighty-seven years. His wife passed away in 1874 and later he
was again married, his second union being with Mrs. Catherine McCarthy,
who was called to her final rest in 1910. There were four children born
of the first marriage.

George H. Snell whose name introduces this review spent his youthful
days with his parents and acquired his education in the public schools
of Chicago. He remained at home until he had reached his eighteenth
year, making himself useful along various lines but then entered upon
an apprenticeship to the lathing and plastering trade, with which he
was identified for forty years. In 1878 he came west, making his way
first to Sioux Falls, South Dakota, to which point he traveled by rail,
and thence continued the journey through to Walla Walla by wagon and
team. He was three months and ten days in making the journey across
the plains. At that time the Indians were on the warpath but his party
was fortunate in escaping trouble with the red men and they reached
the Walla Walla valley unharmed. After arriving at his destination Mr.
Snell took up the work of contracting in lathing and plastering and
also in cement work and was prominently identified with activities
of that character until recent years. He became one of the dominant
factors in the building trades of Walla Walla, large demand being made
upon his time and energies in connection with his chosen occupation.
In 1904 he organized and incorporated the Walla Walla Construction
Company, of which he became the president and which has been developed
into one of the principal industries of the character in the city. In
most of the best buildings, public and otherwise, in Walla Walla his
work is to be seen. His thorough reliability and the excellence of his
work have been the salient features in winning him his continued and
growing success.

In 1891 Mr. Snell married Miss Clara J. Parkes, of Walla Walla, and
they became the parents of a daughter, Laura, who is the wife of James
Daugherty, of Walla Walla. The death of Mrs. Snell occurred September
26, 1911, and caused deep grief to her family and much sincere regret
among her many friends.

Mr. Snell exercises his right of franchise in support of the men and
measures of the republican party and always keeps well informed on
the questions and issues of the day, but the honors and emoluments
of office have had no attraction for him. He is a very prominent
Mason, belonging to Blue Mountain Lodge, No. 13, F. & A. M.; Pendleton
Chapter, No. 23, R. A. M., of Pendleton, Oregon; Washington Commandery,
No. 1, K. T., of Walla Walla; Zabud Council, R. & S. M.; Spokane
Consistory, A. & A. S. R., and is a charter member of El Katif Temple
of the Mystic Shrine. He likewise holds membership with the Independent
Order of Odd Fellows, belonging to Enterprise Lodge, No. 2.

Mr. Snell is identified with the Walla Walla Commercial Club and is
in thorough sympathy with its purposes to further the interests of
the city and exploit its possibilities and advantages, also to extend
its trade relations and, more than all, to uphold the high civic
standards which here prevail. He had no assistance when he started out
in the business world, but he early came to a realization of the fact
that industry wins and industry became the beacon light of his life.
Persistency of purpose has been one of the foundation stones of his
success.


THEODORE PERCY INGALLS.

Theodore Percy Ingalls is an honored pioneer of Washington and a
veteran of the Indian wars. To him the story of frontier life in the
northwest is a familiar one. The story of this great and growing
section of the country has ever been an enticing one to all progressive
young men who have sought the opportunities here offered and in their
utilization have won success, while at the same time their labors have
contributed in marked measure to the upbuilding and development of this
region. Mr. Ingalls, now living retired in Waitsburg, was for a long
period actively identified with farming in Walla Walla county. He was
born September 13, 1835, and has therefore passed the eighty-second
milestone on life's journey. His parents were Israel and Mary (Lord)
Ingalls, both natives of Maine, where they were reared and married.
Subsequently they removed to Ohio, settling near Dayton, where they
resided for several years. Eventually they became residents of Bond
county, Illinois, and the father died in Alton, Illinois, two months
prior to the birth of his son, Theodore, his death being one that
occurred in the great cholera epidemic that ravished the country. His
widow subsequently crossed the plains to Oregon and in later years made
her home with her sister, Mrs. J. V. B. Butler, her death occurring in
March, 1871.

[Illustration: MR. AND MRS. THEODORE P. INGALLS]

[Illustration: MRS. ISRAEL INGALLS]

It was in 1852 that Theodore P. Ingalls accompanied his mother on the
long journey to the northwest. He was then a youth of sixteen years.
They made the trip with ox teams, there being fourteen wagons in the
party. Cholera broke out en route and twenty-one members of the party
died ere they reached their destination. Mr. Ingalls and his mother
first took up their abode in Clackamas county, near Oregon City,
Oregon, where a brother of our subject had preceded them. Here Theodore
P. Ingalls worked at various occupations, much of his time being spent
in the timber, in getting out saw logs and in splitting rails. He also
worked in the sawmills and for a time he was in the mines and thus his
experiences were broad and varied, acquainting him with every phase of
pioneer life and development in the northwest.

On the 27th of February, 1867, Mr. Ingalls was united in marriage to
Miss Catherine Smith, of Clackamas county, Oregon, who had come to the
northwest with her sister, crossing the Isthmus in 1863 and thence
proceeding up the coast. In the summer of 1871 Mr. and Mrs. Ingalls
became residents of Walla Walla county, Washington, where he took up a
preemption of one hundred and sixty acres, but money was scarce, and
being unable to make payment upon his property, he turned it into a
homestead of eighty acres. The place was located in Spring valley about
three miles north of Dixie, and there he made his home and successfully
engaged in farming for thirty-three years. During that period he added
to his holdings from time to time as opportunity offered until his
landed possessions were seven hundred and four acres. This property he
recently sold, but already in 1904, on account of failing health, he
retired from active farming operations and for a time spent his days
largely in travel. He finally took up his abode in Waitsburg, where he
has since remained and where he is now most comfortably situated. At
the age of eighty-two years he is surrounded by many friends, enjoying
the respect and warm regard of all who know him.

In 1856 Mr. Ingalls took part in the Yakima Indian war, serving under
Colonel Cornelius. His political endorsement has long been given the
democratic party, while fraternally he is connected with Waitsburg
Lodge, No. 5, I. O. O. F., is a consistent member of the Christian
church to which his wife also belonged, and their well-spent lives
gained for them the warm regard and respect of all with whom they have
been brought in contact. Mrs. Ingalls passed away quite recently, her
lamented death causing deep grief to her husband and her many friends
who greatly admired her for her high qualities of character.

The growth of the northwest has been marvelous but its resources
stimulated the efforts and ambitions of the men who cast in their lot
with the first settlers. At the time of Mr. Ingalls' arrival the red
men had dominion over this entire section of the country. Only here
and there had a little settlement been made along the rivers or the
coast, for navigation alone could bring to man the things which he
needed from other quarters. There were great broad areas that are now
highly cultivated which at that time were unclaimed. The forests, too,
stood in their primeval strength and the rivers were only used for an
occasional trip. Today the powers of the land have been utilized for
the benefit of man and with every phase of development from pioneer
times down to the present Mr. Ingalls is familiar. He has lived to
see the rude frontier cabins replaced by commodious and substantial
homes, the tiny hamlets converted into thriving villages and cities and
the work of progress carried forward along agricultural, industrial
and commercial lines until the northwest has reason to be proud of her
cities, her homes and her mines as well as her wonderful agricultural
development, in which Mr. Ingalls took an active part as one of the
leading farmers of Walla Walla county for many years.


JOHN F. ADAMS.

An upright, honorable man was John F. Adams, whose entire life measured
up to high standards and whose association with public interests
constituted an element of advancement and improvement in this section
of the state.

He was born in Franklin county, Maine, July 20, 1835, a son of Joseph
and Areta (Barrett) Adams, coming of the same ancestry as John Adams
and John Quincy Adams, two of the early presidents of the United
States. Both the parents were natives of Maine and spent their entire
lives there. They had a family of seven children, all of whom have
passed away.

John F. Adams was twenty-two years of age when in 1857 he became
identified with the northwest, settling first in Douglas county,
Oregon, where he took up the profession of teaching in the Umpqua
Valley, which he followed for five years. He then exchanged the
master's rod for the shepherd's crook, becoming extensively engaged in
sheep raising in Umatilla county, Oregon, in 1865, where he resided
for twenty-three years, and in addition to raising sheep engaged
also in raising cattle and horses, handling only high bred stock. He
became one of the foremost representatives of live stock interests in
this section of the country, his business affairs being wisely and
successfully managed. He was also one of the organizers of the Savings
Bank at Pendleton, Oregon, and served as its president until his death.
He shaped its policy and directed its activities, helping to make it
one of the strong financial concerns of that section. He was devoted to
the welfare of his town and his county and was actuated by a spirit of
progress and improvement in all that he undertook.

On November 17, 1878, Mr. Adams was united in marriage to Miss Susan
F. Fry, a native of Indiana and a daughter of Robert and Amanda
(Francis) Fry. The father was a native of Virginia, while the mother's
birth occurred in Kentucky, and in early life they removed westward
to Indiana, where they were married. The mother died in that state
but Mr. Fry afterward removed to Kansas, where his demise occurred.
In their family were three children, of whom two are now living. To
Mr. and Mrs. Adams were born five children: John R., who is a resident
of Oregon; George H., who has passed away; Walter F., living in Walla
Walla; Pauline, the wife of Walter Bemus, of Walla Walla; and Helen M.,
the wife of Frederick Morrison, of Oakland, California. She was in her
girlhood days a student in Whitman College of Walla Walla.

The death of the husband and father occurred in McMinnville, Oregon, in
March, 1899, but he was laid to rest in Mountain View cemetery in Walla
Walla. He was a self-made man and deserved much credit for what he
accomplished. At the time of his death he owned several hundred acres,
constituting one of the excellent stock ranches of the Inland Empire.
Since his demise his widow and her family have removed to Walla Walla,
where they took up their abode in 1904, and she now owns an attractive
home on Boyer avenue.

Mrs. Adams belongs to the Baptist church, of which Mr. Adams was also a
devoted member and an active church worker, doing all in his power to
further the cause and extend the influence of the church. In politics
he was an earnest republican and took a helpful interest in promoting
party successes. He held several county offices while in Umatilla
county, Oregon, and at all times was true and loyal to the trust
reposed in him. In a word, his was an honorable and upright career and
his memory remains enshrined in the hearts of all who knew him. He
possessed many sterling characteristics, was straightforward in every
business transaction, was patriotic in citizenship, held friendship
inviolable and was devoted to the happiness of his wife and children.


C. S. CREWS.

C. S. Crews, who is perhaps better known to his hundreds of friends on
the Pacific coast as "Doc" Crews, has a most wide acquaintance as a
theatrical manager. He is now manager of the Crews Amusement Company,
operating the Liberty Theater in Walla Walla, which is the only
vaudeville theater in the city.

He was born in Montrose, Henry county, Missouri, October 13, 1881, a
son of Tyson M. and Elizabeth (Reed) Crews, the former a native of
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, while the latter was born in Henry
county, Missouri. The paternal grandfather, Edward Crews, was the
owner of a large tobacco plantation and many slaves in North Carolina.
In young manhood Tyson M. Crews removed westward to Henry county,
Missouri, where he was married and resided until 1881, when he returned
to North Carolina. In 1888 he came to Walla Walla, where he engaged
in the coal and wood business, but the panic of 1892-3 forced him to
suspend operations in that line. He then went to work as a stationary
engineer in a laundry and subsequently removed to Olympia, Washington,
where he established himself in the laundry business. In 1913 he went
to Roy, Idaho, where he has since been engaged in farming.

C. S. Crews was educated in the public schools of Walla Walla, having
been brought to the west during his early boyhood days. The spirit
of western enterprise and progress has always been a dominant factor
in his career. From an early age he has been dependent upon his own
resources and whatever success he has achieved is the direct reward
of his labors. As a boy he worked in a livery stable for a wage of
twenty-five cents per day. Subsequently he was employed in a laundry
at fifty cents per day and later he secured the position of cashier
in the mercantile house of the Schwabacher Company. He was endowed by
nature with musical talent and during these years he became identified
with the Walla Walla Band as drummer and in the years following he
accumulated musical instruments to the value of about a thousand
dollars. These included xylophones, saxophones, aluminum chimes, bamboo
chimes, marimbaphones and sonorophones. In fact he acquired everything
in the musical novelty line. The mercantile company with which he was
employed refusing to allow him vacations in order to attend to his
band duties, he accordingly resigned and later took up a position with
the Mottee-Wheeler Company as credit man, continuing his musical work.
In 1903 and 1904 he toured the country on the vaudeville circuit as a
novelty musical artist with pleasing success. He then returned to Walla
Walla and again entered the employ of the Mottee-Wheeler Company. The
moving picture business became a feature of entertainment and Mr. Crews
associated himself therewith, opening up a moving picture house in a
modest way, and from this small start was developed what is now the
Strand, the Arcade and the Liberty, all of which Mr. Crews established,
but in October, 1916, he sold the Strand and the Arcade and now
operates only the Liberty, where he puts forth nothing but the highest
class pictures and also gives a vaudeville show of equal worth. In the
days of the Western Tri-State Baseball League, of which he was one of
the organizers, he was the vice president and the secretary. He is thus
well known in sporting as well as in entertainment circles.

In April, 1906, Mr. Crews was united in marriage to Miss Mary A.
Connors, of Walla Walla, and to them have been born three sons and
three daughters, known as the Golden Stairway, all being of blond
complexion with golden hair, while Mr. Crews has black hair. The
children are Naomi, Norma, Francis, Mignon, Clarence E. and John. Mrs.
Crews is gifted musically, being a graduate in music of St. Vincent's
Academy, and she possesses notable skill in piano playing.

Mr. Crews belongs to Walla Walla Lodge, No. 287, B. P. O. E. He is also
a member of the Loyal Order of Moose and of the Knights of Columbus.
He likewise belongs to the Turkey Reds, an organization comprising the
most progressive men of the Commercial Club, and his religious faith is
that of the Catholic church.


PETER R. WELLER.

Peter R. Weller, who is devoting his time and attention mainly to stock
raising under the name of the Weller Live Stock Company, resides on
an excellent tract of land on section 22, township 13 north, range 40
east, Garfield county. He was born in Livingston county, New York,
September 1, 1862, and is a son of Andrew J. and Mary (Huff) Weller.
The father was also a native of New York, while the mother was a native
of Ireland, but both passed away in the Empire state. Two of their four
children are now living, the one besides our subject being Mrs. Jennie
Folnsbe, a resident of Garfield county, Washington.

Peter R. Weller was reared in his native state and there obtained a
common school education. When twenty-one years old he crossed the
continent to Garfield county, Washington, and here turned his attention
to farming. At length, however, he decided that stock raising offered
better opportunities and since 1900 he has been engaged in the stock
business under the name of Weller Live Stock Company, which owns 10,600
acres of land which provides abundant pasture and from which large
crops of alfalfa hay are harvested. The company now has about five
thousand head of sheep and two hundred head of cattle and it ranks as
a leader in stock raising circles. Mr. Weller gives careful personal
attention to the management of the company's interests and is a careful
student of all the problems connected with the raising of stock.

[Illustration: PETER R. WELLER]

He supports the republican party at the polls and has been a member
of the school board but has not held other office. He is identified
with the Knights of Pythias and in his life has exemplified the
benefit spirit of the order. Through his membership in the Live Stock
Association he comes in touch with other men engaged in that line of
business and finds the exchange of experiences and ideas of great
value. He has found the Pacific northwest a land of opportunity and
as his salient characteristics are enterprise and the ability to
distinguish between the essential and the nonessential in a situation
he has been able to take advantage of the opportunities here offered
and is now one of the leading citizens of Garfield county.


NICHOLAS S. SULLIVAN.

Nicholas S. Sullivan, manager of and partner in the business conducted
under the name of the Whitehouse Clothing Company in Walla Walla, is
thus active in control of one of the leading enterprises of this kind
in the city. Alert and energetic, his purposes are well defined and are
carried forward to successful completion.

He was born in Marysville, California, April 3, 1872, a son of John E.
and Jane (Richardson) Sullivan. The father was born in Ireland and the
mother in East India and both have now passed away. The former was a
civil engineer, following that profession throughout his entire career.
The family numbered eight children, two sons and six daughters, but
only three of the number are now living.

Nicholas S. Sullivan was educated in the La Salle school, a parochial
school of Walla Walla, and also in the public schools. His father
removed with the family to Walla Walla county about the year 1884, when
the son was a youth of twelve years. He made his initial step in the
business world as a cash boy in the dry goods and clothing store of
Doheny & Marum. When his employers sold out he became a clerk in the
service of Al Goldman, who was proprietor of a clothing store, and with
him remained for about twelve years. He then became connected with R.
E. Guichard, owner of the Whitehouse clothing store, with whom he acted
as assistant manager during Mr. Guichard's life. Before his demise
he purchased stock in the business and upon the death of the senior
partner took over the management of the store and has since been active
in its control. The company carries a large and carefully selected
stock of men's clothing and furnishings and their business has reached
a gratifying figure. They put forth the most earnest efforts to please
their customers, recognizing ever that satisfied patrons are the best
advertisement. Their business methods are such as will bear the closest
investigation and scrutiny, and energy, enterprise and integrity have
gained Mr. Sullivan a place among the leading merchants of Walla Walla.

On the 16th of October, 1905, Mr. Sullivan was married to Miss Flora
Hobkirk, of Portland, Oregon, her parents being Peter and Maria
Hobkirk, the former a pioneer contractor of Portland. Mr. and Mrs.
Sullivan have one son, Nicholas Peter, born September 15, 1906.

The parents hold membership in the Catholic church and Mr. Sullivan is
identified with the Knights of Columbus and the Benevolent Protective
Order of Elks. He is also a member of the Commercial Club and he gives
his political allegiance to the democratic party but has never sought
or desired office, preferring to concentrate his time, energies and
attention upon his business affairs. He is not remiss in the duties
of citizenship, however, and his co-operation can be counted upon
to further every plan and measure for the general good. He has many
sterling traits of character and his pronounced qualities have won for
him personal popularity.


JOHN N. THOMPSON.

John N. Thompson became a resident of what is now Columbia county in
the early days of its settlement and went through all the unpleasant
experiences of pioneer life but also had the satisfaction of knowing
that he was a factor in bringing about the transformation that has made
this county the rival of the older localities in the east in all that
pertains to the highest type of civilization. He was quick to recognize
the unequalled opportunities offered in the unclaimed frontier land of
the Walla Walla valley, and from time to time added to his holdings,
becoming eventually the owner of three thousand acres, of which more
than nine hundred acres is excellently adapted to the raising of wheat.
He accomplished much during his long and busy life, and his demise was
recognized as a loss to his community.

Mr. Thompson was born December 20, 1836, in New York state, and was a
son of Elisha D. and Anne Thompson, the former born in New Hampshire
and the latter in Massachusetts. At length the family removed to
Wisconsin and there the parents resided until called by death. To them
were born ten children, of whom only one survives.

John N. Thompson grew to manhood in the Badger state, and his education
was that afforded by its public schools. In 1860 he decided to try
his fortune in the west and for some time engaged in gold mining in
Colorado. Later he removed to Oregon, whence he came to Old Walla Walla
county, Washington, homesteading land in what is now Columbia county.
He at once began the improvement of his place and his labors proved
so profitable financially that he was able to purchase more and more
land, holding title at his death to three thousand acres. He engaged
in both wheat and stock raising, nine hundred and twenty acres of his
holdings being wheat land, and about two thousand acres comprising a
stock farm. The management of his extensive interests required marked
executive ability as well as a thorough knowledge of the best methods
of cultivating the fields and caring for the stock, but he proved
more than equal to all the demands made upon him and was thoroughly
businesslike in the direction of his affairs.

[Illustration: MRS. JOHN N. THOMPSON]

[Illustration: JOHN N. THOMPSON]

Mr. Thompson was married in Oregon, November 8, 1871, to Miss Viola A.
Eastham, a native of Oregon and a daughter of William F. and Delilah
(Clever) Eastham. Her father was born in West Virginia and her mother
in Illinois, in which state their marriage occurred. In 1848 they made
the long journey across the plains by wagon train, that being the
only means of travel, and Mr. Eastham took up a donation claim of six
hundred and forty acres near Salem, Oregon. Their first residence in
the west was a log cabin and their life was that common to pioneers,
characterized by hard work and self-denial. They were not discouraged,
however, and in time were rewarded by prosperity. Both Mr. and Mrs.
Eastham passed away in Oregon, and six of their fourteen children are
also deceased. To Mr. and Mrs. Thompson were born four children: Myrtle
A., who died when three years old; Roy Eastham, who died at the age of
five years; Leo John, a well known stock man of Columbia county, who
is married and has two children, Roy B. and Helen A.; and Helen Viola,
a graduate of Pullman College and the wife of Irving F. Laucks, of
Seattle, by whom she has a daughter, Helen V.

Mr. Thompson was a stalwart republican and was an active party worker,
doing all in his power to secure the success of the republican
candidates. He had a wide acquaintance throughout Columbia county
and had many friends to mourn his death, which occurred in 1910. His
remains were interred in Dayton cemetery.


THOMAS B. McKEIRNAN.

Thomas B. McKeirnan was well known as an extensive farmer of Garfield
county, Washington, and his death, which occurred at a comparatively
early age, was recognized as a loss to the community as well as to his
friends. He was born in Pennsylvania, March 29, 1874, a son of Michael
and Mary (Donnelly) McKeirnan, the former born in Ireland and the
latter in Pennsylvania. The parents were married in the Keystone state
and resided there until 1884, when they made their way to Garfield
county, Washington, and located upon a farm, which remained their home
until they retired from active life and removed to Pomeroy, where they
still live. To them were born six children, of whom three survive.

Thomas B. McKeirnan was about ten years of age at the time of the
removal of the family to the west and the greater part of his education
was acquired in the public schools of Garfield county. He was reared
to farm work and on starting out upon his independent career continued
to follow agricultural pursuits. He prospered and as the years passed
added to his holdings, owning at the time of his death eleven hundred
acres, which is still in possession of his widow. He was systematic,
practical and progressive in carrying on his work and the success
that came to him was but the natural result of his industry and good
management.

Mr. McKeirnan was married in 1897 to Miss Hattie Edwards, who was born
in western Oregon, a daughter of Orlando and Ella (Ritz) Edwards, both
natives of Oregon and representatives of two of the earliest families
of that state. Both survive and their six children are also living.
Mrs. McKeirnan is a graduate of the Walla Walla high school and taught
for two terms prior to her marriage. She personally manages the estate
and possesses an unusual degree of executive ability and sound business
judgment. She owns a fine residence in Pomeroy and since her husband's
death has lived in town. To them were born seven children, namely:
Thomas L., who spent five years at Gonzaga University in Spokane and
is now at Columbia University in Portland but in March, 1918, expects
to take the examination for West Point Military Academy; Marie, a high
school student; Leland, deceased; Frances J., in high school; John J.;
William R.; and Alice E.

Mr. McKeirnan supported the candidates of the democratic party at the
polls but was not otherwise active in public affairs, preferring to
devote his attention to his farming interests. He passed away November
6, 1913, and was laid to rest in the Catholic cemetery. His salient
characteristics were such as invariably command respect and regard and
he won many friends who still cherish his memory.


KRISTIAN FALKENBERG.

There are many chapters of unusual interest in the life record of
Kristian Falkenberg although he is now quietly engaged in commercial
pursuits, being recognized as the leading jeweler of Walla Walla and
one of the city's most progressive business men.

He was born in Norway on the 16th of August, 1872, where he lived until
a young man of twenty, having graduated from high school and completed
his apprenticeship as a watchmaker with Frederick August Michelet,
the leading chronometer and watchmaker of Norway. At this time Mr.
Falkenberg decided to come to the United States, choosing Chicago as
his destination, and there he lived for nearly five years. In 1897 he
went to Alaska, leaving on the 15th of September with the second party
that left Chicago for the gold fields. They went by way of Edmonton
and the Mackenzie river, which was the all Canadian route. It required
twenty-two months to make the trip, on which they were engaged in
hunting and prospecting. There were three who started together but
only two of them reached their destination. They arrived in Dawson on
the 8th of July, 1899, after having made nine hundred miles of their
journey on foot through the wilderness, carrying from eighty-five to
one hundred and fifty pounds on their backs and in winter time pulling
as high as five hundred pounds each on a sled. During the latter part
of the journey their supply of provisions became exhausted and they
lived on decayed vegetables and lynx meat, shooting lynx from time
to time as needed. From the time Mr. Falkenberg left Chicago until
his return, a period of four years and six weeks, he kept a daily
record of his journey. He left Dawson for Rampart City on the Yukon
in company with a manufacturing jeweler from Dawson and they engaged
in the jewelry business in Rampart. In 1900 they followed the rush
to Nome and were engaged in the jewelry business at St. Michael. In
November, 1901, Mr. Falkenberg returned to Chicago for a visit, but in
the spring of 1902 he again went to St. Michael, where he reopened his
store. In the fall of that year he returned to Rampart City, where he
conducted a jewelry business until 1905, when he again made his way to
Chicago. He was not satisfied with life in that section of the country,
however, after having been for so long a period in the west with its
boundless opportunities and spirit of undaunted enterprise, so after
two weeks spent in the Illinois metropolis he again turned his face
toward the west. He arrived in Walla Walla on the 10th of October and
after deciding to remain here opened a jewelry house at the corner of
Fourth and Main streets, on what is known as the Dacres Hotel corner.
Ten months later he removed to No. 42 East Main street, his present
location. Here he has built up an extensive business and he has one
of the most attractive and modern jewelry houses of the state. He
carries a large and well selected line of goods of domestic and foreign
manufacture, and, in fact, everything to be found in the jewelry trade
can be had in this establishment. Practically his entire life has been
devoted to this line of business, with which he is thoroughly familiar,
and his progressive methods are manifest in the substantial patronage
accorded him.

[Illustration: COUNTRY HOME OF MRS. J. N. THOMPSON, COLUMBIA COUNTY
Built in 1902]

On the 31st of December, 1908, Mr. Falkenberg was united in marriage
to Miss Grace Young, of Chicago, who came to Walla Walla on the 4th
of November, 1907, to teach vocal music in the St. Paul's School for
Girls. To this marriage have been born two children, Karen and Wendell.

Mr. Falkenberg is an active thirty-second degree Mason, a Knight
Templar and Shriner and also a member of the Elks and Odd Fellows. He
is a life member and past arctic chief of Camp Rampart, No. 15, of the
Arctic Brotherhood, which numbers among its members Senators Knute
Nelson, William P. Dillingham, James E. Burnham and Mr. Ramsdell,
Sergeant-at-arms. These men have all had Alaskan experience and are
bound together in ties of memory and comradeship that have to do with
their sojourn in that country. Mr. Falkenberg is also a member of
the Commercial Club and is serving on its board of directors. He has
membership in the Washington State Jewelers' Association, which has
honored him with election to the presidency, in which capacity he has
been serving for two years. He is also on the membership committee of
the American National Jewelers' Association, a fact which is indicative
of his high standing among his business associates.

In his life history are many interesting chapters and when he can be
induced to talk of the past Mr. Falkenberg tells many a thrilling
tale of life in the far north. The west with its opportunities for
advancement made strong appeal to him and he possesses that character
that is ever ready to cope with new conditions and mold them to
his own ends. His course as a representative business man has been
characterized by all those qualities which men in every clime and
country respect. His sterling worth is widely acknowledged and he has
the confidence and goodwill of all with whom he has been associated.


FRANCIS M. STUBBLEFIELD.

Francis M. Stubblefield, deceased, was a well known farmer and
during his residence here gained many friends, who deeply regretted
his demise. He was born in Arkansas, May 7, 1833, and received his
education and grew to manhood in that state. There he continued until
1860, when he crossed the plains to Oregon, locating in that state ten
miles southeast of Walla Walla, on Cottonwood creek. He devoted his
time to farming and stock raising until his death and his industry and
good management enabled him to gain a competence.

In 1874 Mr. Stubblefield was united in marriage to Miss Adeline
Huckaby, a daughter of Berryman and Sarah E. (Milton) Huckaby, both
of whom were born in North Carolina but removed to Missouri, whence
in 1860 they made the long journey across the plains by ox team. For
three years they resided on a farm in southern Oregon and then removed
to California, where they lived until 1872. In that year they took up
their residence near Colfax, in the Palouse country, in Washington,
and there both passed away. To Mr. and Mrs. Stubblefield were born
eleven children, namely; Joseph, Lee, Mary and Hattie, all of whom are
deceased; Francis M., who is living on the old homestead in Oregon;
Sarah and John, both deceased; Clara M., at home; Ida, the wife of
Robert C. Still, of Oregon; Thomas Earl, deceased; and Laura Myrtle,
who is a graduate of the Bellingham State Normal School and is now a
teacher in the public schools at Doty, Washington.

Mr. Stubblefield endorsed the principles of the democratic party
but confined his political activity to the exercise of his right of
franchise. He passed away on August 7, 1893, and was laid to rest in
the Salem cemetery. He was a man of fine character and was highly
esteemed by all who knew him. Mrs. Stubblefield still owns one hundred
and ninety-eight acres of finely improved wheat land and also her
residence in Walla Walla.


H. P. BRUCH.

H. P. Bruch, a retired farmer living in Waitsburg, where he is well and
favorably known, was born in Pennsylvania, February 18, 1844, a son of
John and Mary A. (Hinkle) Bruch, both of whom were born in the Keystone
state. In 1855 the family removed to Hardin county, Iowa, where the
father engaged in farming until he was killed by lightning in 1856.
The mother removed to Nebraska, and died there at the advance age of
ninety-six years.

H. P. Bruch, who is one of two living children of a family of seven,
was reared in Iowa and attended the public schools in the acquirement
of his education. In 1862 he enlisted in Company K, Eighth Minnesota
Volunteer Infantry, and served at the front for three years, thus
assisting in the preservation of the Union. He was in a number of hard
fought battles but escaped injury and remained with his command until
mustered out in North Carolina. He then returned to Iowa and rented
a farm in Hardin county. He remained a resident of that county until
1881, when he came to Walla Walla county, Washington, and took up a
homestead eleven miles north of Prescott. For eighteen years his time
and attention were given to the operation of this place and his ability
as a farmer was proven by the large crops which he annually harvested.
At length he sold that place and removed to Waitsburg, where he owns
seven acres of land as well as residence properties which he rents. His
own home is commodious and up-to-date in its appointments, and he is
enjoying all the comforts of life.

On December 31, 1868, Mr. Bruch was married to Miss Lydia A. Brown,
who was born in Indiana, and was a daughter of Jacob and Sarah
(Starbuck) Brown, also Hoosiers by birth. On leaving their native state
they removed to Madison county, Iowa, whence they later went to Warren
county, Iowa, which they left to take up their abode in Guthrie Center.
There both passed away. Nine of their ten children still survive. To
Mr. and Mrs. Bruch have been born six children, namely: Cora B., the
widow of Arthur Merry; Luvene E., engaged in the laundry business in
Ritzville, Washington; Bessie M., who is the wife of George Smith, a
resident of British Columbia; Harry A.; and Sarah B. and Jacob, twins,
both at home.

Mr. Bruch is a Methodist in religious faith and is loyal in the support
of the activities of that church. His political allegiance is given
to the republican party and he has served with credit on the school
board and as road supervisor. He finds great pleasure in recalling his
services in the Civil war and is a member of Burnside Post, No. 40, G.
A. R., thus keeping in touch with other veterans of that struggle. He
is a member of the Patriotic Sons of America. Both he and his wife are
highly esteemed, their salient qualities being such as never fail to
command respect.


L. B. BURROUGHS.

L. B. Burroughs, proprietor of the Sheet Metal Works, one of the
principal industries of Walla Walla, was born in Pontiac, Michigan,
October 7, 1864, a son of William P. and Elizabeth A. (Allshouse)
Burroughs, natives respectively of Pennsylvania and of New Jersey.
A short time after their marriage in New York city they removed to
Pontiac and thence in 1878 went to Detroit, Michigan. The mother still
makes her home there at the age of eighty-five years and is in vigorous
health. The father died April 18, 1911. He was a successful clothing
merchant and was an important factor in the commercial life of Pontiac,
Michigan.

L. B. Burroughs received his education in the graded school and in the
high school of Detroit, which he attended until his seventeenth year,
when he went to work as a clerk in a hardware store in Detroit. Four
years later he removed to Ypsilanti and for three years he remained
in that city but subsequently went to Montana, where he spent six
years. His next removal was to Portland, Oregon, and he maintained his
residence there until 1900, when he came to Walla Walla. For a decade
he was employed by the Drumheller Company, but in 1910 he established
the Sheet Metal Works, which in the intervening period has developed
into an important concern. It manufactures practically all lines
of sheet metal goods pertaining to the building trades, including
cornices, skylights and hot air furnaces. Gradually new territory has
been covered until the concern now sells over practically the entire
Inland Empire, and its reputation for excellent materials and high
class workmanship is well established. The success of the business is
attributable mainly to the energy, the business experience and the high
standards of its founder, Mr. Burroughs.

On the 18th of September, 1906, occurred the marriage of Mr. Burroughs
and Miss Angeline Sheldon. Her parents, Alonzo C. F. and Dell C.
Sheldon, are residents of Walla Walla county, where the father is
engaged in farming. Mr. and Mrs. Burroughs have five children, namely,
William S., Frances E., John B., Robert L. and Jane.

Mr. Burroughs supports the republican party by his vote but has never
been an office seeker. His fraternal connection is with Walla Walla
Lodge, No. 287, B. P. O. E. He belongs to the Walla Walla Commercial
Club and is enthusiastic in his advocacy of the various measures
instituted by that body for the upbuilding of his city. During the
seventeen years that he has been a resident of Walla Walla he has
gained a place among the leading men of the town and his worth is
generally recognized.


MORRIS A. WOODS.

Morris A. Woods, who is farming on section 21, township 9 north, range
37 east, Walla Walla county, has never had occasion to regret his
choice of an occupation for he has found the work of an agriculturist
both congenial and profitable. His birth occurred in Chippewa county,
Minnesota, January 26, 1872, and he is a son of Joel and Viola M.
(Hull) Woods, the former a native of New York and the latter of
Wisconsin. In early manhood the father went to Menominee, Wisconsin,
and there their marriage occurred March 9, 1870, but they removed at
once to Chippewa county, Minnesota. In 1876 they came by horse team to
the Pacific coast, locating in Grande Ronde valley, near Summerville,
Oregon. Four years later removal was made to Spring valley in Walla
Walla county, Washington, where the winter of 1880-81 was spent.
The next spring, however, the family removed to the Touchet valley,
and in 1882 Mr. Woods took up a homestead and a timber claim a mile
northeast of Pleasant View. He proved up upon his land and then sold
it, removing with his family one and a half miles west of Waitsburg on
the Touchet river. This place remained his residence until his death,
which occurred March 1, 1910. As the years passed, however, he had
greatly added to his holdings and became the owner of 3,700 acres of
rich and valuable wheat land. His extensive farming operations were
conducted in a systematic and businesslike manner, and he received a
large income from his lands. Mrs. Woods survives and still lives on the
old homestead.

Morris A. Woods began his education in the district schools and was
later a student in the Waitsburg schools. This was supplemented by
thorough training in the work of the farm gained under the direction
of his father. On reaching mature years his father took him into
partnership and they farmed together until 1905. Mr. Woods of this
review was married in January, 1906, and removed with his bride to
his present home farm, which he had previously acquired. His place
comprises six hundred and forty acres of as fine wheat land as can be
found in the northwest, and he annually harvests large crops of grain
of the first quality. He has not only won financial independence but
he has also been a factor in the development of Walla Walla county
as a great wheat region, giving the closest study to the problem of
increasing production. He is a stockholder in the Exchange Bank of
Waitsburg.

[Illustration: MORRIS A. WOODS]

Mr. Woods was married January 10, 1906, to Miss Olive Parker, a
daughter of the late James Parker, one of the early settlers of the
county. Her father was born in Virginia and in early manhood was
married at Minonk, Illinois, to Miss Achsah L. Bruce, a native of
Indiana. He not only followed farming but also worked at the cabinet
maker's trade and engaged in contracting. It was in 1876 that he came
to Washington and bought a tract of land adjoining the city limits of
Waitsburg on the northwest. In 1884, however, he returned to Lincoln
county, Washington, where he followed farming and stock raising until
1892, when he retired from active life and removed to Waitsburg, where
his death occurred February 7, 1903. His wife survived him for five
years, passing way February 19, 1908. Both were consistent members of
the Christian church and he was a democrat in politics. To Mr. and Mrs.
Woods has been born a daughter, Mildred Ernestine.

Mr. Woods gives his political indorsement to the republican party but
has never sought office, his farming interests leaving him little time
for outside activities. He is connected with Delta Lodge, No. 70, K. P.
and the Ancient Order of United Workmen, and both he and his wife hold
membership in the Christian church. In his business dealings, as well
as in the private relations of life, he has guided his course by the
highest ethical standards, and his uncompromising integrity and been
sense of justice have made him highly respected wherever known. His
success has been based upon the sure foundation of hard work, careful
management and a progressive spirit, and the place which he occupies in
agricultural circles as an up-to-date and successful farmer is fully
merited.


MAJOR JOHN CARR.

Major John Carr is now living retired in Dayton but in former years was
an active factor in industrial circles, being connected with building
operations and with the lumber and planing mill business.

Wisconsin numbers him among her native sons, his birth having occurred
in that state January 2, 1852, his parents being Nicholas and Anna
Carr. He acquired his education in the public schools of Wisconsin
and after his textbooks were put aside learned the carpenter's
and builder's trade, which he followed for a considerable period.
Eventually he branched out into other lines and became identified with
the operation of a lumber and planing mill. He has been a resident of
Washington since 1877 and conducted business at Dayton for several
years. Untiring industry and perseverance constituted important factors
in his growing success and as the years passed on he acquired a
substantial competence which now enables him to live retired and enjoy
all of the comforts and many of the luxuries of life.

In 1872, in Oconomowoc, Wisconsin, Major Carr was united in marriage to
Miss Anna Nims, a daughter of Loyal and Sylvia Nims. They have become
parents of three children: Flora, who died in childhood; Lolo, the wife
of Fred Harman; and Beulah, the wife of Byron Matzger.

Major Carr's military record is an interesting one. He served as a
captain and lieutenant colonel in the state militia for many years and
was made a major of the First Washington Regiment at the outbreak
of the Spanish-American war, thus winning the title by which he is
known. He has rendered effective service to his city along many lines
of development and progress, has served for seven years as school
director, as a member of the city council for nine years and was mayor
for one year. Fraternally he is well known as a Mason and has attained
the Knight Templar degree of the York Rite and the thirty-second degree
of the Scottish Rite, while with the Nobles of the Mystic Shrine he
has also crossed the sands of the desert. For five years he was master
of his lodge, was also high priest of the Royal Arch chapter for a
year and has held various other offices in the Masonic fraternity.
His religious faith is that of the Episcopal church and its teachings
have guided him in all the relations of life, making him a man whom
to know is to esteem and honor. His worth is widely acknowledged in
citizenship, in business circles and in social relations. He has ever
been loyal and patriotic in his devotion to his country, manifesting
his allegiance in military aid when such was necessary and standing at
all times for those interests and projects which he has believed to be
of worth to the community, the commonwealth and the country.


JAMES W. TAYLOR

James W. Taylor, who is farming on section 29, township 9 north, range
38 east, Walla Walla county, has never had occasion to regret his
choice of an occupation for he has found farming both profitable and
congenial. He was born in Johnson county, Missouri, January 20, 1873,
but when only seven years old was brought by his parents to Walla Walla
county, where he grew to manhood and received his education. During his
boyhood and youth much of his time was given to assisting his father,
and on attaining his majority he and his two brothers began farming in
partnership. This relation was continued until 1905 and they operated
one thousand acres of land. James W. Taylor then withdrew from the firm
and to his share of the property amounting to three hundred and sixty,
he has added until he now owns five hundred and twenty-two acres.
His farm is finely improved and is equipped with the most up-to-date
machinery. The land is excellently suited to the cultivation of wheat
and he annually harvests large crops. He also engages in stock raising,
an industry that has flourished in Walla Walla county since its first
settlement. He is likewise a stockholder in the Exchange Bank at
Waitsburg, and is one of the substantial citizens of the county.

On the 7th day of October, 1896, Mr. Taylor was united in marriage to
Miss Bonnie Brockman, a native of Missouri, who in 1887, accompanied
her parents, William J. and Emma (Cox) Brockman, to Washington. The
father has passed away but the mother is residing in Dayton. Three
children have been born to Mr. and Mrs. Taylor: Herman W. and Helen U.,
both of whom are in high school; and Charles Floyd.

[Illustration: JAMES W. TAYLOR AND FAMILY]

Mr. Taylor gives his political allegiance to the democratic party and
is now serving his district as school director. He is a member of
Touchet Lodge, No. 5, I. O. O. F., at Waitsburg, in which he has filled
all of the chairs, and he also belongs to the Ancient Order of United
Workmen. He and his wife are members of the Rebekahs and belong to the
Christian church. In carefully managing his farming interests he has
not only won prosperity but has also had a part in the development of
Walla Walla county along agricultural and stock raising lines.


OTTO LABUDDE.

Otto Labudde, a representative agriculturist residing in Walla Walla,
was born in Germany on the 2d of September, 1861, his parents being
Carl and Charlotte (Ratzenburg) Labudde, both of whom passed away in
that country. There he attended the common schools in the acquirement
of an education and spent the first twenty-three years of his life.
In 1884 he determined to try his fortune in the new world and crossed
the Atlantic to the United States, locating in Milwaukee, Wisconsin,
where for three years he worked at the blacksmith's trade, which he
had learned in his native land. On the expiration of that period, in
1887, he came to Walla Walla county, Washington, here continuing work
at his trade for seven or eight months. The railroad was at that time
being built through to Eureka and Mr. Labudde therefore erected a shop
at Eureka Junction, conducting business there for four or five years.
He then embarked in merchandising at Eureka and was made postmaster
of the town, ably serving in that capacity for eight years. While a
resident of Eureka he took up three quarter sections of land, using his
homestead, his preemption and his timber culture rights, and in 1897 he
removed to the ranch and turned his attention to the stock business.
Two years later he rented the property and took up his abode in the
city of Walla Walla, where he has since remained. He had purchased
land adjoining his homestead and at one time owned fourteen hundred
and fourteen acres in one body on Snake river, at Page Station, all of
which he recently sold to John Reser. However, he still owns a farm of
one hundred and seventy acres a mile and a half south of Walla Walla
and a tract of twenty-two acres on the Milton road, a mile and a half
south of College Place. Success has attended his undertakings, for in
the conduct of his interests he has ever displayed close application,
unremitting energy and sound judgment that have brought desired results.

In 1893 Mr. Labudde was united in marriage to Miss Caroline Luckenbill,
a native of Walla Walla and a daughter of Martin Luckenbill, who
crossed the plains from Wisconsin to California in 1859 and was engaged
in placer mining for a time. In 1863 he came to Walla Walla county
and here operated a pack train in partnership with Dick Kelling for a
number of years, while subsequently he embarked in business at Walla
Walla.

Politically Mr. Labudde is a stanch republican, believing firmly in the
principles of that party. He is past grand of Washington Lodge, No. 19,
I. O. O. F., and also belongs to the encampment and the canton, while
both he and his wife are identified with the Rebekahs, the latter being
past noble grand. Mr. Labudde likewise belongs to the Ancient Order
of Foresters, of which he is past chief ranger. Mr. Labudde is one of
the charter members of the Farmers' Union and was chosen secretary
soon after the organization was perfected and served in the office
for several years. In religious faith he is a Lutheran but attends
the services of the Presbyterian church with his wife. Mrs. Labudde
belongs to the Pioneers' Association of Walla Walla and is honored
as a native daughter of the county in which her entire life has been
spent. Mr. Labudde has never regretted his determination to seek a home
in America, for he has wisely utilized the opportunities here offered
and during the period of his residence in Walla Walla county, covering
three decades, has gained an enviable measure of prosperity.


L. W. ESTES.

L. W. Estes, residing in Walla Walla, is the owner of valuable farming
property in Walla Walla county, having twelve hundred and eighty acres
north of Prescott, which he continued to personally cultivate and
develop until 1917, when he rented his ranch to his sons. He was born
in Arkansas on the 13th of January, 1859, a son of Thomas and Renie
(Long) Estes. The father was a native of North Carolina, while the
mother was born in Tennessee. They were married in the former state
and subsequently removed to Arkansas, where they resided until 1861.
In that year they crossed the plains with ox teams to Washington. The
wagon train with which they traveled had a great deal of trouble with
the Indians and one man who had lingered behind the others in order to
fish was scalped, while another was shot through the leg but succeeded
in eluding his pursuers and later joined the train. They arrived in
Walla Walla, where they spent the hard winter of 1861 and 1862. Mr.
Estes, however, soon after reaching his destination, homesteaded one
hundred and sixty acres on Dry creek, about six miles northwest of
Walla Walla, and there built a log house which he weatherboarded and
made habitable. He lived upon that ranch until 1879, at which time he
sold four hundred and eighty acres and removed to Pleasant View on the
Eureka Flats. There he bought three hundred and twenty acres and made
his home at that place until his death, which occurred in August, 1887,
when he was eighty-six years of age. His wife passed away two years
later at the age of sixty-seven years.

L. W. Estes was but an infant when brought by his parents to the
northwest, so that practically his entire life has been passed here
and he is entirely familiar with the story of its development and
progress from pioneer times down to the present. He was educated in the
district schools and worked with his father until his twenty-fourth
year, at which time he began farming on his own account, his previous
training and experience well qualifying him for heavy responsibilities
and duties of this character. In 1882 he took up a homestead on the
Eureka Flats and the following year began cultivating his land.
Subsequently he bought adjoining land and increased his farm until
he had nine hundred acres. This he traded in 1893 for Walla Walla
business property and removed to the city but continued to operate
his farm. He still owned a small tract of land and in 1903 he bought
four hundred and forty acres in Umatilla county, near Athena, Oregon.
This he subsequently traded for six hundred and forty acres in the
foothills, about nine miles south of Walla Walla, known as the Bay
Shore ranch. After owning that property for two years he exchanged it
for a ranch of twelve hundred and eighty acres north of Prescott, in
Walla Walla county. This property he still owns and was continuously
and successfully engaged in its cultivation and improvement until
1917, when he rented his farm to his sons. He is now engaged in the
real estate business, handling city property and Montana farm lands as
well as farm lands in Washington. In 1903 Mr. Estes built his present
residence in the Green Park addition to Walla Walla at the corner of
Valencia and Elvarado streets. Upon the place was a fine spring called
the Chinese Garden spring, and it was the only water to be had at that
time. His was the second house in the addition and Mr. Estes planted
the hedge around it and made many modern improvements to the place.

[Illustration: L. W. ESTES]

[Illustration: MRS. L. W. ESTES]

In May, 1883, Mr. Estes was united in marriage to Miss Viola Woods, who
is a daughter of Thomas Woods, of Missouri, and came to Walla Walla
county, Washington, the year prior to her marriage. To Mr. and Mrs.
Estes have been born six children, as follows: Clyde B., who follows
farming on the Touchet river in Walla Walla county; Ray Dooley, who
is deceased; Roxy B., who is operating the home farm with his brother
Emmett; Sylva P., the wife of J. P. Hoben, who is secretary and
treasurer with Max Houser of the Pacific Grain Company, of Portland,
Oregon; Winchester C., who is engaged in farming on Dry creek, Walla
Walla county; and Emmett E., on the home farm.

Mr. Estes gives his political allegiance to the democratic party,
while fraternally he is identified with the Independent Order of Odd
Fellows, belonging to Enterprise Lodge, No. 2. He holds the twenty-five
year membership medal and is very popular among his brethren of that
organization, having been a most loyal adherent to its teachings and
principles. He is today a prosperous resident of Walla Walla and
one whose success is attributable entirely to his own efforts. He
had no assistance on starting out in life but empty-handed made his
initial step. He builded his prosperity, however, upon the substantial
qualities of energy, determination and indefatigable industry and
point by point he has advanced, utilizing every movement to good
advantage and recognizing every opportunity that has come his way. He
has therefore done an important work in developing the agricultural
resources of this section of the state.


ALEXANDER JOHNSON.

Alexander Johnson was an early settler of Walla Walla county and was
one of the men who made this region famous for its extensive sheep
raising interests. He was born in County Antrim, Ireland, December
3, 1848, a son of Samuel and Jane Johnson, both also natives of the
Emerald isle. In 1853 they came to America and located in New York
state, where they lived until death. To them were born four children,
of whom three survive.

Alexander Johnson was reared and educated in New Hartford, New York,
as he was only a child at the time of the emigration of the family to
the United States. He remained in the east for a number of years after
attaining his majority but in 1883 made his way to the Pacific coast,
settling on a ranch in Walla Walla county. At that time there was a
great deal of open range and he turned his attention to sheep raising,
then the leading industry in this section. He was very successful in
that business and continued therein until the country became so thickly
settled that it became impossible to find sufficient pasture for his
large flocks. He then turned his attention to farming and in that
connection also gained prosperity.

Mr. Johnson was twice married. In 1878 he wedded Miss Kate Healey, of
New Hartford, New York, and to them was born a son, W. K. Johnson, who
is now living in Walla Walla county. In 1891 Mr. Johnson married Miss
Margaret A. Lewis, of Walla Walla, and by that union there is also a
son, Terry Alexander Johnson.

Mr. Johnson supported the republican party at the polls but was never
an active worker in politics. He belonged to the Independent Order of
Odd Fellows and was laid to rest in the cemetery maintained by that
organization. After a lingering illness of four and a half years he
passed away in Walla Walla on the 13th of August, 1914. In religious
faith he was a Presbyterian and its teachings guided his life. Mrs.
Johnson owns a fine home on East Alder street, Walla Walla, and has
many friends in the city.


GEORGE D. MINNICK.

Among the large landowners of Walla Walla county is George D. Minnick,
who, in partnership with his brother, holds title to more than
thirty-five hundred acres of fertile wheat land. He was born in Davis
county, Iowa, September 27, 1861, a son of Adam and Nancy J. (Davis)
Minnick, the former born in Pennsylvania and the latter in Iowa. The
mother passed away in the Hawkeye state and in 1871 the father came
with his family to Washington, settling on a farm near Pomeroy. At the
end of four years he was able to purchase a tract of land in Spring
valley and removed to that place. Later he went to California, where
his death occurred. He was married a second time and his widow is now a
resident of Walla Walla. To his first union were born three children,
all of whom survive, and to his second, four children, likewise all
still living.

George D. Minnick was about ten years old at the time of the emigration
of the family to the northwest and completed his education in the
schools of Walla Walla county. Equally as valuable as the knowledge
which he acquired from books was the thorough training in practical
farm work which he gained under his father's supervision and on
reaching mature years he decided to devote his life to the occupation
to which he had been reared. He constantly followed the plan of
investing his capital in wheat land and now, in partnership with his
brother, J. H. Minnick, owns thirty-five hundred and sixteen acres, the
value of which is enhanced by the excellent improvements thereon. For
many years he was actively engaged in the operation of his holdings but
is now living practically retired at Walla Walla. He also owns much
valuable mining stock and is one of the men of wealth of Walla Walla
county.

Mr. Minnick casts his ballot in support of the candidates and measures
of the democratic party but has never had the time nor the inclination
to seek office. He holds membership in the Christian church and in
his business dealings as well as in the other relations of life
has invariably conformed his conduct to high moral standards. Among
his salient characteristics are enterprise, self-reliance and sound
judgment, qualities which go far toward ensuring success in any field
of endeavor.


CHARLES WINFIELD PEARSON.

Charles Winfield Pearson, residing on the Solano Ranch, section 16,
township 12 north, range 36 east, Walla Walla county, is an important
factor in the agricultural development of this section, and is
successfully operating more than five thousand acres of land.

He is a native of Rio Vista, California, and was born August 3, 1870, a
son of Josephus and Anna (Watson) Pearson, the former a native either
of Virginia or Kentucky and the latter of Nova Scotia, Canada, and of
Scotch parentage. The Pearson family came to the west by the overland
route in 1856, and the Watsons made the long journey by way of the
Panama isthmus about eight years later. Both families located in Rio
Vista and there Mr. Pearson and Miss Watson were married in 1869. They
continued to reside there until 1878, when they removed to Columbia
county, Washington, locating a mile east of Starbuck, where the father
bought railroad land. He took a prominent part in the organization
of the first school district in that locality and was also the first
postmaster of Starbuck. His time and energy were, in part, devoted
to farming, and he became the owner of about one thousand acres. For
twenty years he also engaged in the meat business and did considerable
contracting in that line for the railroad. He passed away March 10,
1908, and is survived by his widow, who resides with a daughter in
Spokane.

Charles Winfield Pearson received a good common school education and
also pursued a commercial course at the Empire Business College in
Walla Walla. Subsequently he conducted a bicycle store for about two
years in San Francisco, after which he returned home and joined with
his father in the operation of the latter's land. In 1896, however,
he began farming on his own account, leasing school land which he
cultivated, and as he was a practical and up-to-date farmer his capital
steadily increased. He invested his money in land and now holds title
to two thousand five hundred acres, which he operates together with two
thousand six hundred acres of leased land. He conducts his agricultural
affairs in the same careful and progressive manner as a great business
man would control large commercial enterprises, and his annual income
is a highly gratifying one.

In December, 1906, Mr. Pearson was united in marriage to Miss Jean
Hukill, a teacher in the public schools of Starbuck, and they have
become the parents of two children, Josephus and Francis W.

The republican party has a loyal supporter in Mr. Pearson, but he has
confined his political activities to the exercise of his right of
franchise. Fraternally he belongs to Walla Walla Lodge, No. 287, B. P.
O. E., and is popular in that organization. His wife is a member of
the Protestant Episcopal church and is interested in all movements for
the promotion of the moral welfare of her community. Both are widely
known and highly esteemed. Eastern Washington has rapidly come to the
front as one of the great farming districts of the country, and this
development has been made possible by such men as Mr. Pearson--men who
are energetic, alert and keen in judgment and, throughout the same
time, willing to co-operate for the advancement of the public interest.


JOHN W. SUMMERS, M. D.

A most active and strenuous life has brought Dr. John W. Summers to the
position which he occupies as one of the most distinguished physicians
and surgeons of the northwest. His office is located in Walla Walla
but his practice extends throughout the Inland Empire and even beyond.
This alone would entitle him to mention as one of the representative
citizens of the state, but there are many other reasons whereby
he deserves to be classed as one of the honored and distinguished
residents of Washington. He has been identified with various public
projects which have been of great benefit to the commonwealth and as a
legislator has done most important service in furthering constructive
measures which are proving of benefit not only at the present time but
which look beyond the exigencies of the moment to the possibilities and
opportunities of the future. Broad-minded, clean-cut, a man of high
ideals, never afraid to express his honest convictions and working at
all times for the right as he sees it, Dr. Summers has indeed made for
himself an enviable place among those men of Washington whom the state
delights to honor.

He was born in Valeene, Orange county, Indiana, April 29, 1870, a
son of James M. and Sarah (Tower) Summers. The father was for more
than twenty years a county official and one of the most prominent and
influential residents of Orange county, Indiana. He was descended
from one of the early colonial families of Virginia, established in
Fairfax county prior to the Revolutionary war. This family furnished
men and officers for General Lafayette's army. James M. Summers was
united in marriage to Sarah Tower, whose ancestors settled in Hingham,
Massachusetts, in 1637. This family furnished one member to the Boston
Tea Party and several soldiers to the battles of Lexington and of
Concord. Both families number scores of representatives who fought
in the Indian, the Revolutionary, the Mexican, the Civil and the
Spanish-American wars. In fact in every instance where the country has
needed military aid they have been quick to respond and the record is
one of patriotic loyalty and devotion.

Dr. John W. Summers spent his early years as a farm hand, as a
teamster, as a clerk in a village store and as school-teacher. He
also followed several other lines of manual labor and was ever ready
to accept honorable work, believing that all work is honorable if
honorably done. He earned his first money at dropping corn in the
furrows of an Indiana farm, receiving fifteen cents per day for his
services. After graduating from the public schools his own labors
provided the means that enabled him to continue his studies in the
Southern Indiana Normal College and the Kentucky School of Medicine,
from which he was graduated with high honors in the class of 1892.
He is entirely a self-educated and self-made man. He has studied in
London, England, and in New York, pursuing his work in those cities
in 1895 and 1896. He again went abroad for further study in 1913,
continuing his researches in Vienna, Austria, and in 1914 studied in
Berlin, Germany. For twenty-five years he has led a most active and
successful business and professional life in Illinois and Washington,
making a specialty of the treatment of diseases of the eye, ear, nose
and throat. He has won for himself a most creditable position and is
regarded as an authority in the line of his specialty. He has had
the benefit of instruction from some of the most eminent physicians,
surgeons and specialists of the old world and his ability is attested
by his professional colleagues and contemporaries as well as by the
general public.

[Illustration: DR. JOHN W. SUMMERS]

Dr. Summers before removing to the west became interested in southern
timber and cotton lands, which he still retains. He also has
agricultural and horticultural lands in the Walla Walla valley. It is
said that his preferred recreation is to leave his office cares and
spend as many as fourteen hours per day on the farm or in the orchard,
for he is keenly interested in the development and improvement of
agricultural and horticultural interests. He was one of the organizers
and became a director and vice president of the People's State Bank in
1911, which official positions he still occupies.

On the 29th of September, 1897, in Sullivan, Illinois, Dr. Summers
was united in marriage to Miss Jennie Bosworth Burks, a daughter of
Christopher C. and Sarah E. Burks. Mrs. Summers was educated in the
Central Normal College at Danville, Indiana, and in the Northwestern
University at Evanston, Illinois, and is a lady of liberal culture
and innate refinement. Dr. and Mrs. Summers are the parents of four
children: Allingham Burks, Paul Dilwyn, Sarah Hope and Harriet Jean.

Dr. Summers has for years been an officer of the Christian church, of
which he became a member in early boyhood. He belongs to the Knights
of Pythias fraternity and to the Dramatic Order of the Knights of
Khorassan, being Royal Vizier in the latter organization at this
time. He is also connected with the Modern Woodmen of America and is
an exemplary representative of the Masonic fraternity. He is a lover
of history and has ever been keenly interested in politics from his
boyhood days. He was reared in the faith of Jefferson and of Jackson
but in 1896, differing from his party on the question of the free
coinage of silver, he joined the republicans and has since remained
one of the supporters of that party. He was elected a member of the
state legislature and in this connection one of the local papers
wrote: "Representative Summers made such a good record during the
last session of the legislature that friends throughout the district
quickly saw in him congressional timber and repeated requests have
come to him from legislators and influential republicans throughout
the district to become a candidate for congressman next year. In the
last session of the legislature he succeeded in getting through the
vocational training bill which secures aid from the national government
providing a practical education for every boy and girl in the state
over fourteen years of age. He is saving the state approximately
fifty thousand dollars yearly by the invention of an improved number
plate for autos which he deeded to the state." He brought forth this
invention, gave it to the state and thus contributed to the yearly
income of the commonwealth by a great saving. His bill requiring
automobiles shipped into the state to be fully equipped with dimmer
or anti-glare devices saves annually more than one hundred thousand
dollars to the auto purchasers of Washington. He opposed the million
dollar appropriation for a new capitol building, believing that this
was but the entering wedge for the appropriation of many additional
millions during the next few years. He was, however, connected with
much constructive legislation of great worth, doing valuable service on
the appropriation, revenue and taxation, banks and banking, education
and military affairs committees. For many years he has been recognized
as one of the strongest workers in behalf of temperance in southeastern
Washington and contributed in large measure toward the enactment
of the "bone-dry" law of 1917. The attitude which he displayed in
the legislature when the question of the osteopath, labor union and
Christian Science interests were before the house shows him to be a
man of fairness and tolerance who justly considers the rights of all
men, notwithstanding they oppose his own ideas. In a word he is a
broad-minded man who recognizes the right of every individual to his
honest opinion. There is nothing narrowly partisan or bigoted in his
attitude. During the present crisis in the world's history Dr. Summers
has manifested the same spirit which has actuated his ancestors through
the different wars in which this country has been engaged. Three times
since the declaration of war with Germany he has tendered his services
to state and nation, only to be rejected because of a slight physical
disability. Deprived of the privilege of serving his country at the
front, he has availed himself of every opportunity to render aid and
service at home in behalf of the Red Cross, liberty bonds and twice
served as district chairman of the Y. M. C. A. war fund campaign.
He is a member of the National Society of the Sons of the American
Revolution. He has always been deeply interested in civic affairs and
in the educational welfare of his community and at all times stands for
progress and improvement for the individual and for the state at large.

One of the old, valued and honored members of the house of
representatives gives this estimate of Dr. Summers: "I found him an
indefatigable worker and always supporting measures that he believed to
be right and in the interest of the state at large. He is broad-minded
and capable and secured the passage through the legislature of as many
important measures as any other member of the house and every measure
was good and necessary. He is clear-headed, a great mixer, frank and
open, conscientious and absolutely dependable, and is entirely free
from cant and sophistry."


ANDREW P. PEARSON.

Andrew P. Pearson is now living retired in Walla Walla after many years
devoted to the grocery business. He was born in Sweden, September
15, 1848, a son of Pear Bengtson, who passed his entire life in that
country. Our subject grew to manhood under the parental roof and
obtained the education afforded by the common schools. In May, 1869,
when almost twenty-one years of age, he crossed the ocean, landing in
Quebec, Canada, whence he came direct to the States. He located in
Minneapolis, Minnesota, where he found work as a carpenter. He had
received training in that line under his brother, who was a carpenter
and cabinetmaker. In 1874 he went to San Francisco but a month later
removed to Los Angeles, where he entered the employ of the Southern
Pacific Railroad. He worked on the timbering of the San Fernando tunnel
and proved so capable that he was promoted to foreman. For about six
months he filled that position but in 1876 he decided to take a trip
east and see the Centennial Exposition at Philadelphia. From there he
went to Sweden on a visit, remaining there for about a year, after
which he once more went to San Francisco. He again became connected
with the Southern Pacific Railroad, with which he remained until 1880.

[Illustration: ANDREW P. PEARSON]

Mr. Pearson then came to Walla Walla county, Washington. In connection
with his brother, P. P. Pearson, he became the owner of a grocery store
and for about twenty years was an active factor in business circles
of Walla Walla. He was keen in his analysis of business conditions,
up-to-date and enterprising in the conduct of his store and made it
a point to carry only reliable goods. This well advised business
policy resulted in the building up of a large trade and as his capital
increased he invested in Walla Walla county land, thus giving evidence
of his faith in this section, and time has proved the wisdom of his
course. He now owns about five hundred and fifty acres, situated in
the richest part of the Walla Walla valley, and derives there from a
gratifying income. For a number of years he has enjoyed a well deserved
leisure, having retired from the grocery business.

In 1912 Mr. Pearson was married to Miss Hilda Johnson, a native of
Sweden. He gives his political allegiance to the republican party but
has never sought office as a reward for his loyalty. He belongs to
Columbia Lodge, No. 8, K. P., of Walla Walla, of which he was a charter
member, and to the Ancient Order of United Workmen. He is respected for
his business ability, honored for his integrity and held in the warmest
regard by reason of his attractive personal qualities.


JOSEPH W. HARVEY.

Although a resident of the city of Walla Walla, Joseph W. Harvey gives
personal supervision to the operation of the fourteen hundred and forty
acres of land which he owns. He was born in Linn county, Iowa, January
27, 1865, and is a son of George and Sarah (Wolf) Harvey, natives
respectively of Pennsylvania and Iowa. In 1883 they came with their
family to Walla Walla county, Washington, and settled on a farm in the
Big Bend country, where both passed away.

Joseph W. Harvey, who is one of ten living children in a family of
twelve, received his education in Iowa. He was accustomed from boyhood
to hard work and at the age of seventeen years began his independent
career. For three years he was employed as a common laborer and then
began farming in Walla Walla county, Washington, the family in the
meantime having removed here. He rented land until he had accumulated
sufficient capital to purchase a farm and after gaining a start his
advancement was rapid. His holdings now comprise fourteen hundred and
forty acres, all of which is in a high state of cultivation and is
well improved, and he specializes in the production of wheat. He is
both practical and progressive in his methods and as he manages his
important business interests in connection with his farm work in a
systematic manner, his annual income is an enviable one. For some
years Mr. Harvey conducted a horse ranch on Snake river, where he
raised draft horses for the market but disposed of that business during
the Philippine war, selling most of his stock to the government. He
has a beautiful home, in colonial style, which he has rebuilt and made
strictly modern in every respect.

Mr. Harvey was married in 1887 to Miss Mary Wiseman, a native of Walla
Walla county. Her parents, Jonathan and Nancy Wiseman, were both born
in Arkansas but many years ago crossed the plains with ox teams and
took up their residence in eastern Washington, where both died. To Mr.
and Mrs. Harvey have been born seven children, namely: Vere W., who has
attended Whitman College and the University of Washington; Dareld J.,
a high school graduate; Lynn P., a university graduate; Helen C., who
is attending the University of Washington; Elizabeth M., a high school
student; Nancy R., who died when eight years old; and Elsie J.

Mr. Harvey endorses the policies of the republican party and has served
his district capably as a member of the school board. He belongs to
Trinity Lodge, No. 101, I. O. O. F., and the idea of fraternity which
underlies that organization has found exemplification in his life. Mrs.
Harvey belongs to the Christian church, in the work of which she takes
a commendable interest. Both are well known, not only in the city of
Walla Walla but also throughout the county, and their friends are many.


GEORGE M. LLOYD.

George M. Lloyd, the proprietor of a well patronized meat market at
Waitsburg, was born in Walla Walla county, April 1, 1863, a son of Mr.
and Mrs. A. J. Lloyd, a sketch of whom appears elsewhere in this work.

George M. Lloyd was reared at home and after completing the course
offered in the public schools became a student in an academy. After
finishing his schooling he devoted some time to assisting his father
in the farm work and then was for two years engaged in the railroad
mail service. At the end of that time he again turned his attention to
farming, cultivating land independently for a year. He next engaged
in the butcher business in Waitsburg, and for twenty-eight years has
conducted a meat market. He is careful in the selection of his meats,
maintains the best sanitary conditions in the market and is satisfied
with a reasonable profit and as the years have passed it is but natural
that his trade should have shown a steady growth. He has other business
interests, owning four hundred acres of land in Franklin county,
Washington, and is a director of the First National Bank of Waitsburg.

Mr. Lloyd was married in 1889 to Miss Nellie S. Towsley, and they had
two children, Helen, deceased, and G. Marvin, who is a graduate of the
Waitsburg high school and is now a student in Pullman College. The wife
and mother passed away in March, 1911, and was laid to rest in the
Waitsburg cemetery. She was a woman of many admirable traits and left
many friends to mourn her loss.

Mr. Lloyd is prominent in public affairs and is now serving as
representative from Walla Walla county on the state committee. For
fourteen years he was a member of the school board and during that
time consistently advocated the improvement of the school system,
realizing the paramount importance of good educational advantages. He
has also served as mayor of Waitsburg and his record in that connection
is one of which he has just cause to be proud. He belongs to the United
Workmen and to the Masonic order, in which he has taken all of the
degrees in the York Rite up to and including those of the chapter. He
has filled all the chairs in the Blue Lodge and is recognized as an
exemplary Mason, conforming his life to the beneficient teachings of
the craft.


CYRUS B. LANE.

Cyrus B. Lane became associated in 1913 with Douglas V. Wood in
organizing the firm of Wood & Lane, automobile dealers of Walla Walla.
Since that time the business has been profitably conducted, their sales
having reached a large figure annually.

Mr. Lane was born in Cameron county, Pennsylvania, January 1, 1867, a
son of Joseph and Mary (Bearfield) Lane, of whom mention is made in
connection with the sketch of John A. Lane on another page of this
work. Cyrus B. Lane was a youth of twelve years when he arrived in
Walla Walla county on the 26th of June, 1879. His education, begun in
the public schools of the east, was continued in the district schools
of this section and he was early trained to habits of industry and
economy, such as are cultivated in a frontier district. On reaching
his twenty-third year he began farming on his own account, having the
previous year purchased, in connection with his brother William, a
tract of land of two hundred and forty acres. They had nothing with
which to equip their farm at the time, but the following year they
rented their land to their father and Cyrus B. Lane leased eighty acres
adjoining his place, on which he put in a crop. The following year
he took over his brother's interest in the purchase which they had
previously made and began farming on his own place. There he continued
to carry on general agricultural pursuits with substantial success
until 1911 and in the meantime he extended the boundaries of his place
by additional purchases until he had five hundred and sixty acres of
the most valuable wheat land in the Walla Walla valley. In September,
1911, he took up his abode in Walla Walla in order that his children
might have the advantages of the public schools of the city, and in
the spring of 1913, as he could not content himself without business
interests, idleness and indolence being utterly foreign to his nature,
he formed a partnership with D. V. Wood and organized the firm of Wood
& Lane, who engage in the sale of automobiles, handling the Cadillac,
the Oldsmobile, the Maxwell and the White cars and also operating one
of the largest and best equipped garages in the city. Their business
has reached such magnitude that they have outgrown their present
quarters and will of necessity have to have larger space. Mr. Lane is
also a stockholder in the People's State Bank of Walla Walla.

On the 25th of October, 1891, Mr. Lane was united in marriage to Miss
Frances E. Kennedy, a daughter of Louis Kennedy, who came to Walla
Walla county from Illinois in 1879. They have become the parents of
seven children, namely: Inez, Elsie, Joseph, Harold, Delora, Glen and
Dale. All are still at home.

In politics Mr. Lane is an independent republican. He has served
repeatedly as a delegate to county conventions and has always refused
to become a candidate for office, preferring that his public service
shall be done as a private citizen. He belongs to Trinity Lodge, No.
121, I. O. O. F., to the encampment and to the Rebekahs, and his wife
and two eldest daughters are also connected with the Rebekahs. Mrs.
Lane is a member of the Methodist Episcopal church, while her daughters
hold membership in the Christian church. The social position of the
family is one of prominence and the hospitality of the best homes of
Walla Walla is freely accorded them. Mr. Lane has made for himself
a creditable position in business circles and is now controlling
interests which are constantly growing in volume, bringing to him well
deserved success.


FRANTZ S. ROMAINE.

Frantz S. Romaine, who resides two miles north of Dayton, is numbered
among the well known farmers and stock raisers of Columbia county. He
was born in Fond du Lac county, Wisconsin, September 1, 1862, a son
of Garrit and Martha Romaine, a sketch of whom appears elsewhere in
this work. He was brought to Old Walla Walla county, Washington, in
his childhood and received his education in its pioneer schools. He
remained at home until he attained his majority and then began working
as a laborer, so continuing for five years. At the end of that time
he invested his savings in land and for a long period his time and
attention were taken up with the operation of that place. However, in
1905 he sold that property and bought his present farm, which comprises
two hundred and sixty-five acres. Since the place has come into his
possession he has erected thereon excellent buildings of modern design
and otherwise improved it. He also leases land and farms in all about
one thousand acres, part of which is pasture and part wheat land. He
is systematic in his work and believes firmly that in the twentieth
century the farmer cannot afford to do other than manage his affairs in
accordance with the most approved business principles.

On December 25, 1887, Mr. Romaine was married to Miss Elizabeth Knight,
who was born in 1865 while her parents were crossing the plains on
their way to the Pacific coast country. They were William and Damie
(Ward) Knight, natives of Missouri. On removing to the west they took
up their residence in Lamar, Washington, where both passed away. To
Mr. and Mrs. Romaine have been born five children, namely: Amy E., the
wife of L. B. Harris, who is a high school graduate and is teaching
school at Starbuck; Earl E., who died at the age of eleven years; Cecil
L., who is a high school graduate and is the wife of Jesse Courtney;
William C., a resident of Dayton; and Ella Ward G., at home.

[Illustration: MR. AND MRS. FRANTZ. S. ROMAINE]

Mr. Romaine gives his political allegiance to the republican party
but the successful management of his farm work has left him no
time to devote to public affairs and he has therefore never sought
office. Fraternally he belongs to the Woodmen of the World, in which
organization he is deservedly popular. All that he has, and he is now
financially independent, has been gained through his own efforts, and
he is fully entitled to the honor accorded a self-made man.


FRANK P. KLAHR.

Frank P. Klahr, a well known resident of Walla Walla, from which point
he supervises the operation of six hundred and forty acres of excellent
wheat land, was born in Ohio, September 12, 1849, a son of Conrad and
Catherine (Geiger) Klahr, both of whom were natives of Baden, Germany.
In 1845 the father came to the United States and took up his residence
in Ohio, where he was later married, his wife having removed to this
country in her childhood. They continued to live in the Buckeye state
until called by death.

Frank P. Klahr, who is one of four living children of a family of five,
grew to manhood in Ohio and in the acquirement of his general education
attended the public schools there. In preparation for the medical
profession he entered the Eclectic Medical Institute in Cincinnati,
Ohio, and was graduated from that institution in 1875. He engaged in
active practice in Ohio until 1891, when he went to Wisconsin and for
fifteen years he followed his profession in that state but in 1906
returned to Ohio, where he lived until 1910. In that year he came to
Walla Walla, Washington, and bought land and now owns six hundred and
forty acres in Adams county, which is a well-improved and valuable
tract.

In 1875 Mr. Klahr was united in marriage to Miss Clara E. Einsel, who
was also born in Ohio. They are the parents of two children: Leora
E., who is a graduate of the State University of Wisconsin and is
now teaching in Walla Walla high school; and Florence Marie, also a
graduate of the University of Wisconsin and the wife of William C.
McNoun, of Lawrence, Kansas.

Mr. Klahr has supported the principles of the democratic party since
age conferred upon him the right of franchise and while living in
Wisconsin was appointed as a member of the State Board of Medical
Examiners. He is a Knight Templar Mason and has filled all the chairs
in the blue lodge and chapter. The high principles which govern his
life are further indicated in his membership in the Congregational
church, in which he is a deacon and to which his wife also belongs.
During the years that were devoted to the practice of his profession he
met with gratifying success in that connection and since he has turned
his attention to the management of his farm he has also demonstrated
his ability along that line. He is a man of sterling worth and is held
in high esteem by all who have come in contact with him.


E. G. HASTINGS.

E. G. Hastings, who makes his home on section 2, township 13 north,
range 40 east, Garfield county, is an extensive wheat and stock raiser,
operating with his sons eighteen hundred acres of land. He was born in
Davis county, Iowa, November 18, 1850, and is a son of Jacob P. and
Martha A. (Graham) Hastings. The father was born in Lancaster county,
Pennsylvania, and the mother in Kentucky. They were pioneers of Iowa,
removing there in 1847, and for fifteen years they continued residents
of that state. In 1862 they again sought the frontier, crossing the
plains with ox teams, Washington being their destination. After a hard
trip of five months they reached old Walla Walla county and took up
their residence on a claim near the present site of Walla Walla. Ten
years later they removed to Garfield county and eventually settled in
Milton, Oregon, where his mother died in 1899. The father continued
to reside there for nine years thereafter and then went to Starbuck,
Washington, where he passed away. Only five of their twelve children
now survive.

E. G. Hastings received his education in Iowa and in Walla Walla
county, Washington, and was reared under the parental roof. The
training in farm work which he received under his father proved of
great value to him when, at the age of twenty years, he came to
Garfield county and took up a claim. He sold that farm in 1884 and
came to his present place on the Snake river, which is now one of the
good stock ranches of Garfield county. As the years have passed he has
extended his farming operations and now, in partnership with his sons,
engages in wheat and stock raising on eighteen hundred acres of land.
The adoption of the most efficient methods and the use of the latest
machinery make it possible for him to keep his extensive interests well
in hand and he has gained a good annual income.

In 1872 Mr. Hastings was united in marriage to Miss Alice S. Morris,
a native of Iowa, and they have become the parents of six children:
Alfred G. and Alvin J., twins; William M.; Essie, the wife of J. G.
Krels; John J.; and Ella M., the wife of Walter Long.

Mr. Hastings supports the republican party by his ballot, for two terms
filled the office of county commissioner with entire satisfaction to
his constituents, and has also been supervisor and a member of the
school board. His religious belief is that of the Christian church, to
which he belongs, and in its teachings are found the guiding principles
of his life. Fraternally he is connected with the Masons, belonging to
Evening Star Lodge, No. 30, at Pomeroy. The success which he has gained
is proof of his ability, for it has been won solely through his own
efforts.


EDWIN HUGH VAN PATTEN, PH. M., M. D.

Dr. Edwin Hugh Van Patten, a distinguished member of the medical
profession practicing at Dayton, was born March 8, 1855, near
Springfield, Illinois, and traces his ancestry back to the year
1641, when Charles Frederick Van Patten was born. He came to New
Amsterdam, now New York, in 1664 and from that ancestor the line
comes down unbroken to Dr. Van Patten of this review. His parents
were John Coop and Rachel (McCoy) Van Patten. The father was born in
New Jersey, January 22, 1832, and acquired a public school education
in Springfield, Illinois, accompanying his parents on their removal
to that state during his early youth. He studied for the ministry
of the Cumberland Presbyterian church and remained one of its well
known pastors until the union of the Cumberland Presbyterian with the
Presbyterian church, when he returned to the church of his youth. For
a number of years he was general agent for the Lincoln University at
Lincoln, Illinois, and he became pastor of the Cumberland Presbyterian
church of Lincoln at the time when he accepted the agency, there
remaining for five years. On leaving Illinois he removed to eastern
Washington in 1880, settling in Dayton, where he had purchased land
and where he engaged in preaching the gospel for many years. He was
also prominent in the public life of the community and was chosen to
represent his district in the state senate, which position he was
filling at the time Governor Rodger was elected. He died in the latter
part of August, 1912, when in the eighty-first year of his age.

[Illustration: DR. EDWIN H. VAN PATTEN]

Dr. Edwin Hugh Van Patten, reared in Lincoln, there acquired his
early education as a public school student and afterward attended the
Lincoln University, which conferred upon him the degree of Bachelor of
Philosophy in 1879 and that of Master of Philosophy in the spring of
1883, the latter coming to him from his alma mater as a well earned
honor. In 1880, then a young man of twenty-five years, he accompanied
his parents on their removal westward to Oregon and took up his abode
upon a claim in Sherman county. It was his desire, however, to enter
upon a professional career. He had previously engaged in teaching
school in Illinois but regarded this merely as an initial step to other
professional labor and in 1881 he returned to his native state to
become a student in Rush Medical College in Chicago, from which he was
graduated in February, 1883, with valedictorian honors as a member of
a class of two hundred. He then returned to the northwest and located
for practice in Dayton, where he has remained for thirty-four years,
occupying one office through practically the entire period. Actuated at
all times by a most progressive spirit, he has kept abreast with the
latest thought, researches and discoveries of the science of medicine,
has one of the best equipped offices in the northwest and one of the
most complete medical libraries. In 1888 he went to New York, where he
pursued an extended post-graduate course, specializing in the study
of diseases of the eye and ear. It was Dr. Van Patten who performed
the first successful laparotomy operation and the first successful
hysterectomy operation in Columbia county. He has done much difficult
surgical work which has given evidence of his remarkable skill and high
achievements in this branch of the profession and he is regarded as the
peer of the ablest physicians and surgeons on the Pacific coast. He
is likewise a member of the Edwards-Hindle Company of Dayton and is a
landowner of Columbia county, Washington, and of Sherman county, Oregon.

On the 25th of June, 1884, in Bismarck, Illinois, Dr. Van Patten was
united in marriage to Miss Julia Satterwhite, of Louisville, Kentucky,
who had been a schoolmate of the Doctor in Lincoln. She is a daughter
of Parker Satterwhite and was graduated from the Lincoln schools in
June, 1881, and taught school for some years prior to her marriage.
She afterward became grand correspondent for the Grand Chapter of the
Eastern Star, which position she occupied for a number of years or
until her health caused her to resign.

Dr. Van Patten gives his political allegiance to the democratic party
and in 1889 was a candidate on its ticket for the office of state
senator and again in 1905. On both occasions he was defeated by a small
majority in a strongly republican district, although he ran far ahead
of the regular party vote. He served for six years as a member of the
school board of Dayton and soon after his arrival in Columbia county
was elected county coroner, which position he occupied for many years.
In Masonic circles Dr. Van Patten occupies a very prominent position.
He is a past grand master of the grand lodge of Masons, having served
during 1904 and 1905. He was grand patron of the Order of the Eastern
Star in 1892 and 1893 and is now right eminent grand commander of the
Knights Templar. He is also the grand king of the Grand Chapter of
Royal Arch Masons for the state and he is a member of the Oriental
Consistory of Spokane, in Scottish Rite Masonry. He is likewise an
elder of the Cumberland Presbyterian church, which indicates that
his obligations for the religious development of the community are
not neglected. In fact he is an active and helpful church worker and
does everything in his power to extend the influence and promote the
growth of the organization. He belongs to the Walla Walla Valley
Medical Society and he went abroad for study in surgery in Europe.
He has never ceased to be a close student of his profession and yet
his reading has been by no means confined to medical and surgical
lines but has reached out into the broad realms of thought. While in
Europe he was several times requested to address the Travelers Club
and the Camera Club, organizations of prominent people from all parts
of the world. He is a gifted speaker and is frequently called upon to
address various gatherings. Moreover, he is an unusually entertaining
conversationalist, which makes him very popular in social circles. In a
word, association with Dr. Van Patten means expansion and elevation.


GARLAND B. TAYLOR.

Garland B. Taylor, of Walla Walla, who is actively identified with
farming in southeastern Washington, was born in Johnson county,
Missouri, on the 30th of June, 1866, a son of Simon Taylor, who is
mentioned in connection with the sketch of C. M. Taylor on another page
of this work.

Garland B. Taylor was a lad of but twelve years when his parents
removed of Walla Walla county, where he completed his education as a
public school student. On attaining his majority he began farming in
co-operation with his brothers, Walter and Mack, and about 1897 he
withdrew from business connections with his brothers and began farming
independently. He is today the owner of six hundred and three acres
of rich and productive land and is one of the representative wheat
farmers of Walla Walla county. His business affairs are carefully and
systematically managed and his efforts have brought to him deserved
success.

In 1895 Mr. Taylor was united in marriage to Miss Anna M. Fuller, a
daughter of John Fuller, who came to Walla Walla county from Arkansas
in 1888 and here spent the remainder of his life. To Mr. and Mrs.
Taylor have been born three sons and a daughter, namely: Joseph G.; Ben
F.; Garland E.; and Henrietta, who is deceased.

Mr. Taylor is a democrat in his political views and has served as
deputy assessor of Columbia county for two years. He was afterward
elected to the office of county clerk and served in that position for
one term. He is well known as a valued member of Touchet Lodge, No. 5,
I. O. O. F., of Waitsburg, and he and his wife are faithful members of
the Christian church. His genuine worth is widely acknowledged by all
who have come in contact with him. His record proves that success and
an honored name may be won simultaneously, for while he has prospered
in his undertakings, he has always conducted his affairs in a way that
has brought good results and yet the integrity of his methods has ever
been above question.


HON. ARTHUR F. KEES.

Among the highly esteemed residents of Walla Walla is Arthur F. Kees,
who is devoting his attention to farming and stock raising. He is
a native of Walla Walla county and was born November 13, 1867. His
parents, Samuel M. and Elizabeth (Coyle) Kees, were born respectively
in Pennsylvania and Illinois, but became residents of Oregon in an
early day in the history of that state. There they were married and
continued to reside until the early '60s, when they came to Walla Walla
county, Washington. The father engaged in the stock business here,
which was the leading industry at that time, but subsequently turned
his attention to farming when the range disappeared with the incoming
of large numbers of settlers. He continued to cultivate land until his
death in January, 1914. The mother's demise took place September 6,
1917. To them were born seven children, of whom only two survive, our
subject and Mrs. Lillian Julian, also of Walla Walla.

Arthur F. Kees remained at home until he had attained his majority and
in the meantime he had attended the common schools, the Whitman College
and a business college at Portland, Oregon, and had gained familiarity
with farm work. He decided to follow the occupation to which he had
been reared and for a considerable period devoted his entire time and
attention to farming. In 1898, however, he was elected sheriff of Walla
Walla county and served in that capacity for four years and in 1903 was
elected to the state legislature, and during his service as a member of
that body proved ready in his discrimination between bills calculated
to promote the general welfare and those inimical to the good of the
commonwealth. He makes his home in the city of Walla Walla, but gives
careful supervision to the operation of his farm of two hundred and
sixty acres.

Mr. Kees was married in 1891 to Miss Susan M. Stetson, a native of
Oregon and a daughter of Clinton and Mary (Dixon) Stetson, the former
born in New York state and the latter in Illinois. In 1849 the father
went to California and later removed successively to Oregon and to
Walla Walla county. He was married in the northwest and took up a
homestead in Umatilla county, near the state line. He at once set about
bringing that place under cultivation and continued to operate it until
his death in 1872. His widow still resides there. They were the parents
of four children, all of whom are still living. To Mr. and Mrs. Kees
has been born a daughter, Arline, who is a graduate of Pullman College
and is the wife of Harry Struthers, by whom she has a daughter, Dorothy
Susan.

Mr. Kees is a stanch republican and has filled a number of local
offices in addition to serving as sheriff and state representative.
His official record is one of which he has just cause to be proud,
for he has consistently sought to further the general welfare and has
discharged his duties with signal ability. Fraternally he belongs to
the Elks, the Knights of Pythias and the Eagles, and his friends are
many both within and without these organizations.


WILLIAM A. STRUTHERS.

William A. Struthers, one of the foremost farmers and largest wheat
growers of Walla Walla county, makes his home in the city of Walla
Walla and from that point superintends his extensive agricultural
interests. He was born in Cannon City, Rice county, Minnesota, December
24, 1867, a son of James and Margaret (McDonald) Struthers, the former
a native of Glasgow, Scotland, and the latter of Canada. They were
married, however, in Wisconsin, the father having come to the United
States when a young man. He was a blacksmith by trade and soon after
his marriage he removed to Cannon City, Minnesota, where the active
years of his life were spent at the forge.

William A. Struthers was educated in the public schools of his native
city and when twenty years of age he left the Mississippi valley for
the Pacific slope. He made his way to Walla Walla, where he engaged in
farming. For several years following his arrival he worked for wages
in the employ of his brother George and in 1897 he began farming on
his own account. For ten years he cultivated rented land, operating
fifteen hundred acres on the Eureka Flats. About 1907 he purchased the
W. H. Babcock farm of twenty-two hundred and forty acres, on which
he resided until June, 1917, when he became owner of the Dr. C. N.
Suttner residence at the corner of Palouse and Birch streets in Walla
Walla. This is one of the finest homes in the city and is now occupied
by Mr. Struthers and his family. His farm, also, is one of the best
equipped and most conveniently and comfortably arranged of any in Walla
Walla county. The numerous buildings are large, airy and commodious.
They are strictly modern in every particular and the residence is
elegantly appointed with all the latest conveniences, as Mr. and Mrs.
Struthers made many improvements thereon, intending it at that time
for their permanent home. The grounds are beautifully laid out and
planted with well kept shrubs, while the lawns are interspersed with
rare flowerbeds. The business facilities of the place are looked after
with equally painstaking care and there are even laid sidetracks from
the railroad to the barns to facilitate loading and shipping. Mr.
Struthers still personally superintends his extensive farming interests
and has become one of the leading and representative agriculturists
of this section of the state. He has kept in close touch with the
most progressive methods of farming and wheat growing and the latest
improved machinery is seen upon his land, used in connection with the
plowing, planting and harvesting of the crops. Indeed, there is in
evidence every convenience and accessory of a model farm property of
the present day.

In 1893 Mr. Struthers was united in marriage to Miss Maggie McDonald,
her father being P. J. McDonald, then of Walla Walla county but now
a resident of Sprague, Washington. They became the parents of two
children, of whom one survives, Hazel, who is now the wife of P. J.
Tully, of Sprague, Washington. The wife and mother passed away in 1903
and in 1905 Mr. Struthers was again married, his second union being
with Miss Lucy B. Labudde, a daughter of Gustav Labudde, of Eureka,
Walla Walla county. By his second wife Mr. Struthers has four children,
Selma, Helen, Bernice and Jack.

[Illustration: WILLIAM A. STRUTHERS]

[Illustration: RESIDENCE OF WILLIAM A. STRUTHERS]

In politics Mr. Struthers is a democrat and for twenty years was a
member of the school board of District No. 2. He does everything in
his power to insure the success of his party and extend its influence
but has never been a politician for the sake of office. He belongs
to Walla Walla Lodge, No. 287, B. P. O. E., and he and his wife are
consistent members of the Congregational church. An analyzation of his
career shows that he has always placed his dependence upon industry and
perseverance rather than upon fortunate circumstances or the assistance
of friends. In other words he has not been afraid of hard work and
his close application and intelligently directed effort have been the
means of winning for him a position among the prosperous citizens of
southeastern Washington.


CHARLES C. MAIDEN.

Charles C. Maiden, a progressive and up-to-date farmer of Walla Walla
county, residing on section 9, township 6 north, range 35 east, was
born in Virginia, February 28, 1865. His parents, James F. and Mary
A. (Dutton) Maiden, were both born in Virginia and there passed their
entire lives. They were the parents of ten children, but only four
survive.

Charles C. Maiden grew to manhood in his native state and is indebted
for his education to its common schools. In 1886, after attaining his
majority, he removed to Kansas and three years later again started
west, this time with the Pacific coast country as his destination.
For two years he worked as a farm hand in Walla Walla county and
then for four years operated rented land. At the end of that time he
had saved enough money to purchase sixteen acres of rich land, well
adapted to gardening, and on that place he has since remained. He now
owns, however, one hundred and thirty-five acres devoted to truck
gardening and to the raising of alfalfa. He has erected commodious and
substantial buildings upon this place and otherwise improved it, thus
adding greatly to its value.

Mr. Maiden was married on December 31, 1890, to Miss Laura D. Reynolds,
a native of Illinois. Her parents, Evan and Urana (Stiles) Reynolds,
were born respectively in Kentucky and Ohio. They became residents
of Walla Walla county in 1881, and both lived upon their farm in
that county until called by death. Mrs. Maiden is one of five living
children in a family of twelve. By her marriage she has become the
mother of two children: Florence D., the wife of F. A. Cline, of Clyde,
Washington; and Franklin R., who is at home.

Mr. Maiden is a stalwart democrat in politics and for eleven years has
held the office of accessor and for more than twenty years was a member
of the school board. The length of his public service is proof of his
ability and trustworthiness. Fraternally he belongs to Enterprise
Lodge, No. 12, I. O. O. F., and the principles which guide his life
are further indicated in the fact that both he and his wife belong to
the Baptist church. When he came to Walla Walla county he was without
capital and without influential friends, but he was quick to recognize
the opportunities here offered and through taking advantage of all
chances for advancement that have presented themselves he is now in
comfortable circumstances.


CHARLES E. SHAFFER.

Charles E. Shaffer, who is farming in Walla Walla county, Washington,
was born in Pennsylvania, July 2, 1862, a son of Christopher and Mary
M. (Eckard) Shaffer, both natives of Germany. In 1840 they came to
America and later were here married. They were for many years residents
of Pennsylvania and there both passed away.

Charles E. Shaffer, who is one of four living children of a family of
six, was reared and educated in Pennsylvania but in 1880, when about
eighteen years old, went to California, where he remained for a short
time. He then removed to Walla Walla county, Washington, where for
a number of years he was employed by the Oregon-Washington Railroad
& Navigation Company. In 1884 he returned to California, where he
farmed for a decade, but in 1896 he returned to Walla Walla county and
bought the farm of six hundred and forty acres which he still owns.
He engaged in the cultivation of the soil until 1908, when he went to
Dayton, where he bought a half interest in the J. W. Stevens hardware
business, with which he was connected until 1914. He then removed to
Waitsburg, where he has since resided. Whether engaged in farming or
in the hardware business he has manifested a ready recognition of
opportunities for advancement and has managed his affairs in an able
manner. He is one of the directors of the Farmers Union Warehouse
Company.

In 1887 Mr. Shaffer was married to Miss Amanda Scott, who was born in
Baker county, Oregon, a daughter of John B. and Amanda M. (Cantonwine)
Scott, the former of whom was born in the east and the latter in Iowa.
They were pioneers of Baker county, Oregon, and both met death at the
hands of the Indians. They were a young couple living beside the old
Emigrant road on Lower Burnt river. It was about half a century ago
that they started with a load of peaches and vegetables for the little
mining town of Rye Valley, about eight miles distant, expecting to do
some trading and also visit friends whom they thought they would meet
at a dance that night. The next day they started home, Mr. and Mrs.
Scott occupying the wagon seat and their two-year-old boy and baby girl
asleep in the bottom of the wagon. Suddenly the Indians sprang from
ambush with yells and delivered their fire at close range. Mr. Scott
plunged forward across the dashboard dead and dropped the reins between
the horses, but his wife caught him and dragged him back into the
wagon. The team, of course, started to run, but she climbed over the
dashboard to the wagon tongue, secured the trailing lines and regained
her place in the wagon, where she crouched low, followed by many
bullets. She guided the frightened animals down the difficult road,
forded Burnt river at the foot of the hill and proceeded to her home.
She had saved her husband's body and herself and the lives of their
children, but received two mortal wounds. To those present she told
her story, made her verbal will, consigning her babies to the care of
their grandparents, Mr. and Mrs. George Cantonwine, of Walla Walla.
She left in the hands of a neighbor the gold watch and chain which she
took from her neck, with the request that they be given to her parents
for her little daughter. If ever Oregon produced a heroine the girlish
looking Mrs. Scott was she.

Mr. and Mrs. Shaffer have become the parents of five children, namely:
Ernest M., of Spokane, Washington; Mary Ada, the wife of W. E. Volmer;
Charles P., who is farming with his father; Audrey Grace, who is in
high school; and Clarence, who is an eighth grade student.

Mr. Shaffer is a stanch republican and for two terms served as county
commissioner. He has also been a member of the school board and
many projects for the public welfare have benefited by his hearty
co-operation. His fraternal connections are with Lodge No. 135, I. O.
O. F., of Dayton, and with the Ancient Order of United Workmen. His
wife belongs to the Congregational church and is much interested in
its various activities. They have made many friends in Waitsburg since
removing here and are well and favorably known throughout the county.


DOUGLAS V. WOOD.

Douglas V. Wood is the senior partner of the firm of Wood & Lane,
prominent and successful dealers in automobiles in Walla Walla. He was
born in middle Tennessee, on the 5th of October, 1859, a son of William
and Elizabeth Wood. The father served as a soldier of the Union army in
the Civil war and died while at the front.

Douglas V. Wood was educated in the public schools and in Mount Vale
Academy, now Mount Vale College, at Celina, Tennessee. He took up the
profession of teaching and in 1885 he came west to Walla Walla county,
after which he was employed as teacher in the Waitsburg schools for two
years. On the expiration of that period he turned his attention to the
real estate and insurance business and also engaged in grain buying,
with which undertaking he was identified in Waitsburg for fifteen
years. He later spent two years in traveling over the country and in
1908 he took up his abode in Walla Walla. After one year devoted to the
real estate business he turned his attention to the automobile trade
and in 1911 sold an interest to C. B. Lane, thus forming the firm of
Wood & Lane. The firm has the agency for the White, the Cadillac, the
Oldsmobile and the Maxwell cars, and thus handling moderate and high
priced cars, they do one of the largest automobile businesses in Walla
Walla. They also maintain a splendidly equipped garage and their repair
department is meeting with excellent success, while their annual sales
of motor cars have reached a large figure.

On the 25th of December, 1888, Mr. Wood was united in marriage to Miss
Laura R. Lane, a daughter of Joseph and Mary Lane, who were among the
pioneer families of the county. To Mr. and Mrs. Wood have been born
three children: Merrill D., who is a practicing physician of Spokane;
Robert V., at home; and one who has passed away.

In politics Mr. Wood is a stalwart democrat and has served as a member
of the town council of Waitsburg and was also mayor there for a number
of years. His record as a public official is one which has brought
to him honor and respect by reason of his loyalty to duty and his
faithfulness in the performance of every task that devolves upon him.
Fraternally he is connected with Touchet Lodge, No. 5, I. O. O. F.,
of Waitsburg, and with the Woodmen of the World. He and his wife are
members of the Presbyterian church and are interested in its growth and
development. Aside from his automobile interests Mr. Wood became one
of the organizers of the Peoples State Bank and has continuously been
one of its directors. His activities and his interests are thus broad
and varied and he has done much to further the material, intellectual,
social and moral progress of the community in which he resides. His aid
and influence are always on the side of improvement and advancement and
his labors have been resultant forces.


MRS. MARTHA ELLEN KIBLINGER BECKER.

Mrs. Martha Ellen Becker is living on section 6, township 7 north,
range 35 east, Walla Walla county, and is the owner of a valuable farm
property of six hundred and forty acres. She was born in Vermilion
county, Illinois, and crossed the plains in 1861 in company with her
parents, Jacob P. and Amanda A. (Rutledge) Kiblinger, both of whom
were natives of the Prairie state. At length they determined to try
their fortune in the northwest and made the long journey over the hot
stretches of sand and across the mountains to Oregon, taking up their
abode near Salem. Mrs. Becker was therefore reared and educated in
Oregon and experienced all of the hardships and privations incident
to the settlement of the frontier. After reaching young womanhood
she gave her hand in marriage to Edwin F. Coffin and in 1879 they
removed to the Walla Walla valley, where three years later they
took up as a homestead the farm upon the Little Walla Walla river
where Mrs. Becker still resides. Mr. Coffin bent his energies to the
development and improvement of that place and his labors wrought a
marked transformation in its appearance, for he broke the sod, tilled
the fields and in course of years gathered good harvests, having
brought all of the land under cultivation. Mrs. Becker now owns here
six hundred and forty acres, constituting a very valuable farm on
which are found all of the modern improvements and the accessories and
conveniences known to the model farm of the twentieth century. She has
continued to reside here since she took up her abode upon the place
with her first husband and upon this farm she has reared her family of
three children, two daughters and a son. The eldest, Myrtle, is the
wife of Arthur Beard. The second daughter, Lula May, has become the
wife of Fred Elsworth, of Deer Park, Washington, and the son, Guy H.,
remains upon the old homestead. After the death of Mr. Coffin, his
widow became the wife of Philip Becker and to them have been born three
children: Philip A. I.; Dora May, who is the wife of James Beeson;
and George A., who is at home with his mother. Mrs. Becker is a very
capable business woman, alert and energetic, and has successfully
managed and controlled her farming interests. Her long residence in
the county has made her largely familiar with events which have shaped
the history of this section of the state. She can relate many an
interesting tale of the early days and of the pioneer experiences which
came to the lot of all those who settled in this section of the state
when it was yet a frontier region. She has gained many friends during
the years of her residence here and is highly esteemed by all who know
her.

[Illustration: MRS. MARTHA E. K. BECKER]


PATRICK J. HUGHES.

Patrick J. Hughes, one of the most successful farmers of Walla Walla
county, was born in Westmeath, Ireland, in 1872, a son of Andrew and
Delia (Kenan) Hughes. The father is still living in Westmeath, but the
mother passed away, there, about 1894.

Their son, Patrick J. Hughes, was educated in the public schools of his
native country and on reaching young manhood came to the United States,
crossing the Atlantic in 1891. He landed in New York city on the 7th
or 8th of May in that year and spent one week in the metropolis. He
afterward came to the west, arriving in Walla Walla, Washington, with
a cash capital of fifteen dollars, which was his entire possession in
the way of finances. He was met at the train by Chris Ennis, who had
been a friend of his parents in Ireland and who took him to his home,
making him welcome there, for a week, after which he put him to work
on his ranch at the wage of a dollar per day. He continued to work for
wages for nine years, during which time he saved in the neighborhood of
two thousand dollars. With this capital he started upon an independent
career as a farmer. His beginning was a modest one as he rented land
from Mr. Ennis, thus cultivating fourteen hundred and eighty acres.
This farm he has since operated under lease and about 1903 he bought
his first land, becoming owner of what was known as the Hastings ranch
of three hundred and eighty-five acres. To his original purchase he had
added from time to time until he now has nine hundred and thirty acres
in that place. In 1915 he bought the Osborn ranch of twelve hundred
and forty-four acres, for which he paid eighty thousand dollars. In
1917 he bought eighteen hundred and eighty-nine acres, and it may be
said to be a curious coincidence that this is the very farm on which
he first worked at a dollar per day upon coming to this country. For
this property Mr. Hughes paid the munificent figure of two hundred and
eighty-three thousand, five hundred dollars, or a little more than
one hundred and fifty dollars per acre. Such is the notable record of
Mr. Hughes, who a little more than twenty years ago arrived in Walla
Walla county a poor boy with fifteen dollars in his pocket. He has
accomplished what few others have done in so short a space of time,
making himself one of the wheat kings of the Inland Empire. Mr. Hughes
also has three brothers in Walla Walla county and all of them are
successful as ranchers.

In politics Mr. Hughes has always maintained an independent course,
voting for men and measures rather than party. His religious faith is
that of the Catholic church. He is one of Walla Walla's most esteemed
and valued citizens. He belongs to that class of resourceful men,
who when one avenue of opportunity seems closed carves out another
path whereby he can reach the desired goal. In a word, obstacles and
difficulties have never been allowed to brook his course, but have been
overcome by persistent, earnest effort and steadily he has progressed,
reaching a most enviable and creditable position among the prosperous
residents of the Inland Empire. His record may well serve to inspire
and encourage others, for it is a story of honesty and thrift, the
story of successful accomplishment through individual effort.


HERBERT C. BRYSON.

Herbert C. Bryson has won a conspicuous and honorable position in the
ranks of the legal fraternity at Walla Walla, Washington, and is also
most prominently and successfully connected with the sheep raising
industry of the northwest. He was born in Athena, Oregon, on the
10th of February, 1879, and the spirit of western enterprise finds
expression in all that he does and says. He is a son of Charles K. and
Armilda C. (Darland) Bryson, the former a native of Kentucky, while
the latter was born in Iowa. They came with their respective parents
to the northwest and were married in Oregon. The father was one of
the pioneers of Umatilla county, where he arrived in the early '70s,
and for many years he was actively engaged in farming there. He still
survives and now makes his home with a daughter in Enterprise, Oregon.
His wife, however, passed away in December, 1894.

Herbert C. Bryson was reared on the old homestead farm in Umatilla
county, Oregon, and early became familiar with the duties and labors
that fall to the lot of the agriculturist, for his youthful days were
divided between the work of the fields, the pleasures of the playground
and the duties of the schoolroom. After attending the public schools
of eastern Oregon he continued his studies in the State Normal at
Weston, Oregon, and subsequently became a student in the University of
Oregon, from which he was graduated with the class of 1899, winning
the LL. B. degree. He had determined to make the practice of law his
life work and his preparation therefore was most thorough. Following
his graduation he opened an office in Grant's Pass, Oregon, where he
entered upon the active work of the profession. In February, 1900, he
came to Walla Walla, where he formed a law partnership with Oscar Cain,
who was afterward United States attorney and is now located in Spokane.
This partnership existed up to May, 1907, when Mr. Bryson was appointed
deputy district attorney under Otto B. Rupp, in which capacity he
served for two years. Since 1909 he has been practicing independently
and in the intervening period of eight years he has gained a place
in the front rank of the successful attorneys of Walla Walla county.
He is thoroughly familiar with the principles of jurisprudence, is
careful and painstaking in the preparation of his cases, is logical in
his deductions and clear and sound in his reasoning. Aside from his
law practice Mr. Bryson has gained a prominent position in connection
with the sheep industry in the northwest. For a number of years he was
actively engaged in the business in connection with Henry C. Adams, the
pioneer banker and stockman of eastern Oregon and the founder of the
town of Adams, Umatilla county. After the death of Mr. Adams in August,
1910, his interests were taken over by Mr. Bryson, their extensive
sheep holdings including some twelve thousand acres of land and vast
grazing privileges. His brother, Elmer D. Bryson, was placed in charge
of the business, which in 1916 was incorporated under the name of the
Bryson-Robison Corporation. This company has headquarters at Slater,
Washington, with their large land holdings in Walla Walla county and
their extensive grazing privileges in the Wenaha national forest in
Oregon. This company is conducting the most extensive business in
connection with sheep raising in northeastern Oregon or southeastern
Washington. Mr. Bryson has closely studied every phase of the business
and his intelligent direction of their interests has been a salient
feature in their substantial success.

[Illustration: HERBERT C. BRYSON]

On the 16th of October, 1899, Mr. Bryson was united in marriage to
Miss Daisy Downing, of San Jose, California, and they have become the
parents of a daughter, Juanita C., who is now a sophomore in the high
school.

In politics Mr. Bryson is a republican and fraternally he is connected
with Blue Mountain Lodge, No. 13, F. & A. M., and he and his wife are
members of Alki Chapter of the Order of the Eastern Star. He is also
a member of Walla Walla Lodge, No. 287, B. P. O. E., Columbia Lodge,
No. 8, K. P., and Trinity Lodge, No. 121, I. O. O. F.; also of the
Walla Walla Commercial Club and the Walla Walla Golf Club. His wife
and daughter are members of the Episcopal church. In his professional
connections Mr. Bryson is prominently known and is now vice president
of the Walla Walla County Bar Association. He was also the organizer of
the Wenaha Wool Growers' Association in 1905 and remained its president
for four years, when he retired from active work in connection with
the sheep industry, turning over the management of his interests to
his brother. His ability both in business and professional circles is
pronounced. He has ever held to high ideals, toward which he has made
steady advancement, utilizing every opportunity that would bring him
nearer the desired goal. His business career is indeed a creditable
one, representing the force of active and intelligently directed
effort, and his labors in connection with the sheep industry have done
much to utilize the natural resources of the state. In a profession
where advancement depends entirely upon individual merit he has also
steadily progressed and his thorough understanding of the law and
ability to accurately apply its principles have made him one of the
foremost attorneys of the bar of the Inland Empire.


JAMES F. ROSE.

James F. Rose, an honored pioneer of Garfield county, still resides
upon his farm on section 17, township 10 north, range 42 east, but
leaves its operation to others and is enjoying well earned leisure.

He was born in Adams county, Ohio, February 5, 1839, a son of Israel
and Mary (Peyton) Rose, who were also natives of the Buckeye state.
He grew to manhood in that state and obtained his education in its
schools, but in 1862 accompanied his parents to Walla Walla county,
Washington, the journey being made by ox team. The father took up land
but at length removed to Baker county, Oregon, where both he and the
mother died. Two of their six children survive, including our subject,
who was reared to agricultural pursuits. On accompanying his parents
to Walla Walla county he took up his homestead on his present farm,
which is situated on section 17, township 10 north, range 42 east,
in Garfield county, which has been erected out of Old Walla Walla
county. He owns four hundred and forty acres, nearly all of which is
well adapted to the raising of wheat, and the fertile soil has yielded
abundant crops in response to his well directed labors. For many years
he personally operated his farm but is now living retired.

Mr. Rose was first married in 1865. Later he again married, choosing
as his bride Mrs. Amanda (Fletcher) Jennings, and they have become the
parents of two children: Frank, who is farming the homestead; and Lee,
who is also an agriculturist by occupation.

Mr. Rose supports the democratic party at the polls but has never cared
to take an active part in public affairs. He is a self-made man, having
at all times relied solely upon his own resources for advancement.
His accounts of conditions in Garfield county in the early days are
very interesting and there is no one now living better informed on the
history of the first settlement here, for he was the first man to take
up land in his locality. He has always felt a keen interest in the
development of the county and has thoroughly identified his interests
with those of his community.


ANSON B. WOODS.

Since 1911 Anson B. Woods has resided in Walla Walla, enjoying a
leisure made possible by his well directed labors as a farmer in former
years. He was born in Iowa, near Dubuque, September 12, 1864, a son
of James and Margaret (Daugherty) Woods, both of whom were born in
Pennsylvania. However, they were taken to Iowa as children by their
respective parents and there grew to mature years and were married.
In 1883 they removed to Oregon and located upon a farm in Wasco, now
Sherman, county, to the operation of which the father devotes his
labors, and there both he and his wife are still making their home.

Anson B. Woods, who is one of a family of nine children, all of whom
survive, was reared at home and attended the public schools of Iowa in
the acquirement of his education. He was eighteen years of age at the
time of the removal of the family to Oregon and at once began farming
in that part of Wasco county, which has now become Sherman county. In
1896 he removed to Umatilla county and took up his residence upon a
farm of four hundred and eighty acres which he purchased and which he
still owns. For fifteen years his time and attention were completely
taken up with the operation of that place, which is in a high state of
cultivation and is well improved. As he was progressive in his methods
and at the same time managed his business affairs well his resources
steadily increased and in 1911 he retired and removed to Walla Walla,
purchasing a comfortable residence on Boyer avenue.

Mr. Woods was married in 1895 to Miss Eliza McDonald, a native of
Canada, and a daughter of D. M. and Ellen McDonald. The father died
in July, 1914, and the mother makes her home still in Walla Walla. Mr.
and Mrs. Woods have a daughter, Nellie Faith. They belong to the United
Brethren church and for a number of years Mr. Woods has served capably
as superintendent of the Sunday school. He supports the candidates
and measures of the democratic party at the polls and while living
in Oregon was, for some time, a member of the school board. He is a
self-made man, having at all times depended upon his own powers and
resources for advancement, and the success which he has gained is proof
of his ability and energy.


JESSE D. SCOGGIN.

Jesse D. Scoggin, a prosperous and well known farmer residing on
section 20, township 10 north, range 42 east, Garfield county, was
born in Wisconsin, May 24, 1860, a son of J. G. and Olive (Madry)
Scoggin, the former of whom was born in North Carolina and the latter
in Tennessee. Following their marriage, which occurred in Jo Daviess
county, Illinois, they went to Wisconsin and there remained for
nineteen years. In 1865 they removed to Nebraska and twelve years later
came to Washington, taking up as a homestead the farm now operated by
our subject. There both the parents passed away. To them were born
eleven children, of whom seven survive.

Jesse D. Scoggin obtained a public school education and received
thorough training in farm work through assisting his father. He was
seventeen years old at the time of the removal of the family to
Washington and has since resided upon the family homestead here. He
engaged in its operation in partnership with his father for a number of
years but at length purchased the place and in the intervening years
has added to the improvements thereon. He now owns four hundred and
eighty acres, part of which is devoted to the growing of wheat and part
to pasture, as he also engages in stock raising.

In 1884 Mr. Scoggin was married to Miss Jennie Janeway, a native of
Jasper county, Iowa. They have three adopted children, Marie, Nellie
and Leslie.

Mr. Scoggin is an adherent of the democratic party but has been content
to remain a private citizen, leaving office holding to others. In
giving the most careful attention to the development of his farm he has
not only promoted his own financial interests but has also had a part
in the agricultural development of Garfield county.


EDWARD C. RUCHERT.

Edward C. Ruchert, a prosperous and wide-awake young farmer operating
two thousand acres of wheat and pasture land, with residence on section
19, township 12 north, range 42 east, Garfield county, is a son of Fred
and Minnie (Garphard) Ruchert, both of whom were born in Germany. In
1877 they emigrated to America and for eight years resided in Wisconsin
but at the end of that time removed to Oregon, whence in 1889 they
went to Assotin county, Washington. The father took up a homestead
there and for some time engaged in its development but at length
removed to Idaho, where he and his wife resided for ten years. They
then came to Garfield county, Washington, and here the mother passed
away in 1915, while the father makes his home with his son, Edward C.

The last named, who is one of a family of eight children, all of whom
survive, received adequate educational advantages, attending the public
schools. His father also trained him carefully in farm work and at the
age of eighteen years he found employment as a farm hand. In 1910 he
began operating land on his own account and he now farms two thousand
acres, part of which is pasture land, while the remainder is given over
to the growing of wheat. His successful management of such extensive
farming interests is possible only because he is systematic in his
work, enterprising in his methods and because he utilizes the most
improved farm machinery.

In 1915 Mr. Ruchert was married to Miss Anna Boyd, a native of North
Dakota. In politics he is a strong republican and he is now filling
the office of deputy game warden, in which capacity he is making
a creditable record. Although he has been dependent upon his own
resources for advancement he has already gained a measure of success
that many a man twenty years his senior might well envy. He is strongly
imbued with the characteristic western spirit of enterprise and
self-reliance and is justly accounted one of the leading citizens of
Garfield county.


JAMES C. ROBERTSON.

For more than a third of a century James C. Robertson has been
identified with the farming interests of Garfield county and now
carries on general agricultural pursuits on section 25, township 11
north, range 41 east, where he owns three hundred and seventeen acres
and cultivates part of this tract or about one hundred and fifty
acres. He started out in life empty-handed, so that whatever success
he has achieved is attributable entirely to his persistent efforts and
intelligently directed industry. He was born on Prince Edward Island,
Canada, September 30, 1862, a son of John and Mary (Steel) Robertson,
who are mentioned in connection with the sketch of their son, John
Robertson, on another page of this work.

James C. Robertson spent the first ten years of his life in Canada and
in 1873 accompanied his parents to California, where the family home
was maintained until 1882. In the meantime the father died and the
mother, accompanied by her family of four sons and a daughter, then
came to Washington. James C. Robertson had been a pupil in the public
schools of Canada and of California and was a youth of fifteen years
at the time of his father's death. Being the oldest of the children,
much of the responsibility of the farm work devolved upon him and he
bravely met the task that was a heavy burden for young shoulders. In
the spring of 1882 he came to Washington, making the trip in advance
of the family. He journeyed northward with an uncle and on the 10th
of May they arrived at Pomeroy. That fall the mother and his brothers
and sister came and in connection with his brothers, Samuel N. and
John, James C. Robertson began farming in a partnership relation that
existed for twenty years. Unusual harmony existed between the family,
the tie that binds them being very close. The brothers persistently and
energetically continued the work of improving their fields and, as the
years passed on, success in substantial measure rewarded their efforts.
At length they divided their interests and James C. Robertson is today
the owner of three hundred and seventeen acres of land, part of which
he has brought under a high state of cultivation, his fields returning
to him a gratifying annual income.

[Illustration: MR. AND MRS. JAMES C. ROBERTSON]

In 1888 was celebrated the marriage of James C. Robertson and Miss
Ollie M. Swank, of Garfield county, a daughter of John Swank, who is
now in Orofino, Idaho, but was one of the earliest of the pioneer
settlers of Garfield county. Mr. and Mrs. Robertson have become the
parents of seven children, as follows: Rosella, who is the wife of C.
E. Lewis, a farmer of Garfield county, Washington; Elvira, who gave her
hand in marriage to Henry Rucket, an agriculturist of Garfield county;
Fay, who is the wife of W. A. Lewis, a farmer of Garfield county; and
Floyd, Belinda, Sybil and Byron, all at home. The wife and mother
passed away February 13, 1905, and is laid to rest in the Petowa Flats
cemetery, her demise causing deep sorrow to family and friends.

Mr. Robertson usually exercises his right of franchise in support of
the men and measures of the republican party yet is liberal in his
views and does not hesitate to vote for a candidate of the opposing
party if his judgment dictates this to be the best course. He belongs
to Harmony Lodge, No. 16, I. O. O. F., of Pomeroy; and to Pomeroy
Lodge, K. P. He ranks with the leading farmers of Tatman Gulch and he
well merits the high regard in which he is uniformly held, for his
has been an active, useful and honorable life. He has concentrated
his efforts and attention upon his business interests, has never been
known to take advantage of the necessities of another in a business
transaction, but along legitimate lines has won the success that places
him among the substantial residents of his section of the state.


ALEXANDER RAY.

Alexander Ray, one of the largest grain and stock raisers of Walla
Walla county, residing on what is known as the Sharp farm, on the
Touchet river, was born in Hamilton county, Illinois, September 21,
1867, a son of A. M. and Rachel (Upton) Ray, both natives of the
Prairie state, where they passed their entire lives. To them were born
ten children, of whom five survive.

Alexander Ray remained at home until he was seventeen years of age and
during that time acquired a common school education. In 1884 he crossed
the plains of Walla Walla county, Washington, and for seven years was
employed as a common laborer. He then bought land near Dayton and for
twenty years gave his undivided time and attention to the cultivation
of his farm there. In 1911 he disposed of that place and for five
years rented land, but in 1916 bought twelve hundred acres of the old
Rodgers ranch, which he operates, together with the farm where he now
resides, which comprises twelve hundred and forty acres. That place is
on section 16, township 10, north, range 35, and is known as the Sharp
farm. He raises wheat and stock and derives a good income from both
branches of his business.

In 1890 Mr. Ray was united in marriage to Miss Laura Bates, who was
born in Nebraska, and they have become the parents of eight children:
Alfred, who is a graduate of Whitman College and is now assisting his
father; Ethel, the wife of William Kyme; Irl, who is now a student in
Pullman College; Myrtle, the wife of Earl Jamison, of Montana; Ivory,
who married A. McLaughlin; and Goldie, Wanda and Alton.

Mr. Ray supports the democratic party at the polls and takes the
interest of a public-spirited citizen in governmental affairs, has
never been an aspirant for office however, and always casts his
influence on the side of right and justice. His wife belongs to the
Methodist Episcopal church. In addition to his extensive holdings in
Washington he owns a quarter section of land in Idaho which is also
well improved. He possesses great energy and is a hard worker, giving
the most careful personal supervision to all phases of his extensive
agricultural operations.


CHARLES SNODERLEY.

Charles Snoderley, who follows farming on section 1, township 12 north,
range 41 east, in Garfield county, was born in Page county, Iowa, on
the 3d of September, 1866, but the greater part of his life has been
passed upon the Pacific coast, for at a very early age he came to the
west with his parents, Alfred and Bertha Snoderley, who were natives of
Indiana and of Tennessee respectively. They continued their residence
in Iowa until early in the '70s, when they crossed the plains to
California, and a year later they removed to the Willamette valley in
Oregon, where they remained for three years. On the expiration of that
period they made their way to Washington and established their home in
the Falling Spring district of Garfield county, where the father took
up a homestead, upon which he continued to reside until his death,
actively engaged in farming throughout the intervening period.

Charles Snoderley was reared upon the old home place and acquired his
education in the district schools, but educational facilities at that
time were very limited and, moreover, during much of his youth he
had to work, his services being needed upon the home farm. When his
father died he was not yet twenty-one years of age but he took charge
of the home farm and became the head of the family. Later he took
up a homestead in Coyote Gulch, on which he resided for a number of
years, and about 1905 he removed to his present home farm, which he had
previously purchased. He has prospered as the years have gone by, for
he has worked diligently and persistently, knowing that industry is
the basis of all legitimate and honorable success. He now owns seven
hundred acres of land in the home farm and he also leases four hundred
and eighty acres, all of which he rents to other parties.

[Illustration: CHARLES SNODERLEY]

In his political views Mr. Snoderley is a democrat, voting for the
men and measures of the party but not seeking office. Fraternally he
is connected with the Independent Order of Foresters. He has proven
himself a financier as well as a farmer in the capable management of
his business interests and investments and today he is ranked among the
successful and substantial residents of Garfield county, where he has
made his home for many years.


MILFORD H. BROUGHTON.

The northwest with its pulsing industrial activities, its unlimited
opportunities and its many resources which constitute a call for
action, has drawn to it a large number of progressive men who have
achieved success in this field. Prominent among the number is Milford
H. Broughton, the president and manager of the Walla Walla Iron Works
of Walla Walla, Washington. He was born in Fond du Lac, Wisconsin, on
the 8th of June, 1875, his parents being Edward and Jennie (Hersey)
Broughton, the former a native of New York, while the latter was born
in the Badger state. They were married in Wisconsin, to which state the
father had migrated as a young man. He was a farmer by occupation and
he lived in the middle west until 1879, when he came to Washington,
establishing his home in Walla Walla county. Subsequently he removed
to Umatilla county, Oregon, where he operated a farm for ten or eleven
years, and then took up his abode in the city of Walla Walla in order
that he might give his children the benefit of education in the city
schools. Here he passed away in 1900 and is still survived by his
widow, who yet makes her home in Walla Walla.

Milford H. Broughton is indebted to the public school system of Walla
Walla for his early educational opportunities. He afterward became a
student in Whitman College, which he attended for four years, but his
course was interrupted by the outbreak of the Spanish-American war,
which made a strong appeal to his patriotic spirit and to this appeal
he responded, enlisting for active service in April, 1898. He went to
the Philippines as a member of Company I, First Washington Volunteer
Regiment, and was mustered out in November, 1899, after having done
active duty in the orient.

During the spring following his return Mr. Broughton began work in
the plant of the Gilbert Hunt Manufacturing Company of Walla Walla,
where he was employed for four years. He next became instrumental
in the organization of the Severance-Broughton Company, which was
incorporated for the manufacture of iron products and agricultural
machinery. In 1909 Mr. Broughton acquired the interest of his partner
in the business, which was reorganized at that time under the firm name
of the Walla Walla Iron Works, Mr. Broughton becoming the president
and manager of the business, in which dual capacity he has since
served. Under his control the business has become one of the most
important productive industries of the city, the trade extending over
a vast territory, the output being shipped as far south as San Jose,
California, and as far east as Battle Creek, Michigan. The volume of
their business, however is done on the Pacific coast, there being a
liberal home market for all their product. The plant is thoroughly
equipped with the latest improved machinery and is operated according
to the most modern processes. The business is carefully systematized
with the result that there is no loss of time, labor or material.

On the 10th of December, 1900, Mr. Broughton was married to Miss
Mandana Bryant, of Walla Walla, a daughter of John P. Bryant, one of
the pioneers of this city, now deceased. Mr. and Mrs. Broughton have
become the parents of two children, Viretta and Loree.

In his political views Mr. Broughton is an earnest republican but
has never been an aspirant for office. He has membership with the
Spanish-American War Veterans and with the Loyal Order of Moose. He
is also connected with the Commercial Club of Walla Walla. He and his
wife are of the Christian Science faith and in social circles of the
city they occupy an enviable position, having the warm regard of all
with whom they have been brought in contact. In business circles Mr.
Broughton is recognized as a strong man, strong in his honor and his
good name, strong in his ability to plan and to perform. Persistency
of purpose has been one of the strong factors in his growing success,
combined with a thorough understanding of the business in which he
engages and a close study of trade conditions at large. His efforts,
too, have ever been of a character that have contributed to public
progress as well as to individual prosperity.


RICHARD J. TOMPKINS.

Seemingly insurmountable obstacles have at times barred the path of
Richard J. Tompkins, but with resolute purpose and determination he
has sought out paths which would lead him around his difficulties and
enable him to continue on the road to success. Many a man of less
resolute purpose would have become utterly discouraged. He has never
been afraid of hard work and his determination and energy have carried
him steadily forward to the goal of prosperity. Mr. Tompkins is now
residing in Walla Walla, from which point he controls his farming
interests. His life record should serve to inspire and encourage
others, showing what may be accomplished when one has the will to dare
and to do.

Mr. Tompkins was born in Pike county, Missouri, August 20, 1862, a
son of William and Melinda (Carter) Tompkins. The father was a native
of Missouri, while the mother was probably also born in that state.
William Tompkins died when his son Richard was a youth of fourteen
years. He was the fourth in a family of eight children and at seventeen
years of age he took charge of the home farm, which he managed until
he reached his twenty-fourth year, when a younger brother became old
enough to take care of the mother. Then our subject, in the spring of
1887, made his way westward to Washington. Here he entered the employ
of A. C. Wellman on the Eureka Flats, Mr. Wellman having been an old
friend of his father in Missouri. During the first summer he worked
for a dollar per day. The following summer he received thirty dollars
per month, working for J. C. Painter, and that summer he purchased a
team, harness and wagon and went to work on the construction of the
Washington & Columbia Railroad.

[Illustration: RICHARD J. TOMPKINS]

In the spring of 1889 Mr. Tompkins bought a quit claim deed to a
preemption of eighty acres, on which he filed as a preemption. He
rigged up a five horse gang plow, plowed his own place and then hired
out to plow for others, utilizing all his time that summer and fall in
that manner. In 1890 he bought eighty acres adjoining, proved up on the
preemption and mortgaged the one hundred and sixty acres. He cultivated
his farm and continued to work out for others during those hard times.
In the summer of 1892 he kept account of the days which he devoted
to his own crop, and figuring his labor at the same price which he
received when working for others, his wheat crop, which was a bounteous
one, cost him in labor twenty-five cents per bushel and he hauled to
market a mile and a half, where he received twenty-five and a half
cents per bushel. The price of wheat continued low until 1896, selling
from twenty-five to fifty cents per bushel, and the four years from
1893 until 1896 inclusive were years of crop failure on the Flats. Mr.
Thompkins was keeping bachelor's hall and trying to hold his farm, but
he determined that if he was not successful with his 1896 crop he would
make no further effort to retain his land. Therefore, in January, 1897,
he deeded his land to the mortgage company, they releasing him free
from debt, and all he had left for his eight years of work was twelve
head of horses at a value of about twenty-five dollars per head. During
this time he received eight hundred dollars from his father's estate,
which also went into the maelstrom. In the spring of 1897 he had six
hundred acres of wheat in fallow and three hundred acres of stubble,
with his lease expiring in November. The Oregon Mortgage Company
wanted him to surrender his lease of three hundred acres without any
compensation but Mr. Tompkins demanded fifty cents an acre. The company
refusing to pay it, he turned in and sowed it to wheat in March and
harvested forty-five bushels to the acre in the fall. This sold at a
better price which gave him his start. He then bought back his one
hundred and sixty acre claim for three hundred dollars less than he had
deeded it over to the mortgage company and he also bought one hundred
and sixty acres adjoining. In the fall of 1897 he planted his three
hundred and twenty acres to wheat and in the spring of 1898 returned to
Missouri.

While in the middle west Mr. Tompkins was united in marriage to a
Missouri girl, Miss Mattie L. Hayden, the wedding being celebrated on
the 8th of June, 1898. In the latter part of June he returned with his
bride to Washington and located on his old homestead, where he lived
through the summer, harvesting his crop, and in November following took
up his abode in Walla Walla. In December of the same year he bought
eight hundred acres adjoining his homestead, for which he paid at an
average of eighteen dollars per acre.

In February, 1899, he returned to the farm and resided thereon until
the fall of 1905, when he again moved into Walla Walla, having in the
meantime erected his present commodious residence, which is one of the
attractive homes of the city. In the intervening years he had added
to his holdings from time to time until his landed possessions now
aggregate twenty-eight hundred acres and he is one of the substantial
farmers of Walla Walla county. Success at length crowned his labors and
was well deserved as a fitting reward for his indefatigable industry,
his perseverance, his courage and his persistency. Mr. Tompkins was the
first farmer of his county to branch out into the "bulk wheat system"
and built the first concrete elevator in the country in Walla Walla
county. He found the change profitable and the system will probably be
generally adopted by the farmers in this region.

In 1908 Mr. Tompkins was called upon to mourn the loss of his first
wife, who passed away on the 13th of October of that year, leaving two
children, Veryl and Richard. On the 1st of June, 1911, he wedded Daisy
W. Wilson, a teacher in the Green Park school of Walla Walla and a
daughter of James Wilson, one of the early pioneer settlers of Walla
Walla county. There are three children of this marriage: Morton, Paul
and Mary Anna.

The parents are members of the Nazarene church and are loyal to its
teachings and purposes. In politics Mr. Tompkins largely maintains an
independent course but leans toward the democratic party. He has become
one of the substantial citizens of the Walla Walla valley and certainly
deserves much credit and honor for what he has accomplished. With stout
heart and willing hands he has pushed forward and in the course of
years his life record has proven the eternal principle that industry
wins.




                           HISTORICAL INDEX


  Abbott, J. F., 160

  Abernethy, Governor, 89

  "Abolitionists and black republicans", 136

  Academies, Catholic, 223

  Acquisition of fire, Indian story of the, 23

  Act to organise the county of Garfield, An, 365

  Adams, Mount, The story of, 24

  Address delivered by Dr. Lyman at Wallula, May 4, 1915, 171

  Address of Governor Moore upon retirement, 473

  Advance Guard, Names of, 110

  Advance in rates brings revolt, 169

  Advertisers in "Statesman", 120

  Afraid of "nigger equality", 137

  Agriculture and rainfall, 6

  Agricultural, Horticultural and Stock Products, 1916, 192

  Agricultural Society of 1866, 181

  Ainsworth, J. C., 156

  Aldermen of Walla Walla, 1877-1916, 306-315

  Alfalfa gives four or five cuttings, 190;
    raised, and value in 1916, 225

  Allen, Hon. John B., 286, 289;
    senatorial contest of, 290

  Alter, Rev. Joseph, 225

  Alpowa, Timothy of, and his case, 271

  Alpowa Creek, Description of, 7

  Alpowa Station established, 64

  Alpowa Toll Road, 360

  American Expedition to Oregon in 1788, 44

  American and English fur-traders, 49

  American fur-carrying vessels, 44

  American fur-trade, Beginnings of, 44

  American Theatre, 110

  Anatone Prairie, 400

  Anderson, Doctor A. J., 219

  Ankeny, Hon. Levi, 290

  Annual county fair, 197

  Another camp meeting, 330

  Apashwayhayikt, Chief (Looking Glass), 95

  Apple supply meager, 189

  Apples and their value, 1916, 191

  Apple seeds planted in 1837, 178

  Appleton Hall, Walla Walla, 222

  Arguments, Indian war and peace, 14

  Artesian water, 6

  Ashburton Treaty, The, 65

  Asotin county, 395;
    churches, 424, 472;
    commissioners appointed, 404;
    schools, 422, 467;
    established, 466;
    school superintendent and pioneers, 468;
    school reminiscences, 469;
    pioneers of, 470;
    Indians and pioneers, 470;
    first wheat crop, 471;
    early schools, 472

  Asotin County Sentinel, 419

  Asotin Creek, Description of, 7, 414

  Asotin Spirit, The, 418

  Asparagus, 190;
    1916 crop and value, 192

  Assessed valuation of Walla Walla city, 315

  Assessed valuation of Walla Walla county after division, 285

  Assessors of city of Walla Walla, 1877-1916, 306-315

  Astor, John Jacob, 47

  Astor Company, Data of the, 49

  Astoria, 48

  Attalia News-Tribune, The, 264

  Atmospheric phenomena, 4

  Attorneys, Early, 265

  Authors and narrators of Indian legends, 24

  Automobiles, 174

  Average temperatures, 5


  Baboon Gulch, 127

  Bacon $1.25 per pound, 129

  Baker, Dorsey S., 110, 144

  Baker, Dr. D. S., Donation of school land of, 211

  Baker, Morgan A., 269

  Baker-Boyer Bank, 149

  Baker sells railroad, 170

  Bancroft, H. H., 10

  Bank Allotments (Liberty Loan), 197

  Banks of Walla Walla, 196

  Banks save the day, 184

  Baptist church at Dayton, 334

  Bar, the Old Walla Walla, 265

  Barbarism, 10

  Barley production and value, 1916, 191

  Barley yields 50 bushels to acre, 114, 180

  Barry, Rev. J. N., student of Indian legends, 29

  Barometric pressure, 5

  Bassett, W. F., 125

  Beautiful legend of Yakimas, 20

  Beaver, Legend of, 25

  Beginning of Walla Walla Fair, 179

  Bellman, Charles, 114

  Bennett, Captain, killed in war of 1855, 99

  Bering, Vitus, Discovery of Oregon by, 43

  Berry, Rev. G. M., 229, 471

  Besserer, Charles, 259

  Bibliography, Indian ethnological, 26

  Bishop, B. B., 156

  Bishoprics, Early Catholic, 82

  Blalock, Dr. N. G., 96, 183, 224, 245, 288

  Blanchet, Bishop Francis N., 80, 82

  Blewett, J. H., 141

  "Blind Pool" of Villard, 163

  Blue Mountains, 1

  Blue Mountain Island, 2

  Boarding Schools for girls, 221

  Boas, Dr. Franz, Indian ethnologist, 26

  Bolles Junction, 165

  "Bone-dry" law, 295

  Bonneville, B. L. E., 52, 53;
    upholds "Stars and Stripes" in fur rivalry, 55;
    expedition through Walla Walla, 1832-35, 55

  Books in Walla Walla City Library, 304

  Boundary disputes in regard to Oregon question, 65

  Boundaries of Walla Walla, 1859, 115

  Boundaries of Walla Walla city wards, 300

  Boyer, John F., 129

  Boys' schools, Catholic, 223

  Bradford, Dan, 156

  Brents, Judge Thomas H., 132, 286

  Brick yards, the penal, 290

  Bridal Veil Lumber Co., 193

  Bridegroom, The Spirit, 22

  "Bridge of the Gods, The", 23, 28

  Brouillet, Father, J. B. A., 82, 223

  "Bucket lines", 185

  "Build a road and make wheat legal tender", 375

  Building inspectors of Walla Walla, 314

  Building period of the '80s, The, 286

  Burgunder, Ben, address by, 253

  "Bunch-grass" boys and girls, 6

  "Bunch-grass" horses and cattle, 6

  Burglaries in 1890, 350

  Burnett, Peter H., pioneer, governor of California, chief justice, 70

  Business men of the '60s, 444

  Butter $3.00 per pound, 129

  Butter at 75 cents, 121


  Cain, A. J., lays out an addition, 148, 268

  Calderhead, T. B., 164

  Calls of a pioneer physician, 276

  Camp meeting, 329

  Canal and locks of the Cascades, 170

  Canfield, W. D., 416

  Canoe, the Indian, 12

  Canoe Camp, 35

  Capacity of Walla Walla Waterworks, 302

  Capital and profits in early fur-trade, 44

  Captains, pilots and pursers, 158

  Cascade Mountains, origin of the, 2

  Cascade Range, the, 8

  Cascades Indian story of the, 22;
    another Indian story of the, 23

  Casualties of Indian Rising, in December, 1855, 99

  Catholic Academies, 223

  Catholic church, founding of the, at Walla Walla, 82, 232

  Catholic dioceses, early, 82

  Catholic missionaries, early, 80

  Catholic missions, 80

  Caton, Judge N. J., 258

  Cattle decline, 381

  Cattle worth $20 a head, now worth $100, 179

  Cattle thieves, etc., 132

  Cayuse chiefs, trial of, for Whitman murder, 90

  Cayuse horse, The, 12

  Cayuse horses and cattle herds, 175

  Cayuse war, the, 84;
    scattering of bands, 89;
    close of, 91, 430

  Cayuses, The, 11

  Celilo canal opened 1915, 170

  Census of Asotin County, 404

  Central school at Waitsburg, 215

  Chacha, the bad spirit, 25

  Chamberlain, Rev. P. B., 235

  Champoeg, settlement of, 80

  Chants, Indian death, 14

  Character, the Indian, 13

  Charter and names of men (for R. R.), 166

  Charter of city of Walla Walla, 299

  Charter of Waitsburg, 317

  Chase, Henry M., 91

  Chase and La Fontaine, 320

  Cheese $1.50 per pound, 129

  Chelan highlands, 2

  Chemeketa (peace ground), first permanent American settlement, 59

  Cherries, 1916, their value, 192

  Chief Moses, 331

  Chinese banishment attempted, 350

  Chinook, The, 4

  Christian influences, 64

  Christian missions, The first, 59

  Christian teachings reach Indians, 58

  Christianity, Indians seek, 58, 59

  Christianized Indians, 19

  Church, history of Methodist, in Walla Walla, 229

  Church history of Walla Walla, 228

  Churches of Walla Walla county, 228;
    of Columbia county, 327;
    of Garfield county, 388

  Citizen assaults soldier, 131

  City of Walla Walla, the new charter, 299;
    ordinance No. 185, 300;
    boundaries of wards, 300;
    election precincts, 301;
    commission form of government, 301;
    waterworks municipally owned, 301;
    streets paved, 302;
    the library of, 303;
    elections, 305;
    municipal officers, 305-315;
    financial statement, 315;
    assessments of, 315

  City attorneys of Walla Walla, 1880-1916, 306-315

  City clerks of Walla Walla, 1882-1916, 307-315

  City commissioners of Walla Walla, 315

  City deeds courthouse ground to county, 146

  City engineers of Walla Walla, 315

  City library of Walla Walla, 303

  City officers and council of Walla Walla, 151

  City park, Walla Walla, 462

  City surveyors of Walla Walla, 1882-1916, 307-315

  City wards of Walla Walla, 300

  City of Walla Walla politics, 299

  City officials of Asotin, 419

  Clark, George Rogers, 33

  Clark, Ransom, 110

  Clark, Samuel A., Oregon literary pioneer, 28

  Clark, William, 33

  Clarke, General, 83

  Clarkston, 413;
    incorporated, 420

  Clarkston Republic, The, 425

  Clatsop, Fort, 39

  Climate, 1, 4

  Clubs, Walla Walla, 238

  Coblentz, J. H., tragic end of, 291

  Coffee $2.00 per pound, 129

  Collegial institutions, 218

  Colonel W. S. Gilliam killed, 436

  Colter, John, trapper and explorer, 46

  Columbia, The, and its tributaries, 6

  Columbia basin, 1

  Columbia Chronicle, The, 353

  Columbia county, judges and lawyers of, 266;
    district court of, 276;
    Chapter II, 319;
    Indian war of '55, 320;
    settlers of '59, 321;
    immigration of '61, 321;
    establishment of, 322;
    first county commissioners, 322;
    election of 1875, 322;
    following elections, 323;
    the first school in, 324

  Columbia County Dispatch, 354

  Columbia River Fishing & Trading Company, establishment of, 54

  Columbian Indians, The, 11

  Colville reminiscences, 248

  Commercial Club, The, of Walla Walla, 238

  Commission government of Walla Walla, 301

  Company H, National Guard, 384

  Comparison in costs of living then and now, 120

  Complete file of "Washington Statesman", 118

  Completion of telegraph line, 151

  Condition of county in 1860, 117

  Condon, Thomas, 1, 27

  Conference on subject of railroad, 376

  Congregational missions, 80

  Congressional rivalry in 1878, 286

  Constitutional convention of 1878, 285;
    of 1889, 288;
    Walla Walla members of, 288

  Contests for senatorship, 289

  Cook, James, explorer of the Pacific, 43

  Cook, J. D., 149

  Coppei, Lewis and Clark on the, 40

  Corn nine feet in the tassel, 180

  Corn produced, value 1916, 191

  Cosgrove, Samuel G., 270, 288

  Cost of living then and now, 120

  Councils, city, of Walla Walla 1877-1916, 306-315

  County commissioners of Columbia county in 1875, 322

  County Courthouse, 145

  County Elections (Garfield), 373

  County jail contract given, 117

  County limits reduced, 112

  County Offices over a saloon, 113

  County Officials of Walla Walla from 1876-1916, 295-99

  County seat contest resulted in favor of Pomeroy, but ----, 367

  County seat location, 367

  County seat question in Asotin county, 405

  Courthouse, the new Walla Walla, 295

  Courthouse built, first, 146

  Court Circuits, old, 267

  Court practice in early days, 267

  Court towns, old-time, 267

  Cowboy contests, 202

  "Cowhide and calico", 466

  Cox, Anderson, 144

  Cox, Ross, 49

  Cox's journey in 1812, 51

  Craig, William, 92

  Creation of Man, an Indian story of the, 24

  Cropp, Dr. J. F., 281

  Crowley, D. J., 288

  Cumberland Presbyterian church at Dayton, 334

  Curtin, Jeremiah, 27

  Cutler, J. G., 164


  Daughters of Rebekah, 236

  Davin Brothers, 180

  Dawn of civilization in this territory, 359

  Dayton a city of lodges, 335

  Dayton circuit, 333

  Dayton bar, The, 268-271

  Dayton, Lewis and Clark at the site of, 40

  Dayton, named for Jesse N. Day, 154

  Dayton News, The, 263, 353

  Dayton school faculty, 325

  Dayton woolen mill disappoints, 187

  Deadman Hollow, 360

  Death ceremonies, Indian, 14

  Death islands, Indian, 21

  Death song, Indian, 14

  Defeat of Steptoe's Command, 105

  De La Salle Institute, 223

  Deliberations, Indian war and peace, 14, 15

  Demers, Rev. Modeste, 80

  Denny, A. A., 141

  Dent, Captain F. T., 186

  Descending The Dalles in 1888, 159

  De Smet, Rev. Pierre J., 81

  Desperate medical cases, 280

  Destructive early fires, 149

  Determines to raise wheat on big scale, 183

  Development in mines, ranges, farms, 167

  Development of Industry in Walla Walla, 175

  Devils, Indian, 20

  Disbursements and receipts of Walla Walla city, 316

  Discovery, early era of American, 42

  Discovery of gold in California, 155

  Dispatch, The, 355

  District over-subscribes Liberty Loan, 197

  Diversions of pioneers, 465

  Division of Old Walla Walla county, 153

  Doctor Baker's Road, 165

  Doctor Baker the man, 167

  Dr. Blalock, 170

  Dr. McLoughlin, John, retired, 83;
    vicissitudes besetting 83;
    died of broken heart, 83;
    receives Whitman party, 62

  Donation act of 1850, 474

  Donnehue "gets" Patterson, 135

  Dooley, John, 179

  Dorion, Madam's flight before hostile Indians, 51

  Door, Charles R., 270

  Douglas, James, manager Hudson's Bay Company, 84

  Dress of Nez Perces, 36

  Drumheller, Daniel M., 176

  Drumheller, George, "wheat king", 201

  Drumheller, Jesse, 176

  "Dry town" unheard of, 148

  Dumas, J. L., 190


  Eagle Cap, 8

  Earliest buildings in Walla Walla, 115

  Earliest permanent settler on the Asotin, 398

  Earliest survey of Walla Walla, 115

  Early advertisements in the "Statesman", 120

  Early cattle raisers, 124

  Early days in Asotin, 466

  Early settler's attitude toward Indian, 18

  Early settlers on Anatone Prairie, 400

  Early stockmen, Some larger, 176

  Early teachers at Whitman College, 218

  Early transportation age, 155

  Ears in jar of whiskey, 102

  East Washingtonian, 358

  Eatables, Indian, 13

  Edmiston, J. E., 270

  Educational institutions of Walla Walla county, 210

  Educational system of Asotin county, 421

  Eells, Cushing, 64, 218, 235

  Eells, Father, with missionaries at Chimakain, 89;
    founds Whitman College, 89, 218

  Eels, Rev. Myron, 27;
    life of Whitman (extracts), 68

  Effort to annex Walla Walla county to Oregon, 141

  Eggs at $1.00 per dozen, 121

  Election of 1859, 113

  Election of 1864, vote by precincts, 139

  Election of 1875 in Columbia county, 322

  Election of 1878, 285

  Election of U. S. senators, first, 289

  Election precincts of Walla Walla city, 301

  Election results in Asotin county, 405

  Election returns, 292, 293

  Elections, municipal, of Walla Walla, 305

  Elections in Waitsburg, 317

  Elections in Columbia county, 323

  Elections in Walla Walla county in 1889, 292

  Elections in Walla Walla county from 1876-1916, 295-99

  Elections of 1888 to 1916, 337-345

  Elevation above sea-level, 1

  Elijah, the murder of, and its effects, 79

  Elk among stock, 451

  Elks, the, 237

  Enabling Act, The, 287

  Enactments of first state legislature, 289

  Endowment of Whitman College, 219

  English's Company, Oregon Rifles, in Cayuse war, 86

  English monopolists of fur trade, 45

  Epidemics in pioneer times, 277

  Episcopal church, early history of, 233

  Episcopal church in Walla Walla, 232

  Era of good roads, 174

  Escape of convicts from penitentiary, attempted, 291

  Establishment of Asotin county, 401, 466

  Establishment of Columbia county, 322

  Ethnological bibliography, Indian, 26

  Ethnology, Indian, 11

  Ewing Hall, Walla Walla, 222

  Examples of Indian character, 13

  Expedition against the Cayuses after Whitman massacre, 87

  Expeditions in interest of fur trade, 48

  Expenditures considerable (fort), 150

  Expense of ties and iron great, 169

  Experiences of a pioneer doctor, 275

  Explorers, first, 32

  Explorers, old Spanish, 42

  Extensive business done by stage company, 162


  Fair Grounds, retained, 201

  Fair to be held, October, 1866, 181

  Fall, Dr. E. E., 260

  Famous Criminal Suit, 350

  Famous doctors, 275

  Fare, Portland to Lewiston, $60.00, 158

  Fares lowered, 166

  Farewell address of Governor Moore, 473

  Farmers' Agency, The, 244

  Farmers' Unions, 244, 390

  Farming and fruit raising tested, 180

  Farming industry, 180

  Farrand, Livingston, 27

  Father Wilbur on the Indian Agency, 332

  Federal Reserve Bank, 196

  Ferguson county created, 112

  Ferrel, Mrs. Brewster, 447

  Few hogs raised in Garfield before coming of railroad, 381

  Finances of city of Walla Walla, 315

  Fine wheat crop of S. Maxson in 1860, 180

  Fire chiefs of Walla Walla, 1910-1916, 314, 315

  Fire, Indian story of origin of, 23

  Fireman's Ball, 119

  Fires and start of fire department, 149

  Fires of 1880 and 1882, 348

  First assessment for Asotin County, 404

  First boy in Walla Walla, 455

  First brick building in Pomeroy, 384

  First Catholic church at Walla Wall, 82

  First cattle buyer to Garfield county, 380

  First city election in Pomeroy, 383

  First election results, 116

  First election under charter, 1862, 147

  First events in Garfield county, 359

  First explorers, 32

  First flour mill, 186

  "First Garfield County Pioneer Edition", 358

  First July 4th celebration at Dayton, 364

  First lots sold (Walla Walla), 115

  First man to sail on Snake river, 159

  First merchant in Walla Walla, 114

  First nursery, 188

  First officers of Old Walla Walla County, 92

  First paper in Walla Walla, 118

  First prospecting tour into Idaho, 125

  First school at Pataha City, 382

  First school district on Pataha flat, 381

  First schoolhouse in Asotin county, 467

  First sermon, 329

  First steamers on Columbia river, 156

  First steamship trip up Snake river, 160

  First telegram out of Walla Walla, 151

  First white woman to live in Columbia county, 177

  Five Crows, a Cayuse chief, 87, 94

  Five Mile, 37

  Five regions, 189

  Flag incident of 1863, 132

  Flanders, Alvin, 143

  Flathead Mission, The, 81

  Flinn, Rev. John, 235

  Flohr, Rev. M., 223

  Flour and coffee prices in 1843, 76

  Flour $1.00 per pound, 126, 129

  Flour milling, 186

  Fog conditions, 4

  Food, Indian, 13

  Food supply and condition of Indian, 13

  Foods high and scarce, 127

  Formation of Vigilantes, 132

  Fort abandoned, 150

  Fort a disturbing question, 150

  Fort Henrietta, 100

  Fort Taylor, 319

  Fort Walla Walla, 110;
    the founding of, 51;
    description of, 52;
    trade of, 52;
    missionaries coming to, 52;
    arrival of Mrs. Whitman and Mrs. Spalding, first white women, at, 62

  Forty-five stock shippers, 179

  Fossils of the northwest, 2

  Founding of Walla Walla, 109

  Four-and-one-half-pound potato, 189

  Fourth Annual Fruit Fair, 198

  Frachtenberg, Leo J., on Indian texts, 26

  Franchere, narrative of, in 1814, 51

  Franchere, Gabriel, narrator of Indian legends, 24

  Fraternal Orders in Asotin county, 424

  Fraternal Orders, Garfield county, 389

  Fraternal Orders in Walla Walla, 236

  Frazier, C. R., address by, 252

  Freight and passenger rates, 167

  Freight rates on wheat, 182

  Freight tonnage, 1870-1878, 182

  French-Canadians, the, in early mission work, 80

  Frenchtown in early days, 92

  Friction between civilians and the military,  150

  Friend of the pioneers--the physician, 275

  Frontier Days celebration, 201

  Fruit Growers' Association, 198

  Fruit growing and precipitation, 6

  Fruit lands, acres of, 192

  Fuca, the mystery of Juan de, 44

  Fuel very scarce, 448

  Fur "haul," a, in 1811, 51

  Fur-hunters of all nations, 42

  Fur trade: American and English rivalry, 49;
    American beginnings of, 44;
    and Walla Walla, the, 50;
    and fur traders, 42;
    capital and profits, 44;
    early expeditions, 48;
    fitting out, 44;
    in French and Spanish hands, 46;
    Pacific Fur Company, third rival, 47;
    rivalry between the two great companies, 45;
    Russian, 43

  Fur, value of, at beginning of trade, 44

  Fur trade; vessels engaged in, 44;
    number of skins sold in 1786-87, 44;
    profits, 44


  Game hunting, Indian, 13

  G. A. R., the, 237

  "Garden City" changes name November 17, 1859, 113

  Garden City Monitor, The, 243, 261

  Gardens and Orchards, 188

  Garfield and Asotin repeat experience of Walla Walla and Columbia, 185

  Garfield county, 358;
    first events, 359;
    judges and lawyers of, 266;
    physicians of, 275;
    Pioneer Association, 394;
    press, the, 392

  Garfielde, Selucius, 144

  Garnett crushes Yakimas, 105

  Garrison's Company, Oregon Rifles, in Cayuse war, 86

  Gatchett, Albert S., 27

  General Clarke's proclamation, 105

  General events, 375

  Geological beginnings, 2

  Geological features, 1

  Geological formation, 2;
    Indian tale of, 2

  Geology of the Northwest, 1

  George, Colonel Wyatt A., 268

  German starts "fire water" store, 332

  Gibbs, George, 28

  Gilbert's History of Walla Walla, 178

  Gilbreath, recollections of Mrs. Margaret, 469

  Gilbreath, S. L., 469

  Gill, John, student of Indian geography and languages, 30

  Gilliam, Colonel Cornelius, 84, 87;
    killed by accident, 88

  Gilliam's reference to Whitman, 439

  Girls' schools, 221;
    Catholic, 224

  Glaciers, effects of, on geological formation, 3

  God, Indian names for, 20

  Godman, Melvin M., 269

  Gods, Indian, 2

  Gold, discovery of, at Pend Oreille River and Columbia, 92

  Gold discovered, 104

  Gold discovery stimulated farm products, 180

  Gold dust sent to Portland, 126

  Gold dust thieves, 132

  Gold fever catching, 127

  Gold taken out, 126

  Gold yields on Salmon River, 127

  Gose, Judge Mack F., 270

  Government, provisional of Oregon, 84

  Governor Ferry vetoes Ping county bill, 154

  Governor, the last territorial, 473

  Grading begins at Wallula, 168

  Grain crops, valued at $15,000,000, 188

  "Grain chutes", 185

  Grain lands in bearing, etc., 192

  Grain stacked on banks of Snake river, 375

  Grain yield exceeds demand, 1867, 181

  Grand jury, the first, 266

  Grande Ronde, The, 7

  Grange City, 169

  Gray, W. H., 64

  Great cattle ranges on Dry Creek, 177

  Great wheat belt, 181

  Greatest fire in Pomeroy, 384

  Greeley, Horace, and Dr. Whitman, 69

  Greeley and Sumner, 137

  Greetings to first governor-elect, 475

  Grey Eagle, 432

  Grinding flour in coffee mill, 458

  Guichard, Ralph, 115


  Habits of Indians, 12

  Haidahs, the, 11

  "Half-way House," the, 115

  Halhaltlossot, or Lawyer, 93

  Hall, Fort, 54

  Hangings by vigilance committee, 133

  Harangues, Indian, 15, 16

  Hard road of the pioneer physician, 276

  Hard winter causes big loss of stock, 175

  Hay at $125.00 per ton, 128

  Health officers of Walla Walla city, 1877-1916, 306-315

  Heceta, Spanish explorer, 44

  Hellmuth, Joseph, 149

  Hendron, W. W., 325

  "Heroes and heroic deeds of the Pacific Northwest", 135

  Higgins, David, 269

  High school class, first, 211

  Hill case, the, 357

  Hills considered good only for grazing, 379

  Hills settle rapidly from 1873, 380

  Hipparion, The, 12

  History of business houses in Pomeroy, 385

  History of Columbia county, 319

  History of early courts, 267

  History of lawyers, judges and doctors, 265

  History of native races, 10

  Holladay System, The, 161

  Holt Harvester Works, 193

  Home of berries and "truck", 191

  Honesty, Indian, example of, 40

  Hood, Mount, the story of, 24

  Horse, prehistoric, 12;
    the Indian, 12

  Horse industry not much changed till 1880, 381

  Horse-thieves, etc., 135

  Horticulture and precipitation, 6

  Horton, Robert, 457

  Hospitality, Indian, 40

  Hothouse vegetables, 190

  Hot Springs, 450

  Houser, John, 187

  Houser, Max, 187

  Howlish Wampoo's Racer, 416

  Hudson's Bay Company, grant to, 45;
    lord of the Pacific, 50;
    policy of, 57;
    hostile policy of, 79;
    meeting emergency in Indian uprisings, 63

  Humidity, 6

  Hunt Railroad, The, 163

  Hunt Threshing Factory, 193


  Idaho (Ter.) established, 112

  Ideal fruit and garden land, 185

  Imagination, Indian, 20

  Immigration of 1843, 69

  Immigration of 1847, 439

  Incomers discover Pataha, Tucanon, Alpowa and Asotin locations, 178

  Incorporators of "Baker's Road", 168

  Indian, The, and the violin, 39

  Indian, The, on warpath, 14

  Indian behavior at war, 14

  Indian character, the, 13

  Indian chief executed for Whitman murder, 90

  Indian concourse of 1,500 souls in 1811, 50

  Indian conference, the great, with Governor Stevens, 93

  Indian customs and myths, 10

  "Indian death islands", 21

  Indian death song, 14

  Indian ethnological bibliography, 26

  Indian fighting, early, 13

  Indian food conditions, 13

  Indian gods, 2

  Indian gods and devils, 20

  Indian habits and morality, 12

  Indian heathenism and Christianity, 19

  Indian honesty, 40

  Indian hospitality, 40

  Indian legend of Yakimas, 20

  Indian life, 10

  Indian literature, 10

  Indian loyalty, an example of, 272

  Indian marriage, legality of, 273

  Indian marriage customs, 273

  Indian meals, 13

  Indian music, 37

  Indian mythical festivals, 21

  Indian mythology of the firmament, fire, water, forest, etc., 18

  Indian myths, 25

  Indian names and stories, 19

  Indian nations, 11

  Indian population, 330

  Indian reservations, first, 93

  Indian rising of 1855, 93, 97, 319

  Indian Salmon Spring festival, 26

  Indian spirit men, 21

  Indian story of the Cascades and the origin of fire, 23

  Indian story telling, the manner of, 19

  Indian texts, 27

  Indian traditions, 10

  Indian tribes, 10, 11

  Indian wars, the earlier, 83

  Indian wealth, 12

  Indian women, The, 12

  Indians and early settler, 18

  Indians in St. Louis in 1832, 57

  Indians learn of Christian religion, 58

  Indians, white, traditions of, 24

  Industrial instruction, 225

  Influenza epidemic, 277

  Inland Empire Magazine, The, 261

  Inland Empire Pioneer Association, 110, 245, 255

  Intellectual life in Walla Walla county, 210

  Into the hostile camp, 331

  Introducing high-grade horses and cattle, 176

  Irrigation, natural sub-, 6

  Isaac I. Stevens' survey for railroad, 162

  Isaacs, H. P., 149

  Isaacs, J. C., 149

  Itemized expense of wheat crop, 183


  Jaussaud, Leon, 180

  Jay Cooke & Company, 163

  Jefferson's instructions to Captain Lewis, 33

  Jefferson, Thomas, 32, 44;
    tribute to Captain Lewis, 41

  Jerome W. J., 422

  Johnson P. B., 258

  Joint Occupation Treaty of 1818, 50

  Joseph Band of Nez Perces, The, 95

  Journalism in Columbia county, 353

  Jubilee on opening of canal, 171

  Judge Brents, 132

  Judges, 265, 266

  Judicial districts, 265

  Judicial system, 265

  Julian, R. C., 263

  Junger, Father Arvidius, 82

  Justices of the peace of Walla Walla city, 1877-1916, 306-315

  Jute mills, the penal, 290


  Kahmiakin, Chief of the Yakimas, 94

  Kalispels, The, 11

  Kamm, Jacob, 156

  Keith, Mr., 14

  Kelley, Colonel J. K., 97, 101

  Kelly, Senator J. J., 142

  Kennedy, Robert, 177

  Killing of Peupeumoxmox, 102

  Kirkman, William K., 178

  Klickitat county erected, 112

  Klickitat legends, 21, 23

  Klickitat myth, The, 4

  Klickitat, the chief, 24

  Klickitat tribe, founding of the, 23

  Klickitats, The, 11

  Kohlhauff, William, 115

  Kooskooskie, name and description of, 35

  Kootenais, The, 11

  Kuykendall, Dr. G. B., Indian author and collector, 28;
    on pioneer times of the physician, 275

  Kyger, A., 141


  Labor Union Directory, 242

  Labor unions, 241

  Land and water, the forming of, 2

  Land of spirits, In the, 20

  Land office, 151

  Larger early stockmen, 176

  Lasater, J. H., 141

  Law case, a famous, 271

  Law suits resulting from Timothy land case, 273

  Lawyer, the old-time, 267

  Lawyer's Band, 103

  Lawyers, 265

  Laying out state into sixteen counties, 92

  Leaders in grain raising, 177

  Lease-rights in Washington, 273, 274

  Ledyard, John, 43

  Ledyard, S. F., 127

  Lee, Jason, Christian crusader, 59, 229;
    first of the Protestants, 80

  Legality of Indian marriage, 273

  Legend, a Klickitat, 21

  Legend of the origin of fire and Mounts Hood, Adams and St. Helens, 23

  Legends, Indian, 25

  Legends, Yakima, 20

  Legislative act to create Asotin county, 402

  Legislative deadlock, 289

  Legislative delegations from Walla Walla county from 1876 to 1916, 295-99

  Legislative districts, 289

  Legislators chosen, 1863-1874, 139

  Legislature, the first territorial, 92;
    decrees of the, 92

  Legislature, the first state, 289

  Letter of Dr. Whitman to secretary of war in 1843, 75

  Letter from E. H. Morrison, 376

  Letter from Judge O. S. Pratt, 429

  Letter from Perrin Whitman to W. H. Gray, 428

  Lewis, James Hamilton, 292

  Lewis, Meriwether, 33

  Lewis and Clark expedition, 10, 33;
    a mess of salmon, 38;
    at Lewiston and Clarkston of today, 35;
    at Five Mile, 37;
    at Fort Clatsop, 39;
    at the Touchet, 39;
    distance travelled by, 40;
    find the prairie chicken, 38;
    had passed through, 178;
    hardships of, 35;
    journal of Captain Lewis of, 34;
    journey resumed, 36;
    meeting with Chief Yelleppit, 38;
    meet Nez Perces, 36;
    start of, 34;
    return journey of, 39;
    observations of, 12

  Lewiston, 124

  Liberty Loan bonds, 196

  Librarian, city of Walla Walla, 315

  Library statistics, 304

  Library, Walla Walla city, 303

  Life of Timothy, 271

  Lisa, Manuel, pioneer fur trader, 46

  Litigation, a famous case of land, 271

  Live stock, dairy products, poultry, wool, flour, chop, 1916, 192

  Live stock on hand, 1863 and 1875, 179

  Live stock statistics, 285

  Lived on boiled wheat, 453

  Lloyd, Hon. A. G., 246

  Location of Walla Walla city in regard to growth, 293

  Long tunnels, and big snows no bar, 162

  Looney, Jesse, 427

  "Loowit," the witch, 23

  Loss of stock one million dollars, 128

  Lost in fog and snow, 279

  Lots $5.00 each, 115

  Lot Whitcomb, 156

  Lovejoy, A. L., letters on mid-winter ride from Waiilatpu
    to St. Louis, 66

  Lyman, H. S., 27

  Lyman, W. D., address by, 252


  McAuliffe, Lieut., 100

  McBean, William, 95

  McBeth, Kate, Indian student and missionary among the Nez Perces, 29

  McCabe, Joseph, 164

  McClees, Warden John, 291

  McClellan, George B., assistant surveyor, 162

  McClung, Mrs. Peter, recollections of Pomeroy, 472, 360

  McDermott, Louisa, 26

  McDonald, Mr., 14

  McGuire, Jerry, 178

  McKay, Tom, 87

  McKay, William C., 91, 96

  McKay, Dr. W. C., 30

  McKay's Company, Oregon Rifles, in Cayuse war, 86

  McLoughlin, Doctor, 54, 59;
    founds Champoeg, 80

  McMorris, Lewis, 102

  McWhirk, William, 114

  McWhorter, L. V., student of Yakima lore, 30

  Mackenzie, Alexander, 45

  Magallon, Adrian, 180

  Magone, Major, 89

  Manufacturing, 192

  Many cattle driven in '61, 175

  Many miners in Portland in 1862, 128

  Many orchards hard hit by sub-zero weather, 189

  Marriage customs, Indian, 273

  Marshal resigns, 131

  Marshals of Walla Walla, 1877-1916, 305-315

  Martin, Captain William, 89

  Martin's Company, Oregon Rifles, in Cayuse war, 86

  Masonic Order, the, in Walla Walla, 236

  Matches in the Sorghum, 450

  Mayors of Walla Walla, 1877-1916, 305-315;
    of Waitsburg, 318;
    of Asotin,  419

  Meals, Indian, 13

  Measles, epidemic of, among Indians in 1847, 79

  Medical history, 275

  Medical profession, the, 265

  Medical science and its achievements, 280

  Meek, Joseph L., 87

  Meeting to raise railroad fund, 167

  Memories of old,   474

  Meningitis epidemic in 1888,  277

  Men in the public eye, in Walla Walla county, 292

  Mental characteristics of Indian, 13

  Merchant, Mrs. Lillian Clemans, 467

  Merchants' Carnival, the, 201

  Merchants come, 175

  Merchants hold back goods for big prices, 127

  Methodist church, the, 228;
    early history of, 229;
    the first in Walla Walla, 229;
    jurisdiction over, 229;
    building the first, 230

  Methodist Mission, the first, 59

  Methodist missions, 80

  Methodist parsonage, 231

  Methodist pastors in Walla Walla since 1859, 232

  Methodist presiding elders in Walla Walla since 1859, 232

  Methow highland, 2

  "Michel", 15

  Military organization of volunteers for Cayuse war, 84

  Miller, Joaquin, 114

  Miller, Judge Chester F., contribution by, 266;
    paper of Judge, 320

  Millican, Lettice, 110

  Millican, "Uncle Billy", 457

  Mill Town, 154

  Miner, Mrs. A. J., first school teacher, 211

  Mines at Orofino worked out, 122

  Miners winter in Walla Walla, 126

  Minto, John, Indian student and state builder of the northwest, 30

  Miscellaneous crops, 1916, 192

  Miscellaneous happenings, Asotin county, 411

  Missionaries, attitude of first, toward Indians, 18;
    difficulties of early, 64;
    first, in Walla Walla, 52

  Missionary era, ending of, 82;
    period of the, 57;
    station in 1837, 178

  Missions, early, in Oregon, 59

  Missions of various denominations, 80

  Modoc war, 331

  Modoc war changes views of fort, 150

  Moisture, artificial and natural, 6

  Mojonnier, F. E., 190

  Montagnes Bleues, Les, 8

  Moore, Miles C., appointed territorial governor, 286;
    address of, at pow wow, 204;
    farewell address of, 473

  Morality of Indians, 12, 13

  More agitation for railway, 377

  More fires, 1884-5, 1890, '91, 350

  Morning Star, Chief, 17

  Mountains, height of, 1;
    Indian names of, 19, 20

  Mounts Adams, Hood and St. Helens, Indian legend of, 24;
    other stories of, 28

  "Mullan Road", 120

  Multnomah nation, story of the founding of the great, 23

  Municipal elections of Walla Walla, 305

  Municipal officers of Walla Walla, 1877-1916, 305-315

  Municipal ownership of Walla Walla waterworks, 301

  Municipal politics of Walla Walla, 299, 346

  Municipal warrants, 317

  Municipal waterworks, registrars of, 315

  Music, Indian, 37, 39

  Musk Rat, the Tacullies legend of the, 26

  Mythology, Indian, of firmament and elements, 18

  Myths, Indian, 25


  Names and Stories, Indian, 19

  Names found in advertising columns of the Chronicle, 354

  Names of advance guard at Pataha, 178

  Names of sections of Asotin lands, 400

  National democracy, 138

  Nations, Indian, 11

  Native races, 10

  Nearest flour mill thirty miles away, 465

  Nesmith's, Senator, address to Oregon Pioneer Association, 69

  New county of Garfield, 364

  Newell, William H., 258

  New era of water transportation, 170

  Newspaper twenty-five cents per copy, 118

  Newspaper, the first, 246

  Newspapers at Walla Walla, 246

  Newspapers of Walla Walla county, 257

  News two weeks old, 120

  Nez Perces, the, 11;
    description of dress of, 36;
    meeting of Lewis & Clark expedition with, 36;
    rising of the, in December, 1855, 96;
    save Stevens conference, 94

  Nez Perce war, the, 458;
    underlying cause of, 95

  Night-ride, a physician's, 279

  Northrop, N., 118, 257

  N. P. R. R. builds feeders, 163

  Northern Pacific railroad movement, 163

  Northwestern Fur Company, 45

  Northwestern Stage Company, 162

  No salary to mayor or councilmen, 116

  Number of horses and cattle in 1863 and in 1875, 179


  Oceans of bunch grass, 175

  Odd Fellows, Independent Order of, 236

  Officials elected in 1860, 117

  Officers, first, of Old Walla Walla county 92

  Officers of Old Walla Walla county, 112

  Ogden, Peter Skeen, 84, 87

  Ogress of Saddle Mountain, the myth of the, 25

  Okanogan highlands, 2

  Okanogans, The, 11

  "Old Bones," Chief, 11, 114

  Old Walla Walla County, beginning of, 92

  Olney, Indian agent Nathan, 98, 100, 319

  "O my God, for a Sabre!", 104

  One hundred and ten bushels barley to acre, 183

  Onions, 189, 190, 192

  Only fire-proof building in Walla Walla, 120

  Opening of country, 83

  Orchards and gardens, Asotin county, 413

  Order of the Eastern Star, 236

  Organized bands of criminals, 121

  Organized government in eastern Washington, 92

  O. R. & N. Co. and N. P., 163

  Oregon Lumber Company, 193

  Oregon Methodist Conference, the, 229

  Oregon, provisional government of, 84, 87

  Oregon question, the, 69

  Oregon Rifles in Cayuse war, membership of, 84

  Oregon Steam Navigation Company, 157

  Oregon, territorial government of, 88

  Oregon territory, Dr. Whitman's letter to secretary of war regarding, 75

  Oregon territory, first officers of, 88

  Oregon treaty of 1846, 78

  Oregon volunteers organize after Whitman massacre for Cayuse war, 84

  Ostrander, John Y., 270

  Our conference, 333

  "Our Mother Oregon", 173

  Outbreak of all Columbia Indians in 1855-56, 96

  Outbreak of prisoners, a contemplated, 291

  Owsley school, 381


  Pacific Fur Company, 47

  Page, Right Rev. Herman, 222

  Pageant of May, 1914, 206;
    program of, 207

  Paine, F. W., gives an anecdote, 132

  Palmy period for hold-ups, 161

  Palouse Indians, 11

  Palouse myth, a, 25

  Palouse river, the, 37

  Park at Walla Walla, 462

  Park Club, the, 464

  Parker, Frank J., 258

  Parker, Hollon, 142

  Parleys, Indian, 14

  Parson Quinn, 360

  Pasca Mills, 186

  Pastoral work, 328

  Pataha, 473

  Pataha City, 187, 387

  Pataha "Spirit," the, 402

  Patients and doctors in pioneer times, 275

  Patit, origin of the name of, 319

  Patterson, Ferd., "Bad man", 134

  Paved streets of Walla Walla, 302

  Pavilion erected in 1900, 198

  Pearce, E. D., 125

  Pearson, the express rider, 96

  Penal labor, 290, 291

  Pend Oreilles, the, 11

  Penitentiary, history of the, 290

  Penrose, Rev. S. B. L., 219

  People's Party, 340

  Permanent Organization of Walla Walla county, 109

  Personal contact, 328

  Petty local jealousies, 358

  Pettyjohn, Jonathan, 177

  Peupeumoxmox, chief of the Walla Wallas, 79, 88, 94, 98, 319;
    death of, 320

  Phillips, W. S., "El Comancho," author of "Totem Tales", 29

  Physical condition of Indians, 11, 12, 13

  Physical features, 1

  Physician, mode of travel of pioneer, 275

  Physicians of Old Walla Walla, 275

  Pietrzycki, Marcel, 326

  Pietrzycki bequest, the, 325

  Pine Grove School House, 465

  Ping, Elisha, 154

  Ping County bill passed, 154

  "Pioneer Days", 197

  Pioneer Hotel destroyed, 412

  Pioneer lawyers, 268

  Pioneer meeting of 1904, 245;
    of 1911, 250

  Pioneer, the, Physician, 275;
    race track, 179;
    recollections of Asotin county, 464;
    reminiscences, 426;
    stage lines, 160;
    wheat grower on large scale, 183

  Pioneers, advance guard of, 69;
    in business 247;
    of Asotin county, 470;
    of Whitman party of 1843, 72;
    prior to 1860 (names), 111

  Plant food, ingredients of, in soil, 3

  Plummer, Henry, 121

  Poindexter, Hon. Miles, 290

  Political annals, 335

  Political History of County division, 136

  Political history of Walla Walla city, 299

  Political history of Walla Walla county since division, 285

  Political party dissentions, 292

  Political review, 142

  Pomeroy J. M., 472;
    brings in first good stock, 380

  Pomeroy, 165
    established by J. M. Pomeroy, 360
    town of, 472
    elections, 473
    pioneer physicians of, 275
    wants county seat, 365
    townsite plat filed, 383
    fire department, 384

  Pomeroy Improvement Company, 384

  Pomeroy Republican, the, 263

  Pomeroy Reservoir, 415

  Population of Washington, 1853-1880, 474

  Population, comparisons of various Washington cities, 293

  Potter and Pomeroy build mill, 187

  Prairie chicken first met, 38

  Preachers of note in Walla Walla, 235

  Precipitation, 6

  Predictions of Gov. Moore and their fulfillment 475

  Prehistoric horse, 12

  Presbyterian missions, 80

  Prescott, the town of homes, 216;
    as grain center, 216;
    schools, 216

  Present city government of Starbuck, 352

  Present day churches at Dayton, 335

  Presidential election, 1904, 340

  Presidential vote, the, in Walla Walla county, 292

  Press of Garfield county, the, 392

  Preston, W. G., 215, 226

  Preston Hall, 215, 226

  Prevailing sentiment, democratic, 136

  Prices of foods, etc., in 1861, 120

  Prisoners, escape of, from penitentiary, attempted, 291

  Private schools, 217

  Proclamation of opening of eastern Oregon, 83

  Profits in fur trade, 44

  Prohibition, 294

  Professions, trades, etc., 194

  Provision for dairy and poultry purposes, 180

  Provisional government of Oregon, 84, 87

  Prunes raised, value, 1916, 192

  Public schools, organized, 211

  Pythias, The Knights of, 237


  Quinn, Parson, 360


  Raboin, Louis, 177

  Races, native, of Old Walla Walla county, 10

  Race track laid out in 1875, 198

  Railroad age, the, 162

  Railroad building hangs back, 167

  Rails as "legal tender", 465

  Rainfall, 1, 6

  Ready access to hip pocket, 140

  Receipts and disbursements of Walla Walla city, 316

  Recollections, by Mrs. St. George, 361

  Recollections of C. W. Clark, 455

  Recorders of Walla Walla city, 1877-1916, 306-315

  Record of elections (Garfield county), 369

  Red Cross work, 464

  Rees, Frank, 118

  Rees, R. R., 118, 257

  Rees, S. G., 258

  Reforms the whiskey dispenser, 333

  Registrars of city waterworks, 315

  Reliable, steady incomes, 185

  Religious life in Walla Walla county, 210

  Religious meetings, early, 81

  Remarkable wheat yields, 183

  "Reminiscences" by Governor Moore, 204

  Reminiscences of medical practice, 275

  Report of school superintendent, 1916-17, 325

  Reservoirs built, 149

  Residents in Oregon in 1843, 74

  Resolutions at Pioneer Meeting of 1911, 254

  Retail stores in Walla Walla, 195

  Reynolds, Almos H., 110

  Reynolds raises fine peaches, 189

  Rhubarb, 190

  Ribbon of fertile soil, 191

  Rice 18c-20c per pound, 120

  "Rice vs. County Commissioners of Garfield county", 367

  Riot in theatre, 130

  Riparia or Texas Rapids, 37

  Ritz arrives with trees, 188

  Ritz, Philip, 147

  Ritz ships flour, Walla Walla to New York, 181

  Ritz to try sweet potatoes, 189

  River improvement, 378

  River traffic under O. N. S. Co., 160

  Rivers, Indian names of, 20

  Rivers, system of, 6, 7

  Road agents, 132

  Road justified cost from start, 169

  Roads, lonely and dangerous, 278

  Roads never worked, 161

  Rocky Mountain Fur Company, the, 52

  Rogers, Cornelius, arrival of, in 1857, 64

  Rolling prairies and swelling hills, 180

  Ross, Alexander, 49

  Ross, observation of, in 1811, 50

  Routes, first, thro' northwest region, 32

  Russell, Charles, builds jail, 117

  Russian fur trade, beginning of the, 43

  Rutherford, J. K., 269

  Ryan, M., Jr., 179


  St. George, Mrs., 360

  St. Helens, Mount, the story of, 24

  St. Mary's Hospital, 223

  St. Patrick's Academy for boys, 223

  St. Paul's Episcopal church in Walla Walla, 232

  St. Pauls School, Walla Walla, 221

  St. Rose Mission, at Frenchtown, 82

  St. Vincent Academy, 224

  Sager tragedy, the, 77

  "Sahale", 23

  Sahaptin Indians, 11

  Salish Indians, 11

  Salmon River Emigration, 127

  Salmon spring festival, Indian, 26

  Saloon, chief source of revenue, 148

  Sanitary conditions in pioneer times, 276

  Sapir, Edward, 26

  Saylor, Fred A., 28

  Schnebley, Theodore, 470

  School buildings, beginning of, 210

  School children, the first, 210

  School conditions, in 1917, 214

  School districts, organization of, 211

  School districts of Garfield county, 382

  School enrollment of Garfield county, 382

  School property, value of, in 1900, 214

  School receipts and expenditures, 1897-1900, 213

  School report of 1900, 212

  School statistics of Columbia county, 324

  School statistics of Walla Walla county, 217

  School Superintendent and Pioneers in Asotin county, 468

  School tax levy, first, 211

  School teacher, the first, 210

  School, the first in Columbia county, 324

  Schools in Asotin county, 467

  Schools in Garfield county, 381

  Schools, private, 217

  Scott, Elmon, 270

  Sealth, Chief (Seattle), 29

  Sea-otter, the, 43

  Seasons, the, 4, 5

  Seattle nearly destroyed, 103

  Secret Societies, 237

  Seminary, Whitman, 218

  Semi-tropical in climate, 191

  Senatorial and legislative districts, 288

  Senatorial contests, 289

  Sentinel, the, 418

  Sergeant Smith's party, 126

  Settlement, early, of country after Whitman Massacre, 83

  Settler, the old, in a new age, 474

  Settlers, arrival of early, 64

  Settlers, early, after Cayuse war, 91

  Settlers of '59 in Columbia county, 321

  Seven millions in gold taken in 1862, 129

  Seventh Day Adventists in Dayton, 334

  Severe winter of 1861-2, 128

  Sharpstein, Hon. B. L., 288

  Sharpstein, Hon. J. L., 265

  Shaw's Company, Oregon Rifles, in Cayuse war, 86

  Sheep business grows, 180

  Sheep increase very rapidly, 176

  Sheep now in Garfield county, 381

  Sheep worth $1.00 per head, 176

  Sheriff Whitman and one Bunton, 140

  Shipments and freight rates on flour, 1867, 181

  Ships 40,000 pounds of onions, 189

  Shoemaker sends watermelon to the "Statesman", 188

  Shorthorns imported in 1864, 177

  Shoshone Indians, 14

  Shovels $12 to $16, 129

  Shushwap Indians, 11

  Sickness and death in party of 1843, 76

  "Side Hill" harvester, 193

  Silcott, John, 178

  Sims, J. A., 186

  Siskiyou Mountain Island, 2

  Sisters of Providence, 223

  Site of Orofino Mines, 125

  Six-hundred-eighty acre orchard, 190

  Six hundred miners winter at Salmon River Mines, 127

  Skomalt or Great Mother, 24

  Skyappe, the good spirit, 25

  Slavery question in Oregon, 88

  Slim Jim and Six-toed Pete, 133

  Smallpox epidemic, the, 277

  Smith, A. B., arrival of, in 1857, 64

  Smith, Hon. E. L., lifelong student of Indian legends, 30

  Smith, Jedadiah, 52;
    massacre of part of his party, 53

  Smith, R. D., 118

  Smith, Silas, 27

  Smith, W. N. and R. B., 257

  Snake River, affluents of, 7

  Snake River, description of the, 6

  Snowfall, 6

  Soil, component parts of, 3;
    conditions, 1;
    creation, 2, 3;
    depth of fertile, 3

  Sokulk Indians, 12, 37

  Some "joints" of the '60s, 130

  Some prices in 1869, 182

  Song, Indian death, 14

  Sorghum tried, 189

  Sound Indians, the, 11

  Sows one hundred and fifty acres to oats, 180

  Spalding, Eliza (Hart) diary of, 60

  Spalding, Rev. H. H.
    arrival of, 60
    at Vancouver, 62
    at Waiilatpu and Lapwai, 62
    work among Nez Perces, 63
    difficulties encountered by, 64
    at Waiilatpu before Whitman massacre, 79
    escape of, 79

  Spalding, H. M., 178

  Spanish explorers, old, 42

  Spectacular Villard excursion, 163

  Speelyi, chief God of Mid-Columbia Indians, 2, 5, 21

  Spinden, H. J., 26

  Spirit of the West, the, 260

  Spirits, Indian, 20, 21

  Spokane County laid out, 112

  Spokanes, the, 11

  Spotted Eagle, 103

  Spring festival, Indian Salmon, 26

  Squash weighs 134-1/2 pounds, 189

  Squire, Hon. Watson C., 289

  Stages became big factor, 161

  Staple, Captain, 134

  Starbuck, 165

  Start raising grain, 177

  Starvation and bounty, 13

  Statehood achieved, 475

  Statehood and constitution, 285

  Statehood, transition to, 473

  State legislature, first, 288;
    members for the four counties of the, 288

  "Statesman" urges people to get railroad, 165

  Statistics of Old and New Walla Walla county, 285

  Steamer records, 158

  Steamer service well organized in 1859, 156

  Steer-roping contests, 202

  Stephens, William, 110

  Steptoe Butte, 105

  Steptoe, Colonel, 103

  Steptoe's defeat, 105

  Steptoeville, 113

  Stevens county laid out, 112

  Stevens', General, camp, 93;
    conference of, with the Indians in 1855, 93;
    Nez Perces save day for, 94;
    new outbreak of Indians, 96, 101

  Stevens, Isaac I., first territorial governor, 92

  Stock in demand, 175

  Stock interests, the, 379

  Stock raising in Garfield county, 379

  Stolen horses recovered, 133

  Stories and names, Indian, 19

  Story telling, Indian, 19

  Strap-iron rails laid, 169

  Street commissioners of Walla Walla, 1898-1916, 311-315

  Street railway extended to Fair Grounds, 200

  Stubblefield Home, 227

  Stubblefield, Mr. and Mrs. J. L., 227

  Sturdevant, Judge, 269

  "Sublettes," the, 54

  Suffrage, Woman, 294

  Sugar 18c to 26c per pound, 120

  Sugar 40c to 50c per pound, 128

  Sugar $1.25 per pound, 129

  Summary of first events in Garfield county, 359

  Summary of recent production, 191

  Sunken forests in Columbia River, 23

  Superintendent of city schools of Walla Walla, 315

  Superintendent of Schools' report, 1916-17, 325

  Supreme court, the, 265

  Survey declared official, 115

  Surveyors of Walla Walla city, 1882-1916, 307-315

  Swift, roomy steamers, 158


  Tacoma "City of Destiny", 163

  Taggard, J. D., 190

  Tamsaky killed by Umatillas as result of Whitman massacre, 89

  Teachers' Reading Circle, 213

  Teachers' wages, 214

  Teams no competitors for railroad, 169

  Teit, James, 26

  Telegraph, Portland to Walla Walla, 151

  Temperature, 4;
    averages of, 4;
    records of, 5

  Temperature and rainfall, 1

  Ten per cent of stock survives winter, 443

  Ten thousand pounds wool shipped, 189

  Tent store in 1857, 114

  Territorial delegates, 146

  Territorial governor, the first, 92

  Territorial governor, the last, 473

  Territorial governors, 147

  Territory becomes a state, 370

  Testimony in Whitman murder trial, 90

  Texts, Coos and Umpqua, 26;
    other Indian, 27

  Theatrical performances, 119

  Thermometer measurements, 5

  Thomas, George F., 161

  Thompson, David, 49

  "Those hills reach from hell to heaven, with bunch-grass from
     top to bottom", 380

  "Thunder Bird" legends, 25

  Times of Cowboys, miners, vigilantes, 124

  Timothy, a life history of, 271, 272

  Timothy of Alpowa and his land case, 271

  Timothy saves Steptoe's command, 178

  Tolmie, Doctor, 12

  "Tomanowas Bridge," the Indian story of the, 22

  Touchet, an active business center, 217;
    its schools, 217

  Touchet, Lewis and Clark on the, 39

  Touchet belt excels in high grade apples, 190

  Touchet Pioneer, the, 264

  Touchet valley, first wheat crop in, 471

  Tough collection of human beings, 129

  Town of Dayton booms, 187

  Town of Mentor, 364

  Town of Starbuck, 351

  Town government organized, 115

  Towns of Asotin county, 418

  Towns of Garfield county, 382

  Traditions, Indian, 10

  Trades and Labor Council, the, 242

  Trades, professions, etc., 194

  Transportation, early, 155

  Trappers, early, 51

  Treasurers of Walla Walla city, 1877-1916, 306-315

  Treaties of Oregon, 84

  Treaty of Joint Occupation, of 1818, 50

  Treaty of 1846, 78

  Trees brought on muleback, 188

  Trial of Indians accused of Whitman massacre, 90

  Trial of the Timothy land case, 274

  Tribes, Indian, 11

  Tribes, the Ten Lost, of Israel and Indian lore, 25

  Trip from Wallula to Walla Walla in 1870, 161

  Troup, Capt. James, 159

  Trustees of Pietrzycki Foundation, 327

  Tucanon, 40;
    origin of the name of, 319

  Tucanon river, description of the, 7

  Tum-a-lum, 114

  Tum-a-Lum Lumbering Co., 193

  "Turkey Pen", 334

  Tushepaws, the, 12

  Two hundred thousand boxes apples, 190

  Two remarkable criminal cases, 355

  Two voting precincts, 113


  Umatilla, 124

  Umatilla Rapids, 160

  Umatillas, the, 11

  Union Transportation Company, 157

  United Brethren, 234

  U. S. Fort Walla Walla, 124

  United States Senators, first election of, 289

  "Upper Country" towns, 124

  Up-To-The-Times Magazine, the, 261


  Value of products, 1916, 192

  Value of property in Walla Walla, 1862, 116

  Varied aspects of the Fair, 200

  Vegetables and irrigation, 6

  Vegetables and melons in variety, 180

  Vessels engaged in fur trade in 1786-7, 44

  Vigilantes, etc., 124

  Vigilantes disband, 135

  Villard, Henry, 163

  Vineland Journal, the, 425

  Violin and Indian, 39

  Volcanic eruptions, 3

  Voorhees, Hon. C. S., 286

  Vote against constitutional convention, 145

  Vote for presidential electors, 1892, 338

  Vote in 1863 for Territorial Delegate, 138

  Vote, the presidential, in Walla Walla county, 292

  Voting precincts in 1860, 117

  Voyages, early exploration, 25


  Waiilatpu, origin of name of, 11;
    selected post by Dr. Whitman, 62;
    description of, 64;
    mission a center of light and help, 77;
    clouds gathering and warning indications for mission, 79;
    last days of Whitman mission, 79;
    end of, 80;
    in history, 80;
    hunting the murderers of the Whitman mission, 88, 89, 113

  Wait starts milling in Columbia county, 187

  Waitsburg Academy, 225

  Waitsburg, elections in, 317;
    charter of, 317;
    mayors of, 318;
    schools, 215

  Waitsburg Times, the, 262

  Walker, Rev. Elkanah, arrival of, 64

  Walla Walla & Columbia River Railroad, 165;
    incorporated, 168

  Walls Walla and fur-traders, 50

  Walla Walla, Catholic diocese of, 82

  Walla Walla, battle of the, 97;
    Col. Kelley's report of, 97

  Walla Walla, founding of Catholic church of, 82

  Walla Walla, origin of name of, 11

  Walla Walla Bulletin, the, 260

  Walla Walla City, 147

  Walla Walla City, Inc., 116

  Walla Walla City laid out November 17, 1859, 115

  Walla Walla City's Liberty Loan subscription, 196

  Walla Walla City's revenue for six months, 116

  Walla Walla City, as agricultural center, 293;
    churches of, 228;
    divided into wards, 300;
    election in, under local option law, 294;
    growth of, 205;
    political history of, 299;
    location of, in regard to growth, 293

  Walla Walla clubs, 238

  Walla Walla College, 224

  Walla Walla Commercial Club, 238

  Walla Walla County, beginning of, 92;
    first board of commissioners, 92;
    statistics of, after division, 285;
    political history of since division, 285;
    officials from, 1876-1916, 295-299;
    local political history of, 292;
    subscription to Liberty Loan, 196

  Walla Walla County Fair Association, 200

  Walls Walla County Press, the, 257

  Walla Walla Court House, 295

  Walla Walla Democrat, the, 261

  Walla Walla Journal, the, 259

  Walla Walla Labor Union, 241

  Walla Walla Lumber Co., 193

  Walla Walla newspapers, 246

  Walla Walla Methodist district, 230

  Walla Walla pageant of 1914, the, 206

  Walla Walla Park Association, 238

  Walla Walla Pow-wow, 201

  Walla Walla Race Track Association, 200

  Walla Walla Spectator, the, 263

  Walla Walla Statesman, the, 257

  Walla Walla treaty, 95;
    broken, 96

  Walla Walla Union, the, 258

  Walla Walla, United States senators from, 289, 290

  Walla Walla Volunteers of Cayuse war, 84

  Walla Walla Watchman, the, 261

  Walla Walla Water Company, the, 301

  Walla Walla Wild West show, 202

  Walla Wallas, the, 11

  Wallowa Basin, 7

  Wallula, 124

  Walter, W. W., 430

  Ward division of Walla Walla city, 300

  Wardens of the penitentiary, 291

  War Dress, Indian, 14

  War and peace proceedings, Early Indian, 14

  War Eagle, Cayuse brave, 87

  Warrants, municipal, 317

  Warriors, Indian, 14

  Wascos, the, 11

  Washington & Columbia River Railroad, 163

  Washington, territory of, created, 92;
    organizing territory of, 93;
    made a state, 289

  Washington Independent, the, 263

  Washington Statesman, the, 257

  Washington volunteers for Spanish war, 350

  Waterloo of the Indians, 104

  Water-courses, 1

  Water supply, 149

  Waterway system, natural, 6

  Waterworks of Walla Walla, municipal ownership of, 301;
    registrars of, 315;
    superintendents of, 315

  Waters, Lieutenant Colonel, 89

  Watetash (animal people), 2

  Wealth of Indian tribes, 12

  Weather records, 5, 6

  Webb, Nathaniel, 180

  Weinhard brewery destroyed, 350

  Weiser, Jacob, 128

  Weiser's claim, 127

  Wells, artificial, 6

  Wells, Bishop Lemuel H., 221, 233

  Weyrauch's, Major, batallion on parade, 202

  Wheat at $2.50 per bushel, 126

  Wheat at 40 cents, 181

  Wheat at $2.00 a bushel, 471

  Wheat in field seven feet high, 180

  Wheat production and value, 1916, 191

  Wheat shipped down the Columbia, 181

  Wheat, first in Touchet valley, 471

  "Where the four creeks meet", 114

  "Whisk broom with a drink", 130

  White Man's island, or Samahtumawhoolah, 24

  White women, first at Fort Walla Walla, 62

  Whites and Indians meet, 13

  Whitman, Alice Clarissa, first white child born at Waiilatpu, 1837, 62;
    death of, 63

  Whitman, Dr. Marcus, coming of, 59;
    journey of, 60, 61;
    meets Dr. McLoughlin, 62;
    selects Waiilatpu and Lapwai, 62;
    versatility of, 63;
    difficulties encountered by, 64;
    Whitman controversy, 65;
    motives of, impugned, 66;
    mid-winter ride to St. Louis, 66;
    early life history of, 68;
    on Oregon question, 69;
    guiding party of 1843, 70-74;
    letter to secretary of war, 75;
    philanthropies of, 77;
    treaty of 1846, his work, 78;
    ministering to Indians, 79;
    last days of, 79;
    murder of, 79;
    war following murder of, 80;
    the grave and the monument of, 80;
    trial of Indians accused of murder of, 90

  Whitman built sawmill, 193

  Whitman not a fighter, 417

  Whitman, Narcissa, 60;
    diary of, 60;
    at Fort Walla Walla, 61, 62;
    at Vancouver, 62;
    daughter born to, at Waiilatpu, 62;
    letter of, 63;
    instructor of Indian children, 64;
    philanthropy of, 77;
    Joseph Smith and, 78;
    murder of, 79;
    last resting place of, 80

  Whitman College, founded by Father Eells, 89;
    early teachers at, 218;
    board of trustees of, 220;
    faculty of, 220

  "Whitman controversy," the, 65

  Whitman Massacre, causes leading to, 79;
    survivors of, 79;
    war following, 80;
    tidings of, spread terror, 84;
    remains of victims of, reinterred, 87;
    hunting the murderers, 88;
    Indian chiefs executed in retribution, 89

  Whitman Mission, its place in history, 80

  Whitman's letter to Elkanah Walker, 426

  Whitney, Charles, 176

  Wholesale houses in Walla Walla, 195

  Whyama, the mythical eagle, 20

  Wilbur, Rev. J. H., 229, 235;
    stops liquor dealer, 332

  Wild Horse Creek, 133

  Wilkes, Captain Charles, 25

  Willamette Valley, history of, 71

  Willamette University, origin of, 59

  Wind Brothers, the cold (the Walla Wallas), 4, 5

  Wind conditions, 4

  Wind velocity, 5

  Wingard, Judge, 267, 268

  Wingard, S. C., 147

  Wishpoosh, the monster beaver, 2

  Wiveast, the "myth" chief, 24

  Wollawollahs, the, 40

  Woman's experience crossing the plains, 447

  Woman Suffrage, 294, 336, 370

  Woman's, Park Club, the, 206

  Women, Indian, 12

  Wormell, Mrs. Mary A., 464

  Wright, Colonel, 319

  Wyche, Judge J. E., 141

  Wyeth, Nathaniel, 52, 53;
    expeditions of, 53, 54


  Yakima branch, 165

  Yakima Indian legend, 20

  Yakimas, the, 11

  Yehl, the raven, legend of, 26

  Yelleppit, the handsome chief, 38

  Yellow Bird, 102

  Young Joseph (Hallakallakeen), 95




                          BIOGRAPHICAL INDEX


  Abbott, J. F., 523

  Adams, J. F., 632

  Anderson, Jens, 615

  Angermann, H. E., 579

  Ayres, W. E., 558


  Bartell, G. E., 514

  Becker, Martha E. (Kiblinger), 694

  Berryman, C. M., 587

  Blize, J. R., 622

  Broughton, M. H., 711

  Bruch, H. P., 648

  Bryson, H. C., 698

  Burnap, A. H., 493

  Burroughs, L. B., 649


  Cahill, A. P., 487

  Camp, J. M., 534

  Canfield, O. F., 608

  Carr, John, 653

  Claxon, A. W., 580

  Cochran, George, 594

  Corbett, L. C., 572

  Crews, C. S., 633


  Davis, J. A., 488

  Dement, C. F., 512

  Dickinson, A. C., 576


  Estes, L. W., 658

  Falkenberg, Kristian, 644


  Flathers, B. F., 564

  Fontaine, J. A., 500

  Forgey, John, 571

  Fouts, W. H. H., 604

  Fudge, Adam, 527

  Fudge, William, 588


  Gardner, H. A., 620

  Glafke, Fred, 593

  Glover, J. M., 582

  Graves, A. H., 532


  Harvey, J. W., 673

  Hastings, E. G., 679

  Herrold, B. A., 575

  Herrold, J. B., 532

  Hoffman, E. J., 513

  Hollowell, T. J., 607

  Hughes, P. J., 697

  Hunt, Gilbert, 542


  Ingalls, T. P., 626


  Johnson, Alexander, 663

  Jonas, F. A., 494


  Kaser, F. W., 517

  Kees, A. F., 685

  Keiser, F. T., 610

  Kenny, Michael, 504

  Kershaw, J. S., 496

  Klahr, F. P., 679

  Knott, E. G., 518

  Kuykendall, G. B., 551


  Labudde, Otto, 657

  Lane, C. B., 675

  Lester, Clyde, 503

  Lloyd, G. M., 674

  Lloyd, W. A., 600

  Long, Mary, 603


  McCoy, A. M., 581

  McCullouch, A. J., 506

  McKeirnan, T. B., 643

  Maiden, C. C., 691

  Minnick, G. D., 664

  Minnick, W. C., 569


  Neace, Frank, 495

  Neace, L., 621

  Neace, Louis, 561


  Pearson, A. P., 670

  Pearson, C. W., 665

  Pentecost, P. J., 546

  Prather, S. T., 512


  Rainwater, J. K., 524

  Ray, Alexander, 707

  Ray, A. L., 505

  Reser, Willis, 541

  Retzer, Charles, 599

  Robertson, J. C., 704

  Romaine, F. S., 676

  Rose, J. F., 701

  Ruchert, E. C., 703


  Schneckloth, Henry, 511

  Schwarz, Adolph, 563

  Scoggin, J. D., 703

  Shaffer, C. E., 692

  Shelton, A. L., 521

  Shelton, O. M., 521

  Snell, G. H., 625

  Snoderley, Charles, 708

  Stallcop, H. B., 592

  Struthers, W. A., 686

  Stubblefield, F. M., 647

  Sullivan, N. S., 637

  Summers, J. W., 666

  Swinney, Green, 616


  Taylor, G. B., 684

  Taylor, J. W., 654

  Thompson, J. N., 638

  Tierney, F. W., 591

  Tompkins, R. J., 712


  Van Patten, E. H., 680


  Weatherford, J. C., 494

  Weller, P. R., 634

  Wheeler, E. L., 528

  Whitmore, W. L., 554

  Williams, C. R., 619

  Wilson, H. L., 533

  Winans, A. L., 486

  Winans, G. P., 485

  Winans, P. M., 485

  Winans, W. P., 481

  Wolfe, Ida May, 522

  Wood, D. V., 693

  Woods, A. B., 702

  Woods, M. A., 650


  Yeend, J. A., 539

  Yeend, S. N., 540

  Yenney, F. P., 563





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lyman's History of old Walla Walla
County, Vol. 1 (of 2), by William Denison Lyman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LYMAN'S HISTORY OF OLD WALLA ***

***** This file should be named 46807.txt or 46807.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/8/0/46807/

Produced by Giovanni Fini, Charlene Taylor, Bryan Ness and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
generously made available by The Internet Archive/American
Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

