The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pears of New York, by U. P. Hedrick

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Pears of New York

Author: U. P. Hedrick

Release Date: September 29, 2014 [EBook #46994]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARS OF NEW YORK ***




Produced by Steven Giacomelli, Mark C. Orton, The Internet
Archive (TIA) and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
produced by Core Historical Literature in Agriculture
(CHLA), Cornell University)






[Illustration: Marshall P. Wilder]




             STATE OF NEW YORK--DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE

              Twenty-ninth Annual Report--Vol. 2--Part II

                   *       *       *       *       *




                                  THE

                           PEARS OF NEW YORK

                                  BY

                             U. P. HEDRICK

                              ASSISTED BY

                             G. H. HOWE
                             O. M. TAYLOR
                             E. H. FRANCIS
                             H. B. TUKEY

Report of the New York Agricultural Experiment Station for the Year 1921
                                  II

                                ALBANY
                     J. B. LYON COMPANY, PRINTERS
                                 1921




               NEW YORK AGRICULTURAL EXPERIMENT STATION,

                                       GENEVA, N. Y., _October_ 1, 1921.

 _To the Honorable Board of Control of the New York Agricultural
 Experiment Station_:

 GENTLEMEN:--I have the honor to transmit herewith the manuscript of
 the sixth of the series of monographs on fruits, to be entitled "The
 Pears of New York." I recommend that, under the authority of chapter
 636 of the Laws of 1919, this be submitted for publication as Part II
 of the report of this Station for 1921.

 The wide-spread use of and frequent expressions of appreciation
 for the preceding books of this series are ample justification for
 the preparation and publication of this similar treatise on pears.
 Further, the added years of experience and observation of Dr. Hedrick
 and his assistants serve to bring each successive monograph to a
 higher state of excellence and completeness. The present work is a
 splendid example of painstaking care in the collection and compilation
 of all available evidence concerning all known varieties of pears.

 With the publication of this volume, the series will include books
 on apples, peaches, plums, cherries and pears, all of our leading
 tree-fruits of the non-citrus type. The book on grapes and the
 "Sturtevant's Notes on Edible Plants" are similar treatises published
 in uniform style with those dealing with tree-fruits and it is
 hoped that the series may eventually be extended to include similar
 discussions of small fruits.

 "The Pears of New York" cannot fail to find an extremely useful place
 in the literature of fruit-growing, and its publication will be
 welcomed by the fruit growers of the State and by horticulturists the
 world over.
                                          R. W. THATCHER,
                                                      _Director_




                                PREFACE


_The Pears of New York_ is sixth in the series of books on hardy fruits
being published by the New York Agricultural Experiment Station. The
object and scope of these treatises have been given in prefaces of
the preceding books, and though this work does not differ from its
predecessors, for the convenience of readers the aim and the contents
of the book in hand are set forth in this foreword.

Broadly speaking, the aim is to make _The Pears of New York_ a complete
record of the development of the pear wherever cultivated up to the
present time. With this end in view an attempt is made: To give an
account of the history and uses of the pear; to depict the botanical
characters of cultivated pears; to describe pear growing in this
country and more particularly in New York; and, lastly, to give in
full detail the synonymy, bibliography, economic status, and full
descriptions of the most important cultivated pears with brief notices
of varieties of minor importance.

The reader will want to know what considerations have governed the
selection of varieties for color plates and full descriptions. These
are several: (1) The value of a variety for home or commercial
orchards. (2) Noteworthy new varieties. (3) Varieties desirable in
breeding new pears. (4) A few sorts are described and illustrated to
show the trend of evolution in the pear.

In the use of horticultural names the rules of the American Pomological
Society as adopted at the meeting in Columbus, Ohio, in 1919, have been
followed. With a very few varieties these rules have not been followed
since the changes required by their strict observance would augment
rather than diminish confusion.

The references given are those that have been used in ascertaining
the history and economic status or in verifying the description of
varieties. The synonyms created by pomologists whose works we have had
have been noted, but in no case are synonyms given only when quoted by
pomologists from another writer. One of the chief aims of _The Pears of
New York_ is to set straight in high degree the names of pears.

Biographical sketches of men who have been most prominent in pear
growing in the United States are to be found in the footnotes. These
are written to give in some measure the credit and honor due to those
who introduced new varieties or improved their culture. A knowledge of
the career of these men is indispensable to a full comprehension of the
industry of growing pears.

                               U. P. HEDRICK,
             _Horticulturist, New York Agricultural Experiment Station_




                           TABLE OF CONTENTS


                                                             PAGE
  PREFACE                                                       v

  INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS                                       ix

  CHAPTER   I.--HISTORY OF THE PEAR                             1

  CHAPTER  II.--SPECIES OF PEARS AND THEIR CHARACTERS          57

  CHAPTER III.--PEAR CULTURE                                   83

  CHAPTER  IV.--LEADING VARIETIES OF PEARS                    122

  CHAPTER   V.--MINOR VARIETIES OF PEARS                      236

  BIBLIOGRAPHY, REFERENCES, AND ABBREVIATIONS                 589

  INDEX                                                       599




                        INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS


  PORTRAIT OF MARSHALL P. WILDER                   _Frontispiece_

                                                      FACING PAGE
  DESCRIPTION OF A PEAR                                        68

                               VARIETIES
  ANDRE DESPORTES                                             122
  ANSAULT                                                     122
  BARTLETT                                                    124
  BELLE LUCRATIVE                                             126
  BEURRE D'ANJOU                                              128
  BEURRE BOSC                                                 130
  BEURRE CLAIRGEAU                                            132
  BEURRE DIEL                                                 134
  BEURRE GIFFARD                                              134
  BEURRE HARDY                                                136
  BEURRE SUPERFIN                                             138
  BLOODGOOD                                                   138
  BRANDYWINE                                                  140
  BUFFUM                                                      142
  CLAPP FAVORITE                                              142
  COLONEL WILDER                                              144
  COLUMBIA                                                    144
  DANA HOVEY                                                  146
  DEARBORN                                                    148
  DORSET                                                      150
  DOYENNE D'ALENCON                                           152
  DOYENNE BOUSSOCK                                            152
  DOYENNE DU COMICE                                           154
  DUCHESSE D'ANGOULEME                                        156
  DUCHESSE D'ORLEANS                                          156
  DUHAMEL DU MONCEAU                                          158
  EARLY HARVEST                                               158
  EASTER BEURRE                                               160
  ELIZABETH                                                   162
  FLEMISH BEAUTY                                              164
  FONTENAY                                                    166
  FREDERICK CLAPP                                             170
  GANSEL SECKEL                                               170
  GLOU MORCEAU                                                172
  GUYOT                                                       174
  HOWELL                                                      174
  IDAHO                                                       176
  JARGONELLE                                                  178
  JOSEPHINE DE MALINES                                        180
  KIEFFER                                                     182
  KOONCE                                                      184
  LAMY                                                        184
  LAWRENCE                                                    186
  LE CONTE                                                    188
  LEON LECLERC (VAN MONS)                                     190
  LINCOLN                                                     190
  LINCOLN CORELESS                                            192
  LOUISE BONNE DE JERSEY                                      194
  MADELEINE                                                   196
  MARGARET                                                    196
  MARIE LOUISE                                                198
  MOUNT VERNON                                                200
  ONONDAGA                                                    202
  ONTARIO                                                     202
  P. BARRY                                                    204
  PASSE COLMAR                                                206
  PITMASTON                                                   208
  POUND                                                       208
  PRESIDENT DROUARD                                           210
  PYRUS BETULAEFOLIA                                           80
  PYRUS SEROTINA                                               74
  REEDER                                                      212
  RIEHL BEST                                                  212
  ROOSEVELT                                                   214
  RUTTER                                                      214
  SECKEL                                                      216
  SHELDON                                                     218
  SOUVENIR DU CONGRES                                         218
  SOUVENIR D'ESPEREN                                          220
  SUDDUTH                                                     220
  SUMMER DOYENNE                                              222
  TYSON                                                       222
  URBANISTE                                                   224
  VERMONT BEAUTY                                              226
  VICAR OF WINKFIELD                                          228
  WHITE DOYENNE                                               230
  WILDER EARLY                                                230
  WINTER BARTLETT                                             232
  WINTER NELIS                                                234
  WORDEN SECKEL                                               234




                         THE PEARS OF NEW YORK




                               CHAPTER I

                          HISTORY OF THE PEAR


The pear has no history if history be defined as a record of evolution.
Even the annals of the pear, which but state events in chronological
order, are a heap of confused facts and dates with important data
missing at every turn. The origin of the cultivated pear is so
completely hidden in prehistoric darkness that it can never be known
precisely from what wild pear it came. The historian must content
himself with recording what the pear was when written records began;
what the touch of time has done since the first written accounts; and
what the events and by whom directed which have aided time in making
its impressions since cultivated pears have accompanied its flight.

Happily, it does not matter much what the pear was before husbandmen
appeared on the scene. But from the day the pear began to supply the
needs of men, and in its turn to require ministration from those it
nourished, its history becomes of importance to all mankind. Those whom
it helps sustain as well as those who tend the pear, may well ask:
What was the raw material when the domestication of the pear began?
How has this material been fashioned into the pear of the present? Who
began domestication and who has carried it forward? And, gauged by
past progress, what further progress is possible? These are questions
of prime importance to those who seek to improve the pear; they throw
light on the culture of the pear; and they are of general interest
to all husbandmen, and to all interested in the world's food supply.
The history of the pear is important, as has been said, only as it is
connected with the history of man. Yet, this history must begin with
the wild pear.


                              WILD PEARS

Botanists number from twenty to twenty-five species of pears, all of
which are found in the northern hemisphere of the Old World, there
being no true pear native to the southern hemisphere or to the New
World. Some ten or twelve wild pears are found in China, several of
which overrun the limits of China; three or four are natives of Japan;
at least one has its habitat in Korea; another is to be found in the
western Himalayas; while the remainder, some eight or ten species,
are found westward from Turkestan, through Persia and Asia Minor into
southern and western Europe and northern Africa. From these statements
as to habitats it is seen that pears grow wild over a very extended
area and under quite varied conditions; therefore, it would be expected
that the several species are quite distinct, differing chiefly,
however, from a horticultural point of view, in the fruits.

But three of these wild species are now under common cultivation,
though it is possible that through hybridization the blood of one or
two more are to be found in cultivated varieties. Several others have
horticultural possibilities either for their fruit, as means through
which new characters may be introduced into cultivated pears, or as
stocks upon which to grow orchard varieties. The three species of chief
horticultural importance are _Pyrus communis_ Linn., _P. nivalis_
Jacq., and _P. serotina_ Rehd.

The pear of common cultivation in ancient and modern orchards is _Pyrus
communis_, native of southern Europe and Asia as far east as Kashmir.
The species is now to be found naturalized in forests and byways of
northern Europe, as it is in parts of America, so that it is impossible
to tell precisely what its ancient habitat was. While most often to be
found in mountainous regions in the great area which it inhabits, wild
pears are common enough in the forests of Europe and western Asia so
that it is probable that most of the early inhabitants of this part
of the Old World enlivened their fare, obtained with the spear or the
bow, with ready-made food from the pear. The species runs into at least
three botanical forms, a dozen or more horticultural divisions and
between two and three thousand orchard varieties.

_Pyrus nivalis_, the Snow pear, is a small tree native of southern
Europe, more particularly of Austria and northern Italy, from which
region it has spread in modern times as an escape from cultivation
into neighboring countries. It is called Snow pear because the fruits
are not fit to eat until after snow falls. The French call it the
"Sage-leaved pear" (_Poirier sauger_), from the fact that the under
side of the leaves is covered with down so that the leaf resembles
that of garden sage. The Snow pear is cultivated in southern Europe,
particularly in France, for the making of perry for which purpose
several varieties are grown. Probably the Greeks and Romans used fruit
of this species for perry so that it may be said to have had attention
from man, if not care under cultivation, from the earliest times. It
is doubtful if it has been hybridized with _P. communis_, parent of
nearly all cultivated pears. The Snow pear is not cultivated in America
but is to be found in botanical collections.

From _Pyrus serotina_ came the Japanese, Chinese, or Sand pears of
pomologists. The species is a native of central and eastern China and
is found wild in Japan, but whether as a native or as an escape from
cultivation it is impossible to say. There are three botanical forms of
the species and possibly a score of horticultural varieties cultivated
for their fruits and as ornamentals. Of all the species of Pyrus found
in western Asia, this, in the light of present knowledge, is most
closely related to the common pear, with which it hybridizes freely.

We have now discovered in what countries the progenitors of cultivated
pears grow spontaneously, and are therefore ready to search for the
first landmarks in the domestication of the three cultivated species.
What has ancient literature to say on the subject? We turn first to the
Bible and find that the pear is not mentioned in sacred literature, and
that, according to commentators on the Sanscrit and Hebrew languages,
there is no name in the tongues of Biblical lands for the pear. Nor
should we expect ancient notices of the pear in north-west India or
Persia, for the pear does not flourish in hot countries. The survey
next turns to ancient Greece where landmarks are at once sighted which
must be put down as the earliest records of the pear, and as such
deserve full consideration.


                      THE PEAR IN ANCIENT GREECE

In ancient Greece we find the first landmarks and begin the history
of the pear as a cultivated plant. It is wrong, however, to assume
that the beginning of the cultivation of the pear, or of any plant,
was contemporaneous with the writing of even the oldest books. Mention
of a cultivated plant in a book is proof that its domestication
antedates the writing of the book. It is not easy to imagine tribes of
semi-civilized men in southern Europe and Asia who did not make use of
the apples, pears, quinces, plums, cherries, almonds, olives, figs,
pomegranates, and grapes which grew wild in this land of gardens and
orchards, and who did not minister to their needs as husbandmen long
before men wrote books. Names for orchard operations, as planting,
grafting, and pruning, in the simplest dialects of primitive peoples,
establish the fact that husbandry long antedates writing, as would be
expected from the greater need of the one than of the other.

Plutarch, a Greek writer, A.D. 50-120, enlightens us as to the early
use of the pear by the Greeks, and also as to the Grecian name for the
fruit and tree. He says in his Greek Questions (51):

 "Why do the boys of the Argives playing at a certain festival call
 themselves Ballachrades? (_Ballo_, I throw; _achras_, a wild pear.)

 "It is because they say that those who were first brought down by
 Inachus (founder of Argos) from the rural districts into the plains
 were nourished on wild pears (_achrades_). But wild pears (they say)
 were first seen by the Greeks in Peloponnesus, when that country was
 still called Apia; whence wild pears were named _apioi_. (_Apios_, a
 pear-tree; _apion_, a pear.)"

The pear is one of the "gifts of the gods" which Homer tells us grew
in the garden of Alcinoeus. It is certain, therefore, whether or not
this is the earliest mention of the pear in Greek literature, that in
Homer's time, nearly one thousand years before the Christian era, the
pear was cultivated in Greece. As this garden of Alcinoeus furnishes the
earliest noteworthy landmarks of the pear, and is moreover the most
renowned of heroic times, an early paradise of trees, vines, and herbs,
it is worth while to take a look at it with a view of discovering the
status of the pear at this early date. Stripped of the harmonious rhyme
and pleasing rhythm of Homer's poetry, the garden is described in
English prose as follows:

 "And without the court-yard hard by the door is a great garden,
 of four plough-gates, and a hedge runs round on either side. And
 there grow tall trees blossoming, pear-trees and pomegranates, and
 apple-trees with bright fruit, and sweet figs, and olives in their
 bloom. The fruit of these trees never perisheth, neither faileth
 winter or summer, enduring through all the year. Evermore the West
 Wind blowing brings some fruits to birth and ripens others. Pear upon
 pear waxes old, and apple on apple, yea, and cluster ripens upon
 cluster of the grape, and fig upon fig. There too hath he a faithful
 vineyard planted, whereof the one part is being dried by the heat, a
 sunny plot on level ground, while other grapes men are gathering, and
 yet others they are treading in the wine-press. In the foremost row
 are unripe grapes that cast the blossom, and others there be that are
 growing black to vintaging. There too, skirting the furthest line,
 are all manner of garden beds, planted trimly, that are perpetually
 fresh, and therein are two fountains of water, whereof one scatters
 his streams all about the garden, and the other runs over against
 it beneath the threshold of the court-yard, and issues by the lofty
 house, and thence did the townsfolk draw water.--These were the
 splendid gifts of the gods in the palace of Alcinoeus.[1]"

Divested of the spell with which the poet's flight of imagination
bewitches us, we find that the wonderful garden of Alcinoeus is, after
all, rather trifling, probably of small extent, and containing an
orchard, a vineyard, garden beds and two fountains of water, which
brings us to the conclusion that this renowned garden would cut but a
sorry figure beside modern gardens; but, on the other hand, we are made
sure that certain fruits, among them the pear, were commonly cultivated
in Greece a thousand years before Christ's time. There is no hint in
Homer as to whether there were as yet varieties of pears, or as to
whether fruits were as yet pruned, grafted, fertilized and otherwise
cared for. For indications that these arts of the orchard were under
practice, we must pass on to the writings of another great Greek,
Theophrastus.

Between Homer and Theophrastus nearly 600 years intervene, in all
of which time traces of the pear are few and uncertain. But from
Theophrastus, to whom botanists accord the title "Father of Botany," we
know that orcharding had been making progress, and that the pear, among
other fruits, must have been as well known and nearly as well cared
for in his time, 370-286 B.C., as in this twentieth century. All the
expedients we now know to assist nature to bring pears to perfection,
save spraying and cross-pollination, were known to Theophrastus,
although of course the evolution from the wild state as indicated by
number and diversity of kinds had not progressed so far. Out of one of
the books of Theophrastus, _Enquiry into Plants_, a very good treatise
on the pear might be compiled and one better worth following than
many of his more modern imitators. To quote Theophrastus at length is
impossible, but space must be given to a summary of what he says about
pears.

Theophrastus distinguishes between wild and cultivated pears and
says that the cultivated forms have received names. He speaks of
the propagation of pears from seeds, roots, and cuttings and makes
plain that plants grown from seed "lose the character of their kind
and produce a degenerate kind." Grafting is described. The nature of
the ground is said to regulate the distance for planting pears, and
the lower slopes of hills are recommended as the best sites for pear
orchards. Root-pruning, girdling the stems, and driving iron pegs in
the trunk and other methods of "punishing" trees are said to hasten the
bearing time. Even the necessity of cross-pollination is recognized
though of course the reasons for it are not known. Thus, Theophrastus
says: "Trees which are apt to shed their fruit before ripening it are
almond, apple, pomegranate, pear, and, above all, fig and date-palm;
and men try to find the suitable remedies for this. This is the reason
for the process called 'caprification'; gall-insects come out of the
wild figs which are hanging there, eat the tops of the cultivated figs,
and so make them swell." The growth of the pear on various soils and in
diverse situations is compared; he makes mention of a "peculiar, red
and hairy worm" which infested the pear of these old Greek orchards. In
Pontus, it is stated, "pears and apples are abundant in a great variety
of forms and are excellent." "General diseases" are enumerated as
"those of being worm-eaten, sun-scorched, and rot." Certain affections
due to season and situation are mentioned, as freezing, scorching, and
injury from winds.

This is but a brief epitome of what Theophrastus writes of the pomology
of the Greeks, and only topics in which the pear is specifically
mentioned are set down and not all of these. By inference, one who
reads Theophrastus might apply much more to the pear. Yet enough has
been said to prove the point that pear culture was as well established
in Greece 300 years B.C. as in 1900 years A.D. One leaves Theophrastus,
satisfied that pear-growers of his day had about the same problems that
growers have nowadays and solved them by the same sort of reasoning
intelligence.

In crediting Theophrastus as the earliest writer on pomology, we may
assume that there were earlier writers from whom he must have received
much knowledge. Perhaps greater writers on botany and pomology preceded
him, since he cites older authors on the same subjects whose books have
been lost. His alone of the books of its kind have come down to us from
ancient Greece. Theophrastus was the friend and pupil of Aristotle,
another philosopher and prince of science, and both in turn were taught
by Plato. Who shall say, then, from whence Theophrastus received his
knowledge? Aristotle is said to have written two books on botany
antedating the _Enquiry into Plants_ of Theophrastus, neither of which
has survived the passing centuries. May not these great minds have
been indebted to authors whose books and names have perished? These
speculations serve to remind us again that the beginnings of botany and
pomology long antedate written records.

There were Greeks who wrote on agriculture after Theophrastus, and
before the Roman treatises on farm management, a few of which are to be
mentioned in the next topic. Of books, as monuments of vanished minds,
however, there are none to indicate the activities of Greek farmers who
wrote, but there are citations to show that ancient Greek literature
on farming was voluminous. Thus, Marcus Terentius Varro (B.C. 116-28),
called "the most learned of the Romans," in his eightieth year wrote a
book on Roman agriculture for the guidance of his wife in the practice
of farming. Learned old Varro believed in "book farming," or science
with practice, of which we hear so much nowadays. He begins his
treatise by invoking Greek and Roman deities to aid his wife, and names
fifty monographs on husbandry written by Greeks, in which, he tells
this early farmerette, she will find all of the practical information
she needs. This is but one of several sources from which we learn that
in the making of books on agriculture there was no end in the heroic
days of Greece as in modern times.


                       THE PEAR IN ANCIENT ROME

Italy, by common consent, is the garden of the world, and it would
be strange if the pear had not been taken to this favored land with
the earliest tillers of orchards, or if attempts had not been made to
domesticate the wild pears found in the northern mountains. And so we
may assume, with no very definite proofs, that the pear was cultivated
in ancient Rome some hundreds of years before the Christian era. In
Cato, the first book written in Latin on agriculture, the pear is
discussed, and six varieties are named and described. What had this
illustrious Roman, known generally as a statesman and scholar, to do
with pomology?

Marcus Portius Cato (B.C. 235-150), called the elder Cato, besides
serving Rome in state and army, wrote a treatise on farming,
fruit-growing, and gardening, which, first of its kind in Latin
literature, may be read with greater profit than the works of most
writers of our own day in agriculture. Cato was preeminently the first
agricultural philosopher, and no one who has followed him has packed
more shrewd agricultural philosophy in a book than he. But it is as
a pomologist that Cato concerns us most at this time. Cato describes
almost every method of propagating, grafting, caring for, and keeping
fruits known to twentieth-century fruit-growers. He describes, also,
many varieties of fruits, as well as of vegetables, grains, and breeds
of farm animals. Among Cato's fruits are six varieties of pears. What
is of especial interest in this history is that Cato writes as if the
practices of agriculture and the plants and animals he described were
not only established but ancient in his time.

Varro, whose standing as a Roman writer on agriculture is noted above,
says nothing of varieties of pears, but gives directions for grafting
pear-trees, among other methods that of inarching of which he seems
the first ancient writer to take note, thereby justifying, in small
degree, it is true, the appellation often given him, "the most modern
of all the ancients." Varro also tells how pears should be stored.
While, therefore, he says nothing that helps in following the evolution
of the pear, yet his accounts of grafting and storing make plain the
fact that this fruit was a standard product of the times. Were it worth
while, still other early Roman treatises on husbandry might be quoted
to establish the place of the pear in the agriculture of ancient Rome,
but it is chiefly in the evolution of the fruit we are concerned and so
pass from Varro to Pliny, who, in his _Natural History_, adds to Cato's
six varieties thirty-five new sorts, giving a total of forty-one for
the generation following Christ.

Pliny, more or less discredited as a scientist because he was a
compiler and, as the men of science for science sake never forget to
point out, at all times of a utilitarian bent of mind, makes a most
important contribution to the history of the pear as a domesticated
fruit. Indefatigable compiler as he was, few cultivated pears of his
or more ancient times could have escaped his notice, and the thread of
the utilitarian running through his _Natural History_ makes all the
more important what he has to say in this study of the domestication
and improvement of the pear. A good authority says that there are sixty
manuscript copies of Pliny and eighty different editions, no two of
which are exactly alike. Allowing some latitude, therefore, to the
translator, Pliny's descriptions of pears run as follows:

 "For the same reason (as in the case of apples) in the case of pears
 the name Superba (proud) is given; these are small, but earliest
 ripe. The Crustumia are most pleasant to all; next to these the
 Falerna, so called from the wine, since they have such abundance of
 sap or milk, as it is called; among these are those which others
 call Syrian from their dark color. Of the rest, some are called by
 one name in one place and by another in another. Some by their Roman
 names reveal their discoverers, as the Decimiana, and what they call
 the Pseudo-Decimiana, derived from that; the Dolabelliana with their
 long stalk; the Pomponiana of protuberant (full-breasted) shape;
 the Liceriana; the Seviana and those which spring from these, the
 Turraniana, distinguished by their length of stalk; the Favoniana
 of reddish color, a little larger than the Superba; the Lateriana;
 the Aniciana, which ripens in late autumn and has a pleasant acid
 flavor. The Tiberiana are so called because the Emperor Tiberius
 was very fond of them. They get more color from the sun and grow to
 larger size, but otherwise are the same as the Liceriana. These bear
 the name of the country from which they come; the Amerina, latest of
 all; the Picentina; the Numantina; the Alexandria; the Numidiana; the
 Greek and among them the Tarentine, the Signina, which others from
 their color call Testacea (like tiles, or brick-colored), like the
 Onychina (onyx) and Purpurea (purple). From their odor are named the
 Myrapia (myrrh-pear), Laurea (laurel), Nardina (nard); from their
 season the Hordearia (barley, at the barley-harvest); from the shape
 of their neck the Ampullacea (flask). The Coriolana and Bruttia have
 family-names (Coriolanus, Brutus); the Cucurbitina (gourd-pears) are
 so called from their bitter taste. The origin of the name is unknown
 in the case of the Barbarica and the Veneria which they call colored;
 the Regia, which are attached to a very short stalk; the Patricia; the
 Voconia, which are green and oblong. Virgil mentions also the Volema,
 taken from Cato, who names also the Sementiva and the Mustea.[2]"

It is pertinent to inquire, now, as to what types of pears the ancients
had. Such an inquiry leads up to another and much more important
question: Have new characters appeared in pears since Pliny wrote? If
so, it may be possible that we shall be forced to assume that man's
dominancy over this fruit has produced the new characters, in which
case search might be made for the key to unlock more new characters.
For the present, however, only the first question can be considered,
before going into which it is necessary to know what the most prominent
characters of the pear are. Only those of the fruit need be named.

There are twenty outstanding characters which differentiate the
varieties of pears now cultivated, not taking account of those
introduced by the hybridization of _P. communis_ with _P. serotina_
which has given pomology the Kieffer-like varieties. These characters
are: Smooth or russet skin; red, yellow, or green color; large or
small size; early or late season; long or short stem; round, oblate,
ovate, and pyriform shapes; granular, buttery, or breaking flesh;
sweet or acid flavor. In the pears described by Pliny so many of
these characters are mentioned or may be assumed to be present from
inference, that the conclusion is forced that in the many new pure-bred
pears of _P. communis_ which have come into existence since Pliny's
time, showing a great shuffling of characters in pear-breeding, it is
doubtful whether new characters have come into being in 2000 years.
This, in turn, forces the conclusion that if this fruit is to be
greatly changed, the change must come about through hybridization with
other species.

Another quotation from Pliny shows that the Romans valued pears
as a medicine as well as a food, had curious notions as to their
digestibility, and, as with most plants, ascribed other marvelous
qualities to them. Thus, Pliny says:

 "All kinds of pears, as an aliment, are indigestible, to persons in
 robust health, even; but to invalids they are forbidden as rigidly as
 wine. Boiled, however, they are remarkably agreeable and wholesome,
 those of the Crustumium in particular. All kinds of pears, too,
 boiled with honey, are wholesome to the stomach. Cataplasms of a
 resolvent nature are made with pears, and a decoction of them is
 used to disperse indurations. They are efficacious, also, in cases
 of poisoning by mushrooms and fungi, as much by reason of their
 heaviness, as by the neutralizing effects of their juice.

 "The wild pear ripens but very slowly. Cut in slices and hung in the
 air to dry, it arrests looseness of the bowels, an effect which is
 equally produced by a decoction of it taken in drink; in which case
 the leaves are also boiled up together with the fruit. The ashes of
 pear-tree wood are even more efficacious as an antidote to the poison
 of fungi.

 "A load of apples or pears, however small, is singularly fatiguing
 to beasts of burden; the best plan to counteract this, they say, is
 to give the animals some to eat, or at least to show them the fruit
 before starting."

There is in the books of these old farmer-writers a mass of sagacious
teachings which can never be outlived--will always underlay the best
practice. Followed carefully, except in the matter of pests, the
precepts of Cato and Varro would as certainly lead to success as the
mandates of the modern experiment stations with all the up-to-date
appliances for carrying out their commands. Sagacity fails, however,
in one respect in these Roman husbandmen--all are fettered by
superstitions. In these old books on the arts of husbandry, woven in
with the practical precepts, which stand well the test of science,
superstitions abound beyond present belief. Thus, whenever the
discourse turns to pears, from Diophanes, who lived in Asia Minor a
century before Christ, down through the ages in Greece, Italy, France,
Belgium to the eighteenth century in England, runs the superstition,
with various modifications, that to grow the best pears you must bore
a hole through the trunk at the ground and drive in a plug of oak
or beech over which the earth must be drawn. If the wound does not
heal, it must be washed for a fortnight with the lees of wine. As the
superstition waned, the apologetic injunction usually follows, that, in
any event the wine-lees will improve the flavor of the fruit. Another
superstition, current for centuries, accepted by Cato and Varro, and
handed on with abiding faith almost to modern times was, as stated by
Barnaby Googe, a farmer and writer subject of Queen Elizabeth, "if you
graffe your peare upon a Mulbery, you shall have red Peares." Stories
of promiscuous grafting abound in the old books. Another is that if an
apple be grafted on the pear, the fruit is a "pearmain."

After Pliny follows a dreary and impenetrable period of 1500 years,
in which time but few new facts regarding the evolution of the pear
come to light in what is now Italy. The pear is mentioned, it is true,
by many Roman writers, but all copy Theophrastus, Cato, and Pliny.
Dioscorides, a learned Greek physician and botanist, who may be said to
have been the author of the first book of "applied science" in botany,
was the great botanical and pomological authority for the first 1600
years of the present era, many editions of his book appeared and in
several languages, and it is he who is most often quoted by writers
on fruits even until the seventeenth century, but he adds nothing new
on the pear, and does not even extend the list of known varieties.
During these 1600 years a great number of voluminous commentaries
on Dioscorides appeared, in several of which names of new pears are
mentioned, but, with the exception of one writer, the descriptions are
so terse that the new sorts cannot be connected with older or later
periods. The exception is Matthiolus (1501-1577), but since the English
herbalists, in their turn, largely copy Matthiolus, with valuable
amplifications, it is better to give space further on to them.

Perhaps one more name should be mentioned among the Roman writers.
Messer Pietro de Crescenzi, an Italian born at Bologna in 1230, wrote
a book on agriculture in which the chapters on fruits are especially
well written. For reasons to be mentioned, this book had a remarkable
influence on the horticulture of Europe for the next three or four
centuries. With the discovery of printing, nearly two centuries after
the book was written, Crescenzi was published in numerous editions and
in several languages to the great enlightenment of pomologists on the
cultivation of fruits, but with small additions to the knowledge of
the fruits themselves. Whether because the book was really the most
serviceable of its kind in the world for four centuries, or whether
by virtue of the happy circumstance of being many times printed, it
had absolute supremacy over other agricultural texts, is now too
late to judge. There is good reason to suspect that Crescenzi's is
the precedence of circumstance, for he stole page after page from
Palladius, of the fourth century, who, to be sure, in his turn, copied
Columella and the Greeks. Most of these borrowings, however, meet the
requirement of being "bettered by the borrower" that separates adoption
from plagiarism.

One other landmark, though a somewhat inconspicuous one, in the history
of the pear in Italy, is deserving brief mention. Toward the middle of
the sixteenth century Agostino Gallo, an Italian, wrote _The Twenty
Days of Agriculture and the Charms of Country Life_. With the fall of
the Roman Empire in the fifth century, agriculture was reduced to the
production of the necessities of life and pomology all but perished.
It required a thousand years to recover from the domination of the
barbarian conqueror of Rome. Hence, it is not surprising that Gallo
names but twelve varieties of pears instead of the forty-one of Pliny.
Gallo says that he does not name all of the summer pears, but leaves
the inference that his list is complete for autumn and winter sorts.
There probably was a greater number under cultivation at this time
in Italy, but Gallo's list shows that the number was small. Gallo
is regarded as the restorer of agriculture in Italy after the dark
ages, and as one of the most enlightened men of his time, so that we
may accept him as an accurate historian. Besides furnishing a list
of the pears of his day in Italy, Gallo names two that are now under
cultivation--Bergamot and Bon Chretien.


                          THE PEAR IN FRANCE

Who introduced the pear in France matters little. The Greeks who
founded Marseille 600 B.C. may have done so. The Romans, masters
of ancient Gaul for centuries, undoubtedly planted pears at widely
separated places and in earliest times of Roman occupation. Or,
and quite possibly, the original natives of the land began the
domestication of the pear for, as we have seen, two cultivated species
grow wild in what is now France. Date and manner of introduction matter
less than a recognizable landmark in the history of the pear as an
orchard plant in France. There is such a landmark and a conspicuous one.

Charlemagne, the many-sided genius who ruled the Franks in the ninth
century, exercised his powerful influence in behalf of agriculture
during the time of his reign, and to him is due credit for establishing
the first notable landmark in the history of the pear in France. We
are well informed of Charlemagne's various activities while in power,
for official annals were kept at the Frankish Court. Charlemagne's
secretary has left a biography of his master, and many of the King's
_Capitularies_, or lists of laws, are extant. In these records,
agriculture is a matter of constant comment and the pear is often
up for discussion. One quotation serves to show that this fruit was
cultivated in considerable variety in Charlemagne's orchards.

In the _Capitulaire de Villis_, Chapter LXX, Charlemagne is reported
to have commanded his orchardists to plant pears of distinct kinds for
distinct purposes. That the command was of sufficient importance to
be recorded in a capitulaire indicates that Charlemagne esteemed this
fruit. The order runs: "Plant pear trees whose products, because of
pleasant flavor, could be eaten raw, those which will furnish fruits
for cooking, and, finally, those which mature late to serve for use
in winter." There is little information in this brief command, but it
tells us that a considerable number of varieties of pears were grown
in France in the ninth century, and that they were of sufficient
importance to hold the attention of a great and busy monarch.

Either the culture of the pear abruptly ceased with the death of
Charlemagne or records ceased to be kept that would throw light on
the agriculture of the next five centuries, for from the tenth to the
fifteenth century is an uncharted waste in the history of the pear in
France. Undoubtedly pears were cultivated during this time by the monks
who had the time, the taste, and the land for carrying on agriculture.
When the pear comes to light again in the happier period for pomology
of the sixteenth century, the many names of monasteries in the list of
varieties suggest that the monks not only busied themselves with the
culture of the fruit but greatly increased the number of kinds of pears.

Three great minds now appeared to make France the leading country
in the production of agricultural literature in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries and all paid attention to pomology. The names
of Charles Estienne, Olivier de Serres, and Le Lectier in agriculture
mark the departure from traditions handed down from the old Greeks and
Romans to the beginning of a new agriculture founded on first-hand
study and observation. The printing-press, it is true, was now an
invaluable ally, but these three men were of an original bent of mind
and would have been distinguished in any period before printing.

Charles Estienne, the first and the least of these three early geniuses
of French agriculture, published several works on agriculture, mostly
compilations, but all containing original observations, in one of
which, his "Seminarium," printed in Paris in 1540, is a list of sixteen
pears with brief descriptions of each. Not one of Estienne's pears is
now important, but all appear in the histories of minor sorts in the
last chapter of this text.

De Serres, known in France as "The Father of Agriculture," published
his _Le Theatre d'Agriculture_ in 1608, a book ever to be notable in
agriculture as the first to break wholly away from the 1600 years
of repetition of book after book in the languages of Europe which
but copied the ancients. De Serres was a good farmer--most of his
farming operations have not been improved upon; he founded the first
experimental farm of which there is record at his home near Pradel
and so became the first of a long line of modern experimenters in
agriculture. Lastly, De Serres was a charming writer and his book
rapidly ran through many editions and was translated into several
languages. To him must be given credit for first sounding the alluring
call of "back to the land" which rings from nearly every page of his
books. Here is his appeal to plant pears; and words could hardly make
it simpler, more charming, and more compelling:

 "There is no tree among all those planted which abounds so much
 in kinds of fruits as the pear tree, whose different sorts are
 innumerable and their different qualities wonderful. For from the
 month of May to that of December pears good to eat are found on the
 trees. In considering particularly the different shapes, sizes,
 colors, flavors, and odors of the pear, who will not adore the wisdom
 of the creator. Pears are found round, long 'goderonnees'[3] pointed,
 blunt, small, and large. Gold, silver, vermillion, and satin green are
 found among the pears. Sugar, honey, cinnamon, clove, flavor them.
 They smell of musk, amber, and chive. In short, so excellent are the
 fruits that an orchard would not be worth while in a place where pear
 trees do not thrive."

This laudation of the pear, in which it is made manifest that many
pears of diverse shapes, colors, flavors, and perfumes existed in the
year 1600, is all that space permits from De Serres, though much could
be quoted as to the care of pear orchards, and a list of kinds could
be given, of which, however, the descriptions count for but little. Le
Lectier, to whom we now come, is a better authority on varieties.

Le Lectier, an attorney of the king at Orleans, was an amateur fruit
collector, but a collector who reflected and printed his reflections.
He seems to have been about the first of the many collectors who,
with fruit-growing as an avocation, have zealously sought to improve
and distribute varieties, and thereby have done as much or more for
pomology than those who have made fruit-growing a vocation. Though Le
Lectier collected all of the fruits of his time and country, the pear
was mistress of his passion, a passion which gave him such pleasure
that it excited others to become amateurs and emulate him. The result
was that a country-wide taste for pears was stimulated and a veritable
craze for this fruit was started--everybody planted pears.

The famous collection of fruits was begun by Le Lectier in 1598. By
1628, the infatuation to plant had progressed until Le Lectier could
send to his fellow amateurs a catalog of his possessions of fruits
with the desire to exchange. His offer to exchange shows all of the
collector's zeal. It reads as follows:

 "I beg all those who have good fruits (not contained in the present
 Catalogue) when he obtains them to inform me of it, so that I can have
 grafts of them in exchange for those which they have not, but which
 they wish to get from me, and which I will furnish them.

              "Signed, Le Lectier, Attorney of the King at Orleans.
                                       20th of December, 1628."

From Le Lectier's list we learn that 300 years ago the French had at
least 254 pears. In this catalog are many pears in the pomologies
of today, but, unfortunately without descriptions or any attempt
to determine duplicates in names or varieties, the list serves for
little more than a monument for one of the first and one of the most
zealous collectors of pears. Le Lectier, however, may be said to have
introduced the golden age of pomology in France; for, during historical
times there seems to have been no other period in which pomology
exercised the minds and hands of well-to-do people as in the century
that followed Le Lectier. Even the kings of France took pleasure in
using the spade and the pruning-knife. La Quintinye, the best of
the pomological writers of the day, complained that the country was
overwhelmed with books on pomology. Thus, was ushered in the period
which we may call our own in which the history of the pear may be read
in books innumerable.

As steps in the progress of the pear, the number of varieties may be
noted as given by French pomologists in the modern era of pear-growing.
Merlet, 1667, describes 187 varieties; La Quintinye, 1690, 67; Duhamel,
1768, 119; the Chartreuse fathers, 1775, 102; Tollard, 1805, 120;
Noisette, 1833, 238; while Leroy, 1867, from whom the figures just
given were taken, says that in the half century preceding, the number
of pears in France was quadrupled and that there are 900 varieties
for which there are 3000 names. Leroy notes three events as the cause
of the generous multiplication of pears in the period of which he
writes: The introduction of the many varieties grown by Van Mons and
other Flemish pomologists beginning about 1805; a little later, the
establishment of exchange relations with English nurseries; and still
later, 1849, the importation of a great number of new varieties from
America. To Americans, it is particularly significant to note that the
great progress of the pear in France is due to amateur tendance and not
commercial success.


                          THE PEAR IN BELGIUM

Providence ordained Belgium to produce the modern pear. The evolution
of the pear proceeded slowly, indeed, until its culture became common
on the clayey and chalky soils in the cool, moist climate of Belgium,
where flavor, aroma, texture, size, and color reach perfection. The
pear was improved more in one century in Belgium than in all the
centuries that had past. The part Providence played in endowing the
Belgians with an ideal soil and climate for the pear, is but one of
two causes of the results in improving the pear in this country. The
other is that the Belgians, ever notable horticulturists, give the
pear assiduous care, cultivate only the most approved varieties, and
in breeding, aim ever at high quality, so that Belgian pear-growers,
as well as an ordained soil and climate, must be given credit for the
modern pear.

The early history of the pear in Belgium follows step by step that of
the pear in France. In the sixteenth century, botanists were numerous
in the Low Countries, their zeal and activity showing forth in several
of the best of the early herbals. These herbalists, however, gave scant
attention to the pear. Dodoens, most noted Belgian botanist of the
century, dismissed the matter of varieties with the statement that the
names change from village to village, and that it is therefore useless
to give them. From this we may assume that a considerable number of
pears were cultivated in Belgium at the time Dodoens wrote, about the
middle of the sixteenth century.

Pear-breeding began in Belgium about 1730, when Nicolas Hardenpont,
1705-1774, a priest in his native town of Mons, made a large sowing of
pear seed with a view of obtaining new pears of superior quality. Time
is fleeting in breeding tree fruits, and the Abbe Hardenpont waited
nearly 30 years before introducing his selected seedlings, and then,
beginning in 1758, he introduced one new variety after another until a
dozen or more new pears were accredited to him. At least six of these
are still grown in Europe, but only one, the Passe Colmar, is known
in America. But before going further with the work of the Belgian
breeders, it is necessary to take stock of what was on hand before
their time.

La Quintinye, the most noted French pomologist of his time, in 1690
listed 67 pear varieties. The Belgians probably had all of these.
What were they? Most of them were old sorts--some were centuries old.
All, so far as their histories show, originated by chance in garden,
orchard, hedge row, and forest. No one seems yet to have planted seed
with a view of obtaining new and better pears. Camerarius in 1694
had made known the fact of sex in plants. Soon after, experiments in
hybridization began, but no one as yet had hybridized pears. Lastly,
nearly all pears, before the Belgians began to improve them, were
crisp or breaking in flesh, the _crevers_ of the French, while the
soft-fleshed, melting pears, the _beurres_ of the French, were as
yet hardly known. Now, mostly owing to the work of the Belgians, the
buttery pears predominate.

Of the means by which Hardenpont obtained his superior pears, there
is no precise knowledge. Whether his new sorts were lucky chances
out of a large number of promiscuous seedlings, or whether he was a
pioneer in hybridizing can never be known. Du Mortier, a distinguished
Belgian botanist, gives the credit of hybridization to the Abbe, basing
his opinion on the fact that the characters of most of Hardenpont's
varieties are plainly a commingling of two well-known parents which
could hardly be the case if they were happy chances were fate ever so
kindly disposed.

Hardenpont soon had many imitators in Belgium. Indeed, the Belgians
seem to have been quite carried off their feet by pear-breeding, and
during the first half of the nineteenth century a fad like the "tulip
craze" of Holland and the "mulberry craze" of America reigned in the
country. Among the breeders are found the names of priests, physicians,
scientists, apothecaries, attorneys, tradesmen, and gentlemen of
leisure. The introduction of new varieties made notable in horticulture
the towns of Mons, Tournaii, Enghien, Louvain, Malines, and Brussels.
The awarding of medals for new pears produced the horticultural
sensations of the times. Hundreds if not thousands of new varieties
were introduced, of which many, it is true, have proved worthless,
others of but secondary merit, while still others, as we shall find,
are even now among the best pears under cultivation. But the great
fact, be it remembered, is that these amateur pear-breeders wrought
in a few years a complete transformation in a fruit that had been
domesticated and had been fairly stable for over 2000 years.

A few names besides Hardenpont stand out prominently and must be
mentioned. Of these, Van Mons is best known. Jean Baptiste Van Mons,
1765-1842, was a pharmacist, physicist, and physician, one of the
savants of his time, who, late in the eighteenth century, under the
potent spell cast by Hardenpont's work, began to breed pears. Space
forbids an account of Van Mons' experiments. Suffice to say that he
introduced more than two scores of pears having lasting merit, and
that in the height of his career he had in his "Nursery of Fidelity"
at Louvain, eighty thousand seedlings. Van Mons outlives in fame the
Belgian pear-breeders of his time because he propounded a theory for
the origination of new varieties of plants, and this in its turn
is famed as the first complete system of plant improvement. Van
Mons contributed but little of direct value to plant-breeding, but
indirectly he gave a great impetus to breeding pears and to the culture
of the pear, more especially in America, and we must therefore glance
at his theory and trace more in detail its influence on American
pear-growing.

Van Mons' theory, in brief, as expounded in various papers, is: A
species does not vary in the place in which it is born; it reproduces
only plants which resemble itself. The causes of variation are changes
in soil, climate, or temperature. Whenever a species produces one or
many varieties, these varieties continue to vary always. The source
of all variation, which is transmissible by sowing, resides in the
seeds. The older a variety, the less the seedlings vary, and the more
they tend to return toward the primitive form, without being able ever
to reach that state; the younger or newer the variety, the more the
seedlings vary.

In putting his theory in practice Van Mons took the first seeds from
wild plants or those little improved, from which he grew seedlings,
and from these the seeds were taken from the first fruits to ripen for
new sowings. This practice he repeated generation after generation.
Thus, it is seen that Van Mons was an early apostle of selection. He
is said to have distributed over 400 varieties, about 40 of which are
still under cultivation. It is to be feared, however, that Van Mons'
theory was preconceived without experiment or even observation for a
foundation. He devoted a life of most admirable zeal to verifying and
developing this vision of his early years with some material reward
it is true, but with a better foundation his prodigious labors would
have yielded greater direct results in improving the pear. Still, the
indirect results, his influence on the pomologists of two continents,
even though they did not subscribe to his theories, was more valuable
than the work of one mind and one pair of hands could possibly have
been.

There must always be pioneers, men who stray from beaten paths, but
pioneers seldom exert wide and deep influence at once--leave the worn
path, so to speak, and at once construct a macadamized road--yet this
was what Van Mons did. Pomologists agree that until his time no man had
exerted so profound an influence on pomology. His love of discovery
and love of labor permeated fruit-growing in Europe and America.
Fortunately, it was the age of the amateur fruit-grower. Pleasure
and progress, driven by curiosity, counted for more than commercial
success, so that Van Mons' new varieties at once gave him wide fame.
He was made known to American pear-growers by Robert Manning who
distributed his new varieties in this country and described them in
the horticultural literature of the day and in his _Book of Fruits_
published in 1838. Later, Andrew Jackson Downing, the brilliant genius
of American horticulture, published Van Mons' theories and described
many of his new pears in his _Fruits and Fruit Trees_, which came from
the press in 1845. Thus, Van Mons became the recognized authority in
America on all matters relating to the pear. Indeed, it is hardly too
much to say that we owe him obligations as the founder of pear-culture
in this country.

But the work of the Belgians does not end with Van Mons. There were
other breeders of pears, who, though not to be classed with Van Mons
as a Titan, lacking the quality of mind to set forth a new philosophy,
helped to enliven the impulse given by their leader to the improvement
of the pear by originating new varieties. Chief of these are Major
Esperen, of Malines, who introduced twenty of the pears mentioned in
the _Pears of New York_; Bivort, who has twenty-three to his credit;
Gregoire, forty-two; Simon Bouvier, eleven; De Jonghe, six; and De
Nelis, five. While, if the lists of varieties in the last two chapters
of this text be scanned for Belgians who introduced but one, two, or
three new pears, the list runs up into the hundreds. Labor finds its
summit in the work of these Belgian pear-breeders, who obtained petty
rewards by sifting millions of seedlings through the coarse meshes
of the sieve of selection. We can pardon these enthusiastic breeders
with grace for over-zealousness in naming varieties obtained with such
prodigious efforts.


                THE PEAR IN CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPE

The pear can be improved only where the pear-tree flourishes, and then
only when assisted by the foresight and desire of men. This happy
combination seems not to exist in Europe outside of Italy, France,
Belgium, and England. The pear flourishes along the Danube, in parts
of Austria and southern Germany, and along the upper Rhine, but
the people of these regions seem to have been followers rather than
leaders in developing this fruit, having produced almost no meritorious
varieties. America is indebted to the vast region of central and
western Europe for but one major variety, the Forelle, and this sort is
of little importance.

Pomology, the world over, however, is indebted to Germany for much
valuable pomological literature. Cordus, Mayer, Christ, Diel, Dittrich,
Truchsess, Hinkert, Dochnahl, Oberdieck, Engelbrecht, Lauche, and
Gaucher, all Germans, and Kraft, an Austrian, have been industrious
compilers, and have given pomology some of its best texts on systematic
pomology.

Cordus, earliest German pomological writer, wrote an illuminating
chapter in the history of the pear, which must be reproduced. Valerius
Cordus, 1515-1544, a botanical genius, made botanical expeditions
to nearly every part of Germany, in the course of which he made
special study of the apple and the pear. He described fifty pears and
thirty-one apples. These descriptions are noteworthy as the earliest
for these fruits in Germany. Cordus is called by one great botanist,
"the inventor of the art of describing plants;" by another, he is said
to have been "first to teach men to cease from dependence on the poor
descriptions of the ancients and to describe plants anew from nature;"
a third botanical authority says of him, "the first of all men to excel
in plant description;" while a fourth writes of the four books of his
_Historia Plantarum_ "truly extraordinary because of the accuracy
with which the plants are described." Thus, botanists accord him
special distinction, but pomologists seem not to know this resplendent
systemist of the sixteenth century, who, as we shall see, is especially
deserving of pomological recognition.

Cordus is entitled to honor in the history of pomology as first to
print descriptions of fruits for the purpose of identifying varieties.
No doubt as soon as the earth ceased to furnish spontaneously the
primitive luxury of ready-to-eat food in the shape of fruit, making
culture necessary, varieties were acquired and became commodities as
they are today. Varieties were certain to originate under cultivation,
and their value was certain to be recognized by our first ancestors, to
whom the convenience, necessity, and expediency of having a diversity
of kinds of any fruit as well as of a means of keeping them true to
kind, must have been apparent at the beginning of fruit culture. That
such was the case, the most ancient sacred and profane writings assure
us. Varieties of the fig, olive, grape, and other fruits are mentioned
by all early writers on plants. That varieties of fruits would not come
true to seed was early known, and propagation by cuttings, layers,
and grafting was invented to preserve choice sorts. Many of the early
writers name varieties, tell from whence they came, and some set forth
a remarkable character or two, but none give detailed descriptions.
Cordus was first to engage in this sort of enterprise.

This chapter from Cordus is important, too, because it makes plain that
the pears grown in Germany four hundred years ago possessed all the
characters to be found in modern pears. Culture has increased size,
modified shapes, augmented flavors, brightened colors, and softened
textures, but no characters that can be considered new or distinct,
unit characters of the plant-breeder, have been introduced in the
four centuries that have gone by. The characters possessed by these
German pears are the same, so far as can be made out, as those of the
varieties grown by the Greeks and Latins nearly 2000 years earlier.
From this, the inference must be drawn that the characters of the pear
have not originated under cultivation but exist in wild types. New
and distinct characters can come only by hybridization with another
species. Pears within a species are changed only by a recombination of
the characters possessed by the species.

The descriptions of varieties from Cordus[4] that follow are commended
to pomologists as models of brevity and accuracy. These word-pictures
reproduce the pears as vividly as an artist could paint them. One sees
at once that Cordus was no compiler. Such descriptions as Cordus writes
can be made only in the orchard with the pear in hand.

 "The domesticated pear-tree is like the wild tree in trunk, bark,
 timber, leaves and blossoms, but has straighter and more shapely
 boughs and leaves a little larger. Of the fruits themselves, which we
 call pears, there are innumerable kinds, of which we will describe
 some that are found in Germany, adding also their German names, which
 vary, however, in the different provinces.

 "_Probstbirn_, that is, Provost pear, so-called from their broad base,
 near the stalk end in a blunt point, have a length of three inches,
 breadth a little less. Their color is pale green, speckled with green
 spots or dots; they are astringent to the taste, and by the abundance
 of their juice extinguish thirst. They ripen at the beginning of
 autumn, and quickly decay because of the abundance of watery and
 rather cold juice. They are found in abundance at Eisleben near the
 Harz forest in Saxony.

 "_Speckbirn_, that is, Lard pear, swell in the middle with a thick
 belly, from which they suddenly taper off into a point; they have a
 length of more than three inches, a width somewhat less than three
 inches; they are of pale color, and like the Provost, speckled with
 green dots, rather mild and sweet to the taste, dissolving in the
 mouth like lard, whence they have received their name, and with the
 abundance of their juice they quench thirst; when they are peeled they
 give a sweet odor. They ripen at the beginning of autumn and very
 easily decay.

 "_Kaulbirn_, that is, Ball pear, have almost the roundness of a globe,
 except that near the stalk they rise to a blunt and inconspicuous
 circle. Their length is scarcely two inches; they rarely exceed this,
 but in width slightly exceed their length. In color they are pale
 green, in taste and smell they rival the Lard with which also they
 come to ripeness; these too easily decay. They are found at Eisleben.

 "_Hanffbirn_, that is, Hemp pear, are like the Ball but a little
 larger; they have a green color, marked with spots or dots; in taste
 they correspond to the Ball, but do not dissolve so readily in the
 mouth; they ripen at the same time, and are easily affected by decay.
 These too are found at Eisleben.

 "_Glockenbirn_, that is, Bell pear, from a broad base narrow down to a
 sort of narrow neck and then end in a blunt head; they have quite the
 shape of a bell, whence they have received their name. They are wholly
 of a yellow color spotted with dots, in length a little less than
 three inches, but in width they do not reach two inches. They have no
 unpleasant odor, especially when peeled; in taste they correspond to
 the Hemp, and reach maturity at the same time, and easily decay. They
 grow in abundance at Eisleben.

 "_Koenigsbirn_, King's pear, or _Regalbirn_, Rule pear, that is, Royal
 pear, are large and big-bellied; they have a length sometimes of four
 inches, a width a little less; they are of bluish-gray color, but in
 that part where they have had the sun they become slightly red. They
 are astringent to the taste and with a copious juice, and that sweet
 and something like wine, they allay thirst. They ripen when the sun
 has entered Libra, and do not so easily decay.

 "_Klunssbirn_, that is, Lump pear, are of two varieties; both kinds,
 however, correspond proportionately in shape to the Royal, but are
 inferior to them in size. There is a difference in color, for one
 kind has a bluish-gray color, the other reddish-gray. They have a
 juice similar in flavor to the Royal but more acid. They ripen with
 the Royal. In Saxony there is great abundance of them, especially at
 Hildesheim.

 "_Bonnebirn_, that is, Bonn pear, so-called from the city of Bonn
 on the Rhine, from which they have been transplanted into other
 districts. They have an almost spherical shape, except that near the
 stalk they end in a blunt point. They are three inches in length, a
 little less in width. Their color is on one side green or pale, on
 the other, where they have been touched by the sun, reddish. They
 are moderately acid to the taste, and abound with copious juice,
 rather watery, very refreshing in effect. They ripen when the sun is
 hastening toward Scorpio. They are abundant at Marburg in Hesse.

 "_Schmalzbirn_ that is, Butter pear, so called because they melt in
 the mouth like fat or some liquid mixture; their fruit is generally
 swollen at the lower end and gradually tapers to a narrow neck toward
 the stem. Like gourds they are three inches in length or often more,
 but in breadth two and a half inches. They have a pale yellow color, a
 pleasing fragrance, but are very acid in taste, with the admixture of
 a peculiar, winey flavor; when insufficiently ripe and not thoroughly
 chewed or too greedily devoured they sometimes stick in the throat and
 choke the breathing; on the other hand, when ripe and well masticated
 they melt in the mouth like fat. They ripen before the sun passes into
 Libra. They are found in Hesse, especially in Frankenberg, where there
 is great abundance of them.

 "_Junckfrauenbirn gross_, that is, Maiden pear, large, are like the
 Lump pear in color and shape, but in size somewhat smaller. In taste
 they are powerfully astringent, so that they irritate the throat and
 contract the lips into a pucker like a maiden's kiss. They have a
 watery juice mixed as it were with sour wine. They ripen at the end of
 summer. At Brunswick in Saxony they are very abundant.

 "_Junckfrauenbirn klein_, that is, Maiden pear, small, from a swelling
 belly they end in a narrow neck; they have a length a little less than
 three inches, but in breadth somewhat exceed an inch and a half; they
 are of beautiful color, as if one should mix dark blue-green with
 reddish-purple; they are besides speckled with dots, acid in taste,
 and in like manner are easily dissolved in the mouth. They ripen at
 the beginning of autumn. They are much cultivated at Eisleben.

 "_Hamelsswenstebirn_, that is, Ram's paunch pear, have received their
 name from the fact that in their swelling shape they resemble the
 bellies of wethers; they swell as it were with a thick paunch; reach
 three inches in length and often even more, but less in width. In
 color they are bluish-gray, but slightly reddish on that side which
 they have turned to the sun. They have a very acid flavor, with a
 certain pleasantness and a winey juice. They ripen at the end of
 summer. They are found in Hesse and neighboring districts, and there
 are preferred to other pears.

 "_Loewenbirn_, that is, Lion pear, so called from their excellence;
 these are called Hessiatica in Thuringen and neighboring districts;
 their fruit is remarkable, holding the supremacy among all autumn
 fruits for duration and excellence of taste and juice. They are
 swollen in the lower part and generally unequal; they have a length
 of three inches and often greater; in width they not rarely exceed
 two inches. They are of greenish gray color, slightly reddened. They
 have an astringent taste of marked pleasantness. They abound in
 copious juice, winey, sweet-smelling, and very refreshing, so that
 they speedily quench thirst; indeed the pears themselves by their
 strong aromatic odor wonderfully revive the sick. They ripen when the
 sun has entered Libra; finally when stored away they last for a long
 time. They abound in Hesse, especially at Marburg and likewise at
 Frankenberg, a town near Marburg. They are called Barber's pear, from
 a certain barber who first introduced them there.

 "_Hangelbirn_, that is, Hanging pear, are equal to the Butter in
 shape, color, and size; they hang from a long stalk, whence they have
 received their name; in flavor they differ from the Butter, for their
 juice is not so winey nor so acid; they have a simpler flavor, not
 composed of so many qualities. However, they ripen at the same time.
 These too are cultivated in Hesse.

 "_Margarethenbirn_, that is, Margaret's pear, are so called because
 they become ripe about St. Margaret's Day, when the sun is entering
 into Leo. They end in an oblong neck; in length they reach three
 inches, in width hardly two inches. They have a reddish-blue color.
 Their pulp is tender and juicy, of very sweet taste, easily melting in
 the mouth; they have a very pleasant smell. They abound at Brunswick
 in Saxony.

 "_Winterbirn_, that is, Winter pear, from a round shape become
 slightly conical; they are less than three inches in length, little
 more than two inches in breadth. They have a green color, a very hard
 substance, so that they scarcely give way to the teeth. In taste they
 are very acid and refreshing, quenching the thirst with a watery, sour
 juice. They ripen late in autumn after all other fruits, after they
 have been touched with frosts and cold. They are found at Frankenberg
 in Hesse.

 "_Knochenbirn_, that is, Bone pear, have received their name from
 their hardness; from a swelling belly they end gradually in a short
 and narrow neck. They rarely exceed two inches in length and an inch
 and a half in breadth. They have a light reddish color; they are of
 such hard substance that they cannot be chewed raw but only when
 cooked. They have a very acid taste. They ripen at the beginning of
 autumn. They are cultivated at Frankenberg in Hesse.

 "_Augustbirn_, that is, August pear, would be almost round except that
 they end in a short point. Their length is a little more than two
 inches, their width a little less. They have a yellow color, at times
 turning to pale red. In taste they are acid, with a peculiar sweetness
 of juice. They ripen early in August, whence they have received
 their name. They are short-lived and do not last long. They abound
 everywhere in Hesse.

 "_Honigbirn gross_, that is, Honey pear, large, end in an oblong cone:
 they are two inches and a half in length, but in breadth hardly reach
 two inches. They have a bluish-gray color verging on yellow, and a
 surface not so smooth; in taste they are acid and abound in sweet
 juice; they ripen at the beginning of autumn, lasting for a while.
 They are found at Wittenberg in upper Saxony.

 "_Honigbirn klein_, that is, Honey pear, small, are of conical shape,
 in length do not exceed an inch and a half, in width are a little
 less; they have a light reddish color, a flavor very sweet and
 pleasant, whence they have received their name. They melt readily in
 the mouth of those who taste them. They ripen soon after the August
 pear. They abound in Hesse.

 "_Muscatellerbirn_, that is, Musk pear, are very small and conical, in
 length a little more than an inch, in width a little less. Their color
 is green tinged with red, their taste most sweet and aromatic, as if
 it were flavored with a little musk, whence their name. They easily
 melt in the mouth; they have also a pleasing odor. They ripen in June.
 They are carefully cultivated in Meissen.

 "_Schaffbirn_, that is, Sheep pear, are like the larger Honey in size,
 shape and color, but a little more oblong and narrow. They have a very
 sweet flavor, moderately astringent, and easily dissolve in the mouth
 on account of the tender softness of their pulp and juice. They ripen
 when the sun is hastening toward Libra. They are found in Frankenberg
 in Hesse.

 "_Waxbirn_, that is, Wax pear, are big-bellied at the lower end, at
 the upper end taper off into a cone; in length sometimes exceed three
 inches by a little, but in width rarely exceed two inches. They have
 a yellow or wax-like color, whence their name has been given them,
 but on that side where they have received the sun they invite those
 who look upon them to eat them by their pleasing, speckled redness.
 They have a sweet flavor, slightly astringent; their pulp is soft and
 easily melts in the mouth. They ripen when the sun has entered Virgo;
 they are short-lived and do not last long. They are found at Marburg
 in Hesse.

 "_Rostbirn_, that is, Rust pear, are big-bellied in the middle and
 narrow down at both ends; in length three inches and a half, in
 width two inches and a half. They have a yellow color, speckled with
 bluish-gray spots; they have a very mild, sweet flavor, and easily
 melt in the mouth; because of their extreme softness they last a very
 short time. They ripen at the beginning of autumn. They are cultivated
 at Eisleben and neighboring towns.

 "_Aschbirn_, that is, Ash pear, have their name because they are
 soft like ashes and easily dissolve in the mouth. They resemble the
 Rust pear in shape, color, quality of pulp, and flavor; but are a
 little smaller, and more conical at one end toward the stalk, though
 sometimes they become big-bellied in the middle like the Rust. They
 ripen with the Rust. They are cultivated at Eisleben.

 "_Drinkebirn_, that is, Drink pear, are so called because like a drink
 they drive away anybody's thirst. They are swollen in the middle and
 end in a blunt point; in length a little over two inches, in width
 scarcely two inches. Their color is wholly yellow, but they redden
 on that side which is exposed to the sun; they have a sweet flavor,
 tender pulp, abounding with copious and drinkable juice. They ripen
 with the Rust and quickly decay just as they do. They are cultivated
 in the country near Eisleben.

 "_Eyerbirn_, that is, Egg pear, have received their name from
 their shape, which becomes conical at both ends like a short egg;
 otherwise they do not differ much from the Drink pear in proportion
 and shape. They are, however, a little smaller, have a yellow color
 speckled with dots. In flavor they rival the Rust and like them are
 moderately astringent; they have a very sweet fragrance, ripen with
 the Drink pear, and quickly decay. They too are found at Eisleben and
 neighboring towns.

 "_Pfaltzgraeuischbirn_ (Palatinate grayish-pear), that is, Palatina,
 which are called Mass pear in Hesse, are the most excellent of the
 short-lived ones, and in like manner generally end in a cone; in
 length they reach two inches and a half, in width rarely exceed two
 inches. Their color is mid-way between saffron and reddish purple.
 They have a tender, juicy pulp, an exceptionally sweet flavor,
 aromatic as it were. They have a most pleasing fragrance both when
 they are whole and when they are cut, surpassed in excellence by no
 other variety of pear. They ripen at the end of August, when the sun
 has entered Virgo. They are found in the Rhine Valley, in France,
 Hesse, and many other regions.

 "_Spindelbirn_ or _Rautenbirn_ (Rhombus pear), that is, Spindle pear,
 are like the Rust in shape, color, and size, but a little narrower;
 in substance and flavor they differ from them, since they consist of
 harder pulp and so last longer; they have a flavor astringent and at
 the same time sweet. They ripen with the Rust, and are cultivated in
 the country about Eisleben.

 "_Zuckerbirn_, that is, Sugar pear, are a little more than two inches
 in length, rarely as much in width; of greenish color; they have a
 tender pulp, melting easily in the mouth like sugar, sweet and of
 pleasant flavor. They ripen with the Egg pear and do not last long.
 They are cultivated in the country about Eisleben.

 "_Packelemischbirn_, that is, Paclemiana, are like the Sugar in size
 and shape; their color is green and bluish-gray; their surface is
 rather rough, their pulp hard, juicy, and acid. They ripen with the
 Sugar, and if they receive no injury they do not easily decay, but may
 last for some time, as most others do which have hard pulp and acid
 taste. They are cultivated in the country about Eisleben.

 "_Kirchmessbirn_, that is, Church Mass pear, are round and
 big-bellied, and end toward the stalk in a long, narrow, and much
 attenuated point. In length they are three and a half inches, in
 breadth over two inches, though even smaller ones are produced. They
 are yellow in color, tender and juicy in pulp, and like the Palatina
 and Drink in flavor. They ripen in autumn and last almost until the
 sun enters Sagittarius. They are found at Wittemberg.

 "_Knaustbirn_ or _Gelbe Honigbirn_ (Yellow Honey pear), that is,
 Bread Crust pear, have a broad base and are swollen and almost round,
 toward the stalk ending in a short, blunt, and rounded point; both in
 length and in breadth they sometimes exceed two inches and a half,
 but rarely; they are of yellow color, speckled generally around the
 bottom; they resemble the larger Honey in color and acidity; their
 pulp is rather hard but juicy, stony around the seed-receptacles. They
 have a flavor between that of the larger Honey and the Lion and that
 very pleasing. They ripen in autumn and sometimes last almost to the
 winter solstice. They are cultivated at Wittemberg and neighboring
 places.

 "_Klosterbirn_, that is, Cloister pear, swell out with uneven belly
 and toward the stalk become conical; they reach three inches in length
 and not much less in breadth. They have a yellow color, speckled with
 green dots; their pulp is rather hard and somewhat stony; their taste
 mildly astringent and of slightly glutinous sweetness. They ripen with
 the Bread Crust pear and last as long. They are found in the country
 about Wittemberg.

 "_Glassbirn_, that is, Glass pear, are round and slightly conical;
 in length they generally reach two and one-third inches, in breadth
 a little over two inches; their color is light green verging on
 yellow; their flesh is tender, juicy, astringent to the taste, sweet
 and winey; they ripen with the Rust a little before the beginning of
 autumn. There is an abundant crop of them at Eisleben and neighboring
 towns. They last until the sun enters Sagittarius.

 "_Kirchbirn_, that is, Church pear, have an oblong oval shape but
 end in a cone rather than an oval. They reach two inches in length,
 in width somewhat exceed an inch and a half. Their color is on one
 side yellowish-green, on the other, where they have received the sun,
 reddish. Their pulp is hard, rather juicy, slightly sour to the taste,
 and very astringent. They ripen at the end of summer and last for a
 long time. Of these too there is an abundant crop at Eisleben.

 "_Quittenbirn_, that is, Quince pear, like the Cloister pear, swell
 out with uneven belly, and toward the stalk end in a short point,
 like the conical Cotonea, but protuberant ones are also found, whence
 the name was given them. In breadth as well as length they exceed
 two inches and a third. They have a green color, a hard, juicy pulp,
 rather winey and astringent to the taste. They ripen at the beginning
 of autumn and last till the winter. They are found at Eisleben.

 "_Parissbirn_, that is, Parisiana, are round at the lower end and
 taper to a point at the upper end. Their length is two and a half
 inches, their width not over two inches, or rarely more. Their color
 on one side is yellow, but on the other, where they have felt the sun,
 purple. Their pulp is juicy, their taste pleasantly astringent. They
 ripen with those before mentioned, lasting into the winter. There is
 an abundant crop of them in the country about Eisleben.

 "_Weybersterbenbirn_, that is, Women's Death pear, would be round,
 except that toward the stalk they end in a short, blunt point. They
 generally exceed two inches in breadth as well as in length. They have
 a yellow color, saffron towards the base, speckled with purple dots.
 Their pulp is hard and rather stony, with juice slightly sour to the
 taste and very astringent, like the Church pear, with which also they
 ripen. They last into the winter. They are cultivated in the country
 about Eisleben.

 "_Koelbirn_, that is, Cabbage pear, are large, almost round, tapering
 to a cone, three inches in length and one-half to one-third of an
 inch less in breadth. They have a pale green color, one side slightly
 reddish and speckled with dots. Their pulp is rather hard, juicy,
 somewhat sour and very astringent to the taste, like the Women's Death
 pear, with which also they ripen, and they last as long. They are
 cultivated at Eisleben.

 "_Hoelpenerbirn_, that is, Hollow pear, are large, big-bellied, uneven,
 and conical; in length they sometimes exceed two and a half inches,
 in width almost equal their length. Their color is green; they have a
 juicy pulp, winey in taste, slightly acid, and more astringent than
 the Brassicana. They ripen at the beginning of autumn, and last long
 into the winter. There is a large crop of them in the country about
 Eisleben.

 "_Safftbirn_, that is, Sap pear, are like the Hollow pear but a little
 smaller and less uneven, of a greenish-yellow color; their pulp is
 solid and when cut sheds a copious juice, when chewed passes almost
 wholly into juice and very little dry substance remains; when the
 juice is swallowed, it is cool to the taste, somewhat acid, winey, and
 astringent. They ripen at the beginning of autumn and last for a long
 time. They are found at Wittemberg.

 "_Eierlingebirn_, that is, Little-egg pear, have received their name
 from their oval shape; in shape and size they are midway between the
 Drink and the Egg pear; their color is yellow, speckled with reddish
 dots on a dark background. They have hard, juicy pulp, acid to the
 taste, winey, and astringent. They ripen at the beginning of autumn
 and last for a long time. They grow at Wittemberg.

 "_Kruselbirn_, that is, Curling pear, in shape resemble a top which
 boys throw upon the ground wound up with a string to make it spin. In
 length they reach three inches, in width two and a half. Their color
 is pale green, speckled with many green dots or spots; their pulp
 is solid, juicy, very astringent to the taste, somewhat acid and
 pleasant. They last until the sun has passed Aquarius or Pisces. They
 abound in Meissen.

 "_Bratbirn gross_, also called _Fregelbirn_, that is, pears for
 roasting, are about the largest of all, for sometimes they weigh a
 mina (about 15.2 ounces) and a half; they are of globular shape,
 sometimes conical, and frequently irregular; of a color midway between
 pale green and red, redder on one side. They have a pulp with pleasant
 juice, astringent, partaking somewhat of acid. They grow in Meissen,
 especially at Leisnig and Koldit.

 "_Grauchenbirn_, that is, Gray pear, have received their name from
 their color, since they are ash-colored and at the same time greenish.
 They are small and of globular shape, measuring an inch in breadth as
 well as in length; in appearance are in no way different from some
 of the wild pears; in taste are soft, mild, sweet, with a pleasantly
 astringent quality; they last till after the winter solstice. They
 grow in the country about Meissen and Leipzig.

 "_Gelbrotebirn_, that is, Yellow-red pear, have an oblong pyramidal
 shape, generally reaching a length of three inches, and a width of
 two inches. Their color on one side is yellow, on the other saffron
 and purple; their pulp is soft, astringent to the taste, pleasant,
 slightly acid, and watery. They ripen at the beginning of autumn, and
 last till the winter solstice. They grow at Hildesheim in Saxony.

 "_Gruenlingebirn_, that is, Green pear, are quite large, since
 sometimes they exceed three inches in length, two inches in breadth;
 they have an oblong pyramidal shape, a green color, a juicy pulp,
 sharply astringent to the taste. They ripen at the beginning of
 autumn, and last till after the solstice. There is a large crop of
 them at Hildesheim.

 "_Wasserbirn_, that is, Water pear, rival Green pear in size, they
 have a shape big-bellied in the middle and taper to a point at both
 ends, sharper and more oblong toward the stem, but shorter and blunter
 near the base. Their color on one side is pale, speckled with dots, on
 the other reddish, pale on the edges. They have juicy pulp, watery and
 rather pleasant to the taste. They become ripe with the Green pear but
 do not last so long. They grow at Hildesheim.

 "_Kegelbirn_, that is, Cone pear, have the shape of a pine cone, and
 from a rather broad base end in a point; their length is three inches,
 their width two; their color on one side green, on the other reddish.
 Their pulp is juicy, harsh to the taste. Their maturity falls at the
 beginning of autumn, from which time they may last till the winter
 solstice. They are produced at Hildesheim."


                          THE PEAR IN ENGLAND

Much as America owes England for fruit, farm, and garden crops, she
is but little indebted to her for pears. Varieties of pears have come
to the New World almost wholly from Belgium and France, not more
than three or four major sorts of English origin being among those
now commonly grown in America. But even though the line of march in
the development of varieties scarcely touches England, all English
speaking pear-growers have received instruction as to culture and have
had knowledge of continental varieties transmitted to them through
English publications. In the history of fruits in England, therefore,
many gleams of light illuminate the path along which the pear has been
brought from the ancients to America.

No doubt the pear was brought to Britain before the Roman conquest.
Tacitus, in the first century, says the climate of Britain is suitable
to the culture of all fruits and vegetables except the grape and the
olive. Pliny writes that the Britains had the cherry before the middle
of the first century, and almost certainly the pear and other fruits
were introduced with it. There was, also, a Saxon name for the pear,
_pirige_, so philologists say, before the fall of the Roman Empire. The
years 43 and 407 mark the beginning and the end of the Romans and of
civilization in Britain for many centuries, and whether or not the pear
was permanently established during this time there are now no means
of ascertaining. The climate and soil of England are congenial to the
pear, however, and no doubt wild or little cultivated trees persisted
until the Norman conquest, the spread of Christianity, and the building
of many monasteries with orchards and gardens as essential adjuncts.

Even in England under the Normans who came in 1066, not much progress
was made in fruit-growing. Tillers of the soil were hard pressed for
the necessities of life and could only with difficulty harvest a
bare sustenance from the land. Besides, monks and nobles preyed on
the starving peasants so that at no time could the farmer be sure of
reaping what he planted. Only these monks and nobles enjoyed luxuries.
But even men who boasted of titles and owned large holdings of land
had little room within fortified walls and on moated islands, which
constant wars made necessary, for fruits; nor had they time from
projects of war and the pleasures of the chase to devote to the art of
agriculture. Fortunately, priors and abbots were well disposed toward
the good things of life, therefore made much of fruits and vegetables,
and with abundance of leisure the monks became the only proficients of
the times in gardening and orcharding. Moreover, they were in constant
correspondence with the continent and could ascertain what culture was
needed to grow perfect fruits. Pear culture had its beginnings in
England, then, in the monasteries established under the Normans.

Pressed for an exact date as to when the pear began to be cultivated
in England, the historians would be troubled to name one. There is a
plan of the monastery of Canterbury made in 1165 which shows an orchard
and a vineyard. History, moreover, relates that armed men collected in
an orchard to take hand in the murder of Thomas Becket in 1170. Men in
those days set small store by written accounts, and history must be
helped out by imagination, and we may imagine that there were pears in
this orchard.

Pears by this time had become common, for there are records of
varieties to a considerable number and in large quantities which could
have been had only from rather extensive orchards. Mrs. Evelyn Cecil[5]
publishes documents from the Record office of England which contain
items of pears bought for Henry III and Edward I at different times in
the thirteenth century, the first date being "probably for the year
1223." The pears appear to be of French origin, and the varieties are
Caloels, Pesse Pesceles, Ruler, and Martyns. In a later memorandum,
1292-93, still other varieties are named as the Regul, Calwel, Dieyer,
Sorell, Chryfall, and Gold Knoper. The pears were sold by the hundred
and were used for desert, though "pears in syrup" and pears for cider
are mentioned. The perusal of these documents, printed in considerable
detail in Mrs. Cecil's admirable book, enables us to fix the beginning
of commercial pear culture in England at as early a date as 1200.

Passing by several other references from records and financial accounts
of monasteries in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries as too vague to
be of importance, although they make certain that the pear was rather
widely cultivated in England in these two centuries, we come at last
to a noteworthy landmark in pear history in England, the introduction
of the Warden pear, which may be put at the conveniently vague date of
the end of the fourteenth century, 1388 being the first year they are
mentioned.

"Warden" was a name used for centuries to designate a group of pear
varieties having crisp, firm flesh and which were used for culinary
purposes. Their history runs back to the Cistercian Abbey of Warden
in Bedfordshire and to a date earlier than 1388. Warden pears were
favorites for centuries for pies and pastries which every early
cook-book contained recipes for making. In the early English literature
they are considered a distinct fruit as "apples, pears, quinces,
wardens," and even the herbals and early fruit books count them as
distinct. Shakespeare's clown in _A Winter's Tale_ says: "I must have
saffron to colour the Warden pies." The name came to signify any
long-keeping, cooking pear and even yet is so used in parts of England.

The most noteworthy landmark is found in the discussions of pears by
the English herbalists of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.
Turner, the first of these herbalists, in his _Herbal_ of 1551,
mentions the pear but without important details, though we may infer
from what he says that the pear is now a common fruit. Thomas Tusser,
in his _Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandrie_, published in 1573,
gives a list of fruits to be set or removed in January in which he
includes "pears of all sorts," and then as a separate item includes
"Warden, white and red," showing that "Wardens" were held as distinct
from the pear and that they were prominent in the orchards of the time.
The century ends with John Gerarde's _Herball or Generall Historie
of Plantes_, 1597, in which we are brought to the realization that
the pear is no longer a probationary fruit or even to be considered
a novelty or luxury but a standard food product. Gerarde might well
be quoted in full, but since Parkinson, a few years later, contains a
"fuller discourse," as one of Gerarde's editors says, we take but a few
sentences from Gerarde.

Varieties by this time had become numerous. Gerarde, while he names
but eight, says he knew someone who grew "at the point of three score
sundrie sorts of Peares, and those exceeding good; not doubting but
that if his minde had beene to seeke after multitudes he might have
gotten together the like number of those worse kindes ... to describe
each pear apart, were to send an owle to Athens, or to number those
things without number." Eight sorts are considered worth figuring,
those accorded the honor being: "the Jenneting, Saint James, Royall,
Beugomot, Quince, Bishop, Katherine, and the Winter Peare." Of these
the Katherine is given further prominence by being listed as "known to
all." If one is to judge from number of varieties, the pear at this
time is a more general favorite than the apple, a considerably greater
number of sorts being indicated.

Parkinson's account in his _Paradisus_ of 1629, indeed does prove to be
a "fuller discourse" for he names and describes 65 sorts; but these are
not all for he says: "The variety of peares is as much or more then of
apples, and I thinke it is as hard in this, as before in apples, for
any to be so exquisite, as that hee could number up all the sorts that
are to be had: for wee have in our country so manie, as I shall give
you the names of by and by, and are hitherto come to our knowledge:
but I verily beleeve that there be many, both in our country, and in
others, that we have not yet knowne or heard of; for every yeare almost
wee attaine to the knowledge of some, we knew not of before. Take
therefore, according to the manner before held, the description of one,
with the severall names of the rest, untill a more exact discourse be
had of them, every one apart." Some of the names in Parkinson's list
are group names covering several varieties. Thus, he says, "the Winter
Bon Chretien is of many sorts;" and again, "the Winter Bergomot is of
two or three sorts;" and, "the Winter peare is of many sorts."

Parkinson's descriptions are brief but written with rare clearness, and
the old herbalist seems to have possessed a nicety of observation that
commends him to all who have eyes for the distinguishing characters of
fruits. With Parkinson our history of the pear in England must come to
a close, since later accounts are available to all, and therefore as an
important inventory, and because every word is pertinent, his account
of varieties is republished.

 "The Summer bon Chretien is somewhat a long peare, with a greene and
 yellow russetish coate, and will have sometimes red sides; it is ripe
 at Michaelmas: Some use to dry them as they doe Prunes, and keepe them
 all the yeare after. I have not seene or heard any more Summer kindes
 hereof then this one, and needeth no wall to nourse it as the other.

 "The Winter bon Chretien is of many sorts, some greater, others
 lesser, and all good; but the greatest and best is that kinde that
 groweth at Syon: All the kinds of this Winter fruit must be planted
 against a wall, or else they will both seldome beare, and bring fewer
 also to ripenesse, comparable to the wall fruit: The kindes also are
 according to their lasting; for some will endure good much longer than
 others.

 "The Summer Bergomot is an excellent well rellished peare, flattish,
 & short, not long like others, of a meane bignesse, and of a darke
 yellowish greene colour on the outside.

 "The Winter Bergomot is of two or three sorts, being all of them small
 fruit, somewhat greener on the outside then the Summer kindes; all
 of them very delicate and good in their due time: For some will not
 be fit to bee eaten when others are well-nigh spent, every of them
 outlasting another by a moneth or more.

 "The Diego peare is but a small peare, but an excellent well rellished
 fruit, tasting as if Muske had been put among it; many of them growe
 together, as it were in clusters.

 "The Duetete or double headed peare, so called of the forme, is a
 very good peare, not very great, of a russettish browne colour on the
 outside.

 "The Primating peare is a good moist peare, and early ripe.

 "The Geneting peare is a very good early ripe peare.

 "The greene Chesill is a delicate mellow peare, even melting as it
 were in the mouth of the eater, although greenish on the outside.

 "The Catherine peare is knowne to all I thinke to be a yellow red
 sided peare, of a full waterish sweete taste, and ripe with the
 foremost.

 "The King Catherine is greater than the other, and of the same
 goodnesse, or rather better.

 "The Russet Catherine is a very good middle sized peare.

 "The Windsor peare is an excellent good peare, well knowne to most
 persons, and of a reasonable greatnesse: it will beare fruit some
 times twice in a yeare (and as it is said) three times in some places.

 "The Norwich peare is of two sorts, Summer and Winter, both of them
 good fruit, each in their season.

 "The Worster peare is blackish, a farre better peare to bake (when as
 it will be like a Warden, and as good) than to eate rawe; yet so it is
 not to be misliked.

 "The Muske peare is like unto a Catherine peare for bignesse, colour,
 and forme; but farre more excellent in taste, as the very name
 importeth.

 "The Rosewater peare is a goodly faire peare, and of a delicate taste.

 "The Sugar peare is an early peare, very sweete, but waterish.

 "The Summer Popperin  } both of them are very good dry firme peares,
                       } somewhat spotted, and brownish on the
 "The Winter Popperin  } outside.

 "The greene Popperin is a winter fruit, of equall goodnesse with the
 former.

 "The Soveraigne peare, that which I have seene and tasted, and so
 termed unto me, was a small brownish yellow peare, but of a most
 dainty taste; but some doe take a kind of Bon Chretien, called the
 Elizabeth peare, to be the Soveraigne peare; how truely let others
 judge.

 "The Kings peare is a very good and well tasted peare.

 "The peare Royall is a great peare, and of a good rellish.

 "The Warwicke peare is a reasonable faire and good peare.

 "The Greenfield peare is a very good peare, of a middle size.

 "The Lewes peare is a brownish greene peare, ripe about the end of
 September, a resonable well rellished fruit, and very moist.

 "The Bishop peare is a middle sized peare, of a reasonable good taste,
 not very waterish; but this property is oftentimes seene in it, that
 before the fruit is gathered, (but more usually those that fall of
 themselves, and the rest within a while after they are gathered) will
 be rotten at the core, when there will not be a spot or blemish to
 bee seene on the outside, or in all the peare, untill you come neare
 the core.

 "The Wilford peare is a good and a faire peare.

 "The Bell peare a very good greene peare.

 "The Portingall peare is a great peare, but more goodly in shew than
 good indeed.

 "The Gratiola peare is a kinde of Bon Chretien, called the Cowcumber
 peare, or Spinola's peare.

 "The Rowling peare is a good peare, but hard, and not good before it
 bee a little rowled or bruised, to make it eate the more mellow.

 "The Pimpe peare is as great as the Windsor peare, but rounder, and of
 a very good rellish.

 "The Turnep peare is a hard winter peare, not so good to eate rawe, as
 it is to bake.

 "The Arundell peare is most plentifull in Suffolke, and there
 commended to be a verie good peare.

 "The Berry peare is a Summer peare, reasonable faire and great, and of
 so good and wholesome a taste, that few or none take harme by eating
 never so many of them.

 "The Sand peare is a reasonable good peare, but small.

 "The Morley peare is a very good peare, like in forme and colour unto
 the Windsor, but somewhat grayer.

 "The peare pricke is very like unto the Greenfield peare, being both
 faire, great, and good.

 "The good Rewell is a reasonable great peare, as good to bake as to
 eate rawe, and both wayes it is a good fruit.

 "The Hawkes Bill peare is of a middle size, somewhat like unto the
 Rowling peare.

 "The Petworth peare is a winter peare, and is great, somewhat long,
 faire, and good.

 "The Slipper peare is a reasonable good peare.

 "The Robert peare is a very good peare, plentiful in Suffolke and
 Norfolke.

 "The Pound peare is a reasonable good peare, both to eate rawe, and to
 bake.

 "The Ten Pound peare, or the hundred pound peare, the truest and best,
 is the best Bon Chretien of Syon, so called, because the grafts cost
 the Master so much the fetching by the messengers expences, when he
 brought nothing else.

 "The Gilloflower peare is a winter peare, faire in shew, but hard, and
 not fit to bee eaten rawe, but very good to bake.

 "The peare Couteau is neither good one way nor other.

 "The Binsce peare is a reasonable good winter peare, of a russetish
 colour, and a small fruit: but will abide good a long while.

 "The Pucell is a greene peare, of an indifferent good taste.

 "The blacke Sorrell is a reasonable great long peare, of a darke red
 colour on the outside.

 "The red Sorrell is of a redder colour, else like the other.

 "The Surrine is no very good peare.

 "The Summer Hasting is a little greene peare, of an indifferent good
 rellish.

 "Peare Gergonell is an early peare, somewhat long, and of a very
 pleasant taste.

 "The white Genneting is a reasonable good peare, yet not equall to the
 other.

 "The Sweater is somewhat like the Windsor for colour and bignesse, but
 nothing neare of so good a taste.

 "The bloud red peare is of a darke red colour on the outside, but
 piercing very little into the inner pulpe.

 "The Hony peare is a long greene Summer peare.

 "The Winter peare is of many sorts, but this is onely so called, to
 bee distinguished from all other Winter peares, which have severall
 names given them, and is a very good peare.

 "The Warden or Luke Wards peare of two sorts, both white and red, both
 great and small.

 "The Spanish Warden is greater than either of both the former, and
 better also.

 "The peare of Jerusalem, or the stript peare, whose barke while it is
 young, is as plainly seene to be stript with greene, red, and yellow,
 as the fruit it selfe is also, and is of a very good taste: being
 baked also, it is as red as the best Warden, whereof Master William
 Ward of Essex hath assured mee, who is the chiefe keeper of the Kings
 Granary at Whitehall.

 "Hereof likewise there is a wilde kinde no bigger than ones thumbe,
 and striped in the like manner, but much more.

 "The Choke peares, and other wilde peares, both great and small, as
 they are not to furnish our Orchard, but the Woods, Forrests, Fields,
 and Hedges, so wee leave them to their naturall places, and to them
 that keep them, and make good use of them."

Three hundred years have played havoc with the pears Parkinson knew.
None are known in America, and unless the Pound of Parkinson is the
Pound of today, not a half dozen are found in current lists in England.
Parkinson's Catherine, Winter Bon Chretien, Windsor, Bergamot, possibly
the Pound, and his Gergonell, the Jargonelle of today, are about all
the names that would be recognized by modern pear-growers. The pear
shows far fewer familiar names at the end of three centuries than
Parkinson lists of apples, plums, cherries, or even the peach in
Europe. Dropping old varieties can only be interpreted as improvement
in the pear. The pear, it seems certain, has been more profoundly
changed for the better through the touch of man's hand than the other
fruits named since Parkinson wrote. For this, pomology has the Belgians
to thank.

Pear culture seems to have reached its height, if it be judged by
its literature and by the number of varieties cultivated, early in
the nineteenth century. The Belgians' passion for pears was no doubt
the chief stimulus, for the Belgian breeders spread their offerings
with generous hand throughout England. In 1826, the catalog of the
Horticultural Society of London listed 622 pears. Pomology in England
was then, and is now as compared with America, an art of the leisure
classes. This has been an advantage and a disadvantage to the pear
in England. The advantage is that when fruit is grown for pleasure
many varieties are grown to add novelty to luxury so that the fruit
is thereby more rapidly improved and its culture brought to greater
perfection. The disadvantage is that those who grow fruit for market
find a poorer market for their wares since those who should be their
best customers supply their own wants. For the reason, therefore, that
the English take delight in growing their own fruit, pear-growing is
not the great commercial enterprise that it is in America.

Pear-growing in England differs from that of America in another
respect. The pear-tree in England is built as much as planted. In many
plantations each tree has a precise architectural form. The plants
are trained into fans, cordons, espaliers and u-forms on walls; or as
pyramids, globes, or vases in the open; sometimes in fantastic shapes
to suit the fancy of the grower; and now and then as a hedge or border.
The undisciplined standards of America are hardly known, though what
the English call a standard seems to be increasing. This difference in
training is due in part to the necessity of meeting different climatic
conditions, and in part to greater devotion on the Englishman's part
to the art of gardening--the use of the shears, the knife, and the
billhook give the gardener greater scope. The pear-tree in England is
often decorative as well as useful.


                          THE PEAR IN AMERICA

The pear is a popular fruit in America, but its culture as a commercial
product is limited to a few favored localities. From the earliest
records of fruit-growing in America the pear has been grown less than
the apple and peach and scarcely more than the cherry and plum.
In Europe, it is a question if the pear is not more commonly grown
than the apple, and is much more common than the plum and the peach,
the last-named fruit being grown out of doors for most part only in
southern Europe. Pears are more varied in size, shape, texture, and
flavor of flesh than others of the hardy tree-fruits, and in length
of season exceed all others excepting the apple. Varieties of pears,
possibly, have the charm of individuality more marked than varieties
of its orchard associates. The trees, where environment permits their
culture, are not difficult to grow, and attain greater size, produce
larger crops, and live longer than any other hardy fruit. Why, then,
is the pear not more popular in America? Conditions of climate,
pests, season of ripening, taste, and trade prevent the expansion of
pear-culture on this side of the Atlantic.

The climate in most parts of America is uncongenial to the pear. Pears
from the European stock, to which most varieties grown in America
belong, thrive only in relatively equable climates, and do not endure
well the sudden and extreme variations in climate to which most parts
of this continent are subject. Extremes of heat or cold, wetness or
dryness, are fatal to the pear. In North America, therefore, commercial
pear-culture is confined to favored localities on the Atlantic
seaboard, about the Great Lakes, and on the Pacific slope. Even in
these favored regions, pears sent to market come largely from the
plantations of specialists. On the Atlantic seaboard, European pears
are products of commerce only in southern New England and New York,
westward through Ohio on the shores of Lake Erie, and in the southern
lake regions of Michigan. Away from these bodies of water to the
Pacific, varieties of European pears refuse to grow except with the
utmost care in culture and selection of sites. On the Pacific slope,
in the hardy-fruit regions, the pear reaches its highest development
in the New World. Oriental pears, or varieties having Oriental blood,
as Kieffer and Le Conte, are grown in every part of America where the
culture of hardy fruits is attempted.

Liability to loss by pests is a great detriment to the popularity
of the pear in America. The insect pests of pears are numerous.
Codling-moths attack the fruit wherever the pear is grown in America,
and can be kept down only by expensive arsenical sprays. The psylla,
while irregular in its outbreaks, is most damaging and hard to control
when it appears. These are the chief insect enemies, but a dozen
others take more or less toll from tree or fruit. Foliage and fruit
are attacked by several parasitic fungi, of which pear-scab is most
troublesome, requiring treatment wherever the pear is grown, and under
favorable conditions for the fungus preventives often fail to give
the fruits a fair cheek. But of all diseases pear-blight is the most
serious, its effects and virulency being such as to give it the popular
name "fire-blight." It is caused by a bacterium which cannot be checked
by sprays, and must be combatted with expensive and unsatisfactory
sanitary measures, such as cutting out branches and trees, so drastic
as to make impossible commercial cultivation of pears in regions where
climate favors the disease.

Pears compete with apples more than with any other fruit, but are at a
disadvantage with this near relative in having a much shorter period
during which the fruits can be used. Varieties of the two fruits begin
to ripen at nearly the same season, but there are few sorts of pears in
season later than December, and these are of poorer quality than the
fall varieties; while apples are abundant and of prime quality four or
five months later, and may be kept until early apples usher in a new
season. During most of its season, also, the pear must compete with
the perishable summer and autumn plums and peaches, so luscious and
delectable that the firmer and less highly flavored pome-fruits suffer
in comparison.

Still another reason why the pear is not a popular dessert fruit in
America is that, of all fruits, the varieties of this one are the most
variable in quality of the product. Sorts that should produce pears of
highest quality bear fruits poor or indifferent in texture and flavor
in unfavorable seasons, on unsuitable soils, or under neglect. Good
pears can be grown only when environmental factors are favorable and
under the most generous treatment. Extensive cultivation of the Kieffer
and its kin for canning has hindered the cultivation of pears for the
fruit-stand and to grace the table as a dessert fruit. So common has
the Kieffer become that many of the present generation are hardly aware
that the pear may be a delicious fruit to eat out of hand.

Lastly, the pear falls short of the apple as a commercial product
because it is not nearly so satisfactory to handle as a commercial
crop. Pears are more difficult to pack, and do not stand transportation
as well as apples. They cannot be kept in cold storage nearly as
long, and decay more quickly when brought into warmer temperatures.
The demand for evaporated pears is slight in comparison with that for
evaporated apples, and although perry, the expressed juice of pears, is
quite as refreshing as cider, this by-product of the fruit is little
known in America. As a prepared product, the pear surpasses the apple
only as a canned fruit. Failing in comparison with the apple, as a
commercial product, pears are largely left to fruit connoisseurs,
and with these a generation ago the pear was the fruit of fruits,
many splendid collections of it having been made in regions where
pears could be grown. With the expansion of commercial fruit-growing,
collections of pears, and with them many choice varieties, have gone
out of cultivation--more is the pity--and pear-growing has expanded
least of all the fruit industries in the United States.

With this brief discussion of the present status of pear-culture in
this country, we can proceed to trace the history of the pear with
more exactness by reason of knowing its limitations under American
conditions.

The peach is the only hardy fruit that belongs to the heroic age of
Spanish discovery in the New World. Pears, apples, plums, and cherries
came to the new continent with the French and English. The early
records of fruit-growing in America show that the pear came among
the first luxuries of the land in the French and English settlements
from Canada to Florida. Pioneers in any country begin at once to
cultivate the soil for the means of sustenance. Naturally, cereals and
easily-grown nutritious vegetables receive attention first as giving
more immediate harvests and more sustaining fare to supplement game
and fish. Agriculture and gardening usually precede orcharding, and
this was the case in early settlements in America, but not long. The
first generation born in colonial America knew and used all of the
hardy fruits from Europe; as many records attest, and of which there is
confirmatory proof with the pear in many ancient pear-trees of great
size near the old settlements, some of which were planted by the first
settlers from Europe. Of pears, many notable trees planted by the
hands of the first English and French who crossed the seas to settle
the new country were conspicuous monuments in various parts of America
in the memory of men still living, if, indeed, some of the old trees
themselves are not still standing.

Of these ancient pear-trees, New England furnishes the most notable
monuments to mark the introduction of this fruit in the New World.
Fortunately, their histories have been preserved in several
horticultural annals, and of these accounts the fullest and best is by
Robert Manning, Jr., in the Proceedings of the American Pomological
Society for 1875, pages 100 to 103. Manning's notes throw so much light
on the early history of the pear in New England, as well as upon the
varieties then grown, that they are published in full.

 "The _Endicott_ Pear. The tradition in the Endicott family is that
 this tree was planted in 1630. It is said that the trees constituting
 the original orchard came over from England in June, in the Arabella
 with Governor Winthrop, or in one of the other ships of the fleet
 arriving at Salem in June. The farm on which the tree now stands, not
 having been granted to Endicott until 1632, it is not probable that
 the trees were planted there before that time, but they might have
 been at first set in the Governor's town garden at Salem, where the
 Rev. Francis Higginson, on his arrival in the summer of 1629, found
 a vine-yard already planted. The tradition further states that the
 Governor said that the tree was of the same date with a sun-dial which
 formerly stood near it. This dial, after having passed through the
 hands of the Rev. William Bentley, D.D., is now in the Essex Institute
 in Salem, and bears the date 1630, with the Governor's initials.
 The farm, which early bore the name of 'Orchard,' was occupied and
 cultivated by the Governor and his descendants for 184 years, from
 1632 to 1816, and was held solely by the original grant until 1828,
 a period of 196 years. Under these circumstances the history of the
 tree is more likely to have been handed down correctly than if the
 estate had changed hands. It is certain that Governor Endicott was
 early engaged in propagating trees, for in a letter to John Winthrop
 in 1644, he speaks of having at least 500 trees burnt by his children
 setting fire near them, and, in a letter to John Winthrop, Jr., a year
 later, of being engaged to pay for 1500 trees.

 "As early as 1763 the tree was very old and decayed. It was very
 much injured in the gale of 1804. In the gale of 1815 it was so much
 shattered that its recovery was considered doubtful. It was injured
 again in a gale about 1843. For the last fifty years it has been
 protected by a fence around it. In 1837 it was eighty feet high by
 measurement and fifty-five feet in the circumference of its branches,
 and does not probably vary much from these dimensions now. Two suckers
 have sprung up on opposite sides of the tree, which bear the same
 fruit as the original, proving it to be ungrafted. It stands near the
 site of the first mansion of the Governor, on a slope where it is
 somewhat sheltered from the north and north-west winds. The soil is a
 light loam, with a substratum of clay. Grafts taken from the old tree
 grow very vigorously. From a pomological point of view, the fruit is
 of no value. It is hardly of medium size, roundish, green, with more
 or less rough russet, very coarse, and soon decays.

 "It may be of interest to state that the farm on which the old tree
 stands is again in the Endicott name, having lately been purchased by
 a descendant of the Governor. The tree stands in the town of Danvers
 originally a part of Salem.

 "For further facts concerning this tree, see the _Transactions of the
 Massachusetts Horticultural Society_ for 1837, and also an article
 by Charles M. Endicott, a descendant of the Governor, in Hovey's
 _Magazine of Horticulture_, vol. xix, p. 254, June, 1853, from which
 the above account has been mainly derived. Each of these articles is
 illustrated with a cut of the pear.

 "The _Orange_ Pear. This tree is owned by Capt. Charles H. Allen,
 and stands in his yard on Hardy street, Salem. The Rev. Dr. Bentley,
 who died about 1820, investigated the history of this tree and found
 it to be then 180 years old, which would make it now 235 years old.
 The trunk is hollow, nine feet five inches in circumference in the
 smallest part near the ground; just below the limbs it is several
 inches more. The tree is more than forty feet high, and the limbs are
 supported by shores. It was grafted in the limbs, as a branch fifteen
 or twenty years old, shooting out several feet higher than a man's
 head, produces 'Button' pears, and a large limb, part of which was
 'Button' which grew out still higher up, was blown off several years
 ago. In the very favorable pear season of 1862 it bore thirteen and a
 half bushels of pears. It bears in alternate years, having produced
 eight and a half bushels in 1873. The brittleness of the limbs of
 old pear trees is well known, yet Capt. Allen, with a care worthy of
 imitation, gathers every pear, excepting about a dozen specimens, by
 hand.

 "This variety was, until the introduction of the modern kinds, highly
 esteemed. It is above medium size, averaging fifty-six pears to the
 peck, globular obtuse pyriform, covered with thin russet, juicy
 when gathered early and ripened in the house; of pleasant flavor
 but rather deficient in this respect. It is ripe about the middle
 of September. It was considered by my father a native, and was
 called by him the _American Orange_, and after examination of the
 descriptions and plates, I cannot think it the same as the _Orange
 Rouge_ or _Orange d'Automne_ of Duhamel, Decaisne, and Leroy. The
 Hon. Paul Dudley, Esq., of Roxbury, in some 'Observations on some of
 the Plants in New England with remarkable Instances of the Power of
 Vegetation,' communicated to the Royal Society of London (I quote from
 the 'Philosophical Transactions,' abridged, London, 1734, Vol. VI,
 Part II, p. 341), says: 'An _Orange_ Pear Tree grows the largest, and
 yields the fairest fruit. I know one of them near forty Foot high,
 that measures six Foot and six Inches in Girt, a Yard from the Ground,
 and has borne thirty Bushels at a Time, and this Year I measured an
 _Orange_ pear, that grew in my own Orchard, of eleven Inches round the
 Bulge.'

 "If this is, as believed, of native origin, it is the oldest American
 fruit in cultivation, unless we except the _Apple_ pear, which is
 probably of about the same date. This is small, oblate, of pale yellow
 color, ripening in August. It is quite distinct from the _Poire Pomme
 d'Hiver_, of Leroy, and I think also from the _Poire Pomme d'Ete_, of
 the same author. I had supposed the variety to be extinct, but last
 year discovered in a garden in Salem the remnant of an old tree with
 a trunk four feet in diameter, and still producing fruit.

 "The _Orange_ pear tree which produced the specimens exhibited, was
 inherited by the present owner from his father, to whom it came from
 his wife. It had descended to her almost from the first settlement of
 Salem, but partly in the female line, so that the name of the owner
 sometimes changed. The house on the estate was built in 1812, having
 replaced one which was pulled down after standing 150 years. Within
 the period of a generation there were standing in Salem several trees
 of the _Orange_ pear, some of which were reputed to be more than two
 centuries old, and all of which were undoubtedly very ancient, but
 they are all now gone except Capt. Allen's, the last one having been
 blown down in the winter of 1874-75. I have heard a tradition that
 this last mentioned tree was one of several imported from England and
 planted in gardens at intervals on the northerly side of the principal
 street in Salem. This tradition may or may not be true with regard to
 these trees, but it would not apply to the Allen tree, for the height
 at which it was grafted forbids the idea that it was imported from
 England in a grafted state.

 "The _Anthony Thacher_ Pear. This tree stands near the meadows about a
 fourth of a mile north of the Universalist church in Yarmouth, where
 Anthony Thacher's house formerly stood. It is a large, rotten-hearted
 old tree. It has lost nearly all its old branches, but has thrown out
 many new ones. The late Judge George Thacher, who, if now living,
 would be 120 years old, inquired into its history, and made the matter
 certain that it was planted by Anthony Thacher about 1640. It is
 believed to be a grafted tree, as it contracts two or three inches at
 about a foot and a half from the ground. It is taken good care of and
 will probably last many years. It is now owned by the heirs of James
 C. Hallet. There are other trees of the same kind in the vicinity, but
 their age cannot be proved.

 "The fruit is of medium size, ovate pyriform, green, changing to
 yellow at maturity, of tolerable quality, ripening early in September.
 For the specimens exhibited, as well as the facts above noted, I am
 indebted to the kindness of Amos Otis, Esq., of Yarmouth Port, who had
 made the local history of Cape Cod his study for the last fifty years,
 and who died much lamented on the 19th of October last.

 "Anthony Thacher came from England in 1635, and after residing in
 Marshfield, removed to Yarmouth in 1639, being one of the three
 original grantees of land in that town. The late Dr. James Thacher,
 of Plymouth, author of the 'American Orchardist' (published in 1821),
 was a descendant of Anthony in the sixth generation. Anthony Thacher
 accompanied his cousin, Rev. John Avery, in that disastrous voyage
 of which Whittier has perpetuated the memory in his ballad, 'The
 Swan Song of Parson Avery.' Anthony Thacher got ashore on Thacher's
 Island, the headland of Cape Ann, and gave name to the island.
 (See Whittier's 'Home Ballads' and Young's 'Chronicles of the First
 Planters of Massachusetts,' p. 485.)

 "I endeavored, but without success, to obtain fruit from the pear tree
 planted at least as early as 1650, by Governor Prence, or Prince,
 at Eastham, on Cape Cod, and now owned by Capt. Ezekiel Doane. It
 is known as the _Fall_ pear. It is about the size of a hen's egg,
 tapering towards both ends, green, nearly covered with thin russet,
 of inferior quality, but not as coarse as the _Endicott_. In 1836 it
 was a flourishing, lofty tree, producing an average of fifteen bushels
 of fruit. It consisted of two stems, branching from the ground, the
 larger of which was blown down in the great storm of April, 1851.
 The portion now remaining is thirty-five feet high. It is a natural
 tree and has not failed of bearing for twenty years. It stands in low
 ground.

 "The _Pickering_ or _Warden_ Pear. This tree was grafted on the 19th
 of April, 1775, the day the battle of Lexington was fought, and
 must have been at that time a small tree. It is called by the owner
 the _Uvedale Warden_ or _Pickering_ pear, which are synonyms of the
 _Uvedale's St. Germain_ or _Pound_, but it is entirely distinct from
 that variety, being much smaller as well as otherwise different. It
 resembles, and very probably is identical with, a variety which I have
 known as the _English Warden_, but which I do not find described in
 any pomological work, and have not seen for years. It is of medium
 size, turbinate, light yellow, with a dull brownish cheek, in use in
 winter, for cooking only. Paul Dudley says, in the paper above quoted,
 'I have a _Warden_ Pear Tree that measures five Foot six Inches round.'

 "The Pickering tree contracts suddenly at about a foot from the
 ground, where it must have been grafted. It shows no sign of being
 grafted elsewhere. Below the point of grafting, it is full two feet
 in diameter and is about twenty-five feet high. It stands in a low,
 moist place. The top was much injured by the great gale of September,
 1869, losing several large limbs, but the tree is on the whole in good
 preservation. In the same garden is a tree probably as old or older,
 believed to be a _Messire Jean_.

 "The estate, now much circumscribed from its original extent, on which
 this tree stands, has been in the same family since 1642, having been
 purchased in that year by John Pickering, who came from England in
 1637, and built the house, now standing and occupied by the owner,
 in 1651. It is on Broad street, Salem. The tree was grafted by John
 Pickering, of the fifth generation.

 "The Hon. Timothy Pickering, eminent for his incorruptible integrity
 and immovable firmness, who successively held the offices of
 Adjutant-general and Quartermaster-general in the Revolutionary
 army, and of Postmaster-general, Secretary of War, and Secretary
 of State in the Cabinet of President Washington, and continued to
 hold the last named office under President Adams, was a brother of
 John. At the breaking out of the Revolution he was Colonel of the
 Essex regiment, and on the day when this tree was grafted by John
 Pickering, who was an invalid, his more vigorous brother mustered
 his regiment and marched to intercept the retreating British troops.
 Timothy Pickering was also interested in agriculture, having been
 Secretary of the Philadelphia Society for Promoting Agriculture,
 the oldest agricultural society in the United States, and after his
 return to Massachusetts, was the first President of the Essex County
 Agricultural Society. The estate on which the old pear tree stands was
 devised by John Pickering, who died unmarried, to his nephew John, son
 of Timothy, the most eminent American philologist of his time. On his
 death, it descended to his son John, the present owner, to whom I am
 indebted for the facts here stated, as well as for the specimens of
 fruit exhibited at Chicago last September."

Out of an embarrassing number of references in regard to the early
introduction of the pear in New England one may choose the following:
Francis Higginson, writing in 1629, notes that pears are under
cultivation in New England.[6] In the same year, a memorandum of
the Massachusetts Company shows that seeds of pears, with those of
other fruits were sent to the colony.[7] Trees from these seeds grew
amazingly fast in the virgin soils of the colony, for John Josselyn,
who made voyages to New England in 1638 and 1639, writing in his
_New England Rarities Discovered_, notes that "fruit trees prosper
abundantly" enumerating, among others, those of the pear.[8] Josselyn
further says "the Kernels sown or Succors planted produce as fair and
good fruit, without grafting, as the trees from which they were taken,"
and that "the Countrey is replenished with fair and large Orchards."
As early as 1641 a nursery had been started in Massachusetts and no
doubt was selling pear-trees. These probably came from seeds, for trees
were not imported until in the next century. Varieties were few then as
for many years later. In 1726, Paul Dudley, one of the Chief Justices
of Massachusetts, in a paper in the _Philosophical Transactions_,
says, "Our apples are without doubt as good as those of England, and
much fairer to look to, and so are the pears, but we have not got all
the sorts." In another paragraph, Justice Dudley gives the following
account of several varieties of pears in these first orchards in New
England.

He says:[9] "An _Orange_ Pear Tree grows the largest and yields the
fairest Fruit. I know one of them near forty Foot high, that measures
six Foot and six Inches in Girt, a Yard from the Ground, and has borne
thirty Bushels at a Time: and this year I measured an _Orange_ Pear,
that grew in my own Orchard, of eleven Inches round the Bulge. I have a
Warden Pear Tree, that measures five Foot six Inches round. One of my
Neighbors has a _Bergamot_ Pear Tree that was brought from _England_ in
a Box, about the Year 1643, that now measures six Foot about, and has
borne twenty-two Bushels of fine Pears in one Year. About twenty years
since, the Owner took a Cyon, and grafted it upon a common Hedge Pear;
but the Fruit does not prove altogether so good, and the Rind or Skin,
is thicker than that of the Original."

Thus, early in the history of Massachusetts, the pear was largely
planted and became a prominent fruit. These early plantations grew
so well that no doubt they inspired the horticulturists of the first
half of the nineteenth century, of which the names of Dearborn, Hovey,
Kenrick, the two Mannings, and Wilder are notable in the history of
the pear in this country, to undertake the popularization of this
fruit by extensive culture, by breeding new varieties, and by the
introduction of the best pears from Europe. Their work, as we shall see
later, gave pear-growing its first great impetus in America. Until the
middle of the last century, the pear industry in America centered in
Massachusetts; and most of the new varieties which originated in this
country and nearly all of the introductions from abroad came from that
state.

The pear was not neglected in the other New England states as the
horticultural records of all attest, but its history in the several
states is so similar in time and events that the account of its early
culture in Massachusetts suffices for the whole region. It must,
however, be noted that the pear was introduced in Maine at a very early
date, probably by the French. In an orchard on the east bank of the
Sheepscot, below Wiscasset Bay, a venerable pear-tree stood until early
in the nineteenth century of such girt and height that it was supposed
to be more than 200 years old. Of the planting of this orchard there
are no records nor traditions. The most reasonable supposition was that
the trees had been planted there by the French in one of the several
attempts of France to colonize the coast of Maine.[10]

This introduction of the French in the history of the pear in the New
World, brings us to a discussion of the part they took in bringing this
fruit to America. The debt to France for early horticulture in America
rests largely on tradition, but in the case of the pear, there are
such substantial proofs of it in ancient pear-trees of enormous size
found on the sites of old French settlements, that though there are
no written records, and even the people and their habitations have
disappeared, it is certain that the seeds from which these venerable
trees sprang were planted by early French explorers or missionaries.
The first plantings of pears made by the French were in Canada. History
and tradition, substantiated by ancient trees, make certain that this
fruit was planted by the first French settlers in Nova Scotia, Cape
Breton, Prince Edward Island, in favored situations bordering on the
St. Lawrence, and on the islands in this river, notably the Island of
Montreal. Later plantations of fruit were set in the Niagara region and
along the Detroit river. No new varieties seem to have come from these
early plantings in Canada, but they demonstrated that pear-growing was
possible.

The history of the pear in America cannot be written without making
note of the magnificent specimens of this fruit standing until recent
years--a few may still be found--about the old French settlements in
Michigan, Indiana, and Illinois. These are offspring of seeds brought
from France. A century ago the French _habitants_ in Detroit had a
tradition as to the manner in which these pears were introduced. The
legend ran that an emigrant from France brought three pear seeds in his
vest pocket, which, planted on the banks of the Detroit river, became
the parents through suckers and seeds of the gigantic old pear-trees
that have long been such striking landmarks of the towns and farms on
the Detroit river. No doubt these trees are the remains of orchards
in which there were apples, and possibly some plums and cherries, of
which the shorter-lived trees long since disappeared, while the pears,
flourishing in a green old age, are the sole remaining relics of the
old French settlements of this region. The writer herewith puts on
record another account of these truly remarkable pears as he saw them
in 1899.

All of these ancient French pears are of the same type, but the fruits
vary slightly, indicating that the trees were grown from seeds,
although some may have come from sprouts since many of the trees
throw out sprouts abundantly. The pears are of medium size, usually
turbinate, and lemon-yellow is the predominating color. The ripening
season runs from late summer to early winter. The flesh is melting,
juicy, usually mildly sweet, spicy, not high in quality for dessert
but excellent for all culinary purposes. But the most remarkable
characters of these French pears are the great size of the trees and
their vigor, healthfulness, productiveness, and longevity. The trees
have the majestic port of a century-old elm or oak. They attain a
height of eighty feet; a girt of eight or ten feet is not uncommon,
while one monarch measured by the writer fell a few inches short of
eleven feet in circumference three feet from the ground. The leaves are
small but abundant, and are of the luxuriant green color that betokens
great vigor. The trees have attained immunity to blight, but the fruits
are inviting prey to codling-moth when that insect is rife. In these
rich river-bottom lands the trees almost annually load themselves with
fruit, a crop of from forty to fifty bushels on one tree not being
uncommon. No one knows the age of most of these ancient lichen-covered
giants, although one which stood until a few years ago was known to
have been planted within the pickets of the palisaded fortress of
Detroit in 1705.

A generation or two ago, these French pears were very common about
the French settlements of Michigan and Canada in this region but they
have been disappearing fast, until it is doubtful if any of those
set by French _habitants_ can be found now. The pears possessed no
commercial value, and were replaced by named varieties better known
by fruit-growers and nurserymen. It is doubtful if the trees of the
newcomers will ever attain the age, size, vigor, and productiveness of
these oldtimers of the French, characters which make them noteworthy in
the history of the pear in America.

Pear-trees of enormous size survive on other sites of old French
settlements in the United States to show what notable horticulturists
the early missionaries of this people were, who, we are many times told
in the early records, usually surrounded their missions and homes with
trees of the apple, peach, pear, and cherry. Pear-trees very like those
found about the French settlements in Canada and Michigan still grow
in the rich intervale lands of the Wabash and Mississippi in Indiana,
Illinois, and Missouri. Vincennes, Indiana, was settled by the French
in 1702; Kaskaskia and Cahokia, Illinois, about 1685; St. Louis,
Missouri, in 1764. These may be set down as approximate dates in which
horticulture began in these inland regions. When the English conquered
these settlements they found giant pear-trees which persisted well into
the last century, the second generation of which were scattered far
and wide in the river settlements of this region. Tradition says that
a Monsieur Girardin, a native of France, planted a pear orchard from
seeds he brought with him at Cahokia about 1780, from which came the
Prairie du Pont pear, a small, roundish, lemon-colored fruit similar
to the French pears of Detroit, borne on an immense blight-proof
tree. No doubt the variety could still be found in this part of the
Mississippi valley. One wishes that the American-born descendants and
the conquerers of these early settlers from Normandy were as energetic
in forwarding horticulture as the first settlers. After the invasion
of the English and later the Americans, there is little evidence of
progress in horticulture in this region, until the early years of the
nineteenth century.

Another famous pear-tree of the Middle West is worthy of notice as an
evidence of early interest in horticulture. This tree, known as the
Ockletree pear, from the name of its owner, has acquired fame as the
largest pear-tree of which there is record. The tree was a seedling
brought from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in 1804, and was planted in an
orchard at Vincennes, Indiana. It bore a number of record-breaking
crops, the largest of which was 140 bushels of pears borne in 1837.
In 1855, the trunk measured ten and one-half feet in circumference at
the smallest place below the limbs; the top was estimated to have a
spread of 75 feet. The tree gained its great port and productiveness
from spread of branch rather than height, which was estimated to be
only 65 feet. The variety was unknown, but the fruit was said to be
somewhat inferior in quality. This monarch of its species was struck by
a tornado in 1867 which stripped off its branches and caused the death
of the tree a few years later.

Another living monument marked the beginnings of pear-culture in
America until 1866, when the trunk, little more than a shell, was
broken down by a dray, having furnished shade and shelter in a New
York garden for 220 years. This garden was laid out by the redoubtable
Peter Stuyvesant who took the reins of government in New Amsterdam
in 1647, at which time this pear-tree was planted. The pear was a
Summer Bon Chretien, said to have been imported from Holland in a tub.
Stuyvesant's garden, kept in a high state of cultivation by forty or
fifty negro slaves, was called the "Bouwery," now the Bowery, and the
pear-tree in it stood at what is now the corner of Third Avenue and
Thirteenth Street. No doubt other pears were imported from Holland at
the same time, and from these and seeds and sprouts, this fruit was
started in the Dutch settlements up and down the Hudson, where the pear
even to this day is a favorite fruit, finding here a more congenial
soil and climate than in any other part of America.

Soon after Governor Stuyvesant planted his bowery of fruits, flowers,
and vegetables, the French laid out orchards in the vicinity of New
York City. After the revocation of the Edict of Nantes in 1685, many
Huguenots fled to America. In 1689, some of these French _emigres_
settled at New Rochelle, New York, and on Long Island. The trees grown
by the Huguenots were usually grafted, the parent plants having been
brought from France. No doubt, it was from these importations that
White Doyenne, Brown Beurre, St. Germain, Virgouleuse, and many other
old French sorts that seem to have been in America from time immemorial
came.

However, the pear, in common with other fruits, was more largely grown
from seeds in these pioneer days than from buds or grafts. Fruits
were known and grown as species and not as varieties almost wholly in
America until the nineteenth century. The sale of budded or grafted
trees began in New York, so far as records show, with the establishment
of a nursery at Flushing, Long Island, in 1730, by Robert Prince.
This nursery afterwards became the famous Linnaean Botanic Garden.
At what date Prince began to offer grafted pears for sale cannot now
be ascertained, but advertisements appearing in 1767, 1771, and 1790
offer named varieties at these dates. The following is a list of pears
offered by the Princes in 1771:[11]

 Bergamot                   Russelet
 Catharine                  Early sugar
 Vergalieu                  Baurre vert
 July                       Winter baurre
 Monsier Jean               Baurre de roy
 Trom valette               Green chissel
 French primative           Swan's egg
 Winter bon cretan          Colmar
 Easter bergamot            Cressan
 Amber                      Spanish bon cretan
 Chaumontelle               Large bell
 Citron de camis            La Chassaire
 Summer bergamot            Hampden's bergamot
 Autumn bergamot            Doctor Uvedale's St. Germain
 Amozelle                   Large winter, weighs near two pounds
 Lent St. Germain           Pear wardens
 Brocaus bergamot           Empress
 Winter bergamot            Large summer baking
 Jargonelle                 The black pear of Worcester or Parkinson's
                              warden
 Roussilon                  The skinless
 Cuissemadam                Green catharine

Coincident with the establishment of nurseries selling named varieties
of pears another event of prime importance to pear-growers occurred.
Pear-blight became epidemic in the orchards along the Hudson, and while
it must have been noticed before, its ravages at this time brought
it prominently to the attention of pear-growers. The disease seems
to have been first mentioned by William Denning who described it in
the _Transactions of the Society for the Promotion of Agriculture_
for 1794 (pt. 2, p. 219) in an article on the decay of apple-trees.
Denning says that he first saw the malady in orchards on the highlands
of the Hudson in 1780 attacking apples, pears, and quinces. He gives a
good description of the disease, but says it is caused by a borer in
the trunk which he found after much labor. From Denning's discovery
until Burrill a hundred years later, in 1882, discovered a cause of
the disease and suggested a preventive, every treatise on the pear
speculates on the cause and cure of pear-blight, a disease which has
been and is the terror and despair of growers of this fruit.

Philadelphia was another center of pear-growing in the early
settlements of the country. The Quakers, settling in Pennsylvania in
1682, planted all of the hardy fruits; which were soon, as we are
several times told, a great asset to the colony. No results worthy of
note seem to have come from these early plantings until nearly a half
century later when John Bartram[12] founded, in 1728, what became a
famous botanic garden. The Bartram Botanic Garden became almost at
once the clearing house for native and foreign fruits and plants, and
to it came several varieties of pears for distribution throughout the
colonies. Here, the first variety of the pear to originate in America
of which we have definite record, came into existence. This was the
Petre pear raised by Bartram, from seeds sent him from England by Lady
Petre. The seed was planted in 1735 near the stone house which Bartram
built with his own hands. The tree still stands, somewhat stricken with
its two centuries, but withal a noble specimen seemingly capable of
breasting the blows of age for many years to come.

The pear industry of the eastern United States is confined to the
regions in which the history of this fruit has been traced, and most
if not all of the varieties that originated in this country until
the middle of the nineteenth century came from the importations to
these French, Dutch, and English settlements. There is little profit,
therefore, in attempting to trace further the history of pear-culture
on the Atlantic seaboard in colonial times. Pears were grown in the
states south of Pennsylvania, for many references are found in the
colonial records of the southern states, but they bring out no new
facts to illuminate the history of this fruit in America. The Quakers
and Swedes grew pears in the regions watered by the Delaware, and the
English in Maryland, Virginia, and North Carolina all planted pears
with the other hardy fruits only to find that they so quickly succumbed
to unfavorable climate and the blight as to be unprofitable. The
Bergamy and Warden, in particular, are mentioned as varieties of this
fruit grown in the colonial period of the southern colonies.

Perhaps one, at least, of these lesser centers of pear-growing somewhat
to the south of the pear regions in which there are now commercial
plantations should receive notice. In 1794, William Coxe,[13]
Burlington, New Jersey, began planting experimental orchards. Coxe was
acquainted with the leading pomologists of Europe and his own country,
and collected the best varieties of tree-fruits to be found in the
United States, England, and France. In 1817, he published his _View
of the Cultivation of Fruit Trees, and the Management of Orchards
and Cider, etc._, the first American book on pomology. This pioneer
pomologist described 65 varieties of pears, most of which he had grown
at one time or another on his own place, and names 21 other sorts that
were grown in his and neighboring states. Coxe seems to have been the
first nurseryman to import new varieties from the Old World. To Coxe,
more than to any other one man, the regions adjacent to the Delaware
are indebted for the early development of fruit-growing both for
pleasure and profit, and the whole country is indebted to him for the
introduction of many fine fruits.

A new phase in the history of the pear began soon after the
Revolutionary war. Until this time, and until well into the next
century, tree-fruits were nearly all seedlings. The pears of the
country until as late as 1830 were for most part seedlings, the
fruits varying greatly in size, shape, color, and flavor. According
to the accounts of the times, the product was so hard of flesh and so
astringent in flavor as to be fit only for cooking and perry. Indeed,
the great object in growing apples, pears, and peaches was the making
of cider, perry, and peach-brandy. Good eating pears were few indeed.
But beginning in a small way with Coxe in New Jersey, as noted, a
little later with William Kenrick, Newton, Massachusetts, and still
later with Robert Manning, Salem, Massachusetts, the importation of
European varieties of fruits became an important part of the nursery
business. The importation of pears became an obsession with Manning,
his nursery alone importing several hundred varieties. Manning's work
must have a more extended notice.

In 1823, Robert Manning established a pomological garden at Salem,
Massachusetts, to collect and test as many varieties of fruits as he
could obtain, native and foreign, with the intention of propagating and
distributing those which proved most worthy. In furthering this great
project he entered into correspondence with the leading pomologists
of Europe, and from them secured trees and cions, which, with native
sorts, brought his collection up to 2000 varieties of fruits at the
time of his death in 1842. More than half of the varieties planted by
Manning were pears. This, it will be remembered, was the period in
which Belgian, French, and English pomologists were making pears a
specialty, and led by Van Mons, the Belgian scientist, had succeeded
in putting almost a new pear flora in the hands of fruit-growers.
Manning grew in America nearly all of Van Mons' introductions, received
direct from the originator, and many acquisitions from other European
pomologists as well, notably many varieties from Robert Thompson of
the London Horticultural Society. Manning was one of the most careful
observers amongst American pomologists, and to him pear-growers are
indebted for the first full and accurate descriptions of the fruits
grown in his time in this country. These were published in 1838 in
his _Book of Fruits_. American pomologies before and many since were
compilations. Manning made his descriptions first-hand and described
no fruit "not actually identified beyond a reasonable doubt of its
genuineness."

After Manning, one might well scan the work of several eminent American
pomologists who made pears a specialty. Robert Manning, Jr., continued
the work of his father with this fruit and the two Downings, Wilder,
Barry, and Thomson found the pear the most interesting of the fruits
which they grew. To all of these men, pomologists are indebted for the
introduction of many new and choice pears; for the identification of
varieties; for the correction of the nomenclature of this fruit; for
testing hundreds of seedlings and native and foreign varieties; and for
the distribution of pears throughout the whole country.

A history of the pear in America requires some mention of its
introduction in the Pacific states since that region is now the
greatest center of the pear industry in the country, and the home of
several notable varieties. Franciscan monks established missions in
California at about the time the colonies on the eastern coast were
fighting for their independence. To these they brought the cultivated
plants of Europe and among them the pear. Vancouver, in 1792, found all
of the hardy fruits growing at Santa Clara and the mission of San Buena
Ventura, California. Robinson, a little later, describes extensive
orchards connected with the mission of San Gabriel in which there were
pears in abundance. In 1846, Edwin Bryant found at the mission of San
Jose six hundred pear-trees bearing fruit in great abundance and full
perfection. The missions were secularized in 1834, and the orchards
fell into decay. But the pear and the vine withstood neglect, drouth,
and the browsing of cattle to furnish food to the Argonauts of '49. But
little came of these early plantings that affects the present industry
of growing pears in California either as to methods of culture or the
introduction of new varieties.

As an example of the remarkable recuperative power of the pear,
however, the orchard which Bryant described in 1846 at the San Gabriel
Mission is noteworthy. An enterprising pioneer, W. M. Stockton, grafted
over the old orchard in 1854 to improved varieties, and by pruning,
cultivation, and irrigation succeeded in rejuvenating it so that the
orchard became a profitable commercial plantation--the first commercial
pear orchard in California. There are other instances given in the
early accounts of fruit-growing in California in which the youth of old
pear-trees was renewed by generous treatment, showing that the pear
in a congenial soil and climate is most self-assertive in maintaining
life. It could hardly be otherwise than that the health and vigor of
these old trees stimulated the planting of fruits by the gold-seekers
who rushed to this region in 1849.

Meanwhile, orcharding had been established as an avocation. In the rich
Willamette Valley in Oregon, where the growing of wheat and cattle
was the vocation, the plantations of hardy fruits made by Henderson
Lewelling, near Portland, Oregon, in 1847, included pears and marked
the beginning of pear-culture in Oregon. Lewelling's venture, so
pregnant with results in pomology for the Pacific Northwest, has
been described in _The Cherries of New York_, and needs no detailed
description here. It is mentioned only to call attention to it as
another landmark in the history of the pear.

The padres began the cultivation of the pear at the missions. The
pioneers of '47 in Oregon and '49 in California started a new era in
the cultivation of this and other tree-fruits by introducing named and
improved varieties and extending their cultivation along the coast from
British Columbia to Lower California. So far, the plantings were fruit
gardens, not orchards. The era of commercial fruit-growing began in
the year 1869 in which the first fresh fruits were sent east by rail,
the shipment amounting to thirty-three tons, mostly pears and apples.
This event marks the beginning of a great industry in growing pears on
the Pacific slope for the fresh fruit market, and was followed shortly
by the introduction of canning and evaporation to use up the surplus
product. The special demands of these three more or less distinct
industries called for new varieties, and American pomology has been
enriched by a score or more varieties of pears from this great pear
region.

An event which has had a profound influence on pear-growing in the
whole country was the introduction of Oriental pears and their hybrids.
The mongrel offspring of the Oriental with the European pear were
unfortunate in regions where pure-bred European sorts can be grown, but
in vast tracts of the United States, as almost the whole of the South
and the Middle West, only hybrids of the two species find a congenial
environment, and here varieties with Oriental blood became a great
asset. The introduction of these pears, also, has greatly stimulated
the canning of this fruit in regions where fruit-preserving is an
industry. It was hoped that these hybrids could be used successfully as
stocks upon which European varieties could be worked, but the stocks
have not proved satisfactory, and their use is decreasing.

The Oriental, Chinese, or Sand pear came into America from Asia by
the way of Europe. The importation into Europe was made by the Royal
Horticultural Society of London in 1820. There seems to be no record
of when these pears reached America, but they were growing in the
Prince Nursery as early as 1840 under the names Chinese pear and
Sha Lea. Here, or in one of several nurseries to which it was sent
by Prince, the Oriental seems to have hybridized with the European
pear, the product being the Le Conte, which came to notice in 1846
and is the first of these hybrids on record. The Kieffer fruited
first in 1873 and proved to be much better than Le Conte except in
certain parts of the South. The Garber, another valuable hybrid, came
to notice about 1880. There are now, perhaps, two score of these
hybrids, with new ones coming from time to time. These hybrid pears,
while not blight-proof, are more immune to blight than the European
varieties, and pear-breeders are hybridizing the two species with the
hope of obtaining a variety with the fruit of the European type on
a tree of the Oriental type. Several promising seedlings bred with
this combination in view have been announced, and the number of these
hybrids is certain to be increased as time goes on.

The advent of Russian pears in the United States must also be mentioned
as a notable event in the history of this fruit. Russian pears are
hardy strains of _Pyrus communis_ grown from time immemorial in Russia.
The fruits of these Russian varieties are low in quality, but the
trees are much hardier than those of strains coming from more southern
parts of Europe. Some seventy or eighty of these hardy pears have
been imported from Russia, the first shipment coming in 1879 from
St. Petersburg. For a few years importations followed rapidly, and
fruit-growers in cold regions had high hopes of being able to grow
pears in competition with growers in more favored regions. The fruits
turned out to be so poor in quality and the trees so subject to blight,
however, that the cultivation of all but a few varieties has ceased.
Of the whole number, Bessemianka, possibly, is the only one worthy of
comparison with the pears of southern Europe, and this sort is rated
as poor where the southern pears are grown. Professor J. L. Budd,[14]
Ames, Iowa, and Charles Gibb, Montreal, Canada, were the two men most
instrumental in bringing these pears to America.

The chief import of these brief records of the origin and history of
cultivated pears in several countries is to show the evolution of
this fruit. It is hoped that the chapter will furnish inspiration for
further amelioration of the pear, and that it contains facts that will
be helpful in the future development of this fruit. The men, times,
and places have historical and narrative interest to pomologists; but
these are quite secondary to the knowledge of what the raw material
was from which our pear flora has been fashioned, and the methods of
domestication that were employed. This chapter is only a sketch--the
briefest possible outline of how the leading types of pears came to be,
and how and when they came to America.




                              CHAPTER II

                 SPECIES OF PEARS AND THEIR CHARACTERS


The pear belongs to the great order Rosaceae, the Rose Family. There
are about ninety genera in this family, the most important of all
botanical groups to growers of hardy fruits, of which ten or twelve
bear pome-fruits. Of the genera whose fruits are pomes, only two
contain important hardy fruits, namely, Pyrus, to which belong apples,
crab-apples, and pears; and Cydonia, the quince. Three other genera
are of lesser importance, but must be named to show their relationship
to the pear. These are Mespilus, the medlar, grown in Europe but
little known in America; Chaenomeles, the Japanese quince, well known
as an ornamental, the fruits of which are used for conserves; and
Amelanchier, the Juneberry, a common fruit in American forests. One
other genus in this family has possibilities for domestication but
is not yet cultivated for its fruits in America. This is Crataegus,
comprising the hawthorns and thorn-apples, the fruits of which are
edible and several species of which are cultivated in various parts of
the world as food plants.

Nearly every botanist who has attempted to classify plants has grouped
the pome-fruits according to a plan of his own. There are, therefore,
several classifications of genera and species of the pomes, in
consequence of which the nomenclature is badly confused. A century ago
the tendency was for botanists to put in the genus Pyrus the apple,
pear, crab-apple, quince, medlar, sorbus, and chokeberry. The modern
tendency is to segregate these fruits in distinct genera in accordance
with common names. As a rule the differences which suggest a distinct
common name suffice for a botanical division.

The pear and apple, however, are usually kept together in Pyrus, and
botanists generally agree that separation in species is sufficient, or,
at most, that the separation should not be greater than in two sections
of the genus. Happily, the difficulties of classification in botany
trouble little or not at all in pomology, as each of the pome-fruits
constitutes a distinct pomological group. The distinguishing characters
of Pyrus are:

 Woody plants, trees or shrubs, with smooth or scaly bark. Leaves
 simple, or sometimes lobed, alternate, usually serrate, deciduous,
 with deciduous stipules which are free from the petiole. Flowers
 perfect, regular, borne in compound terminal cymes; torus urn-shaped,
 adnate to the ovary and inclosing it with thick, succulent flesh
 at maturity; calyx-lobes 5, acuminate and reflexed, persistent in
 some and deciduous in other species; petals 5, white, pink or red,
 inserted on the thickened border of the disk; stamens 15 to 20, in
 three rows; styles 2 to 5, free or united below; carpels 2 to 5,
 inferior, crowned by the styles, usually 2-seeded. Fruit an ovoid or
 pyriform pome; seeds two in each cell, brown or brownish, lustrous,
 mucilaginous on the outer surface.

The genus comprises fifty to sixty species in the north temperate zone
of the three continents. The largest number is found in south-central
and eastern Asia. In North America, Pyrus is represented by five
species, while eight or nine species inhabit Europe. In several of the
species there are many natural varieties. The two sections of Pyrus,
given the rank of genera by some authors, are distinguished as follows:

 1. Apples (Malus). Flowers pink, rose-color, red or sometimes white,
 borne in fascicles or subumbellate clusters on short spurs or lateral
 branchlets; ovary 3- to 5-celled; styles more or less united at the
 base. Fruit more or less globular with a distinct depression at both
 ends, the flesh without grit cells, rounded at the base. The species
 in this section number 30 to 40, of which not more than a half dozen
 are domesticated.

 2. Pears (Pyrus). Flowers white, few, borne in corymbs on short spurs
 or lateral branchlets; ovary 5-celled; styles usually free. Fruit
 usually pyriform, sometimes subglobose, usually conical at the base,
 the flesh usually bearing grit cells when ripened on the tree. The
 species number 15 to 20 of which but two are truly domesticated, but
 several others give promise of value for stocks and possibly for their
 fruits.


                   THE STRUCTURAL BOTANY OF THE PEAR

A major purpose in _The Pears of New York_ is to describe varieties
of pears so that their faults and merits can be seen, and that
varieties may be identified. It is apparent at once that one cannot
describe accurately nor understand the descriptions of others unless
acquainted with the organs of tree and fruit--one must know the form
and structure of the whole plant. A study of the organs of plants is
structural botany. Plant descriptions are portraitures of the plant's
organs, and structural botany thus becomes the foundation of systematic
pomology, with a study of which, as concerns the pear, we are to be
chiefly concerned in the following pages. We must, therefore, pay some
attention to the structural botany of the pear. A pear is one of the
pome-fruits. What is a pome?

A pome is variously defined by students of structural botany. The
most conspicuous part of the apple, pear, or quince, the best-known
pome-fruits, is the outer, fleshy, edible part. This succulent part is
said by some botanists to be the thickened calyx; others say that it is
the enlarged receptacle. Some botanists believe that a pome consists
of two to five drupe-like fruits, each drupe called a carpel, each of
which contains one or more seeds. These drupes, if they are rightly
so-named, are held together by a fleshy receptacle. The best definition
seems to be that a pome is a fleshy fruit of which the compound ovary
is borne within and connected to the receptacle.


                       CHARACTERS OF PEAR-TREES

Pome-fruits are all woody plants, shrubby or tree-like, of which the
pear is always a tree. The value of the variety and the recognition of
it usually depend on characters of the fruits, but the trees are nearly
as distinct as the fruits, are always helpful in identification, and in
the absence of fruit must be relied upon to identify a variety. Also,
and even more important, the pear-grower must know whether the plant is
manageable in the orchard, for which purpose he must have a description
of the chief characters of the tree.

_Size and habit of tree._--Size of tree is a very reliable character
to determine varieties of pears. The Winter Nelis pear is dwarf as
compared with other pears. Size varies greatly with environment, it
must be remembered in using this character. The terms _large_, _small_,
and _medium_ are commonly used to designate size. Vigor, which may be
defined as internal energy, must not be confused with size. Small trees
may be as vigorous as large ones.

The term _habit of growth_, as used by pomologists, has reference
to the form of the top. In describing the tops of pear-trees a
number of self-explanatory terms are used, such as _pyramidal_,
_upright-spreading_, _drooping_, _tall_, _low_, _dense_, _open-topped_,
and _round-topped_. Many if not most varieties of pears may be told
by the form of the top. One can tell Bartlett or Clapp Favorite at a
glance by their upright branches; as one can, also, Beurre d'Anjou and
Beurre Superfin by their wide-spreading branches; or Winter Nelis pear
by its drooping branches. Depending upon the form of the top, a variety
is easy or difficult to manage in an orchard.

_Constitutional characters._--Hardiness, productiveness, susceptibility
to pests, adaptability to diverse soils and climates are vaguely
supposed to be dependent on the constitution of the tree. Pomologists
very generally refer to these characters as constitutional. They speak
of the constitution as the aggregate of the vital powers of a variety.

Horticulturally, hardiness is ability to withstand cold. Obviously,
hardiness is of utmost importance in characterizing the value of a
variety to the pear-grower, and degree of hardiness is of some use in
identifying pears. Bartlett and Beurre Bose are relatively tender to
cold, Tyson is hardy, and Flemish Beauty is very hardy. Less important,
but still of some importance, is the ability to withstand heat, a
character possessed in varying degrees by varieties of pears.

Productiveness, age of bearing, regularity of bearing, certainty of
bearing, and longevity are constitutional characters that must be noted
in full descriptions. All help to determine the value of a variety,
and all aid more or less in classification. For most part, these are
inherent characters and are influenced but little by environment.

The degree of susceptibility of a variety to fungous diseases and
insect pests is a valuable cultural character, but has little use
in identifying or classifying pears. There are great variations in
varieties of pears to the dreaded pear-blight: Bartlett, Beurre Bose,
Beurre d'Anjou, and Clapp Favorite are among the varieties most
susceptible; Kieffer, Seckel, and Winter Nelis are among those least
susceptible to blight. Kieffer and related hybrids are somewhat immune
to San Jose scale, but are very susceptible to psylla. Flemish Beauty
and White Doyenne are so badly attacked by the scab-fungus that it is
almost impossible to grow them in eastern America.

Some of these constitutional characters are much modified by care and
environment, as all are more or less. Care and local environment often
make it possible to grow varieties in special localities, although
some varieties are inherently adapted to a greater number of diverse
conditions than others. Bartlett, Seckel, and Kieffer have in common as
one of their most valuable characters adaptability to a great diversity
of soils and climates.

_Trunk and branch._--The trunk does not count for much in descriptions
of varieties. The height of the trunk usually depends on the whims of
the pruner. Whether _stout_ or _slender_ is sometimes noteworthy. The
bark may be _smooth_ or _shaggy_. Color of bark is often a valuable
diagnostic character, especially in young trees. Many if not most
varieties of pears can be identified in nursery rows by an expert
nurseryman from the color of the bark. Seckel, Sheldon, and Beurre
d'Anjou have remarkably distinctive color as young trees.

The branches of pear-trees are often reliable guides in identifying
varieties in orchard or nursery, especially when trees are leafless
and fruitless. The twisting, drooping branches of Winter Nelis serve
to identify that variety at any time. The zigzag branches of Beurre
d'Anjou and Bloodgood are typical. The branches of Beurre Superfin
are rough and shaggy. Those of Dorset and Fox are slender. The
branches of several well-known pears are spiny. A glance through the
technical descriptions in Chapter IV shows that branches and branchlets
are variously colored. The branchlets may be _stout_ or _slender_,
_long-jointed_ or _short-jointed_, _pubescent_ or _glabrous_,
_straight_ or _zigzag_. The angle at which branchlets are set is often
characteristic. The epidermis may be smooth or covered with scarf-skin.
Lastly, the size, shape, color, number, and position of the corky cells
or lenticels on young wood is most important in identifying trees after
leaves have fallen.

_Leaf-buds and leaves._--Size, length, and shape of leaf-buds are
helpful in identifying varieties when the trees are dormant. There is
considerable difference in the length of buds of different varieties,
and they may vary in thickness; some are _plump_, others are _slender_.
The shape can usually be described as _acute_, _pointed_, _obtuse_,
or _conical_. If the bud lies close to the twig, it is said to be
_appressed_; if it stands from the twig at a considerable angle, it is
_free_. In some varieties the leaf-scar is conspicuous; in others, it
is inconspicuous.

While leaves vary much in accordance with the condition of the plant
which bears them, yet they offer a number of valuable distinguishing
characters. It is important in making use of leaves to take only
those borne on free-growing twigs, as those growing on luxuriant
water-sprouts on the one hand, or on slow-growing spurs on the other
are seldom typical.

The size of the leaf is a most valuable determinant of varieties of
pears. Length and breadth should be given in figures. The shape should
be depicted in carefully chosen words. The body of the leaf is usually
_ovate_ or _oval_, but these shapes must nearly always be modified by
_broad_ or _narrow_, _long_ or _short_. The apex requires a descriptive
word or two; as, _taper-pointed_, _acute_, or _obtuse_. Thickness and
texture are sometimes noteworthy. The texture is usually described
as _stiff_, _leathery_, or _pliant_. Sometimes the leaves are flat;
sometimes folded upward, and rarely they are folded downward. The color
of both the upper and lower surfaces is often important; and the amount
of pubescence, if present, must always be noted on the two surfaces.
The autumnal tint is a marked characteristic in some varieties. The
margins offer valuable evidence for identification in the character
of the serrations which are usually distinct in a variety. Sometimes
glands and hairs are found on the margins, in which case they are
usually noteworthy. The time of appearance and the fall of leaves are
life events that distinguish some varieties. Leaves are many in some
sorts; few in others. The length, thickness, color of the petiole and
whether it is _smooth_, _pubescent_ or _channeled_ are usually worth
noting. The presence and the size and color of stipules are often
important enough to record. The petioles of pear leaves are larger and
slenderer than those of the apple, and the foliage of a pear-tree has
something of the tremulous habit of the aspen and other poplars. The
leaves have a gloss that distinguishes them at once from those of the
apple-tree. As a rule, the foliage of the pear drops earlier in the
autumn than that of the apple.

When the leaves of pears open in the spring they are folded along the
midrib, and are covered with snow-white wool, but at full maturity no
trace of this woolly covering remains. The amount and texture of this
covering on the leaves of different varieties vary greatly, although it
is doubtful if this character is of much use for taxonomic purposes.

_Flower-buds and flowers._--It is not possible to distinguish
flower-buds from leaf-buds by their external appearance as certainly
as might be wished for the purposes of ascertaining what the crop will
be and that pruning and budding may be done more intelligently. As a
rule, however, the flower-buds are larger, plumper, and have a blunter
point. The flower-buds are much like leaf-buds in color--usually a dark
brown. They may be readily told by their contents when examined under
a microscope. Time of opening is a mark of distinction with varieties
that bloom very early or very late, but the flowers of most varieties
of pears open at approximately the same time.

The flowers of pears give small opportunity to identify varieties
but are useful. The petals in most of the flowers of varieties of
_P. communis_ meet or lap at the widest point, which is a short
distance from the point of attachment. Occasionally a variety has
the petals widely separated. Easter Beurre, Vermont Beauty, and Dana
Hovey are examples of varieties with widely-separated petals. Round
and broadly-oval petals meet or lap, long narrow petals are usually
separated. The size, shape, and color of the petals offer the best
means of identification from flowers. The length, thickness, and amount
and kind of pubescence on the styles may distinguish varieties. The
styles of the Howell pear are abnormally short. The number of flowers
in a cluster, and whether the cluster is dense or loose are important.
The character of the fruit-spurs is nearly always noteworthy. The
calyx-tubes, calyx-lobes, and pedicels differ materially. These
structures in the flower, while offering decisive evidence in
identification, are seldom used by pomologists because character of
plant and fruit may be studied during a much longer time and are of
greater cultural importance. In the blooming season, length, diameter,
and the pubescence of stamens may be noted, but much more important
taxonomically is the position of the stamens on the calyx-tube in the
mature fruit. These organs, or remnants of them, persist in the ripened
fruits, as will be noted in the discussion of characters of the fruit.
Lastly, some varieties may be told during the blooming season by the
distribution of the blossoms on the tree. The flowers of many varieties
are borne on the periphery of the tree, and give the plant an aspect by
which one may recognize the variety at once.

If a variety is not noteworthy in the characters for which the fruit
is grown--those which appeal to the senses of taste and sight--it
has small chance of being cultivated long or widely. Hence, especial
attention is paid to descriptions of the fruit. Some pomologists
describe varieties only from the fruit, saying little or nothing about
the plant.


                       FRUIT-CHARACTERS OF POMES

_Season and use._--Perhaps season is the first, and certainly it is one
of the most important characters to be noted in the ripened fruit. By
season is meant the period in which a variety is in proper condition
for use. Unless otherwise stated, season has reference to the period
during which fruit is in condition in ordinary storage, as it is
understood that cold-storage greatly prolongs the natural season. The
terms _summer_, _fall_, and _winter_, sometimes modified by _early_
or _late_, give the season with sufficient accuracy. Keeping quality
and shipping quality, both dependent on several factors, are usually
mentioned in connection with season.

Rather closely connected with season is use. The uses for which a
variety is particularly suited should always be indicated. Thus, a
market variety is one suitable for the general market; a local market
sort is one which does not stand handling well enough for the general
market but is acceptable in local trade. A variety for dessert or
table is suitable for eating in the uncooked state; cooking or kitchen
varieties are desirable for culinary purposes.

_Size and shape of fruit._--Of external characters of pears, size
is important if several typical specimens can be examined, but is
often misleading because under the stress of environment abnormal
specimens may be produced. Gradations in size are expressed by the
terms _large_, _medium_, and _small_, modified by _very_, _above_, and
_below_. Used in connection with size, _uniform_ signifies that the
fruit of a variety runs fairly even in the same size.

Shape is the most important character in describing the fruit. It may
be used with immature as well as mature specimens. In determining
the shape of the fruit, the pear should be held opposite to the eye
perpendicular to the diameter from stem to calyx; or the fruit may be
cut longitudinally at its widest diameter. The shape of the body of
the pear is usually described first, followed by a description of the
narrow part bearing the stem, if this neck is prominent enough to be
noteworthy. A pear is _pyriform_ when the curve formed by the body and
neck is concave; _turbinate_, or top-shaped, when the body is nearly
round with a short neck. The neck may be _long_ or _short_, _distinct_
or _obscure_, _obtuse_ or _acute_. Sheldon is typically turbinate;
Beurre d'Anjou, Beurre Bose, and Bartlett are all pyriform.

A graphic record should accompany a description of the fruit to show
size and shape. A simple outline drawing serves the purpose.

_The stem._--Varying as little as any other character of the pear, the
stem is much used in identification. It may be _long_ and _slender_,
as in the Beurre Bose; _short_ and _thick_, as in Doyenne du Comice;
_fleshy_, as in Louise Bonne de Jersey; _clubbed_, when enlarged at
the end; and _lipped_ when the flesh forms a protuberance under which
the stem is inserted. The stems of pears are often set _obliquely_ as
in Beurre Clairgeau; or are _crooked_ or _curved_ as in Howell. In a
few varieties the stems are _channeled_. The stems of some pears have
distinguishing colors, those of others are pubescent. In some pears, as
Souvenir d'Esperen, there are bud-like projections on the stem.

The length of the stem in pears is a reliable diagnostic character
only when it is known from what part of the flower-cluster the fruit
was developed. For, as a rule, the nearer the flower to the tip of the
raceme in the pear, the shorter the stem on the fruit.

_Cavity and basin._--The cavity, the depression in which the stem
is set, offers several marks which greatly enhance the value of a
description of any of the pears. The cavity may be _acute_ or _obtuse_;
_shallow_, _medium_, or _deep_; _narrow_, _medium_, or _broad_;
_smooth_ or _russeted_; _furrowed_, _ribbed_, _angular_, or _uniform_;
or it may be _lipped_ as described under stem. The color of the skin
within the cavity is sometimes different from that without, and there
may be radiating lines, rays, or streaks.

The basin, the depression in which the calyx is set, is as important
as the cavity in classifying pears and is described by the same terms.
The furrows in the basin are sometimes indistinct and are then called
_wavy_. The skin around the calyx-lobes may be _wrinkled_, _plaited_,
_folded_, or _corrugated_. Rarely, there are fleshy protuberances about
the calyx-lobes called _mammiform appendages_.

_Calyx-lobes._--The withered calyx-lobes persist in some pears and
not in others. They persist in European pears, but are deciduous in
the edible-fruited Asiatic species. The calyx-lobes may be _open_,
_partly open_, or _closed_ in varieties of the fruits in which they
are persistent. In some varieties the segments are separated at the
base; in others, united. The lobes may lie flat on the fruit or may
stand erect. When upright, if the tips incline inward the lobes are
said to be _connivent_; if inclined outward, they are _reflexed_, or
_divergent_. The lobes may be _broad_ or _narrow_, with tips _acute_ or
_accuminate_.

_Characters of the skin._--The skin of all pears offers several most
valuable features for classification. Of these characters, color is
the most important. Perhaps no character of fruits varies more in
accordance with environment than the color, yet the color itself
and the way in which it is distributed on the fruit, serve to make
this character a fairly safe distinguishing mark for most varieties
of pears. The ground-color of pears is the green or yellow-green of
chlorophyll, usually with an over-color of tints and shades of yellow
or red. The over-color may be laid on in _stripes_, _splashes_, or
_streaks_; as a _blush_; may mottle the surface; or may be a single
color, in which case the fruit is said to be _self-colored_. In nearly
all varieties of colored pears, it is not an uncommon anomaly to find
trees under some conditions bearing green fruits. Usually, in pears,
the color is laid on solidly; very few varieties have striped or
splashed fruits.

The skin may be _thick_ or _thin_, _tough_ or _tender_. In a few
varieties it is relatively free from the flesh, but with most clings
tightly. The surface of the skin is often waxy or oily. This character
must not be confused with _waxen_ which refers to the glossy appearance
of the skin.

Some pears have an unbroken russet surface as Beurre Bose and Sheldon.
Or, the surface may be rough because of minute russet dots or netted
veins. With many sorts, the cavity alone is russeted. Sometimes the
russet of the cavity is spread out in radiating lines.

Nearly all pears have few or many dots on the skin, notes on which
may enhance the value of a description. These may be _obscure_ or
_conspicuous, large_ or _small_, _raised_ or _sunken_. If visible under
the epidermis, they are said to be _submerged_. When star-like, they
are called _stellate_. If surrounded by a halo of lighter color, they
are said to be _areolar_. In some varieties, the dots are elongated.
Very often the dots are russeted. The roughened outer skin, called
_scarf-skin_, gives a distinguishing appearance to a few pears.

_Cutting pears to show the internal structure._--When varieties cannot
be distinguished from external marks, there are several very reliable
characters that can be made use of in the internal anatomy of the
fruits. To study these it is necessary to make a longitudinal and a
transverse section of the pear. To make an accurate examination of
the internal structure, the sectioning must be done with a keen, thin
knife, with a steady hand, and a good eye.

In making the longitudinal section the knife should pass through the
center of the calyx, showing the remnants of styles and stamens;
through the middle of the core cell, showing the outline of the core
cavity; and through the middle of the stem. A true record cannot be
obtained, unless the organs named are divided fairly accurately in
halves. In making the transverse section, the knife should pass through
the widest diameter of the fruit, cutting the core in half. If the core
is not in the center of the fruit, trial cuts to locate it must be made
that it may be halved exactly.

_The stamens, calyx-tube, and styles._--After halving the fruit
longitudinally, the first organs to be studied are the stamens, the
position of which furnishes reliable taxonomic data in apples and is
occasionally worth noting in pears. Passing from the stamens to the
calyx-tube, it will be found that the shape of this structure is of
some use in separating varieties, although it is exceedingly variable
in accordance with the size of the pear, and is materially altered by
abnormalities in the fruit. The base of the styles in some varieties
develop into fleshy tissue which alters the shape of the calyx-tube.
The calyx-tube may be _cone-shaped_, _funnel-shaped_, or _urn-shaped_.
When funnel-shaped, the broad upper part is called the _limb_; the
narrow lower part, the _cylinder_. In some varieties the remnants of
the styles are often more or less fleshy and form a point, called the
_pistil point_, which projects into the calyx-tube.

_The core._--The position of the core in the fruit is often a valuable
means of distinguishing varieties. If close to the stem, the core is
said to be _sessile_; if at the center of the pome, it is _median_;
when distant from the stem, _distant_.

The cell containing seed, called a carpel, is morphologically a
modified leaf, which, by folding together and by union of its edges
forms a closed receptacle. In some varieties, the carpels are _open_;
in others _closed_. If the tip of the carpel is indented, it is said to
be _emarginate_; if long and pointed, _mucronate_. In shape, carpels
may be _round_, _cordate_, _obcordate_, _elliptical_, _oblong_,
_elongated_, _ovate_, or _obovate_. In the cores of most pomes there
is a central cavity called the _core cavity_, sometimes spoken of as
the _axial sac_ which may be either _narrow_, _wide_, or _lacking_.
This is a character of much importance and reliability in pears. When
the carpels extend quite to the axis of the fruit, they are said to
be _axile_ and there is no core cavity; when distant from the axis,
they are _abaxile_ and a core cavity is formed. Sometimes the carpel
is lined on the inner surface with a white substance, when it is
said to be _tufted_. In some pears, there are many fine hairs in the
core-cavity in which case the cavity is said to be _tufted_.

The limits of the core are marked by a line in most
pome-fruits--usually very distinct in apples and quinces--which in most
varieties of pears is indistinct. The area enclosed by this line may be
large or small and may be variously shaped. When the core-line joins
the calyx-tube along the sides, it is said to be _clasping_; when the
two ends of the line meet at the base of the calyx-tube, the expression
_core-lines meeting_ is used. The core-line in pears is nearly always,
if not always, clasping and very often it is a more or less thickened
area of grit-cells.

_Seeds._--Seeds are characteristic in all varieties of pears and might
well be used more generally than is the case in classification. The
number is exceedingly variable in different varieties. The usual number
is two in each cell, but often there are three or more and occasionally
they are missing. Seeds vary greatly in different varieties in size,
shape, and color, and differences in these characters are as constant
as are those of any other organ of the fruit. Number, size, shape, and
color of seeds should be noted with care in every technical description
of a pear. The point of the seed, also, is worth noting; it may be
_acute, acuminate_, or _obtuse_. Like the carpels, the seeds are often
_tufted_. There are several so-called seedless pears, but all of these
occasionally contain some seeds. Very often seedlessness is brought
about by lack of proper pollination. An occasional fruit without seeds
is found in nearly all varieties, but these fruits are usually more or
less abnormal in size or shape.

_Flesh._--Most pears may be identified from the flesh-characters
without a glance at any other part of fruit or plant. Flavor, odor, and
texture of flesh are distinct in almost every variety, and appeal more
strongly to the senses of taste and smell than characters measured by
the eye do to the sight. Unfortunately, flavors, odors, and textures
are difficult to describe.

All characters of the flesh vary greatly in accordance with conditions
of growth, soil and climate having a profound influence on texture,
flavor, and quality. It is important, also, in describing the flesh
to have the fruit at the proper stage of maturity, and as immaturity
verges into maturity and maturity into decay almost imperceptibly, each
condition affecting the flesh, it is not surprising that differences of
opinion may be many in judging the flesh-characters of a fruit.

In cutting a pear the color of the flesh is first noted. It may be
nearly white, as in Flemish Beauty; tinged with yellow, as in Tyson;
greenish-white as in Bartlett; or tinged with red, as in Josephine de
Malines. Pears with red flesh are occasionally found, but no standard
varieties have flesh of this color. Sanguinole, grown more or less
in Europe, has flesh of a wine-red color. Very often the texture of
pear-flesh is marred by grittiness to which some varieties are much
more subject than others. In most cases, however, the grit-cells are
abnormal, and a discussion of their presence and cause belongs under
the head of diseases in another chapter.

One determines the nature of the texture by cutting the fruit, through
pressure by the fingers, and by eating. The texture may be _coarse_ or
_fine_; _tender_ or _tough_; _crisp_, _breaking_, _melting_, or _almost
buttery_; _dry_ or _juicy_.

_Flavor and quality._--Pears are readily divided into two classes as
to flavor; they are either _sweet_ or _sour_. The qualifying terms
_mildly_ and _very_ are often used with sweet and sour. _Subacid_,
_tart_, and _sprightly_ are sometimes most expressive. _Austere_ refers
to a flavor more or less sour with some astringency. The flavor may
often be put down as _astringent_. All varieties have a more or less
distinct aroma. _Rich_ and _refreshing_ are words often found in the
rather extensive vocabulary necessary to describe the flavor of this
fruit.

Quality is that combination of texture, flavor, and aroma which makes
a fruit pleasant to the palate. Quality is rated by common consent of
pomologists by five grades: _Poor_, _fair_, _good_, _very good_, and
_best_. It should be noted that _good_ in this rating signifies a fruit
of but medium quality.

[Illustration: PEAR]

The characters of pears are graphically shown on the opposite page in
a descriptive form filled out for Bartlett in a description of this
variety for _The Pears of New York_. This is, however, but a skeleton,
and most of the characters must be more fully described than a form
like this permits. Few pomologists in these days have the temerity
to offer a description compiled in whole or in part. Descriptions are
worth while only when made from living specimens before the eyes of the
describer.


                           SPECIES OF PEARS

The foregoing pages discussing the characters of pears were preparation
for a proper understanding of descriptions of pears. A discussion of
the species which constitute or may constitute forms for cultivation
either for their fruit or as stocks upon which to grow edible pears
logically follows.

Edible pears fall into two well-marked groups: Those coming from Europe
and northwestern Asia, occidental pears; and those coming from eastern
and northeastern Asia, oriental pears.


                           OCCIDENTAL PEARS

In this group belong the thousands of varieties under common
cultivation in Europe, the United States, and in temperate regions
settled by Europeans. These pears are distinct from oriental pears in
place of origin, and by fairly well-marked botanical characters. Thus,
the leaves of these occidental pears are crenate-serrate and entire
and never setose-serrate; and the calyx is persistent on the fruits.
For most part, the fruits of the two divisions are quite distinct,
especially in shape, but no constant line of cleavage can be found in
the pears. There are several species of these occidental pears grown
for their fruits or as ornamentals. Only one, however, is of great
importance. This is _P. communis_, to a discussion of which we now come.


                     1. =PYRUS COMMUNIS= Linnaeus.

  =1.= Linnaeus _Sp. Pl._ 479. 1753.
  =2.= Loudon _Arb. et Frut. Brit._ =2=:880. 1838.
  =3.= Schneider _Laubholzk_. =1=:661. 1906.

 Tree vigorous, attaining a height of 50 ft. and a diameter of 2 ft.,
 usually with an upright, oblong, or pyramidal, compact top; bark on
 trunk of mature trees rough, with large persistent scales; branches
 usually stout, thorny, variously colored, overlaid with scarf-skin;
 branchlets glossy, smooth, glabrous, with more or less conspicuous
 lenticels. Leaf-buds prominent, plump, obtuse or pointed, mostly
 free; leaf-scars conspicuous. Leaves 2 to 4 in. long, 1 to 2-1/2 in.
 wide, oval or oblong-ovate, thin, hard or leathery, veiny; upper
 surface dark green, glabrous; lower surface light green, glabrous;
 both surfaces downy as the leaves open; apex acuminate; margins
 crenate-serrate or entire, never setose-serrate; teeth often tipped
 with small glands; petiole 1 to 2 in. long, slender. Flower-buds
 larger and plumper than leaf-buds; borne on fruiting spurs in dense
 or loose clusters of 4 to 10; flowers showy, 1 in. across, white or
 sometimes with tinge of pink; calyx persistent or rarely deciduous;
 styles distinct to the base, sometimes downy; stamens 15 to 20;
 pedicels 1 in. long, slender, sometimes pubescent.

 Fruits exceedingly variable under cultivation; varying from 1 in.
 in length and diameter to 3 in. in diameter and 5 to 6 in. in
 length; variously shaped, as pyriform, turbinate, round-conic, or
 round-oblate; green, yellow, red, or russet, or combinations of these
 colors; flesh white, yellowish, sometimes pink or wine-red, rarely
 salmon-colored; flesh firm, melting, or buttery and when ripening
 on the tree with few or many grit-cells. Seeds 1 to 3 in a cell,
 sometimes abortive or wanting, large, brown, or brownish, often tufted
 at the tips.

_Pyrus communis_, the common pear, as stated in the preceding chapter,
is a native of southern Europe and southwestern Asia as far east as
Kashmir. The species is a frequent escape from cultivation, multiplying
from seed distributed by animals and by human agencies, and is now
to be found naturalized in forests and byways of the temperate zones
wherever pears are cultivated in orchards. The pear is not as hardy
as the apple, and is, therefore, less generally grown. It refuses to
grow in the warmest and coldest parts of the temperate zones, but is
a favorite orchard, dooryard, and roadside plant in all mid-temperate
regions.

The species comes from regions or localities where the climate is mild
and equable, neither very hot nor very cold, and grows in moist, cool,
and rather heavy soils. These predilections cling to cultivated pears
wherever grown, and pure-bred varieties do not thrive under other
conditions. Wild or cultivated, the pear is a deep-rooted plant, a fact
that must be taken into consideration in selecting orchard sites. On
shallow soils pears thrive better on the shallow-rooted quince.

Few cultivated fruits have changed more under domestication than
the common pear. The trees under cultivation are larger and much
more vigorous, and the fruits in the best orchard varieties--the
consummation of the breeder's art--would by no one be considered the
same species if the two were found in the wild. The pears from truly
wild trees in the Old World are small, nearly round, hard, gritty,
sour, and astringent. Fruits from the run-wild trees from the chance
transport of seeds in this country are scarcely more attractive to
either eye or palate. The product of these wild trees can hardly be
called edible fruits. Cultivated varieties seem to have been evolved,
until the advent of Le Conte and Kieffer, only by cultivation and
selection. All plants are improved more rapidly under hybridization
than selection, and now that the hybridization of this pear with other
species is in full swing, we may expect, for the New World at least, a
new pear flora in the immediate future.

The pear supplies man not only an important article of food but also
a refreshing drink. Perry, the expressed juice of pears, is a common
drink in all European countries. It is used somewhat as a fruit-juice,
but chiefly as a fermented beverage. Pear-juice is fermented in open
casks and at the end of fermentation contains from six to twelve per
cent of alcohol. In parts of England and France, special varieties are
grown in considerable numbers for perry-making. The wood of the pear is
hard, heavy, and close grained, for which qualities it is esteemed by
turners and engravers and for fuel. A mature pear-tree is a beautiful
ornamental, and few forest trees are nobler or more picturesque than
an old specimen of this species with its great size and irregular,
pyramidal top. A pear-tree has much merit for shade as well as an
ornamental.

Pears are easy of culture and propagation, subjects to be discussed in
full in the next chapter. A few words as to propagation are in place
here to show the affinities of this species with other species and
genera. The common pear readily inter-grafts with other pears, and its
cions may be made to grow, though with difficulty, on the apple. A
most noteworthy fact with this fruit is that though not easily grafted
on the apple and some other pears, it unites readily with the quince
and the hawthorn, both of which belongs to distinct genera. The common
pear hybridizes freely with the oriental pear, but whether with other
species does not appear. There are no records of the pear hybridizing
with the apple, but there are trustworthy accounts of hybrids with the
quince and with sorbus.

The classical name of the pear was Pirus, changed to Pyrus by
Tournefort, after which it was adopted by Linnaeus, who established
the genus and united with it the Malus and Cydonia of Tournefort.
Fortunately there is no confusion in the botanical nomenclature of
this fruit. Botanists agree, without notable divergence of opinion,
on the generic and specific names of this fruit. There are several
well-marked botanical varieties of _Pyrus communis_ as well as a number
of horticultural forms. The most prominent of these must be noted.


                  =PYRUS COMMUNUS PYRASTER= Linnaeus

      =1.= Linnaeus _Sp. Pl._ 479. 1753.

 This variety, rather common in parts of Europe, is similar to the type
 in foliage but has globose fruits. The leaves differ somewhat in being
 more rounded and in having margins more serrate. The plant is often
 very thorny. Some botanists believe this form to be only an escape
 from cultivation.


                  =PYRUS COMMUNIS SATIVA= De Candolle

      =1.= De Candolle _Prod._ =2=:634. 1825.

 This name is applied to the cultivated pear in its many pomological
 forms. The trees are usually larger than those of the wild pears and
 are without thorns. They differ also in having larger leaves, and
 larger and better-flavored fruits.


                    =PYRUS COMMUNIS CORDATA= Hooker

      =1.= Hooker, J. D. _Stud. Flora_ 131. 1878.
      =2.= _P. cordata_ Desvaux _Obs. Pl. Anjou_ 152. 1818.

 This botanical variety is a spiny shrub or shrub-like tree. The leaves
 are smaller than those of the species, 1 in. in width, suborbicular
 to ovate, subcordate at the base. Flowers smaller. Fruit globose or
 slightly turbinate, very small, 1/2 in. in diameter; calyx persistent.
 The species is a native of western France and is found in Devon and
 Cornwall, England. This species is said to propagate itself freely
 from root-suckers which suggests that it might be tried as a dwarfing
 stock for the common pears.


                    =PYRUS COMMUNIS LONGIPES= Henry

      =1.= Henry _Trees Gt. Brit. & Ire._ =6=:1561. 1912.
      =2.= _P. longipes_ Cosson and Durien _Bull. Soc. Bot. France._
          =2=:310. 1855.

 The tree is small with a few spines. The leaves are about 2 in. long
 and 1 in. wide, ovate, acuminate, subcordate, glabrous, finely and
 crenately serrate, on long slender petioles. This variety differs
 little from var. _cordata_ in its fruit except in the deciduous calyx.
 It is found along the mountain streams of Algeria.


                   =PYRUS COMMUNIS MARIANA= Willkomm

      =1.= _Linnaea_ =25=:25. 1852.
      =2.= _P. bourgaeana_ Decaisne _Jar. Fruit._ i. t. 2. 1871.

 This is a small tree found in the Sierra Morena in Spain. The leaves
 are ovate, 1 in. in length, rounded at the base, on very long, slender
 petioles. The pear is very small with a persistent calyx.


                      2. =PYRUS NIVALIS= Jacquin

      =1.= _Fl. Austr._ =2=: 4, t. =107.= 1774.

 Tree small, stout, without thorns; young shoots thickly covered with
 white wool. Leaves oval or obovate, 2 to 3 in. long, 3/4 to 1-1/4 in.
 wide, crenate at the base, entire, upper and lower surfaces covered
 with white wool when young, nearly glaucous and the upper surface
 shining when mature. Flowers white, 1-1/2 in. across, clustered. Fruit
 roundish, yellowish-green, borne on a stalk as long or longer than the
 fruit, acid or becoming sweetish at full maturity.

This pear is a native of eastern Europe and Asia Minor and is often
found in France as an escape from the orchard. The tree, which
sometimes attains a height of fifty feet, is said to be a handsome
ornamental. The species is sometimes under cultivation in France for
the fruits which make very good perry, and when bletted, as is the
medlar, are suitable for dessert. In Austria and adjoining parts of
Germany, the species is somewhat cultivated for the same purposes as
in France under the name _Schnee birn_ or Snow pear, because not fit
to eat until snow falls. This pear might have value to hybridize with
common pears for the improvement of their fruit.

Botanists are not quite certain of the botanical standing of _P.
nivalis_. By some botanists it is considered a cultivated form of _P.
elaeagrifolia_ Pallas. By others it is thought to be a cross of which
_P. communis_ is one parent. _P. salvifolia_ De Candolle is either
closely allied to or identical with this species. _P. kotschyana_
Boissier differs from _P. nivalis_ chiefly in having smaller and harder
fruits. _P. elaeagrifolia_ Pallas is distinguished by some botanists
from _P. kotschyana_ only by its spiny branches--not a constant
character.


                    =3.= =PYRUS AURICULARIS= Knoop

      =1.= _Pomol._ =2=:38.   1763.
      =2.= _P. irregularis_ Muenchhausen _Hausvater_ =5=:246. 1770.
      =3.= _P. pollveria_ Linnaeus _Mant._ =2=:244. 1771.
      =4.= _P. bollwyleriana_ De Candolle _Fl. France Suppl._ =5=:530.
          1815.

 A tree 30 to 50 ft. high, forming a round head; branchlets and buds
 downy. Leaves ovate or oval, 3 to 4 in. long, 2 to 2-1/2 in. wide;
 pointed, irregular, and coarsely and sometimes doubly toothed; upper
 surface glossy, dark green, with glands on the midrib, glabrous at
 maturity, downy when young; lower surface permanently covered with
 gray tomentum; stalk 1 to 1-1/2 in. long, woolly. Flowers white,
 nearly 1 in. across, 5 to 20 in tomentose corymbs; sepals covered with
 pure white wool on both surfaces; styles 2 to 5, united and tomentose
 at the base; stamens rosy red. Fruit pyriform, 1 to 1-1/2 in. in
 diameter; stalk 1 to 1-1/2 in. long, reddish yellow; flesh yellow,
 sweet.

This tree is an interesting hybrid between _P. communis_ and the
whitebeam, _P. aria_. It was first noticed at Bollweiler, Alsace, and
was first mentioned by J. Bauhin in 1619. It is propagated by grafts
as few of the seeds are fertile and these do not come true to name. It
bears fruit very sparingly, none being produced in some seasons.

Besides the species that have been named there are several other
occidental pears named by European botanists which may be looked
for in botanic gardens. Some of these might have value for work in
hybridization but it is doubtful. Of these, _P. heterophylla_ Regel and
Schmalhausen (_Act. Hort. Petropol_ =5=:pt. ii, 581. 1878) is a small
thorny tree from the mountain valleys of Turkestan. _P. amygdaliformis_
Villars (_Cat. Meth. Jardin Strasbourg_ 323. 1807) is a spiny
shrub or small tree, bearing small worthless fruits; a native of arid
soils in the regions of olives in southern Europe. _P. salicifolia_
Pallas (_Itin._ =3=:734. 1776) is a small spiny tree from the Crimea,
Caucasas, and Armenia; the fruit has little or no value. _P. syriaca_
Boissier (_Diag. Nov. Pl. Orient_ =10=:1. 1849) is a thorny, shrubby
tree from Syria, Asia Minor, and Kurdistan.

A review of botanical literature shows several other names of doubtful
species of Pyrus which seem more likely to be hybrids or abnormal
escapes from orchards. There are, also, many names which seem to be
synonyms. Material and literature at hand do not enable the author to
make certain of these, even if any sufficiently worthy purpose could be
served in a pomological text.


                            ORIENTAL PEARS

The oriental pears have been brought to America in comparatively
recent years, chiefly as ornamentals and for blight-resistant stocks;
but hybrids of at least one species of this group, _P. serotina_,
with the common pear have given many valuable orchard varieties. The
Chinese and Japanese cultivate several species for their fruits. These
pears constitute a group quite distinct in aspect of tree and fruit,
but no characters not in occidental species are found in all species
of the oriental group. The most constant differences, besides region
of origin, are found in the leaves and the calyx. The leaves in most
species are markedly acuminate and their margins are sharp-serrate
or setose-serrate. The calyx falls from the fruit in the species now
cultivated for food, but does not in two species promising for stocks.


[Illustration: _PYRUS SEROTINA_]

                     =4.= =PYRUS SEROTINA= Rehder

      =1.= Rehder _Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts & Sci._ =50=:213. 1915.

 Tree vigorous, upright, attaining a height of 20 to 50 ft., the
 branches becoming glabrous. Leaves ovate-oblong, sometimes ovate,
 3 to 5 in. long, rounded at the base and rarely subcordate or
 cuneate, long-acuminate, sharply setose-serrate, with partially
 appressed seratures; when young, villous, or lower surface cobwebby,
 but becoming glabrous. Flowers white, borne in 6 to 9 flowered
 umbellate-racemose clusters; glabrous or somewhat tomentose and borne
 on slender pedicels; calyx-lobes triangular-ovate and long-acuminate,
 1/4 to 1/2 in. long, glandulose-denticulate; petals oval,
 short-clawed, 3/4 in. long; stamens about 20; styles 4 or 5, glabrous.
 Fruit subglobose, russet-brown; stalk slender; calyx deciduous.

This oriental pear has been referred to _P. sinensis_ Lindley (not
Poiret) by botanists and horticulturists since its introduction
in Europe nearly one hundred years ago until 1915 when Rehder,
discovering that the true _P. sinensis_ had been lost to cultivation,
proposed the name _P. lindleyi_ for one group and _P. serotina_ for
another group of Chinese pears passing under Lindley's original
species, _P. sinensis_.

This species comes from central and western China, where the fruits are
used for food under the name, with that of other brown-fruited species,
of _tang-li_. American pomologists are interested in the type species
as a possible source of blight-resistant stocks for varieties of the
common pear. Stocks of this species, however, grown on the Pacific
slope have not proved satisfactory because difficult to bud, and very
susceptible to leaf-blight, and because they are not as resistant
to pear-blight as an ideal stock should be. Rehder, an authority on
oriental pears, gives two botanical varieties. His var. _stapfiana_
differs from the type in bearing pyriform fruits; leaves with less
appressed serratures; and petals with attenuate claws. So far as now
appears it is of no greater value to pomology than the type. The other
botanical variety which Rehder describes, var. _culta_, is of great
importance in pomology and must have detailed consideration.


                     =PYRUS SEROTINA CULTA= Rehder

      =1.= Rehder _Prod. Amer. Acad. Arts & Sci._ =50=:233. 1915.
      =2.= _P. sinensis_ Hort. Not Lindley nor Poiret.
      =3.= _P. japonica_ Hort. Not Thunberg.
      =3.= _P. sieboldi_ Carriere _Rev. Hort._. 110. 1880.
      =5.= _P. sinensis culta_ Makino _Tokyo Bot. Mag._ =22=:69. 1908.

 Tree large, vigorous; top spreading, drooping, open; trunk thick,
 shaggy; branches stout, zigzag, greenish-brown, with a slight covering
 of scarf-skin marked with many conspicuous, elongated lenticels;
 branchlets slender, with long internodes, brownish-red, tinged
 with green and with thin, ash-gray scarf-skin, glabrous, with many
 unusually conspicuous, raised lenticels. Leaf-buds sharply pointed,
 plump, thick at the base, free; leaf-scars prominent. Leaves 4-1/8
 in. long, 2-5/8 in. wide, thick, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin
 tipped with very fine reddish-brown glands, finely serrate; petiole
 thick, 2 in. long, lightly pubescent, greenish-red. Flower-buds
 thick, short, conical, plump, free, arranged singly on very short
 spurs; flowers with a disagreeable odor, bloom in mid-season, 1-1/4
 in. across, averaging 7 buds in a cluster; calyx-lobes long, narrow,
 acuminate, glandular, reflexed, lightly pubescent within and without;
 petals broadly oval, entire, apex rounded; pistils 4 or 5, from a
 common base, longer than the stamens, pubescent at base; stamens 1/4
 in. long, with dull red anthers; pedicels 1-1/2 in. long, slender,
 thinly pubescent, pale green.

 Fruit ripe February-March; 2-1/4 in. long, 2-1/8 in. wide, round,
 slightly pyriform, irregularly ribbed, with unequal sides; stem 1-1/2
 in. long, curved, slender; cavity acute, deep, narrow, furrowed,
 lipped; calyx deciduous; basin shallow, wide, obtuse, gently furrowed
 or wrinkled; skin tough, smooth, waxy; color lemon-yellow, with russet
 lines and nettings and many russet specks; dots numerous, small,
 conspicuous, brownish-russet; flesh yellowish-white, very granular,
 crisp, tough, juicy, with a peculiar aroma unlike that of the common
 pear; poor in quality. Core large, open, axile, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds roundish, of medium
 size, wide, plump, obtuse.

The Sand pear differs from the type in fruit and foliage. The pears are
much larger and are commonly apple-form as shown in the accompanying
plate, but trees bearing pyriform fruits are not unknown. The leaves
are larger and broader. Rehder, who separated this form from its
species, writes, "The Japanese pear cultivated under the name Madame
Von Siebold may be considered as representing the type of this
variety." These pears are known to pomologists under several names; as
Chinese Sand, Sand, Japanese, Hawaii, Sha Lea, Gold Dust, Mikado, and
Diamyo, although it is possible that the last three are hybrids. The
pear illustrated and described in this text as a representative of this
botanical variety came from seed sent from Manchuria.

The pears are attractive in appearance, keep well, and are palatable
in culinary preparations, but are possessed of a gritty flesh and
potato-like flavor which debar them as dessert fruits in all regions
where the common pear can be grown. The several varieties of var.
_culta_ now in America came from Japan where the species must have been
early introduced from China as this is now the most common fruit of the
Japanese with the exception of the persimmon. In China and Japan there
are a number of pomological varieties, which, however, differ from
each other less than varieties of the European pear. The fruits of the
several varieties grown in America are often mistaken for apples, from
which they are distinguished by their deciduous calyxes, rough, dry
skins, long stems, juicy, gritty flesh, and insipid potato-like flavor.
Seedlings of var. _culta_ fail as stocks for European varieties in the
same characters in which the species is unsatisfactory.

This oriental pear hybridizes freely with the common pear, and it
is for this purpose that it is most valuable in America. Several of
these hybrids are important commercial varieties in North America
of which Kieffer, Le Conte, and Garber, in the order named, are the
best known and the most useful. Sterility is a common attribute of
hybrids, but the hybrids between these two species are not more sterile
than varieties of the parents. These hybrids are stronger and more
rapid in growth than the common pear and are more productive and more
resistant to blight. The pears are more pyriform and of much better
flavor than those of the oriental parent. The calyx of hybrid fruits
is sometimes persistent and sometimes deciduous. The hybrids do not
make good stocks and intergraft but poorly with the common pear. Of all
pear-trees, these are handsomest in growth when in perfect health and
make excellent ornamental trees. The strong, clean growth, luxuriant
green foliage, beautifully tinted in the autumn, resembles the oriental
rather than the occidental parent. It is doubtful whether hybrid trees
will attain the great size of those of the common pear, and they seem
to succumb to the ills of old age rather more quickly than those of
the European parent. The hybrid pears seem less well liked by the
pestiferous San Jose scale than the common pear. The first flush of
popularity having passed, hybrid pears have found their proper place
in American pomology. They belong to the South and Middle West where
the common pear is illy adapted to the climate. In the North and on the
Pacific slope, pear-growers are wisely planting varieties the fruits of
which are better in quality.


                  =5.= =PYRUS USSURIENSIS= Maximowicz

      =1.= _P. ussuriensis_ Maximowicz _Bull. Acad. Sci. St. Petersb._
          =15=:132. 1857.
      =2.= _P. sinensis_ Decaisne _Bull. Acad. Sci. St. Petersb._
          =19=:172. 1883.
      =3.= _P. simonii_ Carriere _Rev. Hort._ 28. 1872. fig. 3.
      =4.= _P. sinensis ussuriensis_ Makino _Tokyo Bot. Mag._ =22=:69.
          1908.

Rehder says of _P. ussuriensis_,[15]

 "This species differs from the allied species chiefly in the short
 stalk of the globose fruit with persistent calyx, in the broad, often
 nearly orbicular, strongly setosely serrate leaves and in the lighter
 yellowish-brown branches; the flower clusters are, owing to the short
 stalks, rather dense and hemispherical, the petals are obovate and
 rather gradually narrowed toward the base; the styles are distinctly
 pilose near the base."

Wilson,[16] describing the vegetation of Korea, says of this species:

 "_Pyrus ussuriensis_ is abundant and this year is laden with fruit.
 On some trees the fruit is wholly green, on others reddish on one
 side; the length of the peduncle varies and the same is true of the
 leaf-structure; the calyx is persistent or deciduous often on fruits
 on the same branch."

The habitat of this species is northern and northeastern China and
eastern Siberia. Manchuria, Korea, Amurland, and Ussurri are named as
regions in which it is most commonly found. A glance at the map shows
that this habitat is in the far north for pears, and it might well be
suspected that this would be one of the hardiest of all pears, and this
proves to be the case. Horticultural varieties are reported by Chinese
explorers, some of which have been introduced by the United States
Department of Agriculture. These no doubt have some value in the most
northern fruit regions of America and if not for their fruits, they may
prove useful in hybridization. But it is as a possible stock resistant
to blight that the species has received most attention in this country.

Reimer, of Oregon, found this species to be very resistant to
fire-blight and at first thought it might prove to be a valuable stock.
Following Reimer's experiments much was said of it as a promising
new stock, and the United States Department of Agriculture gave it a
thorough trial from the results of which they discouraged its use. The
tree proved to be a slow grower; very subject to leaf-blight, therefore
unable to hold its leaves during the growing and budding season,
difficult to use in budding as the tough bark did not "slip" easily,
and but a small number of the buds took. According to Galloway,[17]
however, the Kuan li or Chinese water pear, which he says belongs to
the Ussuriensis group, is one of the most promising pear stocks. Both
for its fruits and as a stock, this species is likely to receive much
attention in the United States for some time to come. The difficulty at
present, as we have found at this Station, is to get seeds or budding
wood true to name of the forms of the species that seem to be most
desirable.


                      6. =PYRUS SERRULATA= Rehder

    =1.= _P. serrulata_ Rehder _Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts & Sci._ =50=:234.
        1915.

Chinese Saw-leafed Pear. This species, according to Rehder, is closely
related to _P. serotina_ but differs from it chiefly in its serrulate,
not setosely serrate, generally broader, leaves, in the smaller flowers
with usually three or four styles, and in the shorter sepals and
smaller fruit.

This pear was first found by E. H. Wilson in 1907 in western Hupeh.
The province of Hupeh is 800 or 900 miles west and south of Shanghai.
The pears in this location grow in thickets at an altitude of 4000 to
5000 feet. Reimer found the species at Ichang, in Hupeh, at elevations
of 3000 to 3700 feet. Its occurrence at these altitudes indicates that
it is a hardy form. Whether the species is likely to be valuable for
its fruits, or for hybridization, does not appear, but Galloway,[17]
reporting on it as tested by the United States Department of
Agriculture, says that it is affected but slightly by leaf-blight,
holds its foliage well in hot summers, and has a long budding season.
These statements indicate that it is worth trying as a stock.


[Illustration: _PYRUS BETULAEFOLIA_]

                    =7.= =PYRUS BETULAEFOLIA= Bunge

      =1.= _P. betulaefolia_ Bunge _Mem. Sav. Etr. Acad. Sci. St. Petersb._
          =2=:101. 1833.
      =2.= Decaisne _Jard. Fruit._ =1=:20. 1872.
      =3.= Carriere _Rev. Hort._ 318. 1879. figs. 68, 69.
      =4.= Sargent _Gard. & For_. =7=:224. 1894. fig. 39.

 Tree vigorous, upright-spreading, tall, open-topped, hardy; trunk
 stocky, shaggy, and rough; branches thick, dull brownish-red, thickly
 coated with gray scarf-skin, sprinkled with numerous small, raised
 lenticels; branchlets slender, willowy, long, with long internodes,
 dull reddish-brown, with gray scarf-skin, heavily pubescent, with
 small, conspicuous, raised lenticels. Leaf-buds small, short,
 flattened, pointed, free. Leaves 4 in. long, 2-1/8 in. wide, thick,
 stiff; apex taper-pointed; margin sharply and coarsely serrate;
 teeth tipped with small, reddish-brown glands; petiole 1-3/4 in.
 long, slender, pubescent, tinged red. Flower-buds small, short,
 conical, plump, free, arranged singly on long spurs; flowers open
 late, with a rather unpleasant odor, showy, 1-3/16 in. across, white,
 in dense clusters, 13 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-5/16 in. long,
 slender, pubescent, pale green; calyx-tube pale green mingled with
 white pubescence, dark greenish-yellow within, campanulate, thickly
 pubescent; calyx-lobes greenish within and with white pubescence,
 short, narrow, acuminate, tipped with very small, sharp, reddish-brown
 glands, heavily pubescent within and without, reflexed; petals
 separated at the base but with meeting cheeks, round-oval, entire,
 with short, narrow claws, white at the base; anthers deep pinkish-red;
 filaments short, shorter than the petals; styles 2 to 3; pistils
 glabrous, usually as long as the stamens; stigma very small. Fruit
 russet, heavily dotted, the size of a small grape; calyx deciduous;
 pears hanging until the following spring.

The above description was made from a plant grown from seed obtained
from the Arnold Arboretum in 1900, that institution having obtained
the species from the mountains near Peking in 1882. This pear has been
collected by various explorers in the regions about Peking, especially
to the north and east, and is not uncommon in these parts of China. The
small pears are without value for food, but the trees are promising
stocks. While Reimer reports the species as susceptible to fire-blight
in Oregon, it has not proved particularly so on the grounds of this
Station nor elsewhere in the East. The seedlings are also free from
leaf-blight. The young plants grow vigorously from seed or cuttings;
are capable of being budded throughout a long season; they make a good
union with other pears in China according to Reimer; and the variety is
so common in China that there is little difficulty in getting seed true
to name. The tree is a handsome ornamental.


                   =8.= =PYRUS CALLERYANA= Decaisne

    =1.= _P. calleryana Decaisne Jard. Fruit._ =1=:8. 1872.

Rehder[18] says of this species,

 "_Pyrus calleryana_ is a widely distributed species and seems not
 uncommon on mountains at an altitude of from 1000 to 1500 m. It is
 easily recognizable by its comparatively small crenate leaves, like
 the inflorescence glabrous or nearly glabrous, and by its small
 flowers with two, rarely three styles. When unfolding most specimens
 show a loose and thin tomentum on the under side of the leaves which
 usually soon disappears, but in No. 1662 from Kuling even the fully
 grown leaves are loosely rusty tomentose on the midrib beneath. In
 No. 415a the leaves are longer, generally ovate-oblong, the pedicels
 very long and slender, about 3 to 4 cm. long and the sepals are mostly
 long-acuminate. The fruit of No. 556a is rather large, about 1 to 1.4
 cm. in diameter, but a fruit examined proved to be two-celled."

This species is reported from various places in China with western
Hupeh as the chief habitat. Reimer,[19] of Oregon, reports this as a
most promising stock for the common pear, and Galloway,[20] of the
United States Department of Agriculture, says that "Of all the pears
tested and studied this remarkable species holds out the greatest
promise as a stock." In America it stands the cold as far north as the
Arnold Arboretum, near Boston, and endures summer heat as far south as
Brooksville, Florida. The plant is reported as vigorous under nearly
all conditions. Galloway reports that it can be budded from July 1 to
September 1 at Washington. All kinds of pears take well upon it; the
seeds are easily obtained, easily grown, and run remarkably uniform.


                      =9.= =PYRUS OVOIDEA= Rehder

      =1.= _Proc. Am. Acad. Arts & Sci._ =50=:228. 1915.
      =2.= _P. sinensis Hemsley Jour. Linn. Soc._ =23=:257. 1887, in part.
          Not Poiret nor Lindley.
      =3.= Schneider _Ill. Handb. Laubholzk_. =1=:663. 1906. fig. 364 c-d.
      =4.= _P. simonii_ Hort. Not Carriere.

Rehder, who established this species, says of it: "This species seems
to be most closely related to _P. ussuriensis_ Maximowicz which differs
chiefly in the broader orbicular-ovate or ovate leaves, in the lighter
colored branches, and in the short-stalked subglobose fruit with the
persistent sepals spreading. The shape of the fruit of _P. ovoidea_
is very unusual and quite distinct from any pear I know; the fruit
is exactly ovate, broad and rounded at the base and tapering from
the middle toward the truncate apex, as figured by Schneider (fig.
364 d). This may, however, not be a specific character and the shape
of the fruit may vary in other specimens referable to this species.
The Chinese material which I have seen and which might belong here
is very meagre. The Fokien specimen is in young fruit which suggests
a more pyriform shape, though tapering toward the apex and showing
the same kind of persistent calyx; the serration of the leaves is
more minute and more accumbent. The Yunnan specimen is in flower and
differs somewhat in the more copious tomentum of the leaves and of the
inflorescence and in the shorter, nearly entire calyx-lobes.

 "It is not known when and whence this species was introduced. Possibly
 it was sent in the early sixties from northern China by G. E. Simon,
 or by A. David a little later from the same region or from Mongolia to
 the Museum in Paris and was afterwards distributed by Decaisne."

This species is of importance to pear-growers as a stock. Discussing it
as a stock, Reimer[19] says: "This species ranks second only to _Pyrus
ussuriensis_ in blight resistance. During 1915 we were unable to get
the disease to develop more than four inches even in vigorous growing
shoots of this species. During the very favorable season of 1916
vigorous shoots would blight down as much as fifteen inches. As soon as
it reached the hard wood of the previous season it would stop. All the
inoculations into one and two-year-old trunks have failed to develop
the disease.

 "The trees are vigorous growers, and produce medium sized fruit, which
 is egg-shaped, and has a persistent calyx. This species is a native of
 northern China, and was formerly known as _Pyrus simonii_."


                    =10.= =PYRUS VARIOLOSA= Wallich

      =1.= _Cat. No. 680._ 1828.

Reimer,[21] now a leading authority on blight-resistant stocks, writes
of _P. variolosa_: "This species is one of the most promising types in
our collection. The tree is a beautiful, vigorous, upright grower. It
makes a good union with cultivated varieties, and should prove valuable
as a stock for top-working.

 "This species, while not immune to blight, is very resistant. During
 the summer of 1915 a large number of innoculations were made into
 the tips of young branches, and these usually would blight back for
 a distance of three to five inches. During 1916, a very favorable
 season for pear blight, the disease would extend down young branches
 as much as from twelve to eighteen inches, and in one case as much
 as two feet. Seventy-seven inoculations were made into the trunks
 of two-year-old trees. All but seven of them failed to develop the
 disease. In the successful infections, only small superficial cankers
 were produced. In these cankers a new cambium would readily form, and
 the entire wound would heal over perfectly in a short time.

 "The origin of this species, or type, is still a matter of dispute. It
 has been confused with _Pyrus pashia_ of northern India, from which
 species it is very distinct. _Pyrus variolosa_ produces medium sized,
 pear-shaped fruits, which have a persistent calyx. It is possible that
 this is not a distinct species, but a hybrid. If this should prove to
 be the case, it probably will not come true to type from seeds. This
 matter will be determined by a study of the seedlings of this type.
 If this does not come true to type from seeds, the seedlings may be
 of little value for root stocks. If this should prove to be the case,
 it will, nevertheless, be of value as a stock for top-working, when
 propagated by budding or grafting on some other root system."




                              CHAPTER III

                             PEAR CULTURE


The common pear or some of its hybrids with the oriental pear is grown
for a home supply of fruit, if not for the markets, in every part of
North America where hardy fruits thrive except in the extreme north and
south. But commercial pear-growing on this continent is confined to
a few regions, and in these is profitable only in carefully selected
situations. Perhaps the culture of no other fruit, not even of the
tender peach nor of the capricious grape, is more definitely determined
by environment than is that of the pear. A study of the regions in
America in which pears are successfully grown for the markets furnishes
clews to the proper culture of this fruit in New York, and shows with
what regions this State must compete in growing pears for the markets.
The location of the pear regions in America is readily determined by
figures showing the number of trees and their yield in the various
fruit regions of the country.


          PEAR STATISTICS FOR THE UNITED STATES AND NEW YORK

Six states produced over 65 per cent of the pears grown in the United
States in 1919. The census of 1920 shows that in the preceding year the
total crop of the country was 14,211,346 bushels, of which California
produced 3,952,923 bushels; New York, 1,830,237 bushels; Washington,
1,728,759 bushels; Oregon, 761,063 bushels; Texas, 637,400 bushels; and
Missouri, 430,828 bushels. Trees in all other states yielded 4,870,136
bushels. There were according to this census 14,646,995 bearing trees
and 6,051,845 not of bearing age. The yield of fruit was 60 per cent
greater than in 1909; the number of bearing trees 3 per cent less;
and the number of non-bearing trees 28 per cent less. Compared with
other tree-fruits, according to this census, the pear occupies fourth
place in value of product, the apple, peach (including the nectarine),
and plum (including the prune), in order named, outranking the pear.
Probably the orange, grape, and strawberry yield greater value to the
country than the pear, although the acreage of each of these three
fruits is smaller. Commercial production cannot be segregated from
the total, but without question the increase in plantings is due to
commercial activities; for the development of the canning industry,
refrigerator service, and better transportation have greatly stimulated
trade in this fruit.

In the states in which pear-growing is a commercial industry,
commercial orchards are confined to localities in which climate,
soil, and transportation combine to favor the pear. In New York, for
example, pears are grown for market on a large scale in only ten of the
sixty-one counties. These, with the number of trees in each, according
to the last census are as follows: Niagara, 620,743; Monroe, 384,374;
Orleans, 377,371; Columbia, 308,298; Wayne, 305,239; Ulster, 304,158;
Greene, 208,885; Oswego, 154,576; Ontario, 121,934; Orange, 96,456.

Over 77 per cent of all the pear-trees in the State are in these
counties, and 79 per cent of the pears grown in the State are produced
in these ten counties. The production of pears in New York for the
eleven-year period from 1909 to 1919, inclusive, show the increase and
fluctuation in the production of pears in the State for this period.
The figures for 1909 and 1919 are from the thirteenth and fourteenth
census reports, while those of the intervening years are estimates
from the Bureau of Crop Estimates of the United States Department of
Agriculture. The yields run in bushels for the eleven years as follows:
1,343,000, 1,530,000, 1,886,000, 1,128,000, 2,016,000, 1,298,000,
1,375,000, 1,675,000, 1,708,000, 1,352,000, and 1,830,237.

Bartlett and Kieffer are conspicuous leaders among varieties in
number of trees and in production for the whole country. In the great
commercial pear-growing regions of New York and California, Bartlett
is the favorite variety, but Kieffer is grown largely also, especially
for canners. In the South and in the Mississippi Valley, Kieffer is
the leading variety because it is relatively resistant to blight and
withstands extremes in climate better than other varieties. For many
years after its introduction about 1870, Kieffer was over-praised by
both fruit-growers and nurserymen. Fruit-growers liked it because of
its resistance to blight and great productiveness, and nurserymen
preferred it to other sorts because it is the easiest of all varieties
to grow in the nursery. It is, however, so universally condemned for
its tasteless fruits that it is losing its popularity, and is not now
as largely planted in competition with Bartlett as it once was. Seckel,
Clapp Favorite, Winter Nelis, Beurre d'Anjou, Beurre Bosc, Howell,
Sheldon, Beurre Clairgeau, and Garber for the South, are the standard
varieties following Bartlett and Kieffer in popularity.

Bartlett is far in the lead of commercial varieties in New York. At
present, Kieffer probably holds second place in this State, but its
popularity is fast waning and Seckel is nearly as commonly planted,
if, indeed, it does not now surpass Kieffer in number of trees. Clapp
Favorite, Beurre d'Anjou, Beurre Bosc, Beurre Clairgeau, Duchesse
d'Angouleme, Howell, Lawrence, Sheldon, Vermont Beauty, and Winter
Nelis are all planted more or less in commercial orchards, and are
the favorites for home use. All of these varieties are susceptible to
blight, are a little too tender to cold, and have other faults of tree
and fruit, so that pear-growers in New York anxiously look forward to
better varieties. It is hardly too much to say that pear-growing can
never become a great industry in New York until better varieties take
the place of the unreliable sorts that must be planted now.

To some extent, man-governed agencies determine where pears may be
grown profitably if the planter is growing for the markets. Pears do
not keep long and are easily bruised, and transportation must not
take too great toll; therefore, handling facilities must be suitable,
markets must not be distant, and transportation must be cheap and
efficient. But in the culture of this fruit, natural agencies outrank
those depending on man, two of which determine very largely where pears
are to be grown commercially in both the country and the state. These
two, climate and soil, have been mentioned before, but must now be
discussed somewhat in detail.


                                CLIMATE

The ideal climate for a cultivated plant is one in which the plant
thrives as an escape from cultivation wholly independent of care from
man. The apple, cherry, plum, and peach are often found wild in one or
another part of America, but the pear almost never. The pear does not
naturally become inured to the American climate, and in the orchard
is not well acclimated even in the varieties which have originated in
the country. In particular, as a young tree and until well advanced
toward maturity, the pear shows the bad effects of maladjustment to
climate, but as an old tree it seems to be far less susceptible to the
extremes of climate to which fruit trees are subjected in most parts of
America. Both of the two chief constituents of climate, temperature and
rainfall, are determinants of regions and sites in pear-growing.

Extremes in temperature, more particularly of cold, are the only phases
of temperature that pear-growers need consider in New York. The pear is
not nearly as hardy as the apple, and Bartlett, the foremost variety
in the State, is almost as tender to cold as the peach. The limits of
commercial pear-culture are set in this State by the winter climate.
The pear cannot be grown profitably where the temperature often falls
below -15 deg. F., for while winter-killing of the wood does not always
occur at this temperature it sometimes does, and even occasional
injury to the tree is almost fatal to the profitable growing of fruit.
Fruit-buds of the pear are a little more tender to cold than the wood,
and a season's crop is often ruined when the temperature drops to -10 deg.
F. Pears in the nursery are more tender to cold than trees in the
orchard, and unless the wood is thoroughly mature or protected by a
heavy covering of snow, nursery stock is likely to be injured by any
temperature below zero. The injury of nursery stock is manifested in
the well-known "black heart" of young pear-trees subjected to severe
cold.

Happily, there is some flexibility in the constitutions of varieties
of pears, as with all fruits, and a degree of cold that will kill a
variety under one set of conditions may not under another. While,
therefore, it is not safe for commercial fruit-growers to gamble with
the weather, those who grow pears for their own use may do so with
the expectation of losing trees or crop now and then but of having
them in most seasons. A little can be done to prevent winter injury by
carefully selecting sites protected from prevailing winter winds, and
by planting on warm soils on which the wood matures more thoroughly
than on cold soils. Careful cultural methods, especially the use
of cover-crops, may be helpful. Not much can be done in the way of
coddling pear-trees from cold. They cannot be laid down as is sometimes
done with peach-trees, nor can they be grown low enough, even as
dwarfs, to count on much protection from deep snow.

Happily, also, there are varieties of pears endowed with constitutions
fitted for very different climates. Varieties of pears from central
and northern Russia show remarkable capacity in resisting cold, heat,
dryness, strong winds, and other peculiarities of the climate of the
Great Plains, and some of them can be grown in the coldest agricultural
regions of New York. A few hybrids, as Kieffer, Le Conte, Garber,
Douglas, and others of their kind can be grown in the Gulf States
where the common pear cannot withstand the hot summers. Cincinis, Le
Conte, and Garber thrive as far south as central Florida and southern
Texas. There is considerable variation in the hardiness of the common
pear. Tyson, Flemish Beauty, and Beurre Superfin are much hardier than
Bartlett, Seckel, or Clapp Favorite, and may be chosen to extend the
culture of this fruit to any part of New York in which the Baldwin
apple can be grown. It is most surprising to find occasionally these
hardiest of the common pears growing in some of the coldest parts of
the State, usually as demonstrations not only of superior inherent
hardiness but also of hardiness brought about by conditions which
enable the trees to enter the winter with unimpaired constitutions.

The pear is seldom injured by heat in the summers of New York.
Occasionally fruit and foliage suffer from long-continued heat in the
dry weather of a hot summer. More often the trunks of pear-trees are
injured by a blazing sun in late winter or early spring, especially
when the sun's rays are reflected by ice or snow and strike the tree
intensified. Indeed, sun-scald so produced is one of the common
troubles of the pear in New York. With the pear, as with all other
fruits, there is a sum total of heat units above a certain temperature,
put by most experimenters at about 43 deg. F., the awakening point of
growth, necessary to carry the crop from blossoms to proper maturity.
Of the number of units necessary to mature a crop little is known.
Many varieties do not ripen in New York in a cold season, but come to
perfect maturity in warm seasons. A study of phenology would throw much
light on the failure of pears to ripen properly.

The average date at which the last killing frost occurs in the spring
helps to determine the limits in latitude and altitude at which the
pear can be grown in New York. The pear blossoms early, and while both
in bud and blossom the reproductive organs seem able to stand more cold
than those of the peach and sweet cherry, yet even in the most favored
regions for growing this fruit in New York a crop is occasionally lost
from killing frosts, and there are few years in which frost does not
take toll in some part of the State. Damage from frost must be expected
when the commonly recognized precautions in selecting frost-resistant
sites are not recognized. Little or nothing can be done in New York
to prevent injury from frost once trees have been set. Windbreaks,
whitewashing, smudging, and orchard-heaters are all failures in
frost-fighting in this State.

The pear-grower should know how the blooming time of the varieties
of pears he plants agrees in time with spring frosts. To do this he
must have weather data and must know the approximate date of blooming
of varieties. He ought also to be able to synchronize three of these
phases of climate--spring frosts, fall frosts, and the length of the
summer--with the ripening dates of varieties. Data as to the average
dates of spring and fall frosts can be obtained from the nearest local
weather bureau. The accompanying table gives the blooming and ripening
dates of pears grown at the New York Agricultural Experiment Station.
Blooming and ripening dates vary in different parts of the State, and
to make use of the data from this Station the grower must compare the
latitude, altitude, and local environment of his orchard with those of
the Station. Data for the Station is as follows:

 BLOOMING SEASON AND SEASON OF RIPENING OF PEAR-VARIETIES
 ==========================================================================
                 |       Blooming season      |       Ripening season
 ----------------+-----+-----+------+----+----|-----+-----+------+----+----
                 |Very |Early| Mid- |Late|Very|Very |Early| Mid- |Late|Very
                 |early|     |season|    |late|early|     |season|    |late
 ----------------+-----+-----+------+----+----|-----+-----+------+----+----
 Abraham         |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 Alamo           |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Andre Desportes |     |     |  *   |    |    |  *  |     |      |    |
 Ansault         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Appert          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Bartlett        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Belle Lucrative |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Beurre d'Anjou  |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Beurre          |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   d'Arenberg    |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 Beurre Bosc     |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Beurre Clairgeau|     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Beurre Diel     |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Beurre Giffard  |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Beurre Hardy    |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Beurre de Jonghe|     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 Beurre Superfin |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Bihorel         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Bloodgood       |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Bordeaux        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Buffum          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Canner          |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Chamogea        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 Cincincis       |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |    | *
 Clapp Favorite  |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Cocklin         |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Colonel Wilder  |     |     |      |    | *  |     |     |      | *  |
 Columbia        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Craig           |     |     |      | *  |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Dana Hovey      |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Dearborn        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Diamyo          |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |    | *
 Dorset          |  *  |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    | *
 Douglas         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Doyenne         |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   d'Alencon     |  *  |     |      |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Doyenne Boussock|     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Doyenne du      |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   Comice        |     |     |      | *  |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Duchesse        |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   d'Angouleme   |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Duchesse        |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   d'Orleans     |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Duhamel du      |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   Monceau       |     |     |      | *  |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Early Harvest   |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Easter Beurre   |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Eastern Belle   |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Elizabeth       |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Fitzwater       |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |

 BLOOMING SEASON AND SEASON OF RIPENING OF PEAR-VARIETIES -- _Continued_
 ==========================================================================
                 |       Blooming season      |       Ripening season
 ---------------------------------------------|----------------------------
                 | Very|Early| Mid- |Late|Very| Very|Early| Mid- |Late|Very
                 |early|     |season|    |late|early|     |season|    |late
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Flemish Beauty  |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Fontenay        |     |     |      |    | *  |     |     |      |  * |
 Fox             |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Frederick Clapp |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 French          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Gansel-Seckel   |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Garber          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 Glou Morceau    |     |     |      |  * |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Golden Russet   |     |     |      |  * |    |     |     |      |    | *
 Grand Isle      |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Guyot           |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Hemminway       |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Howell          |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Japan           |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |    | *
 Jargonelle      |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Jones           |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Josephine de    |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   Malines       |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Kieffer         |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Koonce          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Krull           |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    | *
 Lady Clapp      |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Lamartine       |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Lamy            |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Lawrence        |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Lawson          |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Le Conte        |  *  |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Leon Leclerc    |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   (Van Mons)    |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Lemon           |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Liegel          |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Lincoln         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Lincoln Coreless|     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    | *
 Longworth       |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Louise Bonne de |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   Jersey        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Louvenjal       |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Lucy Duke       |     |     |      |  * |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Madeline        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Magnate         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Margaret        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Marie Louise    |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Mongolian       |  *  |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Mount Vernon    |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Nickerson       |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Ogereau         |     |     |      |  * |    |     |     |      |    |
 Olivier de      |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   Serres        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    | *
 Onondaga        |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Osband          |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 P. Barry        |     |     |      |  * |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Peffer          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |
 Pitmaston       |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |  * |

 BLOOMING SEASON AND SEASON OF RIPENING OF PEAR-VARIETIES -- _Concluded_
 ==========================================================================
                 |       Blooming season      |       Ripening season
 ---------------------------------------------|----------------------------
                 | Very|Early|  Mid-|Late|Very| Very|Early|  Mid-|Late|Very
                 |early|     |season|    |late|early|     |season|    |late
 --------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Pound           |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |    | *
 President       |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   Drouard       |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 President Mas   |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 Raymond         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Reeder          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Riehl Best      |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Ritson          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Romain          |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Roosevelt       |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Rossney         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 Russet Bartlett |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Rutter          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Seckel          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Seneca          |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Sha Lea         |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |    | *
 Sheldon         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 Siebold         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Souvenir de     |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
   Congres       |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Souvenir        |     |     |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
   d'Esperen     |     |     |      |  * |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Sudduth         |     |     |      |  * |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Summer Beauty   |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      |    |
 Summer Doyenne  |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Treyve          |  *  |     |      |    |    |     |     |   *  |    |
 Triumph         |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Tyson           |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Ulm             |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |
 Vermont Beauty  |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 White Doyenne   |     |  *  |      |    |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Wilder Early    |     |     |      |  * |    |     |  *  |      |    |
 Winter Bartlett |     |     |      |    | *  |     |     |      | *  |
 Winter Nelis    |     |     |      |  * |    |     |     |      | *  |
 Worden Seckel   |     |     |  *   |    |    |     |     |  *   |    |

The latitude of the Smith Astronomical Observatory, a quarter of a
mile from the Station orchards, is 42 deg. 52' 46.2"; the altitude of the
orchards is from five hundred to five hundred and twenty-five feet
above the sea level. The soil is a loamy but rather cold clay; the
orchards lie about a mile west of Seneca Lake, a body of water forty
miles in length and from one to three and one-half miles in width and
more than six hundred feet deep. The lake has frozen over but a few
times since the region was settled, over a hundred years ago, and has a
very beneficial influence on the adjacent country in lessening the cold
of winter and the heat of summer and in preventing early blooming.

The blooming period is that of full bloom. The data were taken from
trees grown under normal conditions as to pruning, distance apart, and
as to all other factors which might influence the blooming period.
There is a variation of several days between the time of full bloom of
the different varieties of pears. These differences can be utilized in
selecting sorts to avoid injury from frost. In using blooming-time data
it must be kept constantly in mind that varieties of fruits may not
bloom in the same relative time. In very warm or very cold springs the
usual relations of blooming-time may be upset.

Rainfall, moisture, and cloudiness are most important in growing
pears. England, Belgium, and northern France, regions where the pear
finds the climate most congenial, have much cool, moist, cloudy
weather with much less variation in temperature than is the case in
the United States. The climate of New York and the states bordered by
the Great Lakes where most of the pears of eastern America are grown,
is cooler, moister, and cloudiness is more prevalent than in other
eastern states. The summer climate of the Pacific slope is not moist
but is equable and, in the best pear orchards, moisture is supplied
abundantly by irrigation. From these considerations we may assume that
the pear requires more moisture than most other fruits. The pear in
New York more often suffers from too little than from too much rain.
The exception is when pears are in bloom, at which time the crop is
sometimes lost or badly injured by cold, wet weather. Warm, moist
weather is favorable to both fire-blight and the scab fungus, the two
most dreaded diseases of the pear.

Several other weather problems should be studied before selecting
a region as a site for a pear-orchard. The direction, force, and
frequency of prevailing winds both in winter and summer are important
considerations. Unfavorable winds in winter favor winter-killing; in
blooming time prevent the proper setting of fruit; and at ripening time
make many windfalls. Hail storms are more frequent in some parts of New
York than in others and may be a deterrent in selecting a site. Lastly,
drouths, so fatal to the pear, are more common in some parts of the
State than in others.


                     LOCATIONS AND SOILS FOR PEARS

Pears thrive in a great diversity of soils, provided, almost always,
that there is depth for proper root-run. A few varieties may be grown
in comparatively shallow soils, but most pears are deep-rooted. The
common pear is rather averse to sand, gravels, and light soils in
general, and does best in rather heavy loams, clays, and even in
silts. Many varieties show preferences for the several types of loam
and clay, and the commercial grower must see to it that the varieties
he plants are suited in their particular soil preference. Hybrids
between the common pear and the oriental pear--the Kieffer and its
kin--grow well in much lighter soils than pure-bred sorts of the common
pear, and, as a rule, find sands and gravels more to their liking than
clays and heavy loams. Pears will stand rather more water in the soil
than any other of their orchard associates, but a soil water-soaked
for any great length of time in the growing season is a poor medium
in which to grow pears. If, therefore, a soil is not sufficiently dry
naturally it must be tile-drained.

Pear soils must be fertile. All varieties of this fruit refuse to
produce good crops in soils lacking an abundance of the several
chemical elements of plant nutrition. Even the light soils on which
Kieffer, Garber, and Le Conte seem to do best must be well stored
with plant-food. This means that good pear land is costly. Soils that
grow good pears usually grow good farm crops. Pears planted in a poor
soil do not live but linger. Who has not seen short-wooded, rough,
malformed, dwarfed, starved trees which have come to their wretched
condition because planted on land not fertile enough for this fruit?
The land-skinner who grows grass in his orchard usually comes to grief
quickly. Pears start best in a virgin soil from which the forest has
not been long removed; on the other hand, they are often hard to start
on senile soils even though they have been heavily fertilized. Plenty
of humus seems to stimulate pears. There is a prejudice against soils
too rich, some holding that on overly rich land the growth is soft and
sappy and therefore a good medium for the multiplication of the blight
bacteria. This is mostly prejudice, but certain it is that culture and
fertility should not be so managed that the growth continues late, and
the trees go into the winter soft and tender to cold.

Soils seem to have a profound influence on the flavor and texture of
pears. In uncongenial soils the fruits are often so sour or astringent,
dry or gritty, that the product is poor in quality; whereas the pears
of the same variety in a soil to which it is suited are choicely good.
A few varieties, as Bartlett, Clapp Favorite, and Seckel, grow well and
produce fine fruit in a great diversity of soils, but most sorts do so
much better in one soil than in another that it becomes a matter of
prime importance in pear-growing to discover the particular adaptations
of the varieties to be planted. To discover an ideal soil for a variety
is about the highest desideratum in pear-growing.

Some varieties are made to grow in uncongenial soils by grafting them
on stocks better adapted to the soil. Thus, on certain soils some pears
grafted on quince stocks do better than on pear roots. This is a great
field of future discovery and one in which discoveries are being made
as experimenters try new stocks to secure greater resistance to blight.
In all of this work, pear-growers must know not only how well the stock
resists blight, but also how well the cion takes to the stock and the
stock thrives on various soils.

The pear is easy to suit in matter of site for the orchard so far as
lay of land is concerned. Altitude, exposure, slope, and local climate,
all so important in choosing sites for the more tender peach, plum,
and sweet cherry, need receive little consideration in planting the
pear. A site somewhat higher than the surrounding country gives the two
great advantages of soil drainage and air drainage. Good air drainage
is a prime requisite with pears, as it helps to reduce the danger from
frost, and neither pear-scab nor fire-blight are as virulent as on
trees planted on sites where there is little movement of air. Rolling
land, so often recommended for all fruits, seems not to be essential
for pears, as many splendid orchards of this fruit are on flat lands,
which, however, usually have an elevation above the surrounding country
on one or more boundaries. The influence of large bodies of water, so
favorable to the peach, is not as necessary with the pear, although the
best pear regions in the State are near the Great Lakes, the Finger
Lakes, or along the Hudson. There are no successful pear-orchards in
the State surrounded by higher land. Frosts, freezes, pear-blight, and
fungi would soon play havoc with pear-trees in such a situation.

The shelter of hills, forests, or of apple-orchards, provided they do
not shade the pear-orchard too much, may be a valuable adjunct to a
site. Such shelter, however, is desirable only when so situated as to
protect against unseasonable winds and storms. Tree and fruit suffer
greatly when loaded branches are whipped about by strong winds. The
advantages of artificial windbreaks, whether of evergreen or deciduous
trees, are usually more than offset by disadvantages. The direction in
which land slopes is greatly over-emphasized by horticultural writers
if orchards in New York are considered. The only important aspect of
exposure for pears in this State is that the land slope toward the
water when near a large body of water that the orchard may secure in
full the effects that come from planting trees near the water.

Economic considerations are becoming more and more important in
choosing sites for all fruits in New York. Transportation facilities,
including good roads, markets, labor, and packing and selling
organizations are now more important in the pear regions of the State
than the natural determinants of soil and climate, since these are so
favorable in any of the fruit regions in which pears are largely grown.
Natural advantages are more common than man-made ones, and the pear
may be grown on vast areas of New York lands so far as climate and
soil are concerned, but which are wholly unsuited because the economic
factors are unfavorable. Sites for pear-orchards should be sought
for in localities where there are pears enough grown for a central
packing association; near a shipping center where the haul is short and
over good roads; the freight service should be prompt, regular, and
efficient, with low freight and good refrigerator service; labor should
be abundant and not too expensive; and the markets should be several
and so located that they are not controlled by growers in regions more
advantageously situated.

The pear-grower is becoming more and more concerned with the kind of
stock upon which his trees are grafted. One or more of several objects
is sought in working a pear on roots other than its own. The stock
may be chosen, and most often is, with the single purpose in view of
perpetuating a variety; it may be selected to dwarf or magnify the
size of the cion; very often the stock is better adapted to the soil
than the cion would be on its own roots; the quality of the fruit is
sometimes improved by the stock; lastly, some stocks are much more
resistant to fire-blight than others. It is this last character of
the stock that is now receiving most attention. Stock and cion are
united either by budding or grafting, with budding coming more and more
in use. More than with any other fruit, _double-working_ is used in
propagating pears. For example, the quince stock is often preferred to
a pear stock. But some varieties of pears do not unite well with the
quince, in which case a sort which makes a good union with the quince
is first budded or grafted on the stock, and when this cion has grown
to sufficient size, it is top-worked to the desired variety. According
to the size of the mature plant, pear-trees are designated as _dwarfs_
and _standards_, the difference in size being brought about by the
stock. Dwarf trees are usually grown on quince stocks; standards, on
pear stocks.

Dwarfing pear-trees is an old practice, having been in use in Europe
at least 300 years. During this time the use of quince stocks to
dwarf the pear has been a common practice in France and England. For
a century, dwarfing the pear by growing it on the quince has been
common in America. Dwarfing is recommended to secure several effects.
Dwarf trees are more manageable than standard trees when the orchard
area is small; dwarfing stocks are shallow rooted, and dwarfs, as a
rule, do not need a soil so deep as do standard trees; pears grown
on quince stocks are often larger, handsomer, and better in flavor
and texture than those grown as standards; the trees come in bearing
earlier. Dwarf pears, never very common on this continent, are not
planted as much now as they were some years ago. At one time, orchards
of these dwarfs were a familiar sight in New York. A dwarf orchard
and even a dwarf tree is now seldom seen. The faults that have driven
them out of New York are: The stocks used in dwarfing are not uniform,
consequently the trees vary in vigor, health, habit of growth, and in
time of maturity; nurserymen find that the stocks vary greatly in ease
of propagation either from cuttings or layers; the quince stocks are of
several varieties, difficult and expensive to obtain and, therefore,
the orchard trees are expensive; dwarf trees require much more care in
pruning, training, and cultivation than do standard trees; the cost of
producing pears in a dwarf orchard is greater than in a plantation of
standard trees, and the fruit does not command a much higher price;
dwarf trees are commonly rated as less hardy than standard trees and
are much shorter-lived; left to themselves, or if planted too deep,
the cions take root and the trees are but half dwarf. Some of the
objections to dwarf trees could be done away with by obtaining a
variety of the quince which would dwarf the pear satisfactorily, which
could be grown easily from cuttings or layers, and upon which most
pears could be easily worked. A quince of this description is not in
sight.

There is great difference of opinion among growers as to what varieties
may be successfully grown on quince stocks. Probably all will agree
that the following, few indeed, are the best dwarfs in America: Beurre
d'Anjou, Duchesse d'Angouleme, Howell, Lawrence, Louise Bonne de
Jersey, Elizabeth, and White Doyenne. All other sorts, if to be grown
on dwarfs, grow better when double worked.

Almost all of the pears grown in America, as has been said, are
standard trees. The stocks for these standard pears are nearly all
imported from Europe under the name French stocks, although on the
Pacific slope seedlings of oriental species are being used more and
more. The French stocks are seedlings of vigorous forms of the common
pear, _P. communis_. Efforts to grow stocks of this species in America
usually fail because leaf-blight is so destructive as to make their
culture unprofitable. Leaf-blight can be controlled by spraying, but
other deterrents, as high price of labor and losses from dry summers,
added to the cost of spraying, make American-grown stocks expensive.
Stocks raised in this country are usually seedlings from imported seed.
Seedlings of the Sand pear, _P. serotina_, and its hybrids have been
tried extensively in the South and West to obtain cheap stocks more
resistant to pear-blight than the French stock, but they do not seem to
be much more resistant to blight, and many of the best varieties do not
take on these stocks, so that they are generally considered a failure.

New types of stocks are needed badly. The ideal stock must be vigorous
and hardy; fairly immune to leaf-blight and fire-blight; it must
come from a species which seeds freely, and the seedlings from which
are uniform; this ideal stock must be adapted to all pear-growing
regions in the country; a large percentage of the seedlings must make
first-class stocks; the budding season must be long; congeniality with
all cultivated varieties must be great or very nearly perfect; the
consort of stock and cion must make a long-lived tree.

Quince stocks are obtained from cuttings or mound-layers. Layering
is considered the better method of the two. Stocks from the oriental
hybrids, of the Kieffer and Le Conte type, are often grown from
cuttings in the South. These are made in the spring from mature wood
of the preceding year's growth, and are treated much as are grape
and currant cuttings. Long cuttings, a foot in length if possible,
should be used. These stocks are of little value for varieties of
the common pear, but are better than French stocks for the oriental
hybrids, since these, in the South at least, usually overgrow French
stocks. Own-rooted trees of these oriental hybrids are often grown from
cuttings.

While of doubtful utility, stocks from other genera may be used for the
pear. Some of the thorns are occasionally used as dwarfing stocks. The
mountain ash is sometimes used to adapt pears to light sandy soils.
Occasionally one hears of pears grafted on sorbus. The pear on the
apple is short-lived, but old apple-trees top-worked to pears sometimes
give abundant crops for a few years. Apple roots may be used as a nurse
for pear cions. To be successful, the pear cion should be long, when,
if grafted on short apple-roots and set deeply, the pear sends out
roots and eventually becomes own-rooted.


                     PEAR ORCHARDS AND THEIR CARE

Perhaps no tree-fruit is more exacting in care than the pear. Young
trees, in particular, must be well cared for and more or less coddled
if any factor in environment is adverse. Almost any young orchard of
this fruit becomes moribund if the owner settles down to self-satisfied
complacency. As the trees come into full bearing, the several items
of culture need not be so intensive. A perfect pear-orchard is about
the consummation of good fruit-growing. But a perfect orchard of this
fruit is seldom to be found, for, sooner or later, blight is certain
to take its toll. Because of blight, the culture of no other fruit is
attended with more frequent or keener disappointments. Today a man may
walk in his orchard with adoration, as an artist walks in a beautiful
landscape. Tomorrow, blight may blast the fairest trees. Pear-growing,
thus, becomes a good deal of a gamble, and the boundaries within which
a fruit-grower's ambitions must be confined as to acreage must be more
closely drawn than with other fruits. In most pear regions, the risks
are too great to venture all in the culture of this fruit.

It is an uphill task to grow pears on land not well fitted before
planting. A young pear-tree is about the least self-assertive of any
of the tree-fruits. For the first year or two young pears seem to have
almost no internal push, and are unable to get much of a start out of
any but land in the best of tilth. A bare, stony, starved soil is no
place for a young pear. The ground should be well tilled almost or
quite to the depth the trees are to be planted, otherwise the roots
seek the upper layers of earth where there is least resistance and food
is most available. If the drainage is faulty, subsequent treatment
is well-nigh useless. Sometimes retentive soils in which drainage is
good most of the year but slow at planting time may be brought into
condition by plowing a back-furrow along the line of each row in the
direction of surface drainage to carry away the surface water. Under
no circumstances should a tree be planted in a hole in which water
is liable to stand about the roots. If possible, the land should be
prepared a year in advance by putting in a hoed crop, after which it
should be plowed deeply in the fall and pulverized well in the spring,
and the trees planted as promptly as possible.

Land suitable for growing pears does not need to be fertilized for
young trees. It is not too much to say that land which will not grow
good wheat or corn is hardly fit for pears, although lighter soils
fertilized as the trees come in bearing grow some varieties very well;
but even on these the young trees will start as well without as with
fertilizers. Commercial fertilizers, at least, are not wanted by young
trees. Stable manure, usually priceless in orchard regions, often puts
an atmosphere in an orchard not to be had by any other means, chiefly,
probably, because it helps to put the land in good tilth rather than
because of the plant food supplied.

Present practices in the use of fertilizers for mature pear-trees are
very diverse. Until experiments in fertilizing pears are carefully
carried out, the pear-grower may well follow the practices of
apple-growers, since a considerable number of long-time experiments
have thrown light on the fertilizer requirements of apples in the
several great fruit regions of the country. The pear, however, requires
a richer soil than the apple; but, on the other hand, it is pretty
well agreed that the blight bacterium finds readier entrance and a
better medium in which to grow in the soft wood of a luxuriant growth
than in the more compact wood of slow growths. Whatever fertilizer is
used should be applied early to promote early growth and so permit
thorough ripening of wood well in advance of severe cold. Many growers
maintain that blight is less virulent in orchards laid down to grass.
It is doubtful if this is true and if true the produce is so scant
and the pears so small that an orchard grown in grass is about as
often a liability as an asset. When the pear is set in grass, however,
nitrate of soda applied very early in the season in liberal amounts is
a necessary adjunct to the grass-mulch. In any pear orchard, when the
foliage is off color, small, sparse, or hangs limp, nitrate of soda is
a sovereign rejuvenator.

This discussion may be closed with advice as to how one may know
when his trees need fertilizers. If the trees are vigorous, bearing
well, the fruits of proper size, the foliage a luxuriant green, the
growth plump, the buds turgid, he may well assume that his trees need
no additional plant-food. If the trees are not in the condition of
well-being indicated, one ought to be well assured that drainage,
tillage, and health are as they should be before applying expensive and
uncertain fertilizers. Nothing is more satisfactory than making sure
that one is not putting chemicals in the ground for nothing in the use
of fertilizers. A simple experiment to obtain positive evidence as to
whether a pear-orchard needs fertilizers is easily carried on and gives
assurance where before there was doubt.

The following is an example of such an experiment: (1) Acid phosphate
to give about 50 pounds of phosphoric acid to the acre applied to one
plat; (2) phosphate as above and muriate of potash to give 100 pounds
of potash to the acre on another plat; (3) phosphate and muriate as
above and nitrate of soda and dried blood to give 50 pounds of nitrogen
per acre on a third plat; (4) six tons of stable manure on a fourth
plat; and (5) one plat left unfertilized as a check.

Planting practices vary so greatly from place to place and from time
to time, and each method at the place and time seems so justifiable,
that one can hardly advocate particular methods and can only state what
they are. Thus, pears have been set in accordance with all of several
planting plans, and at distances ranging from sixteen to twenty-five
feet apart. At present, pear-orchards are usually laid out in meridians
and parallels at intervals of eighteen and twenty feet; when the first
distance is used, one hundred and thirty-four trees are planted to
the acre; if the second, one hundred and eight trees. It is patent to
the eye of every passer-by that these distances are more often too
small than too great. Certainly on rich soils and with varieties the
trees of which are spreading, the distance might often better be put
at twenty-two or twenty-four feet. A poorly-colored pear is usually a
poorly-flavored pear; and color and flavor are largely dependent on
sunshine and air which are hardly to be had in closely-planted trees.
Perfect alignment is imperative for convenience in working and pride
of appearance. Dwarf trees in New York should be set at least fifteen
feet apart each way, one hundred and ninety-three trees to the acre,
although it is a common practice to set them closer.

Until recently one of the discouragements in pear-growing was the
failure of fruit to set, even though the trees bore an abundance of
blossoms. The discovery that failure was often due to self-sterility in
a variety, and that it was necessary to set another variety near-by to
furnish pollen to fertilize the self-sterile blossoms has removed much
of the uncertainty in growing pears. We now know that self-sterility
has a most important economic aspect in the planting of pears. Some of
the varieties most profitable when planted to secure cross-pollination,
are so unfruitful as to be quite unprofitable when a tree stands
alone or when the variety is set in a solid block with no other sort
near. Under most conditions Bartlett and Kieffer, the mainstays of
American pear-culture, both need pollen from another variety to insure
a full set of fruit. Under some conditions both may be sufficiently
self-fertile. From these two statements it is seen that self-sterility
is not a constant factor in a variety.

Self-sterility and self-fertility are greatly influenced by the
condition under which a variety is grown. Thus, a variety is often
self-sterile in one locality and not in another. Occasionally Bartlett,
usually nearly or quite self-sterile, and other varieties as well,
set fruit one season and not the next. All pears, the Bartlett in
particular, seem to have a greater degree of self-sterility in eastern
pear regions than on the Pacific slope. In general, the better the
adaptation of a variety to its environment the better it sets fruit
with its own pollen. It is obvious, therefore, that it is not possible
to give lists of self-sterile and self-fertile varieties. Such lists
can be made out only for regions and localities. Some varieties,
however, more often fail to set fruit because of self-sterility
than others. Among standard pears, Bartlett, Beurre d'Anjou, Beurre
Clairgeau, Clapp Favorite, Howell, Kieffer, Lawrence, Sheldon, and
Winter Nelis appear to be most often self-sterile. Beurre Bosc, Flemish
Beauty, and Seckel are usually self-fertile.

A self-sterile variety usually sets fruit when another variety is at
hand to supply pollen. Several considerations determine the selection
of varieties to interplant. Thus, the two varieties must blossom at the
same time if cross-pollination is to be effective. The table on pages
88 to 90 shows the sorts that bloom at the same time, or nearly enough
so to make cross-pollination possible. Under normal conditions, the
blooming time of varieties overlaps sufficiently for cross-pollination
excepting those that bloom very early and very late. If the table is
used for regions much to the north or to the south of this Station,
allowance must be made for a shorter blooming period the farther
north; a longer one the farther south. That varieties of pears have
sexual affinities is another consideration that merits some attention.
That is, one variety will fertilize another sort very well, while
pollen from a third may not be at all acceptable. "Affinities" can be
determined only by hand crossing. Probably the importance of affinities
is over-rated. The distance between varieties set for cross-pollination
must not be too great--not more than two or three rows apart. For
convenience in harvesting, varieties should be selected in relation
to ripening. Only commercial varieties should be interplanted, as
the wastage is too great if comparatively worthless sorts are set to
fertilize a standard commercial variety.

Some disadvantages attend the setting of mixed orchards of pears,
and these must be weighed and overcome as far as possible. There are
many current statements to the effect that all varieties, whether
self-sterile or self-fertile, are more fruitful and produce better
fruit with foreign pollen than with their own. To old pear-growers,
this seems to be putting it rather strong, but the statements come from
accurate experimenters and observers and should have consideration.
Cross-pollination, be it remembered, is not a cure-all for failures to
set fruit. Unseasonable weather, lack of vitality in trees, various
fungi, and no doubt other agencies, may be the cause of unfruitfulness.

As to commercial varieties, the tale is soon told. Only a half-dozen
sorts are generally planted in New York orchards. These, about in
order of importance, are: Bartlett, Kieffer, Seckel, Beurre Bosc,
Beurre d'Anjou, and Winter Nelis. To this short list may be added
the following grown more or less for local markets: Clapp Favorite,
Sheldon, Beurre Clairgeau, Lawrence, Howell, Tyson, and Mount Vernon.
A list for the home orchard should include all of these and many more
to be chosen from the major varieties described in Chapter IV. The pear
flora of the country changes very slowly, and there are now almost no
new sorts on general probation in the country.

Perhaps with no other tree-fruits is it more important to begin with
good trees, as even with the best it is often difficult to get a good
start toward a pear-orchard. Black-heart, caused by winter-killing, is
a sign that must be heeded, and a tree badly blackened in its pith,
especially if the surrounding wood is discolored, should be discarded.
Crown-gall on tap roots affects the tree deleteriously. Trees marked
by hail or insects are often worthless. Other marks that commend or
condemn trees are: A short stocky plant is better than a tall spindling
one. A tree with many branches is better than one with few branches.
The roots should be much branched rather than sparsely branched. A tree
with smooth, bright bark is better than one with rough, dull bark. Both
trunk and branches should be plump and show no signs of shrivelling. A
poor pear-tree in the nursery seldom makes a good tree in the orchard.
There is great variation in varieties as the trees come from the
nursery, a fact to be considered. In New York, two-year-old trees are
best.

A good deal of the success that attends the culture of the pear depends
on properly setting the young trees and the right care of the young
plants. It is superfluous to discuss these operations in detail, but
a statement as to proper setting and care will serve as reminders. In
this State, pear-trees should always be set in the spring. A young
pear-tree should be set in the soil about as deep as it stood in the
nursery; in light soils the roots might well be planted a little
deeper, and in heavy soils not quite so deep. The soil must be packed
firmly about the roots--best done by tramping. Watering is necessary
only when the land is parched with drought. When necessary, water
should be used liberally. Puddling the roots by dipping them in thin
mud before planting serves very well for watering. The surface soil
should always be left loose. Rank manure about the roots of young trees
is plant infanticide. During the tender nonage of the young pear,
cultivation should be intensive; insects and fungi should be kept off;
and plants that refuse to grow well must be marked for discarding.

A catch-crop grown between the rows of pears is a profitable adjunct
to the pear-orchard for the first four or five years. Few indeed are
the pear-orchards in New York that cannot be made to sustain themselves
for the first few years by inter-cropping. The crops should be hoed
crops, such as potatoes, cabbage, beans, tomatoes, and nearly all
crops in demand at the canneries. Along the Hudson, small-fruits are
often planted in young pear-orchards, but in Western New York these
are not looked upon with favor. Grass and grain are deadly in a young
pear-orchard, and no right-minded man would plant them there. This
brings us to cultivation.

Cultivation should be the rule; sod mulch, the exception, in growing
pears in New York. After pear-trees come into bearing they may be made
to produce crops if kept in sod. The grass in sodded orchards should
be kept closely mown to form a mulch about the trees. Commercial
fertilizers as well as mulch are needed in sodded orchards, and of
the several chemical fertilizers nitrogen is most requisite. The man
who grows pears in sod must not expect as much fruit, as the crop is
lessened in both number and size of the pears. On the other hand, the
pears may be better colored, and the trees may be freer from blight.

Tillage is begun in the spring by plowing the land. This operation is
followed by cultivation with smoothing-harrow, weeder, or cultivator.
There are several reliable guides to tell when and how often a
pear-orchard should be cultivated. When the soil becomes dry it should
be tilled. A heavy rain should always be followed by the cultivator
to prevent the formation of a crust on the surface. At this time, he
tills twice who tills quickly. Cultivate when there are clods to be
pulverized. Usually a pear-orchard should be cultivated once in two or
three weeks until time to sow the cover-crop in midsummer. The depth
to till is governed by the season and the nature of the soil. Heavy
soils need deep stirring; light soils, shallow stirring. Till moist
soils deeply; dry soils, lightly. The time to stop tillage depends on
the soil, the climate, and the season. The fruit should be nearly full
sized when tillage is stopped and the cover-crop sown.

The cover-crop seed is covered the last time the cultivator goes over
the orchard. Clover, vetch, cow-horn turnip, rape, oats, rye, and
buckwheat are all used as cover-crops in this State. Combination crops
are not popular because of too great cost of seed. The quantity of
seed sown is the same as when the crops are grown as farm crops. The
crops must be changed from time to time in whatever rotation seems
most suitable for the soil. The weather-map must be watched at sowing
time to make sure of a moist seed-bed. Whatever the crop, it should be
plowed under in the fall or early spring, and under no circumstances
should it stand late in the spring to rob the trees of food and
moisture. In moist, hot seasons, the cover-crop should be sown earlier
than in seasons of slow growth, when, possibly, it acts as a deterrent
to blight, and certainly makes more certain thorough ripening of the
new wood.

The double nature of pruning must be kept in mind whenever a pruning
tool is taken in the pear-orchard. Fruit-trees are pruned to increase
the quantity and quality of the crop--this is pruning proper; and
to give the trees such form that they are easily managed in the
orchard--this is training. Pruning tools are used first when the trees
are set, and they should be used every year thereafter as long as the
tree lives. The pruning at setting time is particularly important with
the pear, since newly set pears are slow and uncertain in starting, and
linger in growth for a year or two after going into the orchard. The
pruning is much the same as with other trees, but must be done with a
little greater care.

The top of the young plant must be pruned to enable the injured
root-system to supply the remaining branches with water. The less the
roots are injured, the less the top need be cut. Some cut back all of
the branches; some remove whole branches and do not head back those
that remain. The latter is the better plan for this reason: The top
buds on branches are largest and develop first, and the newly set tree
will grow best if it develops a large leaf-surface before hot dry
weather sets in. Young trees usually have surplus branches; remove
those not needed, leaving three, four, or rarely five to form the
framework of the tree. A pear so pruned will start growth and acquire
vigor more quickly than if all branches are cut back.

A choice must be made when planting as to whether the tree is to be
low- or high-headed. The habit of growth of varieties differs so
greatly that there can be no rule to determine how high the head of
a tree should be started. One can generalize to this extent: The
heads of varieties with spreading tops should be started higher than
those having an upright or pyramidal top. Without question, the choice
should be for a low-headed pear-tree. The trunks of pear-trees suffer
terribly from blight and sun-scald. The less trunk and the more it is
shaded by branches, the less the tree suffers from these two troubles.
Also, low trees are more easily sprayed and pruned; the crop is more
easily thinned and harvested; crop and tree are less subject to injury
by frost; the top is more quickly formed; and a low-headed tree bears
fruit soonest. By low-headed is meant a distance from the ground to the
first limb of two feet.

Two shapes of tops are open to choice--the open-centered and the
close-centered. In the open-centered, or vase-form top, the tree
consists of a short trunk, surmounted by four or five main branches
ascending obliquely. In the close-centered top, the trunk is continued
above the lower branches and forms the center of the tree. The
close-centered pear-tree produces more fruit and is most easily kept to
its shape. No doubt it is best for most varieties. The open-centered
tree, with its framework of several main branches, has the advantage
when trees are attacked by blight, since if one or two branches are
destroyed by the disease a part of the tree may still be saved. The
head should never be formed by two central leaders forming a crotch, as
the trunk is liable to split and ruin the tree.

For several years after planting, the pear needs to be pruned only
to train the tree to the height of head determined upon and to form
the top. Exceptions are the sorts which produce few branches and thus
form straggling heads. This defect is overcome by cutting back some of
the branches in the spring, an operation which increases the number
of branches. A few other sorts, as Winter Nelis and White Doyenne,
have drooping, twisting, wayward branches which can be trained into
manageable shape only by cutting back or tying the branches in place.
Pear-growers as a rule prune young trees too much. Over-pruning
increases the growth of wood and leaf too greatly, and thus delays the
fruiting of the plant. A good deal might be said about the use and
abuse of heading-in pears--that is, cutting back the terminal growths
from year to year. Dwarf pears must be headed-in severely to keep the
trees down, but standard trees should be headed-in only to make the
tops thicker and broader--a desirable procedure with some varieties.

Old trees often need to be pruned to increase their vigor. Such pruning
is often spoken of as _pruning for wood_. When the tops of pear-trees
have dead and dying wood, when the seasonal growth is short and
slender, when the crops are small and the pears lack size, or when
trees are weakened by disease, a healthy condition may oftentimes be
restored by severely cutting back some branches and wholly removing
others. In such pruning the following rules ought to be observed:

Weak-growing varieties are pruned heavily; strong-growing kinds,
lightly.

Varieties which branch freely need little pruning; those having few and
unbranching limbs should be pruned closely.

In cool, damp climates, trees produce much wood and need little
pruning; in hot dry climates, growth is scant and trees need much
pruning.

Rich, deep soils favor growth; trees in such soils should be pruned
lightly. In light or shallow soils, trees produce few and short shoots;
the pruning of trees on such soils should be severe.

A good deal is said about _pruning for fruit_. It is doubtful,
however, whether unfruitful pear-trees can be made more fruitful by
the pruning recommended for this purpose. When barrenness is caused
by the production of wood and foliage at the expense of fruit-buds,
as possibly sometimes happens, summer-pruning may check the
over-production of growth and cause flower-buds to form. There seems
to be no definite experiments to prove this theory in America, nor do
pear-growers generally practice this kind of pruning which has been
preached so long and so often. To follow the rules in this operation,
summer-pruning should be done when the growth for the season has
nearly ceased. If done earlier, the shoots cut back start again and
the pruning has been useless. If done too late, there is too little
time for the production of fruit-buds. In the unequable climate of
this country it is most difficult to know when to prune in the summer
to meet the requirements of the theory urged so strongly by European
pomologists. A weighty objection to summer-pruning in America is that
the wounds might and probably would become centers of infection for
blight.

There is no attempt to give a full discussion of pruning in this
text. Such details as making the cut, covering the wounds, pruning
paraphernalia, filling cavities and the amount to prune, belong to
texts on pruning. Perhaps two minor details important in growing
pears should be mentioned. Suckers or water-sprouts form so freely
on branches of pears that they often seriously devitalize the tree,
and usually are centers of blight. They should therefore be removed
promptly whenever and wherever found. The time to prune the pear is
important. If the work is done too early in the winter, injury may
result to the tissues near the wound from cold or from checking. If
done late in the spring when sap is flowing, the wound becomes wet and
sticky and is a suitable place for the growth of fungi and the blight
bacterium.

The pear is as easily grafted as any other pome, and the operation
is more certain and more often desirable than with any of the
stone-fruits. Almost any method of grafting used with orchard fruits
is successful with the pear. But the pear is not often grafted in this
State after the tree has been set in the orchard. The great objection
is that the vigorous growth made by grafts is nearly always nipped by
blight. Possibly the lack of affinity between different varieties is
more pronounced than with other pomes. The common European varieties
cannot be inter-worked without experimental knowledge of how one
variety will grow on another, and it is almost impossible to intergraft
common varieties with the oriental hybrids. The temptation is strong in
this State to graft such sorts as Bartlett and Seckel on Kieffer. This
combination is seldom successful; nor, as a rule, can other European
pears be grafted on Kieffer, although some growers have succeeded
fairly well in growing Seckel on Kieffer.

Thinning the fruit is not a common practice in pear-growing in this
State. There is no doubt but that much might be done to improve pears
in both size and quality by thinning, for be it remembered that large
size of fruit and high quality are usually correlated in pears.
Thinning often saves the vigor of the tree, and it is often good
orchard management to destroy insect- or disease-infected fruit by
thinning. The objection is high cost. Most growers, however, find that
it pays to thin. Thinning is usually done as soon as possible after
the June drop. It is most difficult to tell, when thinning, what will
prove superfluity at harvest. A skilled grower adjusts the size of the
crop to the variety, the vigor of the tree, fertility and moisture in
the ground, the season, and insects and fungi. Thinning should begin in
the winter with the removal of what seem to be superfluous branches,
for even at this time fruit-prospects for the ensuing season are
fore-shadowed.


                       HARVESTING AND MARKETING

Fruit-growing is made up of several quite distinct phases of activity;
as, propagation, culture, pruning, pests, harvesting, and marketing.
Treated in detail, each of these several operations constitutes matters
quite sufficient for separate treatises. In a manual such as this only
outlines of present practices are in place. Perhaps of all deciduous
fruits the pear needs as particular attention in the various operations
which conduct it from the orchard to the table as any other, if,
indeed, it is not the most difficult of hardy fruits to handle after it
leaves the orchard. The several operations that should be treated in a
discussion of handling the pear crop, no matter how brief, are picking,
grading, packing, storing, shipping, and marketing.

The time of picking is most important in handling pears. Pears are
picked, especially for the markets, long before they are ready to eat
out of hand. So harvested, almost without exception, all pears acquire
higher quality than when they ripen on the tree. Moreover, when the
necessary percentage of sugars and solids has developed to give full
flavor the pears are too easily bruised to be shipped. Just how green
pears can be harvested and afterward have the rich shades of red and
yellow and the delectable flavor of ripe pears develop seems not yet
to have been determined.[22] No doubt the stages of development differ
somewhat with the variety. In New York, the generally accepted rule is
to pick when the stem parts readily from the branch if the fruit is
lifted. Some wait until there is a perceptible yellowing of the maturer
fruits; others until full-grown, wormy specimens are ripe; still others
until the seeds begin to change color. But on the Pacific slope and for
the cannery in this State, pears are picked when much greener than in
any of the conditions named and yet seem to ripen well. As a matter of
economy, the fruits should be left until they attain nearly or quite
full size.

The directions just given apply more particularly to the main-crop
pears and early and fall sorts. Winter pears in this State should be
left on the trees until in danger from freezing. Even so, the season
is too short for some choice winter sorts. No matter what the season,
pears should be shipped before they reach edible condition. A few of
the winter pears, suitable only for culinary purposes, never soften,
and change color little or not at all.

Picking pears is not the delicate business that picking the
stone-fruits is, but yet must be done with considerable care as a
bruise provides a place for subsequent decay. Few picking appliances
are needed, but these should be carefully chosen to insure speed
and careful handling of the fruit. A full complement of ladders is
necessary, and the picking receptacle, either bag, basket, or bucket,
should be chosen to fulfill most conveniently its purpose and yet not
be a source of danger to the fruit. From the picking receptacle, the
pears go to the crate or barrel for carriage to the packing-house; for,
unless the fruit is going to the cannery, pears should be graded and
packed in the packing-house.

Grading pears is a more difficult operation than grading apples, as
mechanical graders have proved of little use, and the work must be
done by hand. Only good fruit is worth grading. It follows, that the
higher the price and the more special the market, the more carefully
should the pears be picked and graded. Pears are usually graded in New
York into firsts, seconds, and culls. The State has no law governing
the grading and packing of pears as it has of apples and peaches, so
that pear-growers must establish their own grades. By common consent
of growers and dealers, Grade I consists of pears of one variety, full
sized, well formed, free from dirt, skin-breaks, worms, scale, scab or
other damage caused by insect or disease, hail pecks, or mechanical
injuries. Grade II differs from Grade I only in that the pears may not
be of full size nor perfect in form. A leeway of five to ten per cent
is allowed for variation incident to grading and handling. Culls are
pears which do not meet the requirements of the foregoing grades.

In putting up grades every effort is made to keep the fruit in a
package uniform in size. At the beginning of the season the sizes are
gauged by putting the pears through rings of the diameter desired.
But packers soon become expert in sizing, and with a little practice
perform the work quickly and accurately without rings. Of the larger
pears, such as Bartlett, Clapp Favorite, Beurre Bosc, and Beurre
d'Anjou, fruits are hardly worth putting in a good package that do not
measure two and one-fourth inches through the shorter axis.

Grading and sizing pears are greatly neglected, and most of the crop
goes to the market in this State wretchedly packed, for which reason
maximum prices are seldom received. The industry can never compete
successfully with western pear-growing until higher standards are
adopted in putting the New York crop on the market.

In common with grading and sizing, packages are neglected in marketing
New York pears. Some growers pack in bushel baskets; a few send the
crop to market in half-bushel baskets; a large size of the Climax
basket is occasionally seen in the markets filled with summer pears or
small Seckels; a keg holding about a bushel or more is less used; a
pear barrel holding a peck less than an apple barrel was formerly more
used than now; Kieffer is often sent to the market in apple barrels. A
very few New York growers ship in boxes, but these are few indeed. In
all excepting the boxes, the pears, having been graded, are carefully
put in the packages, sometimes in layers and sometimes hit or miss,
but the package is always faced. Good grades are usually labeled,
though the same attention is not given to labeling pears that is given
in putting up apples. Truth is, the packing of pears in New York is a
decade or two behind the packing of apples.

The commercial pear-grower now stores his pears in cold storage if he
keeps them any length of time after harvesting. A few varieties, of
which Beurre Bosc is most notable, do not keep well in cold storage,
but most of the mainstays in the pear industry keep fairly well in
artificial cold. There is, however, much to be learned about the
commercial storage of pears. There seems to be little information
that can be relied upon as to how low the temperature should go; how
humid the atmosphere should be; how long the pears can be kept in good
condition; and how different varieties behave under these several
conditions.

Perhaps a word should be said as to how the pear can be ripened best
in the home. After harvesting, the pears should be placed in a cool
sweet-smelling fruit-room in shallow boxes or spread upon shelves to
acquire in time full flavor and color. Most pears part with their
moisture readily, and the pear-room must not be open to draughts which
usually cause the fruits to become hard and leathery or to shrivel.
If the pears are to be kept long, wrapping in paper helps to prevent
shriveling. Nearly all pears ripen perfectly in cool or cold storage,
but a few late winter sorts ripen better if brought into a temperature
of 60 deg. or 70 deg. for two or three weeks before their season.

A large part of New York's pear crop is canned in commercial canneries.
Canners usually pay high prices, and the crop, when sold to them, need
not be so carefully picked, packed, and otherwise handled. It is a
mistake to assume that pears for the cannery can be shaken from the
tree or handled roughly otherwise. Neither do the canners want the poor
grades, after the good pears have been sent to the market. Large sizes
are usually preferred, and the fruits must be well formed, free from
serious insect, fungous, or mechanical injuries, and at a particular
stage of maturity which the canner specifies. The profits in selling to
canners are usually more certain, and are often quite as great as in
selling on the markets. The cannery is a splendid safety valve to the
pear industry in this State. Pears are not dried commercially in New
York as they are in California, although it would seem that here in the
center of the apple-drying industry of the world pears might also be
dried with profit.

Most of the pear crop of this region is now sold to local buyers or on
consignment to city dealers. Co-operative methods are just beginning
and promise much. There are several reasons why the pear, even more
than the apple, which is more and more going to the markets through
co-operative associations, should be handled by organizations of
growers. Thus, an association could load a car quickly, which few
individual growers can do; pears are not now, but would be, graded and
packed under one standard; more favorable transportation rates would be
secured; and, most important of all, the pear crop would be distributed
to the great markets of the country without the disastrous competition
that attends individual marketing. If the pear industry is to grow in
the State, pears must be largely marketed through the central packing
associations that are now being rapidly organized to sell fruits.

No reliable data can be obtained to show what the costs are in
growing pears in this State. It would be hard to obtain such data,
for pear-growing is now a game of chance from start to finish. Good
pear-lands are not hard to obtain, and the risks to tree and crop
attendant on weather are not great, but the trees are everywhere
subject to blight; which, despite the recommendations of plant
pathologists, cannot be controlled, and which annually destroys
thousands of trees, ruins others, and sooner or later upsets
calculations of costs and profits in almost every pear-orchard in the
State. Other pests, as psylla, the scab-fungus, and codling-moth beset
the pear and make profits uncertain. When all goes well, the costs are
about the same as in growing apples, while the profits are somewhat
greater.[23] But with blight to contend with, most of the economic
factors are inconstant, and calculating costs and profits is guessing
pure and simple.


                         DISEASES OF THE PEAR

The pear is attacked by a half dozen or more diseases in New York, of
which two, at least, need treatment every year, in every orchard, and
on nearly every variety. One, pear-blight, is about the most malignant
of the diseases of the orchard, for which there is no antidote and
no alleviation or preventive except by the most drastic sanitary
measures. The other, pear-scab, is always present but not always
destructive, although some varieties are always injured by it. The
scab, however, is amenable to treatment and at its worst only destroys
fruit and foliage, seldom endangering the life of the tree. The four or
five other diseases of the pear in New York are of minor importance and
are readily controlled by the treatment necessary to keep in check the
scab-fungus. Pear-blight merits attention first.

Pear-blight is a malignant bacterial disease, very contagious, usually
virulent and so terrible in its consequences as to warrant the common
name _fire-blight_. No part of the tree is exempt from destruction
by the malign bacterium that causes blight of the pear. Root, trunk,
branch, leaf, flower, and fruit are all attacked, turn black and wither
under the disease. Few plant diseases produce more disastrous results.
The pear competes with the apple in importance in Europe where blight
is unknown. In America it is a poor fourth to the apple, peach, and
plum, and takes fourth place instead of second because of the ravages
of blight. About the most important discovery to be made in pomology is
a race of blight-resistant pears. Failing in this, if the pear-industry
is to grow, or even continue in its present magnitude, blight-resistant
stocks must be found.

The symptoms of pear-blight are so characteristic that the disease
cannot be confounded with any other malady or condition of the
tree. It appears earliest in the season on the blossoms causing
blossom-blight. Attacked by blight, the blossoms wilt, and after the
petals fall, fruit and spur show the characteristic blackening of the
disease. Blossom-blight may escape the attention of the pear-grower,
but twig-blight, a succeeding form of the disease, can escape no
one who has the sense of sight. No other disease of the pear brings
on such palpable destruction to the tree as twig-blight. No other
disease causes such comfortless despair to the grower. Twig, branch,
or tree, as the case may be, in all affected parts, turns black, the
leaves droop, seeming to show the effects of fire. A marked symptom
is, if there can be doubt of those given, that the blackened foliage
clings most tenaciously to the dead branches. Twig-blight is the
most common manifestation of the disease. Another form of the blight
appears as a canker on the trunk and large branches--canker-blight or
body-blight. These cankers are dark, smooth, and sunken, with definite
margins marked by a crevasse in the winter; but as spring comes on
the advancing margins become raised and more or less indefinite.
Occasionally an opaque liquid oozes from lenticels newly attacked. On
branches, the cankers usually surround a smaller offshoot, sucker, or
spur. The disease spreads with great rapidity, by reason of which it is
easily told from winter-killing. Injury from cold is also more general,
and the foliage browns rather than blackens.

Pear-blight is an American disease, the history of which was briefly
given on page 51. Until recently it was confined to regions east of the
Rocky Mountains, but since about 1900 it has been a virulent epidemic
on the Pacific slope as well, and is now found from coast to coast
wherever pears are grown in North America. It seems not to be found in
the pear regions of other continents. It attacks the apple, quince,
and other pomes as well as the pear, and plant pathologists declare it
to be the most destructive disease attacking the pome-fruits. Trees in
the nursery suffer as well as those in the orchard. Every variety of
the pear bearing edible fruit is attacked. Fortunately, some sorts are
more immune than others. Kieffer, Seckel, Winter Nelis, and Duchesse
d'Angouleme are most resistant of standard varieties, while Bartlett,
Clapp Favorite, and Flemish Beauty are little resistant.

Pear-blight is caused by a bacterium, _Bacillus amylovorous_, the
discovery of which by Burrill in 1877 as a cause of this disease is
one of the landmarks in plant pathology. The organisms are dormant
during the winter, which they pass in the margins of blight-cankers
where moisture is sufficient to keep them alive. With the return of
vegetative growth, some sort of fermentation seems to set in and drops
of a thick, opaque liquid ooze out of the margins of blight-cankers.
These contain countless numbers of the blight bacteria which may
swarm into the healthy tissues adjoining, or be carried by any one of
the great number of kinds of insects which visit trees at flowering
time to the pear-blossoms, to growing tips, or to wounds in tender
bark. The pruner with his tools may be an unwilling agent in carrying
the bacteria from tree to tree. The organisms now multiply apace,
killing tissues wherever they find entrance and causing the several
manifestations of the disease described under symptoms. Were it not
that the bacteria are killed by sunlight and even brief periods of
drying, the life of the plants attacked would be the only limits of the
disease unless checked by man.

Theoretically, pear-blight can be controlled. Practically, pear-growers
fail to control it. Control consists in orchard sanitation whereby
the bacterium causing the disease is kept out of the orchard. This
proves all but impossible in the average orchard. Sometimes, without
doubt, the virulency of the disease is lessened. Possibly, if all
the recommendations of plant pathologists could be put in practice,
pear-growers would more often succeed in keeping blight down, but the
necessary sanitary measures require such watchful care and so great an
expense that few pear-growers can carry out the program for controlling
this disease. Of those who have studied methods of control and have
given advice on the subject, Hesler and Whetzel[24] are as reliable as
any and we quote herewith their recommendations:

 "In attempting to control fire-blight, the following important points
 should be borne in mind: (1) That the disease is caused by bacteria
 which gain entrance to the host tissues only through wounds, or
 punctures by insects, into succulent, rapidly growing tissues, or
 through the nectaries of the blossoms. (2) That insects of several
 kinds are the usual agents of inoculation. (3) That practically
 all pome fruit-growing sections in North America are infested, and
 therefore there is always a source from which the bacteria may be
 disseminated. (4) That all known varieties of the hosts, on which the
 blight organism occurs, are more or less susceptible; while some show
 resistance, none are wholly immune. Therefore control consists chiefly
 in the elimination of the pathogene from the infected trees. This is
 accomplished by a strict application of the following operations: (a)
 Inspect all pear trees in the autumn and again in the early spring
 before the blossoms open, and cut out and treat all cankers in the
 body and main limbs. With a sharp knife, or draw-shave, remove all the
 diseased tissue, wash the wound with corrosive sublimate (one tablet
 to one pint of water), and, when dry, paint the wound with coal-tar
 or lead paint, preferably the former. The wound-dressing will need
 renewal every year or so. (b) Throughout the summer, beginning with
 the fall of blossoms, make an inspection every few days of the young
 trees. Break out the blighted spurs and cut out diseased twigs, making
 the cut at least six inches below the diseased portion. Disinfect the
 cuts with corrosive sublimate. (c) Remove all watersprouts from the
 trees two or three times during the season. (d) In the nursery remove
 the blossom-buds, particularly of the quinces. Here inspection must
 be frequent, particularly in susceptible stock, in order to keep the
 disease under control. It is often necessary to inspect certain blocks
 daily, the diseased twigs being cut out as soon as observed. When
 budded stock of the first year becomes affected, the trees should be
 dug out, since cutting below the diseased area causes the trunk of the
 young tree to be crooked and therefore not marketable. (e) Control the
 insects. The real point of attack lies in this phase of the problem."

Scab (_Venturia pyrina_ Aderh.), after blight, is the best-known and
most prevalent disease of the pear in New York. Like blight, it is
found wherever pears are grown in North America, and also wherever
pears are grown in foreign countries. It attacks the pear at all ages
from the youngest to the oldest plant. Twigs, leaves, flowers, and
fruit suffer. A closely related and very similar fungus attacks the
apple and causes the apple-scab, but the two fungi are not the same and
do not spread from the one fruit to the other.

The name describes the disease at maturity so that all may know it.
Black, canker-like lesions spot the fruit, leaf, and twig. These are
most characteristic on the pear. The scabs first appear on the fruit
as olive-green velvety spots; the young fruits may drop; if they
persist, growth may cease, the skin crack, or the fruit be distorted;
the fruit-stalk is often shriveled. The scab shows on the leaves much
as on the fruit and usually attacks the lower surface. On the twigs the
scab is not so conspicuous, but appears as a small round spot which
may or may not slough off and be replaced by healthy bark. Young twigs
are most often attacked, in which case the scabby spots suggest scale
insects.

Pear-scab is caused by a fungus. The chief life events of this fungus
must be known to control the disease. The organism passes the winter
in leaves on the ground. In the spring, the spores which have matured
in the spore-cases are forcibly discharged, and, being very light, are
carried hither and thither by the wind so that some of them reach the
opening flower and leaf-buds. If moisture and heat are sufficient, the
spores germinate, and an infection is started. A foothold secured, the
germ-tubes branch and form a dense mycelium--the velvety layer visible
to the unaided eye. From these masses of mycelium spore-stalks arise in
great numbers bearing countless spores which by one agent and another
are carried to other leaves, twigs, or blossoms for new infections. New
infections continue throughout the growing season. The black scab spots
on fruit and leaf are corky layers of tissue formed to heal the wounds
made by the fungus which has ceased to grow vigorously in these scabs.
The fungus may pass the winter on the twigs as well as in fallen leaves.

Different varieties resist the scab-fungus differently. Flemish Beauty
and Summer Doyenne are most susceptible and in seasons favorable to the
fungus seldom present fruits with a clean cheek no matter how careful
the treatment. Pruning off badly infected twigs and plowing under
scabby leaves are good sanitary measures. In New York, two applications
of lime and sulphur at the summer strength, if applied annually,
are usually sufficient to control the fungus. The first of these
applications should be made when the blossoms show color, a few days
before they open. The second should be put on when most of the petals
have fallen. In seasons favorable to the scab, a third application two
weeks after the second may be the means of saving the crop. The spread
of the disease is greatly favored by damp warm weather.

Pear-growers are plagued by two leaf-spots, one of which is also known
as leaf-blight. The leaf-spot here to be discussed (_Mycosphaerella
sentina_ (Fr.) Schroet.) is sometimes called the ashy leaf-spot. The
disease is not often seriously troublesome in New York, but is capable
of doing great damage in both the nursery and orchard. The spots which
give name to the disease are conspicuous enough, but even when present
in great numbers are often not seen by the pear-grower until there is a
premature dropping of the leaves in August or earlier. The trees often
put out new growths, with the result that the wood does not ripen and
the tree is left in no condition to stand the cold of winter in this
northern climate.

As with nearly all diseases of plants, some varieties suffer more
than others. Sheldon, Seckel, and Flemish Beauty are more injured
than Kieffer, Lawrence, and Mount Vernon. Nursery stock is more often
injured the second than the first year set. Only the leaves suffer.
The fungus first shows its work in minute purplish spots on the upper
surface of the leaf. The mature spots measure about one-sixth of an
inch in diameter, are angular in shape, with well-defined margins, and
have an outer zone of brownish-purple, with a grayish center. Late
in the season, dots, the spore-cases of the fungus, appear in the
gray central area. The fungus passes the winter in diseased leaves
which fall to the ground in late summer. From these leaves spores
are discharged into the air to be carried to the leaves after growth
begins in the spring. The disease is usually controlled by the sprays
necessary every year to keep pear-scab in submission. In the nursery,
two-year-old trees are sprayed just after the new leaves open and twice
thereafter at two-week intervals. One-year-olds seldom need to be
sprayed.

Leaf-blight (_Fabraea maculata_ (Lev.) Atk.) is a common and destructive
fungus in pear-nurseries in New York and is sometimes troublesome in
orchards. The quince suffers even more than the pear from this fungus.
In the nursery, leaves and twigs are attacked, and in the orchard the
pears themselves sometimes suffer. The disease appears in the spring
as minute, reddish-brown circular spots on the upper surface of the
leaves, but the fungus penetrates through to the lower surface as
the disease progresses. Eventually the color changes to dark brown,
and later a coal-black, raised spot appears in the center. The spots
sometimes run together. Young leaves shrivel under the attacks of
the fungus; while old ones, if badly diseased, turn yellow and drop
prematurely. Twigs and leaf-stalks are frequently girdled, and the
lesions are more elongated. The spots are similar on the fruits to
those on the leaves. The fungus spends the winter in fallen leaves. In
the spring the spores are discharged from the fruiting organs of the
fungi and are carried to the tender leaf or twig of the pear or quince.
The parasite begins growth at once and in about a month a new crop of
spores develop. This fungus grows on various other pome-fruits which
complicates remedial measures. The treatment recommended for leaf-spot
should control leaf-blight.

As are all tree-fruits in New York, the pear is attacked by crown-gall
(_Bacterium tumefaciens_ Smith & Townsend). This disease, however, is
seldom a serious menace to orchard trees this far north, but the vigor
of nursery stock is sapped when the galls girdle the tap-root or the
stem at the collar. Moreover, trees affected by crown-gall are barred
in most states by inspection laws so that nurserymen can ill afford to
produce gall-infected trees. It is a wise precaution not to plant badly
diseased trees. The galls are tumor-like structures on the roots of
the plant, or often at the juncture of root and stem. They vary from
the size of a pea to that of a large egg, forming at maturity rough,
knotty, dark-colored masses. Another form of the disease appears as a
dense tangle of hair-like roots arising from callous-like galls. This
form passes under the name "hairy root." Neither preventive nor cure
is known. Orchard or nursery should not be planted on ground known to
have been infected as the disease is highly contagious. The brambles,
especially raspberries, are common carriers of crown-gall, and none of
the brambles should be planted as inter-crops in pear-orchards.

Brown-blotch (_Leptothyrium pomi_ (Mont. & Fr.) Sacc. var.) is another
fungus which is sometimes troublesome. The fungus causes reddish
blotches on the fruit which coalesce into rusty-brown patches often
covering the whole surface of the pear. Here, again, the Kieffer
suffers most although fruits of other varieties are often disfigured by
the blotch. The disease is most common on heavy soils and in densely
shaded trees. Pruning to let in the sun is usually sufficient to keep
the fungus in check, but a late application of lime and sulphur is
often necessary.

Black mold (_Fumago vagans_ Fr.), a fungus which grows in the honey-dew
exuded by the nymphs of the pear-psylla, sometimes causes a sooty
covering of the pears which spoils their sale. Twigs and leaves are
also covered with thin superficial growth of the fungus somewhat to the
detriment of growth. The remedy is obvious--control the psylla.

Pink-rot (_Cephalothecium roseum_ Cda.) sometimes does much damage to
pears in common or cold storage. The fungus seems able to enter the
skin of pears only through injuries, and when reasonable care is used
in handling the fruit the rot does little damage. Not infrequently it
is found on fruits unpicked, having entered the skin through ruptures
made by pear-scab, black-spot, or other fungi. This, of course, seldom
happens in well-sprayed orchards.


                      INSECTS ATTACKING THE PEAR

Several insect pests are very destructive to pear-trees, as many more
are often troublesome, while perhaps in addition to the dozen that must
always or occasionally be combatted some thirty or forty more have
been listed as pear-pests. Young pear-trees are very susceptible to
injuries of any kind and if beset by any of the common insect pests do
not prosper. As the trees come to maturity, life and vigor of the tree
may not be endangered by any but two or three of the worst pests, but
the crop is always cut short by infestations of insects on any part of
the plant which interferes with the normal life of the tree. The pests
most destructive to the pear in New York, about in order of importance,
are San Jose scale, psylla, codling-moth, pear-slug, and pear-leaf
blister-mite.

San Jose scale (_Aspidiotus perniciosus_ Comstock) is particularly
harmful to tree and fruit of the pear. The pears, possibly, are
malformed more and show the scales with their discoloration more
plainly than the product of any other fruit-tree. A scale-infested
pear-tree is easily recognized. Dead and dying twigs or branches and
moribund trees are evidences of the dreaded pest. Examination shows
the moribund parts to be covered with myriads of minute scales which
give the infected bark a scurfy, ashy look. A reddish discoloration
is discovered if the bark be cut or scraped. A foothold gained on
trunk or branch, fruit and foliage are soon infected. Reproduction is
continuous throughout the summer, and the scales increase by leaps
and bounds. Smooth-barked young trees succumb within three or four
years if the insects are unchecked; the rougher-barked old trees
survive the pest indefinitely, although the vigor is lessened to the
point of unproductiveness in many old orchards. Pear-growers find the
lime-sulphur solution applied in the dormant season the most effective
spray in combating San Jose scale. Several insect enemies of the scale
help to keep the pest down. A quarter-century ago, it was feared that
the pear industry of the State might be ruined by San Jose scale, but
no energetic fruit-grower now fears the pest.

Next to San Jose scale, psylla is the most feared pest of the pear
in New York. Indeed, this insect is much more difficult to combat
successfully than scale, and were it as wide-spread, the pear industry
in New York would be hard hit. The psylla is a minute, sucking
insect, wingless in its immature stages, but winged and very active
as an adult. They are nearly related to plant-lice, and like them
suck the juices of the buds and new leaves. Like plant-lice also
they reproduce very rapidly. The immature insects secrete a sticky
honey-dew which becomes blackened with a fungus, and the presence of
this blackish, sticky substance on foliage and branches is usually
the first indication of the pest. The adult is about one-tenth inch
long, with four membranous wings, the body dark in color and showing
brownish-black markings. Seen through a hand lens, the mature insects
look like tiny cicadas. The adults hibernate in crevices of the bark,
and at the time buds are swelling in the spring come out to lay their
eggs. The eggs hatch in two or three weeks, and there may be four
or five broods in a season. The pest is best controlled by spraying
with such contact insecticides as tobacco extract both to kill the
hibernating insects and later the immature psylla. The winter strength
of lime-sulphur solution will kill the eggs.

The apple-worm, the larva of the codling moth (_Carpocapsa pomonella_
Linnaeus), destroys great quantities of pears year in and year out in
New York, causing greater monetary loss to pear-growers than any other
insect pest. The worm and its work scarcely need description--all
know "wormy" apples and pears and the agent of the mischief. A
pinkish-white, fleshy worm eats a cavity within the pear, usually
through and around the core, and then eats its way out to the surface,
after which it finds suitable shelter in a crevice of the bark and
spins its cocoon. About the time apples blossom the larvae transform
into small brown pupae, from which small moths emerge in two or three
weeks. The moths are coppery-brown, small, with a wing expanse of about
three-quarters inch, and very inconspicuous as they rest during the
day on the bark of the pear-tree which they closely resemble; they fly
only at dusk. The moth lays its eggs on leaves or the fruit itself and
the young larvae immediately begin work on the nearest pear. Control
consists in spraying with arsenate of lead. Two and sometimes three
sprayings are necessary. The most important spraying is made just after
the blossoms fall, while the calyx-cup is still open, so that the
poison will lodge in the blossom-end of the upturned pear. Codling moth
was once a most serious pest of the pear, but is now easily kept under
control by seasonal applications of arsenate of lead.

The pear-slug (_Caliroa cerasi_ Linnaeus), a generation ago, before
spraying was common, did much damage to the pear in New York, but is
now a negligible pest except in the orchards of the indifferent or
slothful since it is easily controlled by spraying. The slugs are
small, dark green shiny creatures which eat the surface of the leaves
of pear, cherry, and plum. They devour the upper surface of the leaf
leaving the veins and the tissues of the lower surface, which turn
brown so that the infested tree has the aspect of having been scorched
by fire. The slugs molt and finally lose their shiny coat and dirty
green color, the full-grown larvae becoming clear yellow. The adult is
one of the numerous saw-flys. Eggs are laid within the tissues of the
leaves. There are two or three generations in a season. The slugs are
most common in the hottest part of the summer or late in the summer.
This pest is easily kept in check by applications of arsenate of lead.

The foliage of the pear, in common with that of the apple, is often
seriously injured by a mite (_Eriophyes pyri_ Pgst.) which burrows into
the tissues of the leaves. The mites attack the young leaves causing
reddish blisters which turn black. The blisters are thickened spots
which are found to have a corky texture. The young fruits are sometimes
attacked, in which case they are badly malformed. The mites are of
microscopic size and can be seen only by the aid of a magnifying glass.
They hibernate under the scales of the leaf-buds, and are thus ready to
attack the young leaves as soon as they unfold, which they do by eating
their way in from the under side and then by their work cause the
characteristic swellings. As they mature, the mites come out and move
to new places and start more colonies. In the autumn, they find their
way to the maturing buds and go into winter quarters. An application
of lime-sulphur solution at winter strength usually disposes of the
mites; that put on for San Jose scale suffices for this pest also.
Summer sprays do not reach the mites as they are then hidden within the
leaves. The pest was once a serious menace to the pear, but with the
advent of winter spraying has become of small importance.

Of the numerous other insects which occasionally become serious pests
of the pear, at least twenty have been troublesome at one time or
another in New York. Space does not permit a description of these minor
pests--they are named as a matter of record. It is not necessary to
give remedies for them, as all are controlled by the treatment of major
pests which in most orchards need annual applications of one spray or
another.

Several scale insects, other than San Jose scale, are more or less
pestiferous in the pear-orchards of this State; commonest of these
is the oyster-shell, which not infrequently does serious damage to
young and unhealthy trees. The scurfy scale found chiefly on the apple
sometimes becomes a pest on the pear. A hemispherical scale, about
one-twelfth of an inch in length, known as the terrapin scale, now
and then infests the pear, but is seldom if ever harmful. As a rule,
the treatment for San Jose scale keeps all other scales in check,
but all are more difficult to kill than the San Jose and in cases of
troublesome infestations may require drastic treatment with a contact
insecticide.

A great number of chewing insects, as distinguished from sucking
insects, defoliate the pear when given an opportunity, but are kept in
check by the treatment for codling moth. The much-dreaded browntail
moth and gypsy moth now have a foothold in the State, but as yet
can hardly be called pests although their advent threatens the pear
industry as it does all other orchard industries. The bud-moth, seldom
seen in well-cared-for orchards, is sometimes a vexatious visitor in
pear-orchards. Three species of caterpillars, all most striking in
appearance, the larval stages of tussock moths, infest pear-trees.
These are the white-marked tussock moth, the rusty tussock moth, and
the definite-marked tussock moth.

The pear-tree has its share of borers. A small, dark brown beetle,
about one-third of an inch in length, the apple twig-borer, sometimes
does considerable damage to young shoots of the pear. The flat-headed
apple-tree borer works in the sap wood of the pear as in the apple.
The shot-hole borer, a tiny insect, eats a small round hole in the
trunk of the pear, as it does also in several fruits, but does little
damage except in devitalized trees. The shot-borer, a tiny black
beetle, one-tenth of an inch long, bores into twigs or small branches
and sooner or later causes their death. None of these borers are
very harmful on the pear in New York, but all must be reckoned with
occasionally. All are difficult to control.

The pear thrips attack the newly opening flower- and leaf-buds and
when the insect, a small winged creature with sucking mouth-parts, is
abundant much damage is done. This pest in New York is chiefly confined
to the Hudson River Valley. The European grain aphis, closely related
to the destructive apple aphis, is sometimes a serious pest on pears.
Both of these pests are comparatively easily controlled by timely
applications of contact insecticides.

Lastly, there are several chewing insects which feed on the leaves of
the pear, which, unless checked, sometimes become major pests for a
season or two in an orchard here and there. All of them, fortunately,
are controlled by the arsenical poisons which are necessary to keep
the codling moth down. The pests are: Cigar case-bearer, green fruit
worm, pistol case-bearer, and oblique-banded leaf-roller. With these,
as with most of the other pests of the pear, cultivation to keep down
all foreign vegetation, and orchard sanitation, consisting chiefly of
the destruction of infested fruit, foliage, or wood, are essential
preventives.




                              CHAPTER IV

                      LEADING VARIETIES OF PEARS


                            ANDRE DESPORTES

 =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:127, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
 =3=:51, fig. 122. 1878. =3.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 138, fig. 1906.

This old French sort is sparingly grown in New York, and is still
listed by a few American nurserymen. The pears are handsome and very
good in quality, but they quickly soften at the center and neither
keep nor ship well. While usually of medium size, or sometimes large,
the pears often run small. The variety is well worth planting in a
collection, but has no value in a commercial plantation, and there are
many better sorts for home orchards.

[Illustration: ANDRE DESPORTES]

The parent tree of this variety grew in the seed beds of M. Andre
Leroy, the well-known authority on pomology, at Angers, France. M.
Leroy obtained it in 1854 from pips of Williams' Bon Chretien, or as
it is better known here, the Bartlett pear. He named it after the son
of M. Baptiste Desportes, manager of the business department of his
establishment. The vigor and high quality of the fruit were quickly
appreciated, and the variety was soon disseminated far and wide.

 Tree characteristically upright and vigorous, rapid-growing, hardy,
 productive; branches slender, smooth, light brown overlaid with thin,
 grayish scarf-skin, marked with small lenticels; branchlets thick,
 long, with short internodes, reddish-brown, slightly streaked toward
 the tips with ash-gray scarf-skin, dull, smooth, glabrous, with
 numerous small, but very conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, pointed, plump, appressed. Leaves 2-3/4 in. long,
 1-5/8 in. wide, ovate, stiff, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin
 glandular, slightly crenate; petiole 1-1/2 in. long. Flower-buds
 large, long, conical, plump, free, arranged singly as lateral buds or
 on short spurs; flowers showy, 1-1/4 in. across, occasionally tinged
 pink, in dense clusters, averaging 9 flowers per cluster; pedicels 3/4
 in. long, thick, pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in August; medium in size, 2-7/8 in. long, 2-1/4 in. wide,
 obovate-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical, uniform; stem 1 in. long, thick,
 curved; cavity obtuse, shallow, dotted with russet, often lipped;
 calyx small, open; lobes separated at the base, short, narrow, acute;
 basin shallow, narrow, obtuse, gently furrowed, symmetrical; skin
 thin, tender, smooth; color dull greenish-yellow, dotted and marbled
 with reddish-brown, blushed on the sunny side; dots numerous, small,
 light colored, obscure; flesh tinged with yellow, fine, tender and
 melting, buttery, juicy, sweet, aromatic; quality very good. Core
 large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide,
 conical; seeds small, wide, plump, acute.


[Illustration: ANSAULT]

                                ANSAULT

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1883. =2.= _Can. Hort._ =24=:454, fig.
 2169. 1901.

 _Bonne du Puits-Ansault._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:486, fig. 1867.
 =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 1st App. 123, fig. 1872. =5.= _Am. Pom.
 Soc. Cat._ 34. 1877.

Well grown, the fruits of Ansault rival those of Seckel in quality.
In particular, the flesh is notable, and is described by the term
_buttery_, so common in pear parlance, rather better than that of any
other pear. The rich sweet flavor, and distinct but delicate perfume
contribute to make the fruits of highest quality. Unfortunately, the
pears are not very attractive in appearance. They are small, and the
green coat, nearly covered with russet dots and markings, is dull,
though enlivened somewhat at full maturity by a rich yellow. The tree
in good pear soils is vigorous, productive, bears annually, and is not
more subject to blight than that of the average variety. While not at
all suitable for commercial orchards, Ansault should find a place in
every collection of pears for home use.

The pear Bonne du Puits-Ansault was raised from seed in the nurseries
of M. Andre Leroy, Angers, France. The parent tree bore fruit in
1863, and M. Leroy states that the name which it bears is that of the
enclosure where it was first raised. It was propagated in 1865. The
American Pomological Society first listed this variety in its catalog
in 1877, and in 1883 shortened the name to its present form.

 Tree large, upright-spreading, hardy, very productive; trunk stocky,
 shaggy; branches thick, dull brownish-red, tinged with green and
 heavily covered with greenish scarf-skin, with numerous raised
 lenticels; branchlets long, reddish-brown, with traces of gray
 scarf-skin, smooth, glabrous, with few inconspicuous, small, slightly
 raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds plump, pointed, nearly free. Leaf-scars prominent. Leaves
 numerous, 2-3/4 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, ovate or broadly oval,
 leathery; apex abruptly pointed; margin finely serrate, with small,
 reddish, sharp-pointed glands; petiole 1-1/2 in. long, slender,
 glabrous. Fruit-buds large, conical, plump, free; flowers 1-1/8 in.
 across, in dense clusters, 7 to 9 flowers in a cluster; pedicels 5/8
 in. long, thick, greenish, lightly pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late September and early October; medium in size, 2-3/8
 in. long, 2-1/8 in. wide, uniform, obtuse-obovate-pyriform, irregular;
 stem 5/8 in. long, short, thick; cavity obtuse, russeted, furrowed,
 ribbed; calyx partly open, large; lobes acute; basin somewhat abrupt,
 furrowed and wrinkled; skin roughened with russet markings and dots;
 color pale yellow, considerably russeted about the basin and cavity
 with russet dots, with scattered flecks and patches of russet; dots
 numerous, small, russet; flesh tinged with yellow, granular at the
 center, melting and tender, buttery, very juicy, sweet, aromatic;
 quality good to very good. Core closed, axile, the core-lines
 clasping; calyx-tube long, narrow, funnel-shaped; seeds rather short,
 plump, obtuse.


[Illustration: BARTLETT]

                               BARTLETT

 =1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 334, fig. 134. 1845. =2.=
 _Horticulturist_ =2=:169. 1847-48. =3.= _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr. Gr._ 29.
 1848. =4.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:11, Pl. 1851. =5.= _Horticulturist_ N.
 S. =3=:350, Pl. 1853. =6.= Field _Pear Cult._ 190, 276, fig. 66. 1858.
 =7.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 666, fig. 1869. =8.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr.
 Ont._ 148, fig. 1914.

 _Williams' Bon Chretien._ =9.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 350. 1831.
 =10.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:137. 1831. =11.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 664.
 1884.

 _Williams' Apothekerbirne_. =12.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:181.
 1856.

 _Bon Chretien Williams'._ =13.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 16, Pl. 16.
 1863. =14.= Mas _Le Verger_ 2:23, fig. 10. 1866-73.

 _Williams._ =15.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:758, fig. 1869.

 _Williams Christbirne._ =16.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 18, Pl.
 18. 1882. =17.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 298. 1889.

Bartlett leads all other pears in number of trees in New York, and
vies with Kieffer for the greatest number in America. Its fruits are
more common and more popular in American markets than those of any
other pear. When the characters of the variety are passed in review,
although several poor ones of fruit and tree appear, the popularity
of Bartlett with growers and sellers, if not with consumers, seems
justified. As with the leading variety of any fruit, the preeminently
meritorious character of this one is its great adaptability to
different climates, soils, and situations. Thus, Bartlett is grown
with profit in every pear-growing region in America and in all is
grown in greater quantities than any other sort excepting, perhaps,
the notorious Kieffer. Another character which commends this variety
to pear-growers is fruitfulness--barring frosts or freezes, the trees
bear full crops year after year. Moreover, the trees are very vigorous,
attain large size, bear young, live long, are easily managed in the
orchard, and thrive on both standard and quince stocks. The pears are
large, handsome, of good but not of the best quality, and keep and ship
remarkably well.

Bartlett is not without serious faults, however. The trees blight
badly, and are not much above the average in resistance to blight, the
black plague of the pear. Neither are they as hardy to cold or to heat
as those of some other varieties. They are scarcely hardier to cold
than those of the peach, and cannot withstand the summer heat of the
southern, or of the Mississippi Valley states. Another serious defect
of the trees is that, more than those of any other standard variety,
their blossoms require cross-fertilization. The fruits are satisfactory
in all characters excepting quality. There are many better-flavored
pears. The fruits lack the rich, perfumed flavor of Seckel on one
hand, and the piquant, vinous taste of Winter Nelis on the other. But
the pears are much above the average in quality, and since no other
variety is so easily grown, nor so reliable in the markets, Bartlett
promises long to continue its supremacy for home and commercial
plantations. After Kieffer, it is the most desired of all pears by
the canning trade. Bartlett is the parent of several other well-known
varieties, and of many sorts of small importance.

This pear was found as a wilding by a Mr. Stair, a schoolmaster
at Aldermaston, Berkshire, England. From him it was acquired by a
Mr. Williams, a nurseryman at Turnham Green, Middlesex, and as it
was propagated and distributed by him it became known by his name,
although it is still known as Stair's pear at Aldermaston. It was
brought to this country in 1797 or 1799 by James Carter of Boston
for Thomas Brewer who planted the variety in his grounds at Roxbury,
Massachusetts, under the name of Williams' Bon Chretien, by which name
it was then and still is known both in England and France. In 1817
Enoch Bartlett, Dorchester, Massachusetts, became possessed of the
Brewer estate, and not knowing its true name allowed the pear to go
out under his own. Henceforth it was known in America as Bartlett. The
American Pomological Society added this variety to its catalog-list of
fruits in 1848.

 Tree medium in size, tall, pyriform, upright, hardy, very productive;
 branches stocky, smooth, reddish-brown overlaid with ash-gray
 scarf-skin, with few lenticels; branchlets short, with short
 internodes, reddish-brown, glossy, smooth, glabrous, with conspicuous
 lenticles.

 Leaf-buds short, obtuse, pointed, mostly free; leaf-scars prominent.
 Leaves 2-3/4 in. long, 1-2/5 in. wide, oval, leathery; apex
 taper-pointed; margin tipped with small dark red glands, finely
 serrate; petiole 1-3/4 in. long. Flower-buds large, conical, pointed,
 free; flowers showy, 1-1/4 in. across, in dense clusters averaging
 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/8 in. long, slender, slightly
 pubescent.

 Fruit matures in September; large, 3-3/8 in. long, 2-3/8 in. wide,
 oblong-obtuse-pyriform, tapering toward the apex, symmetrical,
 uniform; stem 1-1/8 in. long, often curved, thick; cavity small,
 usually lipped, with thin, overspreading streaks of light russet,
 acute, shallow; calyx partly open; lobes separated at the base,
 narrow, acute; basin very shallow, narrow, obtuse, furrowed and
 wrinkled; skin thin, tender, smooth, often dull, the surface somewhat
 uneven; color clear yellow, with a faint blush on the exposed cheek,
 more or less dotted with russet and often thinly russeted around
 the basin; dots many, small, conspicuous, greenish-russet; flesh
 fine-grained although slightly granular at the center, melting,
 buttery, very juicy, vinous, aromatic; quality very good. Core
 large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube long, wide,
 funnel-shaped; seeds wide, plump, acute.


[Illustration: BELLE LUCRATIVE]

                            BELLE LUCRATIVE

 =1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 364. 1831. =2.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._
 135. 1841. =3.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:41, Pl. 1851. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Rpt._ 53. 1852. =5.= Field _Pear Cult._ 194, fig. 68. 1858.

 _Fondante d'Automne._ =6.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 387, fig. 168.
 1845. =7.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 578. 1884.

 _Seigneur._ =8.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =7=:5, Pl. 1859. =9.= _Pom. France_
 =1=: No. 28, Pl. 28. 1863. =10.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1, 21, fig.
 9. 1866-73.

 _Bergamote Lucrative._ =11.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:247, figs. 1867.

 _Seigneur d'Esperen._ =12.= _Guide Prat._ 59, 303. 1876.

 _Esperen's Herrenbirne._ =13.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 212. 1889. =14.=
 Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 37, Pl. 85. 1894.

 _Lucrative._ =15.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1889.

This good old pear has been a standard autumn sort for nearly a
century. The internal characters of both flesh and flavor are
nearly perfect, but externally much more might be desired as to
shape and size. In flesh and flavor, the fruits are of the Bergamot
type--fine-grained, buttery, juicy, and sugary, with a musky taste
and perfume. The fruits are not as large as is desirable, and are
variable in shape and color, external defects which a rather handsome
color offsets in part. The trees are more satisfactory than the
fruits. They bear enormously and almost annually on either standard
or dwarfing stocks; they are very vigorous, with a somewhat distinct
upright-spreading habit of growth; are hardier than the average variety
of this fruit; and are rather more resistant to blight than the average
variety. The fruits are too small for a good commercial product, but
their delectable flavor and luscious flesh make them as desirable as
any other pear for home use; besides which the trees grow so well, and
are so easily managed that the variety becomes one of the very best for
the home planter.

Belle Lucrative is of Flemish origin. In 1831 it was growing in the
London Horticultural Society's gardens at Chiswick, and was then
described by Lindley as "another of the new Flemish pears." It had
been taken to England by a Mr. Braddick who received the cions from M.
Stoffels of Mechlin. By some writers it is considered probable that
it originated with M. Stoffels, but the leading Belgian and French
writers say that it was raised by Major Esperen, also of Mechlin, about
1827. In this country it first fruited in the Pomological Garden of
Robert Manning, Salem, Massachusetts, in 1835 or 1836. The American
Pomological Society added the variety to its fruit catalog-list in 1852
under the name Belle Lucrative.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright-spreading, dense-topped,
 rapid-growing, hardy, productive; branches smooth, grayish-brown
 mingled with red, covered with scarf-skin, with numerous elongated
 lenticels; branchlets slender, short, light brown, glossy, smooth,
 glabrous, with few small, inconspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, pointed, plump, appressed. Leaves 3
 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, stiff; apex abruptly pointed; margin finely
 serrate, tipped with very small, sharp glands; petiole 2 in. long.
 Flower-buds conical, pointed, plump, free, singly on very short
 spurs; flowers with an unpleasant odor, showy, 1-1/2 in. across,
 average 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/16 in. long, thick, thinly
 pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late September and October; medium in size, 2-3/8 in.
 long, 2-1/4 in. wide, obovate, conical, with sides unequal; stem 1-1/8
 in. long; cavity very shallow and narrow, or lacking, the flesh drawn
 up about the base of the stem; calyx open, large; lobes long, narrow,
 acuminate; basin shallow, obtuse, smooth; skin thin, tender, smooth;
 color dull greenish-yellow, thickly sprinkled with small, russet dots,
 often overspread with russet around the basin; dots numerous, small,
 russet, conspicuous; flesh tinged with yellow, firm, fine-grained,
 crisp, buttery, juicy, sweet; quality very good. Core closed, abaxile;
 calyx-tube long, narrow, funnel-shaped; seeds narrow, plump, acute.


[Illustration: BEURRE D'ANJOU]

                            BEURRE D'ANJOU

 =1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 136. 1841. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 360.
 1845. =3.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:61, Pl. 1851. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._
 53. 1852. =5.= _Flor. & Pom._ =5=:1, Pl. 1866. =6.= Downing _Fr. Trees
 Am._ 679, fig. 1869. =7.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 510. 1884.

 _Anjou._ =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1883.

 _Winter Meuris._ =9.= Lucas _Tafelbirnen_ 171, fig. 1894.

 _Nec plus Meuris._ =10.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 321, fig. 214. 1908. =11.=
 _Guide Prat._ 49, 282. 1895.

Beurre d'Anjou is a standard market pear for late fall and early
winter, its season lasting until well into January even in common
storage. As an early winter pear, it has no superior and few equals in
appearance and quality of fruit. In appearance, the pear is of distinct
type--large, very uniform, the sides slightly unequal, smooth of skin,
yellow, marked and dotted with russet, faintly blushed, and borne on a
very short, thick stem. A fruit of this variety can never be mistaken
for that of another. The internal characters are scarcely less notable
than the external ones. The yellowish-white flesh is firm but tender,
slightly granular, very juicy, sweet, spicy, with a rich, vinous
flavor. Uniformity of shape and the smooth skin are marked and constant
characters. In common with all varieties, the fruits of this pear are
not always up to their best, but they are never poor in quality. The
trees are vigorous, hardy, fairly free from blight, grow rapidly and
come in bearing early, but have the serious fault of being uncertain
croppers. In Europe and America, the trees thrive on the quince, and
the variety is rated by all as a splendid one for dwarfing. Of all
winter pears, none is more valuable for commercial or home orchards
than Beurre d'Anjou. In particular, it is recommended for New York,
where, possibly, it is more at home than in any other part of America.

Beurre d'Anjou is an old French pear the origin of which is obscure,
although it is supposed to have originated in the vicinity of Angers.
Early in the nineteenth century it was introduced into England by
Thomas Rivers, noted author and pomologist. The variety was introduced
into this country by Colonel Wilder[25] of Boston about 1842, and first
fruited with him in 1845. The American Pomological Society added Beurre
d'Anjou to its list of fruits recommended for general cultivation in
1852.

 Tree large, vigorous, spreading, hardy, an uncertain bearer; trunk
 smooth; branches slightly zigzag, covered with gray scarf-skin over
 reddish-brown, with few small lenticels; branchlets long, with long
 internodes, reddish-brown tinged with green, smooth, glabrous, with
 many conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, obtuse, nearly free. Leaves 3-1/2 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide, elongated-oval, thin, leathery; apex taper-pointed;
 margin nearly entire or crenate; petiole 2 in. long. Flower-buds
 large, long, conical, plump, free; flowers 1-3/8 in. across, showy, in
 dense clusters, from 8 to 12 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1/2 in. long,
 very thick, pubescent, green.

 Fruit ripe November to early January; large, 3-1/2 in. long, 3
 in. wide, uniform in size, oblong-obovate-pyriform, with surface
 irregular in outline, sides slightly unequal, uniform in shape; stem
 1/2 in. long, short, very thick and woody; cavity obtuse, shallow,
 russeted and furrowed, usually lipped; calyx open; lobes separated
 at the base, long, narrow, acuminate; basin shallow, narrow, obtuse,
 smooth, symmetrical and regular; skin thin, tender, smooth, dull;
 color yellow, clouded with russet around the basin and occasionally
 with very fine russet lines and markings; dots many, small, russet,
 conspicuous; flesh yellowish-white, firm, but slightly granular,
 tender, buttery, very juicy, sweet and spicy, with a rich, aromatic
 flavor; quality very good. Core large, closed; core-lines clasping;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long, plump,
 acuminate, tufted at the tips.


                         BEURRE D'ARENBERG[26]

 =1.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =5=:406. 1824. =2.= Lindley _Guide
 Orch. Gard._ 392. 1831. =3.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:51. 1831. =4.=
 Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 188. 1832. =5.= _Ibid._ 156. 1841. =6.= _Gard.
 Chron._ 716, fig. 2. 1844. =7.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 423, fig. 195.
 1845. =8.= _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr. Gr._ 51. 1848. =9.= Hovey _Fr. Am._
 =1=:1, Pl. 1851. =10.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 93, Pl. 1852. =11.= Mas
 _Le Verger_ =1=:161, fig. 79. 1866-73. =12.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 510.
 1884.

 _Orpheline d'Enghien._ =13.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:35, Pl. 1855. =14.=
 _Guide Prat._ 108, 292. 1876.

In favorable locations this pear seems to possess all of the characters
which constitute a first-class fruit; but, notwithstanding, although
it has been in the country nearly a century, it is now scarcely to be
found in the nurseries, and orchard trees are becoming rare. The fruits
are distinguished by their refreshing, vinous taste and long-keeping
qualities. Very often, however, they do not ripen in eastern America,
and when not properly ripened the pears are highly acidulous and so
astringent as to be almost intolerable to the taste. The frequency
with which these poor fruits are borne, always on heavy, cold clays
and in cold climates, coupled with rather small, short-lived trees,
condemn the variety for most pear regions in the East. In the far West,
the crop ripens better, and the pears are splendid winter fruits. The
merits of the variety are so varying in New York that it is not now
worth while attempting to bring it into new life.

Beurre d'Arenberg, in the opinion of some European writers, holds first
place among the pears produced by French and Belgian pomologists.
Unfortunately, Beurre d'Arenberg and Glou Morceau are often mistaken
the one for the other. Beurre d'Arenberg was raised by Monseigneur
Deschamps, Abbe of the Orphan Hospital, Enghien, Belgium. At about the
same time, M. Noisette, a nurseryman of Paris, sent out Glou Morceau,
which he had procured from the gardens of the Duc d'Arenberg, under
the name Beurre d'Arenberg, so that there were two distinct varieties
in cultivation under the same name. The true Beurre d'Arenberg of the
Abbe Deschamps came to this country about 1827, having been sent over
by Thomas Andrew Knight, President of the London Horticultural Society,
to the Hon. John Lowell of Boston. The American Pomological Society
recommended this variety for cultivation in 1848, but in 1871 the name
disappeared from the Society's catalog.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, upright, very hardy and very
 productive; trunk and branches medium in thickness and smoothness;
 branchlets slender, short, light brown mingled with green, smooth,
 glabrous, with numerous, small, raised lenticels. Leaf-buds small,
 short, plump, free; leaf-scars with prominent shoulders. Leaves 3 in.
 long; 1-3/8 in. wide; apex taper-pointed; margin glandless, finely
 serrate; petiole 1-7/8 in. long. Flower-buds small, short, sharply
 pointed, free, singly on short spurs.

 Fruit ripe December to January; large, obovate-pyriform, ribbed;
 stem 1 in. long, thick, fleshy at the base, obliquely inserted;
 cavity lacking, drawn up in an oblique lip about the stem; calyx
 small, closed; lobes short, sometimes lacking; basin deep, smooth;
 skin roughish, thick, uneven; color yellow, with patches and
 tracings of russet especially around the calyx end; dots numerous,
 cinnamon-russet; flesh white, very juicy, melting, vinous or
 acidulous; quality very good. Core large; seeds large, roundish, plump.


[Illustration: BEURRE BOSC]

                              BEURRE BOSC

 =1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 161. 1832. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 358,
 fig. 152. 1845. =3.= _Proc. Nat. Cong. Fr. Gr._ 29, 51. 1848. =4.=
 Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:65, Pl. 1851. =5.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:79, Pl.
 1857. =6.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:320, fig. 1867. =7.= Hogg _Fruit
 Man._ 514. 1884.

 _Bosc's Butterbirne._ =8.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:100. 1856.

 _Beurre d'Apremont._ =9.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 26, Pl. 26. 1863.
 =10.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 2, 65, fig. 129. 1866-73. =11.= _Guide
 Prat._ 48, 230. 1895.

 _Bosc._ =12.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1883.

 _Bosc's Flaschenbirne._ =13.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 75,
 Pl. 75. 1883. =14.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 188. 1889. =15.= _Deut.
 Obstsorten_ =2=: Pt. 5, Pl. 1906.

The fruits of Beurre Bosc merit unqualified praise. They are nearly
flawless in every character. The pears at once receive approbation from
all who see them by virtue of their uniquely beautiful color and shape,
in which characters they are wholly unlike any other pear. The shape
is pyriform, with a very long, tapering neck, perfectly symmetrical
and unequalled in trimness of contour. The color is a dark rich yellow
overspread with cinnamon-russet, with here and there a spot of the
yellow ground color visible. The quality is rated by all as "very
good" or "best;" the Seckel alone surpasses it as a dessert fruit
in the estimation of most pear fanciers. The flesh, while slightly
granular, is tender and melting or almost buttery, very juicy, with
a rich piquant flavor and a pleasing aroma. The fruits seldom crack,
scab, or mildew. The characters of the tree fall far short of those
of the fruits. Nurserymen complain that it is difficult to propagate
the trees as they make a poor growth in the nursery and come to
transplanting age with a root system of two or three prongs almost
devoid of fibrous roots. The trees must be humored in soil and climate,
and under favorable conditions make but moderate growth as young
plants. Established trees in suitable soils, however, surpass most of
their neighbors in size and luxuriance of foliage. Very old trees
have a nobility of aspect possessed by few other pears. While slow in
coming in bearing, after fruiting begins the trees bear regularly and
abundantly. The variety does not succeed well on the quince unless
double-worked. Unfortunately, the trees are tender to cold and somewhat
too susceptible to blight. Beurre Bosc has long been a favorite in the
pear regions of Europe and America, and its culture in this country may
be recommended for the home, for local and general markets, and for
exportation.

This pear is a native of Belgium, having been raised from seed in
1807 by Dr. Van Mons, the renowned pomologist of Louvain, and was in
the first instance named by him Calebasse Bosc in honor of M. Bosc, a
distinguished French naturalist. In 1820, it was received at the garden
of the Horticultural Society of London under the name Beurre Bosc, and
Robert Thompson, at that time Director of the gardens, thought it best
to retain this name. The variety was early introduced into France.
About 1832 or 1833, Robert Manning and William Kenrick received cions
in the United States from Van Mons and from the London Horticultural
Society. The variety was cataloged by the American Pomological Society
at its first meeting in 1848.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright-spreading, hardy, productive,
 not an early bearer; trunk stocky; branches smooth, brownish, covered
 with ash-gray scarf-skin, with large lenticels; branchlets brownish,
 tinged with gray, glossy, smooth, nearly glabrous, with slightly
 raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds obtuse, pointed, appressed; leaf-scars prominent. Leaves 3
 in. long, 1-7/8 in. wide, ovate, thick, leathery; apex taper-pointed;
 margin finely crenate; petiole 1-1/4 in. long. Flower-buds large,
 conical, pointed, free; flowers open early, 1-1/2 in. across, showy,
 in dense clusters, from 10 to 20 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1 in.
 long, slightly pubescent, light green.

 Fruit ripe in late October and November; large, 3-3/8 in. long, 2-3/4
 in. wide, uniform in size, acute-obovate-pyriform, with a very long,
 tapering neck, uniform in shape and very symmetrical; stem 1-1/2 in.
 long, curved; cavity very obtuse or lacking, occasionally very shallow
 and narrow, wrinkled, russeted, with a fleshy ring folded up around
 the stem, slightly lipped; calyx open, small; lobes short, broad,
 obtuse; basin very shallow, narrow, obtuse, smooth, symmetrical;
 skin slightly granular, tender, roughened by russet, dull; color
 dark yellow, overspread with thick, dark russet, laid on in streaks
 and patches, with a cheek of solid russet; dots small, light russet,
 obscure; flesh yellowish-white, slightly granular, tender and melting,
 buttery, very juicy, with a rich, delicious, aromatic flavor; quality
 very good to best. Core large, closed, with clasping core-lines;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds wide, short, plump, obtuse.


[Illustration: BEURRE CLAIRGEAU]

                           BEURRE CLAIRGEAU

 =1.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:73, Pl. 1851. =2.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:103,
 Pl. 1854. =3.= _Gard. Chron._ 805. 1854. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._
 337. 1860. =5.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 11, Pl. 11. 1863. =6.= Mas _Le
 Verger_ =1=:39, fig. 26. 1866-73. =7.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =12=:211.
 1867. =8.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:335, fig. 1867. =9.= Downing _Fr.
 Trees Am._ 678. 1869. =10.= _Gard. Chron._ 1271. 1873. =11.= Hogg
 _Fruit Man._ 517. 1884.

 _Clairgeau's Butterbirne._ =12.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:127.
 1856. =13.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 7, Pl. 7. 1882. =14.= _Deut.
 Obstsorten_ =3=: Pt. 9, Pl. 1907.

 _Clairgeau._ =15.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1883.

Beurre Clairgeau is one of the mainstays in American pear-growing, and
is an especially valuable variety in New York. It maintains its place
among standard varieties chiefly because of splendid tree-characters,
as the fruits, while handsome, are not of the best quality. The tree
is second only to that of Buffum in vigor, health, and productiveness,
and is nearly as handsome as an ornamental. It does equally well on
quince or pear stock, although the Europeans maintain that the product
is better on the dwarfing stock. On either stock, the trees bear young
and annually. The fruits are large, smooth, symmetrical, and uniform
in shape, with a handsome ground color of rich yellow at maturity
and a bright crimson cheek. But here praises end, for the "deceptive
cheek of the Clairgeau" is proverbial in pear-growing, the handsome
coat covering rather coarse, granular flesh which is sometimes very
good but more often commonplace. The core is very large, and the
flesh surrounding it often rots or softens prematurely. The fruit is
more suitable for cookery than dessert. The pears are heavy and often
drop before maturity, and the trees should not be set in wind-swept
situations. Despite these demerits of the fruits, the variety is well
worth planting in commercial orchards for late markets.

The original tree of Beurre Clairgeau appears to have grown by chance
about 1830 with Pierre Clairgeau, Nantes, France. M. Clairgeau's first
account of it was given in 1848 when he exhibited fruit. The reputation
of the variety seems to have been at once established, for J. de Jonghe
and others combined and purchased the stock of about 300 trees grafted
on quince. Together with the parent tree, these were the same year
removed to Brussels, and in 1852 the pear was placed on the market.
Thus it happened that a French pear was first distributed by Belgian
growers. The variety was introduced in America about 1854. The American
Pomological Society placed it upon its list of recommended fruits in
1860.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, unusually upright, dense, slow-growing,
 hardy, productive, a regular bearer; trunk slender, shaggy; branches
 smooth, slightly zigzag, ash-gray almost completely overspreading
 reddish-brown, with many lenticels; branchlets thick, short, with
 short internodes, greenish-brown, smooth, glabrous, with slightly
 raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds conical, pointed, appressed; leaves very numerous, 3 in.
 long, 2 in. wide, broadly oval, leathery; apex abruptly pointed;
 margin glandless, finely serrate; petiole 2 in. long, glabrous;
 stipules rudimentary or lacking. Flower-buds medium to long, conical,
 pointed; flowers 1-1/2 in. across, showy, in dense clusters, averaging
 7 buds to a cluster; pedicels 5/8 in. long, thick, pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit in season, late October and November; large, 3-5/8 in. long,
 2-5/8 in. wide, uniform in size, roundish-acute-pyriform, with a long,
 tapering neck, symmetrical, uniform in shape; stem 1/2 in. long,
 short, very thick and fleshy; cavity obtuse, very shallow and narrow,
 fleshy around the base of the stem, russeted, lipped; calyx open,
 large; lobes separated at the base, long, broad, acute or acuminate;
 basin shallow, narrow, obtuse, furrowed, often compressed; skin thick
 and granular, tough, smooth, glossy; color yellow, with bright red
 blush; dots many, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh white, quite
 granular, firm at first but becoming at maturity tender and melting,
 buttery, very juicy, sweet, aromatic, with a rich, vinous flavor;
 quality variable, good to best. Core large, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long,
 plump, acute.


[Illustration: BEURRE DIEL]

                              BEURRE DIEL

 =1.= _Pom. Mag._ =1=:19, Pl. 1828. =2.= _Ibid._ =3=:131, Pl. 1830.
 =3.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 392. 1831. =4.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._
 189. 1832. =5.= _Ibid._ 156. 1841. =6.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 360,
 fig. 153. 1845. =7.= _Gard. Chron._ 856. 1845. =8.= Hovey _Fr. Am._
 =1=:77, Pl. 1851. =9.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 231. 1854. =10.= _Pom.
 France_ =1=: No. 7, Pl. 7. 1863. =11.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:137, fig.
 67. 1866-73. =12.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:349, fig. 1867. =13.=
 Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 686, fig. 1869. =14.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 518.
 1884. =15.= _Guide Prat._ 234. 1895.

 _Diel's Butterbirne._ =16.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 110. 1825. =17.=
 Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =11=: No. 8, Pl. 8. 1882. =18.= Mathieu _Nom.
 Pom._ 203. 1889.

 _Diel._ =19.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1883.

The catalogs and text-books supply Beurre Diel with several virtues
which Nature denies it as the variety grows in New York. As grown in
the eastern United States, the pears are dull and unattractive even
at maturity when the pale lemon color is brightest. When the tree is
happily situated as to soil and care, the quality of its product is
excellent, its fruits being delicious and ranking among the very best,
but when illy suited to soil, climate or care, the flesh is coarse, the
flavor insipid and astringent, bringing the quality down to second or
third rate. The pears keep and ship well. The tree is hardy, uncommonly
vigorous and fruitful, but very subject to blight; it is characterized
by its long twisting branches which need to be pruned back heavily. The
variety is still being planted, but there are better autumn pears.

This variety came from a chance seedling found near Brussels in 1805
by M. Meuris, head gardener for Dr. Van Mons. Being unnamed and of
fine quality, Van Mons dedicated it to his German friend, Diel, one of
the most distinguished German pomologists. Van Mons sent cions of the
variety to the London Horticultural Society in 1817. In 1823, Thomas
Andrew Knight sent cions to the Massachusetts Agricultural Society
whence it became disseminated generally throughout the United States.
The American Pomological Society placed this variety upon its fruit
catalog-list in 1854.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, spreading, open-topped, slow-growing,
 hardy, productive; trunk slender, smooth; branches slender, twisting,
 reddish-brown mingled with grayish scarf-skin, with few lenticels;
 branchlets with short internodes, dark reddish-brown, smooth,
 glabrous, with few small, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds obtuse, free; leaf-scars prominent. Leaves 2-3/4 in. long,
 1-3/4 in. wide, oval, thick, leathery; apex abruptly pointed; margin
 finely serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in. long. Flower-buds large, long,
 conical, rather plump, free; flowers open early, nearly 1-3/8 in.
 across, showy, in dense clusters, 7 or 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels
 1-1/8 in. long, pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit ripe in November; large, 3 in. long, 2-3/8 in. wide, uniform in
 size, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, often irregular and usually with sides
 unequal; stem 1-1/4 in. long, thick, curved; cavity obtuse, shallow,
 very narrow, russeted, furrowed and uneven, often lipped; calyx partly
 open, large; lobes separated at the base, broad, acute; basin shallow,
 obtuse, furrowed and uneven; skin very thick and granular, somewhat
 roughened by russet markings and by dots; color lemon-yellow, with
 a faint pinkish-red blush and markings and flecks of russet; dots
 many, russet, very conspicuous; flesh yellowish-white, firm, becoming
 tender and melting, quite granular around the core, very juicy,
 sweet, aromatic and rich; quality very good. Core large, closed, with
 clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large,
 wide, long, plump, often abortive, acute.


[Illustration: BEURRE GIFFARD]

                            BEURRE GIFFARD

 =1.= _Gard. Chron._ 69. 1848. =2.= _Mag. Hort._ =18=:433, fig. 30.
 1852. =3.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:69, Pl. 1857. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Rpt._ 231. 1858. =5.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 1, Pl. 1. 1863. =6.= Mas
 _Le Verger_ =2=:39, fig. 18. 1866-73. =7.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:369,
 fig. 1867. =8.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 689. 1869. =9.= Hogg _Fruit
 Man._ 521. 1884. =10.= _Soc. Nat. Hort. France Pom._ 374, fig. 1904.

 _Giffard's Butterbirne._ =11.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 255. 1881. =12.=
 Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 57, Pl. 57. 1883.

 _Giffard._ =13.= _Gard. Chron._ 415. 1863. =14.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._
 38. 1883.

This is one of the few summer pears with a distinctly vinous flavor,
which, with the crisp and tender flesh, makes it one of the most
refreshing of summer fruits. The pears are larger than those of most
other sorts of its season, somewhat like those of Beurre Clairgeau in
shape and color, and ripen at a time--just before Clapp Favorite--when
good pears should be in demand for home and market. The fruits keep
well for summer pears, and are remarkable for their small cores. The
trees, while in no way remarkable, are quite up to the average in all
characters, and surpass most of their orchard associates in hardiness
and fruitfulness. The variety is desirable for both home and commercial
orchards.

This early summer pear was found as a chance seedling in 1825 by
Nicolas Giffard, Foussieres, France. In 1840, M. Millet, president
of the Society of Horticulture of Maine-et-Loire, wrote the first
description of it in the Bulletins of the Society. It was introduced in
America about 1850, and in 1858 was added to the fruit catalog-list of
the American Pomological Society.

 Tree of medium size, vigorous, spreading, open-topped, hardy,
 productive; branches reddish-brown, nearly covered with gray
 scarf-skin, with long and narrow, large lenticels; branchlets slender,
 new growth willowy, long, reddish-brown, smooth, glabrous except near
 the tips of the new growth, with conspicuous, raised, round lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 2-3/4 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide, stiff; apex taper-pointed; margin entire, sometimes
 slightly pubescent; petiole 2-1/2 in. long, slender, reddish-green;
 stipules very long and slender. Flower-buds small, plump, free,
 singly on very short spurs; flowers showy, 1-1/4 in. across, in
 dense clusters, average 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 3/4 in. long,
 pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late August; variable in size, averages 3 in. long,
 2-3/8 in. wide, obovate-acute-pyriform; stem 3/4 in. long; cavity
 lacking, the flesh closing up symmetrically around the stem
 except when drawn up in a lip; calyx open, small; lobes separated
 at the base, narrow, accuminate; basin shallow, narrow, obtuse,
 almost smooth, symmetrical; skin thin, tender, smooth; color dull
 greenish-yellow, with a dotted, dull red blush, often without blush;
 dots numerous, small, greenish and russet, very conspicuous; flesh
 tinged with yellow, granular at the center, melting, very juicy,
 vinous, highly aromatic; quality very good. Core small, closed, with
 clasping core-lines; calyx-tube narrow, funnel-shaped; seeds plump,
 acute.


[Illustration: BEURRE HARDY]

                             BEURRE HARDY

 =1.= Barry _Fr. Garden_ 314. 1851. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 466.
 1857. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 66. 1862. =4.= _Pom. France_ =2=:
 No. 46, Pl. 46. 1864. =5.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1, 11, fig. 4.
 1866-73. =6.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:379, fig. 1867. =7.= Hogg _Fruit
 Man._ 521. 1884. =8.= _Soc. Nat. Hort. France Pom._ 378, fig. 1904.

 _Hardy._ =9.= _Gard. Chron._ 463. 1863. =10.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 38.
 1883.

 _Gellert's Butterbirne._ =11.= Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 38, Pl.
 78. 1894.

Beurre Hardy is one of the good autumn pears. Both fruit and tree
commend it. The fruits are usually large; are handsome in appearance;
and the flesh and flavor are exceptionally fine. Thus, the flesh,
while a little granular at the core, is melting, juicy, and richly
aromatic,--as truly luscious as in any other pear. Unfortunately the
fruits do not keep well, having a tendency to soften at the core as
maturity advances. When poorly grown or not properly ripened, the
pears are sometimes a little astringent, and there is always a smack
of astringency. The trees, while not large, are vigorous, hardy,
productive, and healthy except in being a little susceptible to blight.
This is a favorite pear with nurserymen to bud or graft on the quince,
Japanese pear stocks, or other stocks, since it makes a perfect union
with any of those in common use. The tree is one of the best dwarfs,
also, for its own crop. Wherever pears are grown, this is a good
dessert sort, and in many regions it is a valuable fruit for commerce.
Beurre Hardy does especially well in New York and in eastern United
States.

This is a French pear raised about 1820 by M. Bonnet, Boulogne-sur-Mer,
France. In 1830, it was acquired by M. Jean-Laurent Jamin, a nurseryman
near Paris, who named it in honor of M. Hardy, Director and Professor
of Arboriculture at the Garden of the Luxembourg. It was propagated,
made known, and distributed by M. Jamin between 1840 and 1845. The
American Pomological Society added Beurre Hardy to its list of
recommended fruits in 1862.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright, dense-topped, hardy,
 productive; trunk stocky; branches smooth, dull brown overspread with
 gray, marked more or less with scarf-skin, with very numerous large,
 elongated lenticels; branchlets thick, greenish-brown, glossy, smooth,
 glabrous, with numerous small, raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds conical, pointed, plump, usually free; leaf-scars prominent.
 Leaves 2-1/2 in. long, 2 in. wide, stiff; apex abruptly pointed;
 margin tipped with small glands, finely serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in.
 long. Flower-buds small, short, conical, pointed, plump, free, singly
 or in small clusters on short spurs; flowers 1-1/4 in. across, well
 distributed, average 9 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1 in. long,
 pubescent, reddish-green.

 Fruit in season, late September and early October; large, 3 in. long,
 2-1/4 in. wide, uniform, obtuse-pyriform, with a rather long neck,
 symmetrical; stem 7/8 in. long, thick, slightly curved; cavity obtuse,
 very shallow and narrow, russeted, often uneven and gently furrowed,
 lipped; calyx large, open; lobes broad, acute; basin shallow, narrow,
 obtuse, gently furrowed; skin granular, tender, russet; color dull
 greenish-yellow, overspread with thin, brownish-russet, without blush;
 dots numerous, russet, small, very conspicuous; flesh granular,
 melting, buttery, very juicy, sweet, richly aromatic and somewhat
 vinous; quality very good to best. Core large, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long,
 plump, acute.


                           BEURRE DE JONGHE

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =28=:258. 1857. =2.= _Gard. Chron._ 147, fig. 1866.
 =3.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:73, fig. 43. 1866-73. =4.= Downing _Fr.
 Trees Am._ 683. 1869. =5.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =32=:408. 1877. =6.=
 Hogg _Fruit Man._ 522. 1884. =7.= _Guide Prat._ 64, 232. 1895. =8.=
 _Garden_ =49=:225. 1896.

 _De Jonghe's Butterbirne._ =9.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 201. 1889.

A prime requisite in any pear of best quality is that there be no
disagreeable after-taste in the flesh. The fruits of almost none of
the winter pears meet this requirement. Almost all have more or less
astringency in the after-taste. But the fruits of this variety are
wholly free from this astringency and are, moreover, so sweet and rich
that they are nearly as delectable as those of Seckel, the standard of
excellence in quality. The pears ripen at Geneva in January and may
be kept for a month or six weeks at a season when there are few other
sweet, rich pears, the fruits of nearly all other pears of this season
being vinous and piquant. The trees are hardy and productive, but are
slow in coming in bearing, rather small, and not at all self-assertive
and must be coddled somewhat. They are reported by many to do better
on quince than on pear stocks. The variety is desirable only for the
amateur.

According to Mas, the French pomologist, M. de Jonghe mentioned this
pear in a pamphlet on new varieties published in 1865. It was described
in the _Magazine of Horticulture_ in 1857 as a new variety. In
_Gardener's Chronicle_, 1866, M. de Jonghe said that he saw this pear
first in 1852 at Uccle, Belgium. The seedling had been planted there
two years before.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, spreading, slow-growing, hardy, very
 productive; trunk slender, shaggy; branches reddish-brown overspread
 with thick scarf-skin; branchlets thick, curved, short, with very
 short internodes, smooth except for the raised, conspicuous lenticels.
 Leaf-buds small, short; leaf-scars with prominent shoulders. Leaves
 2-3/4 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, thick; apex abruptly pointed; margin
 glandular, finely serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in. long, reddish-green.
 Flower-buds large, long, very plump, free; flowers 1-1/4 in. across, 7
 or 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1/2 in. long, thick.

 Fruit ripe December to January; medium in size, 3 in. long, 2-1/4
 in. wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, very regular; stem short, thick,
 inserted obliquely; cavity very shallow or none, the flesh often
 drawn up in a lip on one side of the stem; calyx small, open; basin
 shallow; skin thin; color dull yellow, thickly overspread with a
 pale, brownish-russet, often with traces of a russet-red blush; dots
 numerous, small, dull russet; flesh nearly white, fine-grained,
 melting, buttery, pleasant flavored, aromatic, sweet; quality very
 good.


[Illustration: BEURRE SUPERFIN]

                            BEURRE SUPERFIN

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:8, 135. 1854. =2.= _Horticulturist_ N. S. =5=:
 88. 1855. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 465. 1857. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Rpt._ 231. 1858. =5.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:432, fig. 1867. =6.= Hogg
 _Fruit Man._ 529. 1884.

 _Hochfeine Butterbirne._ =7.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 59, Pl.
 59. 1883. =8.= Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 47, Pl. 60. 1894.

 _Superfin._ =9.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 40. 1883.

Tender in skin and delicate in flesh, the product of this variety is
not for the markets, but that of few other sorts so admirably supplies
those who want choicely good fruits. The pears are not as attractive
in appearance as might be wished, but are hardly surpassed in flavor in
their season. The flesh is notable for juiciness, rich vinous flavor,
and pleasant perfume. The trees are large, healthy even as regards
blight, very productive, and are easily suited as to soils. The trees
do not bear early, but are regular in bearing after this life event
begins. In Europe, the variety is commonly and successfully grown as a
dwarf, and the pear-growers of a generation ago in America recommend
this variety as one of the good sorts to work on the quince. The
variety is a valuable one for home orchards, especially in New York
where it grows exceptionally well.

Beurre Superfin was raised from a bed of pear seeds made at Angers,
France, by M. Goubault, a well-known pomologist, in 1837. The
parent tree so produced bore fruit in 1844 and the Committee of the
Horticultural Society of Maine-et-Loire was requested to report on its
merits, which it did in that year, and M. Millet, president of the
society, named it Beurre Superfin. It was introduced in America about
1850. The variety was placed on the fruit catalog-list of the American
Pomological Society in 1858.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright-spreading, dense-topped, hardy, very
 productive; trunk stocky, rough; branches thick, rough and shaggy,
 zigzag, dull brownish-red, overspread with gray scarf-skin, sprinkled
 with numerous elongated lenticels; branchlets slender, light brown,
 glossy, smooth, glabrous, with small, raised, inconspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, pointed, plump, appressed or free;
 leaf-scars prominent. Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 1-7/8 in. wide, stiff;
 apex abruptly pointed; margin tipped with small glands, coarsely
 serrate; petiole 1-3/4 in. long. Flower-buds conical, pointed, plump,
 free, singly on short branches and short spurs.

 Fruit matures in October; large, 3-1/4 in. long, 2-3/4 in. wide,
 roundish-oblate, with a short, thick, rounded neck, symmetrical; stem
 1-1/8 in. long, very thick, curved; cavity very shallow and narrow or
 lacking, the flesh tapering into the stem or wrinkled in a fleshy fold
 about the base of the stem, often lipped; calyx open; lobes separated
 at the base, broad, narrow; basin narrow, obtuse, gently furrowed,
 symmetrical; skin very granular, tender, smooth; color yellow, netted
 and streaked with light russet, often with a slight brownish-russet
 cheek; dots numerous, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh tinged with
 yellow, granular, melting, buttery, very juicy, sweet yet with a rich,
 brisk, vinous flavor, aromatic; quality very good. Core large, closed,
 with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds
 large, wide, long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: BLOODGOOD]

                               BLOODGOOD

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =3=:14. 1837. =2.= Manning _Book of Fruits_ 65.
 1838. =3.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:366, fig. 31. 1843. =4.= Downing _Fr.
 Trees Am._ 332, fig. 132. 1845. =5.= _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr. Gr._ 51.
 1848. =6.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:181, fig. 89. 1866-73. =7.= Leroy
 _Dict. Pom._ =1=:449, fig. 1867. =8.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 532. 1884.

 _Bloodgood's Sommerbirne._ =9.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 186. 1889.

Bloodgood has long been a standard summer pear in America. It
surpasses any European associate of its season in both fruit- and
tree-characters. In particular, the fruits are meritorious for flesh
of fine texture, which, though a little granular, is melting and
juicy, and has a rich, sweet, perfumed flavor. Complaints appear in
the horticultural press that the quality is exceedingly variable.
The reports of poor flavor may arise from the fact that the quality
is always poor if the fruit is not picked as soon as full grown and
ripened indoors. The season in New York is August. The trees are
resistant to blight, healthy, bear young and regularly, are long-lived,
and attain large size, although in some situations they are but medium
in size. The variety has little or no value in commercial plantations,
but is prized in every collection for home use.

The origin of this pear is unknown, but it is supposed to be a native
of New York. It seems to have been brought to notice about 1835 by
James Bloodgood of the nursery firm of Bloodgood and Company, Flushing,
Long Island. According to Robert Manning, the variety was listed in
Prince's _Catalogue_ for 1837 as Early Beurre. After being introduced
by Bloodgood and Company, it was speedily recognized as one of the
most valuable native sorts. The variety was placed upon the fruit
catalog-list of the American Pomological Society in 1848.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, upright, dense, slow-growing,
 productive; trunk medium in thickness and smoothness; branches
 zigzag, reddish-brown partly overspread with grayish scarf-skin,
 marked with few small lenticels; branchlets thick, very long, with
 long internodes, reddish-brown, the new growth greenish, with a brown
 tinge, glossy, smooth, with small, raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds broad at the base, small, short, sharply pointed, free;
 leaf-scars with prominent shoulders. Leaves 2-1/4 in. long, 1-3/8
 in. wide, oval, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate;
 petiole 1-1/4 in. long, slender, tinged red; stipules few, variable
 in size and shape, tinged red. Flower-buds medium in size and length,
 conical, plump, free, arranged singly on short spurs; flowers early,
 1-1/4 in. across, in dense clusters, 7 or 8 buds in a cluster;
 pedicels often 7/8 in. long, pubescent.

 Fruit matures in late August; medium in size, 2-1/8 in. long, 2 in.
 wide, roundish-pyriform to acute-pyriform, symmetrical, uniform,
 with equal sides; stem 3/4 in. long, thick; cavity russeted, lipped,
 drawn up in fleshy folds about the stem; calyx open, small; lobes
 separated at the base, short, broad, obtuse; basin narrow, obtuse,
 smooth, symmetrical; skin thick, tough, roughish; color bright yellow,
 with patches and nettings of russet, producing a mottled russet
 effect; dots many, small, russet, inconspicuous; flesh tinged yellow,
 granular, melting, buttery, rich, very juicy, sweet, highly flavored,
 aromatic; quality very good. Core small, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, narrow, conical; seeds small, short,
 plump, acute.


[Illustration: BRANDYWINE]

                              BRANDYWINE

 =1.= _Horticulturist_ =3=:166, figs. 25 and 26. 1848-49. =2.= _Mag.
 Hort._ =15=:106. 1849. =3.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:51, Pl. 1851. =4.=
 _Mag. Hort._ =19=:450, fig. 30, 1853. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 231.
 1858. =6.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:496, fig. 1867. =7.= _Pom. France_
 =4=: No. 160, Pl. 160. 1867.

Were it not that Tyson is better in both tree and fruit, Brandywine,
which ripens its crop with that of Tyson, could be put down as about
the best pear of its season. Tyson is the better variety, however,
in almost every soil and situation, and Brandywine has a place in
American pear flora only because the pears have a distinct flavor which
gives them the charm of individuality. The flesh is neither sweet nor
perfumed, as is that of most pears at this season, but has the piquant
smack of some of the winter pears which makes the fruits particularly
refreshing. The tree is vigorous, with a handsome pyramidal top, but is
not remarkable otherwise. Sometimes it is unproductive. The variety is
worth planting for the sake of diversity in home orchards.

The original tree, a chance seedling, was found on the farm of Eli
Harvey, Chaddsford, on the banks of the Brandywine River, Pennsylvania.
This parent tree began to bear about 1820, but in 1835 wind broke it
down near the surface of the ground. The present tree is a sucker
from the original, and first fruited in 1844. This fact accounts for
its not sooner having become known to cultivation. Dr. Brinckle of
Philadelphia showed the fruits first at a meeting of the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society in 1848 when it received high commendations. In
1858 the American Pomological Society added Brandywine to its list of
recommended fruits.

 Tree large, vigorous, very upright, dense-topped, productive; branches
 long, olive-gray, sprinkled with roundish lenticels; branchlets
 slender, curved, with short internodes, brownish-red overspread with
 scarf-skin, glabrous, with few small, obscure lenticels.

 Leaf-buds medium in size and length, pointed, free. Leaves small,
 long-ovate; apex taper-pointed; margin serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in.
 long. Flower-buds large, plump, conical, free, singly on spurs and as
 terminal buds; flowers 7/8 in. across, in dense clusters, average 9
 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1/2 in. long, slender, pubescent.

 Fruit ripens in late August and early September; medium in size,
 2-3/4 in. long, 2-1/2 in. wide, variable in shape but generally
 obovate-pyriform; stem 1-1/2 in. long, fleshy, curved, obliquely
 attached; cavity lacking, the flesh drawn up in a wrinkled fold about
 the base of the stem; calyx large, open; lobes short, entire; basin
 small, shallow, usually smooth; skin roughish; color greenish-yellow,
 blushed with red on the sunny side, marked with tracings of russet
 especially near the cavity; dots numerous, large, conspicuous, russet;
 flesh whitish, or faintly tinged with yellow, granular, melting,
 juicy, aromatic, vinous; quality good to very good. Core small; seeds
 few, small, dark brown.


[Illustration: BUFFUM]

                                BUFFUM

 =1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 166. 1832. =2.= _Mag. Hort._ =10=:300, fig.
 15. 1844. =3.= _Ibid._ =16=:297. 1850. =4.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:19,
 Pl. 1851. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 53. 1852. =6.= _Horticulturist_ N.
 S. =6=:300, Pl. 1856. =7.= _Ibid._ =25=:104, fig. 1870. =8.= Mas _Le
 Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1, 81, fig. 39. 1866-73.

 _Buffam._ =9.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 356, fig. 150. 1845.

Without deserving a high place among pears, Buffum has several
meritorious characters which should keep it in the list of standard
varieties. The variety must depend chiefly on its tree-characters
for approbation, and in these it excels nearly all of its orchard
associates. The trees are remarkably vigorous, nearly free from blight,
very productive, although they have a tendency to bear biennially;
and by virtue of great size, symmetrical, pyramidal form, dark green,
glossy foliage, and sturdy, ruddy wood in winter, they are among the
most ornamental of all fruit trees. In full leaf, a Buffum tree might
easily be taken for a Lombardy poplar. The quality of the fruits is
very variable. At times the flesh is rich, aromatic, melting, and very
good; again, the pears may be insipid or even illy flavored, devoid of
perfume, coarse in texture, and poor. The fruits are never large and
often run small. To attain good quality, the pears must be picked early
and ripened in a moderately cool fruit-room. The culture of Buffum is
on the wane, chiefly for the reason that its fruits ripen with those of
Seckel and fail in competition, as the Seckels are nearly as large and
much better in quality. But because of its admirable tree-characters
the variety should not be lost.

Some confusion exists as to the origin of Buffum. Some writers state
that the original tree stood on the grounds of Prescott Hall, Newport,
Rhode Island. Hovey, however, in his _Fruits of America_, 1851, says
that the variety originated in the garden of David Buffum, Warren,
Rhode Island, shortly after the advent of the nineteenth century. In
the opinion of Downing the variety came from seed of White Doyenne.
Soon after the founding of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society
in 1828, Robert Manning exhibited specimens of the Buffum pear, and
through him the variety became known in the vicinity of Boston from
which place it was disseminated throughout the country. Buffum was
added to the fruit-list of the American Pomological Society in 1852.

 Tree vigorous, very upright, dense, hardy, almost immune to blight,
 very productive; branches shaggy, zigzag, reddish-brown, overspread
 with grayish scarf-skin, with numerous small lenticels; branchlets
 short, reddish-brown, tinged with green and streaked with grayish
 scarf-skin, smooth, glabrous, with conspicuous, small, raised
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, pointed, appressed; leaf-scars
 prominent. Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 2 in. wide, oval, thin, leathery;
 apex abruptly pointed; margin glandular, finely serrate; petiole 2-1/4
 in. long. Flower-buds large, conical, pointed, plump, free, arranged
 singly on short spurs and branchlets; flowers 1-1/2 in. across, showy,
 in dense clusters, 6 to 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 7/8 in. long,
 slender, pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit ripe in late September and October; medium in size, 2-1/4 in.
 long, 2 in. wide, uniform in size and shape, oblong-obovate-pyriform,
 with unequal sides; stem 3/4 in. long, very thick; cavity obtuse, very
 shallow, narrow, russeted, gently furrowed, often lipped; calyx open;
 lobes separated at the base, short, narrow, obtuse; basin shallow,
 obtuse, gently furrowed; skin thick, very tough and granular, smooth
 except for the russet markings, dull; color deep brownish-yellow, with
 a bright reddish blush on the exposed cheek toward the basin; dots
 many, small, brownish or russet, conspicuous; flesh white, tinged
 with yellow, firm, granular, stringy toward the center, juicy, sweet,
 aromatic; quality good. Core large, closed; core-lines clasping;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, plump, acute.


[Illustration: CLAPP FAVORITE]

                            CLAPP FAVORITE

 =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 50. 1860. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 20.
 1867. =3.= _Pom. France_ =4=: No. 170, Pl. 170. 1867. =4.= Downing
 _Fr. Trees Am._ 720, fig. 1869. =5.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 452.
 1897.

 _Favorite de Clapp._ =6.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:207, fig. 102. 1866-73.

 _Clapp's Favourite._ =7.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 548. 1884. =8.=
 Bunyard-Thomas _Fr. Gard._ 134, 462, fig. 1904.

 _Clapp's Liebling._ =9.= Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 31, Pl. 46.
 1894.

Clapp Favorite is by universal consent the standard late summer pear to
precede Bartlett, which it much resembles in size, shape, color, and
flavor. In most regions in the United States and Canada where pears
are largely grown for the market, Clapp Favorite is the first pear
to be put on the market. The season is usually a week or sometimes
ten days before that of Bartlett. The chief fault of the fruits is
that they soon soften at the center after ripening, to obviate which
they should be picked at least ten days before they would ripen on
the tree. This softening at the core debars the fruit from distant
markets, and makes it suitable only for local trade. The illustration
of the whole fruit in the accompanying plate is so foreshortened by the
camera that size and shape are not shown correctly, but the half-fruit
illustrates the size and shape very well. The fruits are usually a
little larger than those of Bartlett. Except in one particular, the
trees of Clapp Favorite are as nearly perfect as those of any variety
in American orchards. The weak character, unfortunately, is a most
important one, and all but debars the variety from some regions in
which pear-growing is a large industry. The weakness is susceptibility
to blight. No standard pear goes down so quickly as this one when
blight is epidemic. Two good characters of the trees redeem the variety
from failure because of blight. After those of Flemish Beauty and
Tyson, the trees of this variety show greater hardihood to cold than
those of any other standard sort; and of all pears grown in America,
Kieffer not excepted, the trees of Clapp Favorite are most fruitful.
Other merits of the tree are large size, great vigor, longevity, and
earliness and regularity in bearing. The variety shows a predilection
for heavy soils, and the trees may be set on the heaviest clays. Clapp
Favorite is grown satisfactorily on dwarf as well as standard stocks.
The variety is a desirable one wherever pears are grown, and is one of
the half-dozen leading sorts in New York.

Clapp Favorite was raised by Thaddeus Clapp, Dorchester, Massachusetts,
but the date of its origin is uncertain. It was favorably mentioned as
a promising new fruit at the meeting of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society in 1860. By some writers this pear is supposed to be a cross
between Flemish Beauty and Bartlett, but this supposition cannot be
proved. The variety was early introduced into England and France where
it almost immediately received favorable commendation. The American
Pomological Society first listed Clapp Favorite in its fruit-catalog in
1867.

 Tree large, upright-spreading, round-topped, very productive;
 trunk stocky, rough; branches characteristically shaggy, zigzag,
 reddish-brown overspread with gray scarf-skin, marked by few small,
 roundish, raised lenticels; branchlets short, dull reddish-brown,
 tinged with green, smooth, glabrous, with few small, inconspicuous
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds medium in size, short, conical, pointed; leaf-scars
 prominent. Leaves 2-1/2 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, oval, leathery; apex
 taper-pointed; margin glandular, finely serrate; petiole 2 in. long.
 Flower-buds large, conical, pointed, plump, free, arranged singly on
 short spurs and branches; flowers very showy, 1-5/8 in. across, large,
 well distributed, averaging 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-3/16 in.
 long, lightly pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late August and early September; large, 4 in. long,
 3-1/4 in. wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, tapering slightly toward the
 apex, symmetrical; stem 1-1/4 in. long, very thick, curved, fleshy;
 cavity very shallow, narrow, lipped, with a fleshy ring around
 the stem; calyx large, open; lobes separated at the base, narrow,
 acuminate, usually erect and very stiff; basin shallow, wide, obtuse,
 corrugated and wrinkled; skin thick, tough, smooth, glossy; color pale
 lemon-yellow, mottled and dotted with bright red, deepening in highly
 colored specimens to a crimson blush, with occasional faint traces of
 russet; dots numerous, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh tinged with
 yellow, very granular and gritty at the center, tender and melting,
 buttery, juicy, sweet, rich, vinous, aromatic; quality very good. Core
 large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube long, narrow,
 funnel-shaped; seeds medium in size and width, plump.


[Illustration: COLONEL WILDER]

                            COLONEL WILDER

 =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ Pt. 2. 119. 1875. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
 Am._ 2nd App. 146, fig. 1876. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 23. 1881. =4.=
 _Me. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 114. 1891.

Colonel Wilder originated in California and was once a favorite
there, but is now reported as being little planted. At one time it
was prominent in eastern orchards because of its late season and
large, handsome, well-flavored fruits. The variety came in competition
with Beurre d'Anjou, however, the season and fruits of the two being
similar, but the trees of Colonel Wilder were so greatly outmatched by
those of Beurre d'Anjou that this variety is less and less planted in
the East. Perhaps it is worth preserving in pear collections for the
sake of variety.

This pear originated from seed sown by Bernard S. Fox, San Jose,
California, about 1870. It was named after Marshall P. Wilder, Boston,
Massachusetts. Just prior to his death Mr. Fox, in a letter to the
editor of the _Rural Press_, wrote of three pears, P. Barry, Fox, and
Colonel Wilder, as follows: "The list of pears is already large, and,
unless something extremely good is offered, there is no use adding to
it. But, after many years of trial here and elsewhere, I claim now,
that, at their respective times of ripening, there are no large pears
superior to them in size, flavor, and good shipping qualities."

 Tree medium in size, spreading and drooping, open-topped, hardy,
 an uncertain bearer; trunk shaggy; branches stocky, roughish,
 reddish-brown nearly covered with gray scarf-skin, marked with many
 lenticels; branchlets slender, willowy, light brown, with a slight
 reddish tinge, smooth, glabrous, with few small, slightly raised,
 obscure lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, sharply pointed, free or slightly appressed.
 Leaves 2-1/4 in. long, 1-1/4 in. wide, narrow, short, oval, leathery;
 apex abruptly pointed; margin glandless, finely serrate; petiole 2-1/4
 in. long, slender, pale green or yellowish, sometimes with a tinge of
 pink; stipules light greenish-yellow, with a pink tinge. Flower-buds
 small, short, conical, plump, free, arranged singly on very short
 spurs; blossoms open very late; flowers 1-1/4 in. across, in dense
 clusters, 7 or 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1/2 in. long, pubescent,
 greenish.

 Fruit in season, late December to February; large, 3 in. long, 2-1/4
 in. wide, uniform in size, ribbed, oblong-obovate-pyriform, with
 unequal sides; stem 3/4 in. long, thick, curved; cavity small, obtuse,
 shallow, narrow, furrowed, occasionally lipped; calyx large, open;
 lobes separated at the base, narrow, acute; basin shallow, narrow,
 abrupt, usually smooth, symmetrical; skin thick, tough, rough, dull;
 color light yellow, often with a faint orange-red blush on the exposed
 cheek, with nettings and markings of russet; dots numerous, small,
 grayish and russet-colored, conspicuous; flesh yellowish-white,
 granular around the core, melting, buttery, very juicy, sweet,
 aromatic, with a musky flavor; quality good. Core large, closed, with
 clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds wide,
 plump, acute.


[Illustration: COLUMBIA]

                               COLUMBIA

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =2=:37. 1836. =2.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 159. 1841.
 =3.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=: 252, fig. 15. 1843. =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees
 Am._ 430, fig. 198. 1845. =5.= _Horticulturist_ =1=:20, 480, fig. 9.
 1846-47. =6.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:17, Pl. 1851. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Rpt._ 66. 1862. =8.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:589, fig. 1867. =9.= _Pom.
 France_ =4=: No. 140, Pl. 140. 1867. =10.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
 725. 1869.

Once a favorite in eastern United States, Columbia is planted now only
in collections. The variety never was a leader as far north as the pear
regions of New York and Massachusetts, but when pear-growing was being
attempted in the southern states in the middle of the last century,
before the advent of Kieffer, Garber, and Le Conte, Columbia was the
most dependable sort for the South. The pears are not attractive
in appearance, nor remarkably good in quality, but the trees are
vigorous, healthy, and very fruitful, although they come in bearing
late. The variety is above the average in both fruit and tree, and is
too valuable to be discarded. This variety must not be confused with
the Columbia now listed in many catalogs, the proper name of which is
Barseck.

The original seedling grew on the farm of a Mr. Casser in Westchester
County, thirteen miles from New York City. In 1835, Bloodgood and
Company, nurserymen of Flushing, Long Island, secured fruit from the
original tree, which was then fifteen inches in diameter, and sent it
to the Massachusetts Horticultural Society. Later, the variety was
propagated and distributed by the Bloodgood Nursery. Columbia was added
to the fruit-catalog of the American Pomological Society in 1862.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright-spreading, hardy, very productive; trunk
 stocky, roughish; branches thick, rough, shaggy, dull brownish-red
 overspread with much gray scarf-skin, marked with roundish lenticels;
 branchlets short, light brown intermingled with green, dull, smooth,
 glabrous, with few very small, slightly raised, lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, pointed, plump, usually appressed.
 Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, long-oval, thin; apex abruptly
 pointed; margin finely serrate, usually tipped with very small glands;
 petiole 2-1/4 in. long. Flower-buds small, short, conical, pointed,
 plump, free, arranged singly on short spurs; blossoms late; flowers
 1-3/4 in. across, very showy, in dense clusters, 9 to 12 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 1-1/8 in. long, very thick, pubescent, light green.

 Fruit ripe from late November to January; large, 3 in. long, 2-3/8 in.
 wide, uniform in size, oblong-obovate-pyriform, broad at the middle,
 unequal sides, uniform in general shape; stem 1 in. long, curved,
 thick; cavity obtuse, very shallow and narrow, smooth; calyx partly
 open, large; lobes narrow, acuminate; basin shallow, obtuse, wrinkled;
 skin thick, granular, tough, roughish, dull; color yellowish-green,
 frequently with a dotted, dull red blush on the exposed cheek; dots
 many, of various colors, conspicuous; flesh yellowish-white, firm,
 granular, rather tough, very juicy, sweet, aromatic and rich; quality
 good. Core large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube wide,
 conical; seeds narrow, very long, often flattened and abortive,
 acuminate.


[Illustration: DANA HOVEY]

                              DANA HOVEY

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ =48.= 1891.

 _Dana's No. 16._ =2.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:541. 1853. =3.= _Ibid._
 =20=:136. 1854.

 _Dana's Hovey._ =4.= _Mag. Hort._ =25=:202, fig. 10. 1859. =5.= _Am.
 Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68. 1862. =6.= _Gard. Chron._ 1191, fig. 1866. =7.=
 Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 730. 1869. =8=. Hogg _Fruit Man._ 556. 1884.
 =9.= _Garden_ =49=:226. 1896.

 _Danas Hovey._ =10.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =47=:67, fig. 39. 1910.

Dana Hovey is a delicious little dessert pear, so juicy, sweet, and
rich that it is a veritable sweetmeat. The fruits are so similar to
those of Seckel that the variety is sometimes called "Winter Seckel."
Dana Hovey is one of the best pears to succeed Seckel. The fruits come
in season about the middle of November and keep six weeks in ordinary
storage. The flavor is that of Winter Nelis with a smack of Seckel. If
the fruits are picked early and kept in a dry, cool place they ripen
early in December with a rich, golden color strewn with russet. It is
in the same class with Seckel as to size of fruit, although the pears
average larger and are more uniform in size from different trees and
in different seasons. The pears are also more brightly colored than
those of Seckel. Superiority in size and color makes the fruits of this
variety much more attractive than those of the better-known Seckel.
The trees are hardy, vigorous, and thrive on various soils but are
only moderately productive and are somewhat susceptible to blight,
falling far short of those of Seckel in these characters, for which
reason the last-named variety is the better for commercial plantations.
Dana Hovey is one of few winter pears with fruits of high quality, and
thus is very desirable for home plantations and ought to have value in
commercial plantations.

Francis Dana, Roxbury, Massachusetts, was an indefatigable raiser of
new fruits, there being no fewer than sixteen varieties of pears with
the prefix "Dana's," of which the one under notice is the best of all.
It was introduced to the public about 1854 under the name of Dana's
Hovey in honor of C. M. Hovey, the well-known nurseryman of Boston and
author of _The Fruits of America_. Dana Hovey is so similar to Seckel
that the latter is supposed to be one of its parents. The variety was
added to the American Pomological Society's fruit-list in 1862.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright-spreading, rapid-growing, productive;
 trunk stocky; branches reddish-brown mingled with green which is
 almost completely overspread with gray scarf-skin, marked by few
 small lenticels; branchlets thick, short, light brown mingled with
 green, marked with ash-gray at the tips, smooth, glabrous, with small,
 scattering, slightly raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, plump, usually appressed. Leaves
 3-1/4 in. long, 2-1/8 in. wide, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin
 glandless or with few reddish glands, finely serrate; petiole short,
 stocky, 1-1/2 in. long, glabrous. Flower-buds short, conical but
 obtuse at the apex, plump, free, arranged singly on short spurs;
 flowers 1-1/2 in. across, in dense clusters, average 8 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 3/4 in. long, slender, thinly pubescent.

 Fruit matures in late October and November; medium in size, 2-1/2
 in. long, 2-1/8 in. wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical,
 uniform; stem 1/2 in. long, slender; cavity abrupt, shallow, very
 small, narrow, slightly lipped; calyx partly open, small; lobes short,
 narrow, acute; basin shallow, narrow, obtuse, smooth, symmetrical;
 skin thin, tender, smooth; color golden-yellow at maturity, covered
 with thin russet; dots numerous, small, greenish-russet; flesh tinged
 with yellow, granular at the center, tender and melting, juicy, sweet,
 highly perfumed; quality of the best. Core large, closed, abaxile;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds wide, short, plump, obtuse.


[Illustration: DEARBORN]

                               DEARBORN

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1883. =2.= _Ont. Dept. Agr. Fr. Ont._
 155. 1914.

 _Dearborn's Seedling._ =3.= _Kenrick Am. Orch._ 154. 1832. =4.=
 _Downing Fr. Trees Am._ 336, fig. 135. 1845. =5.= _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr.
 Gr._ 51. 1848. =6.= _Hovey Fr. Am._ =1=:63, Pl. 1851. =7.= Elliott
 _Fr. Book_ 336. 1859. =8.= _Mas Le Verger_ =2=:17, fig. 7. 1866-73.
 =9.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:7, fig. 1869.

Once a favorite, Dearborn is now nearly lost to cultivation, and few
or no nurserymen grow the trees. It is too good a variety to be lost,
however, because of splendid fruit- and tree-characters. The fruits
ripen early and are of good quality, though hardly as richly flavored
as those of Elizabeth which ripen at the same time. Unfortunately the
pears run small, but they are attractive in shape and color. In season,
the crop succeeds that of Bloodgood and precedes that of Bartlett.
The trees are almost flawless, and therefore are well adapted to home
orchards where fruits cannot receive the care of skilled hands. Besides
being almost free from blight, the trees are hardy, vigorous, and very
productive. The variety has many valuable qualities for a summer pear
in home orchards.

This pear was found growing in a border of shrubs in 1818 at
Brinley Place, Roxbury, Massachusetts, the home of General H. A. S.
Dearborn,[27] first president of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society. In 1831, General Dearborn first exhibited fruit of the
variety at the Massachusetts Horticultural Society where it was named
Dearborn's Seedling in honor of the originator. This variety should
not be confused with a pear raised by Van Mons of Belgium and named by
him Dearborn. The Dearborn of Van Mons is larger and ripens later than
the American Dearborn, and was long since taken from lists of pears
recommended for cultivation in America. Dearborn was included in the
American Pomological Society's first fruit-catalog in 1848, where it
was called Dearborn's Seedling. In 1883, the Society shortened the name
to Dearborn. Since 1891, the name has failed to appear in the catalogs
of this Society.

 Tree large, vigorous, spreading, tall, very productive; trunk stocky;
 branches thick, zigzag, reddish-brown partly covered with a heavy,
 gray scarf-skin, marked by many reddish-brown lenticels; branchlets
 slender, very long, with long internodes, older wood brown, new growth
 greenish, nearly covered with reddish-brown, mottled with ash-gray
 scarf-skin, smooth, glabrous becoming pubescent near the tips of the
 new growth, with numerous small, brownish, round, raised, conspicuous
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds very small, short, pointed, plump, free. Leaves 3 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide, thin; apex obtusely-pointed; margin with very fine
 dark tips, finely and shallowly serrate; petiole tinged red, 1-3/4
 in. long, glabrous. Flower-buds small, short, conical, plump, free,
 arranged singly on short spurs; flowers showy, 1-1/4 in. across, in
 dense clusters, 9 or 10 buds in a cluster; pedicels 3/4 in. long,
 pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late August; small, 2 in. long, 2-1/4 in. wide, uniform,
 roundish-pyriform, with a slight neck, symmetrical, uniform; stem 1
 in. long, slender; cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow, thinly russeted,
 often slightly lipped; calyx open, large; lobes separated at the
 base, narrow, acuminate; basin very shallow, obtuse, gently furrowed
 and wrinkled, symmetrical; skin thick, very tough, smooth, dull;
 color pale yellow, with russet specks; dots numerous, small, russet,
 conspicuous; flesh white, slightly granular at the center, tender and
 melting, very juicy, sweet but spicy, aromatic; quality good. Core
 large for the size of the fruit, closed, with clasping core-lines;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: DORSET]

                                DORSET

 =1.= Ellwanger & Barry _Cat._ 6, fig. 1895. =2.= _Ibid._ 17, fig.
 1900. =3.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 118. 1900. =4.= _Ill. Hort. Soc.
 Rpt._ 220. 1902.

Dorset has been on probation in New York for twenty-five years, and
its status is not yet decided. The fruits resemble those of Seckel
in shape and color, but are larger and come in season later. These
external resemblances to Seckel have given it the name "Late Seckel,"
which, however, is a misnomer, as a taste of the two fruits at once
makes plain. Dorset is not nearly as richly flavored as Seckel. The
tree-characters are all very good. Since there are few good late pears
to follow Seckel, there may be a place for Dorset.

Dorset was raised from seed by Lemuel Clapp, Dorchester, Massachusetts,
but the exact date of origin is unknown. The variety was introduced
by Ellwanger and Barry, Rochester, New York, in 1895. During the next
ten years it was placed on trial by several state experiment stations,
and soon gained a reputation for the characters noted in the preceding
paragraph.

 Tree small, spreading, very productive, a regular bearer; trunk
 slender, shaggy; branches slender, smooth, reddish-brown mingled with
 dull ash-gray, marked with many large lenticels; branchlets slender,
 dark brown, smooth, glabrous, with large, raised, lenticels.

 Leaf-buds medium to small, conical, pointed, free. Leaves 3 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide, oval, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin crenate;
 petiole 1-3/4 in. long, slender. Flower-buds large, long, conical,
 pointed, free; blossoms open very early; flowers often 1-3/8 in.
 across, showy, in dense clusters, from 8 to 12 buds in a cluster;
 pedicels 1 in. or less in length, pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit matures in December; medium in size, 2-3/4 in. long, 2-1/2
 in. wide, uniform in size and shape, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, with
 unequal sides; stem 3/4 in. long, curved, cavity almost lacking,
 obtuse, shallow, narrow, furrowed, compressed, often lipped; calyx
 open; lobes separated at the base, long, acute; basin narrow, obtuse
 or often quite abrupt, gently furrowed; skin thick, smooth; color dull
 greenish-yellow, marked with a dull bronze-red blush on the exposed
 cheek; dots many, small, grayish and russet, conspicuous; flesh
 yellowish-white, firm, granular at the center, tender, very juicy,
 very sweet and aromatic; quality good. Core closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long,
 plump, acute, broad at the base.


                                DOUGLAS

 =1.= _Kan. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 63. 1908-09. =2.= _Rural N. Y._ =70=:59,
 fig. 24. 1911. =3.= _U. S. D. A. Yearbook_ 267, Pl. 4. 1912. =4.=
 _Rural N. Y._ =72=:458, fig. 146. 1913. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 41,
 42. 1915.

In regions where blight and heat make pear-growing precarious, and
only pears with oriental blood, as Kieffer, Garber, and Le Conte, can
be grown, Douglas, which belongs with the pears just named, might well
be tried. Certainly it is better in flavor than any other variety of
its class. The trees come in bearing remarkably early, and are as
productive as those of Kieffer, though hardly as large or as vigorous.
The trees are inclined to overbear, in which case the fruits run small.
The variety has little to recommend it for New York, but those who grow
Kieffer might put it on probation with the hope of growing a fruit
passably fair for dessert.

Douglas is a seedling of Kieffer crossed, it is believed, with Duchesse
d'Angouleme by O. H. Ayer, Lawrence, Douglas County, Kansas, about the
year 1897. It fruited first in 1902 and attracted the attention of A.
H. Griesa, also of Lawrence, who propagated it in 1907, and sent out
specimens of it for appraisement in October, 1910, when it was very
favorably reported on by many prominent horticulturists. In accordance
with Mr. Griesa's suggestion, it was named Douglas after the county of
its origin.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, upright, very productive; trunk
 slender, smooth; branches slender, dull brownish-red, mottled with
 gray scarf-skin; branchlets medium in thickness and length, smooth,
 glabrous, sprinkled with numerous raised, conspicuous lenticels.
 Leaf-buds large, long, pointed, plump, free; leaf-scars prominent.
 Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, thick; apex taper-pointed;
 margin glandless, finely and shallowly serrate; petiole 1-5/8 in.
 long. Flower-buds large, long, conical, plump, free; flowers 1-1/4 in.
 across, white or occasionally with a faint tinge of pink, 11 or 12
 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-5/8 in. long.

 Fruit matures in October; large, 3-1/4 in. long, 2-3/4 in. wide,
 obovate-pyriform, tapering at both ends like the Kieffer; stem 1-5/8
 in. long, slender; cavity deep, narrow, compressed, often lipped;
 calyx small, partly open; basin furrowed; skin thick, tough; color
 pale yellow, heavily dotted and sometimes flecked with russet; dots
 numerous, small, light russet or greenish; flesh tinged with yellow,
 firm but tender, granular, very juicy, sweet yet with an invigorating
 flavor; quality good. Core closed, axile; calyx-tube short, wide;
 seeds long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: DOYENNE D'ALENCON]

                           DOYENNE D'ALENCON

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 213. 1856. =2.= _Ibid._ 231. 1858. =3.=
 _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:15, Pl. 1860. =4.= _Pom. France_ =2=: No. 47,
 Pl. 47. 1864. =5.= _Mas Le Verger_ =1=:23, fig. 10. 1866-73. =6.=
 Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 742. 1869. =7.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:55,
 fig. 1869. =8.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =20=:135. 1871. =9.= _Guide Prat._
 61, 264. 1876. =10.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 564. 1884.

 _Marmorirte Schmalzbirne._ =11.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:65.
 1856.

 _Dechantsbirne von Alencon._ =12.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 201. 1889.

This old French pear is worth planting, if the trees can be obtained,
because of its very late fruits and long season. The pears come in
season under ordinary conditions in December and keep until March.
The fruits are not remarkable for either taste or appearance, but are
good for a winter product when there is little competition with other
varieties. The pears are admirably adapted for culinary purposes. In
some seasons the pears fail to ripen, and the variety should be planted
only on warm soils and in situations where the season is warm and long.
Tree and fruit have a family resemblance to Easter Beurre; the latter,
however, is generally a better pear than this one. This variety is
much grown in Europe on the quince, and in the various fanciful forms
Europeans make use of in training fruit trees.

Doyenne d'Alencon is reported to be a wilding discovered by the Abbe
Malassis near Alencon, Orne, France, and propagated by M. Thuillier,
a nurseryman at Alencon. There was, however, a pear of the same name
and season found at Orleans in 1628, in the orchard of Le Lectier, the
renowned pomologist. It is probable that the pear which M. Thuillier
propagated was the one found many years previously by Le Lectier. The
variety must have been introduced into America between 1840 and 1850,
as it was mentioned by the American Pomological Society in 1856 as one
of the promising new pears. In 1858, the Society added the variety to
its fruit-catalog, but discontinued recommending it in 1897.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, upright, dense-topped, productive;
 trunk thick, shaggy; branches stocky, reddish-brown lightly covered
 with gray scarf-skin; branchlets slender, curved, short, with short
 internodes, light brown, with a faint reddish tinge, smooth, pubescent
 near the tips of the new growth, with numerous small, raised,
 conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, sharply pointed, plump, free; leaf-scars with
 prominent shoulders. Leaves 2-3/4 in. long, 1-1/8 in. wide, thin;
 apex taper-pointed; margin with few glands, coarsely serrate; petiole
 2-5/8 in. long, glabrous, with tinge of red, slender. Flower-buds
 small, short, conical, plump, free, arranged singly on short spurs;
 flowers early, 1-1/4 in. across, in dense clusters, average 9 buds in
 a cluster; pedicels 5/8 in. long, lightly pubescent.

 Fruit ripe December to February; 2-7/8 in. long, 2-3/8 in. wide,
 medium in size, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical, uniform; stem
 3/4 in. long, thick, curved; cavity obtuse, shallow, symmetrical,
 often slightly lipped, small; calyx open, large; lobes not separated
 at the base, broad, narrow; basin narrow, abrupt, smooth, symmetrical;
 skin very thick, tough, roughish; color dull greenish-yellow, with
 a faint orange blush on the exposed cheek, marked with many brown
 and russet dots and netted with russet; dots numerous, small,
 brownish-russet, inconspicuous; flesh tinged with yellow, granular
 at the center, tender and melting, juicy, aromatic, with a lively
 vinous flavor; quality good. Core large, closed, axile, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long,
 plump, acute.


[Illustration: DOYENNE BOUSSOCK]

                           DOYENNE BOUSSOCK

 =1.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:31, Pl. 1851. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 210.
 1856. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 742, fig. 1869.

 _Doyenne Boussock Nouvelle._ =4.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 143. 1841.

 _Beurre de Merode._ =5.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:81, Pl. 1857.

 _Doyenne de Merode._ =6.= _Pom. France_ =2=: No. 86, Pl. 86. 1864.
 =8.= _Guide Prat._ 64, 266. 1876. =7.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1,
 171, fig. 84. 1866-73.

 _Doyenne Boussock._ =9.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:58, fig. 1869. =10.=
 Hogg _Fruit Man._ 564. 1884.

 _Boussock._ =11.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1883.

 _Doppelte Philippsbirne._ =12.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 204. 1889. =13.=
 Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 33, Pl. 61. 1894.

This old Belgian pear is a leader in the second rank of commercial
pears in this country. If the fruits were better in quality and kept a
little longer, the variety would take rank among the best commercial
pears, for the fruits are handsome and the trees are nearly flawless.
As the color-plate shows, there are few pears more attractive than
this one, but the briskly acid flavor is not pleasing to many, and the
fruits become soft at the center soon after ripening. The pears are
above medium in size and are sometimes large or very large. The seeds
are often abortive. The trees are very large and vigorous, as hardy as
those of any other pear to cold, less susceptible to blight than most
of their orchard associates, and are remarkable for their prominent
buds and large, thick, glossy-green leaves, which turn deep red in the
autumn. On some soils the trees do not hold their crop well, and it
is always best to plant them where there is some protection against
heavy winds. The trees are prodigious bearers, and fruit regularly,
characters which make the variety desirable for local markets.

This pear is supposed to have been raised by Van Mons at the beginning
of the nineteenth century. It was placed on sale at Brussels about
1819. The variety was first given the name Doyenne de Merode in honor
of the Comte de Merode of Waterloo, Belgium. In 1836, however, the
name was changed to Doyenne Boussock. The catalog of the Horticultural
Society of London shows that it was received in England in 1842.
William Kenrick, on his return from Europe in the spring of 1841,
brought the variety to America. In 1856 the American Pomological
Society added this pear to its fruit-list.

 Tree very large, vigorous, upright-spreading, tall, hardy, productive;
 trunk thick, shaggy; branches stocky, shaggy, grayish-brown;
 branchlets long, with long internodes, light brown tinged with red,
 overspread with ash-gray, smooth, glabrous, with few elongated,
 raised, inconspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, sharply pointed, plump, free; leaf-scars with
 prominent shoulders. Leaves 3-1/2 in. long, 1-7/8 in. wide,
 leathery; apex abruptly pointed; margin very finely serrate; petiole
 1-1/2 in. long, slender. Flower-buds small, long and narrow, conical,
 free, singly on very short spurs; flowers early, showy, 1-5/8 in.
 across, in dense clusters, average 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/8
 in. long, thick, pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in September; large, 3 in. long, 2-3/4 in. wide, uniform,
 obtuse-obovate-pyriform, symmetrical; stem 1 in. long, very thick;
 cavity obtuse, rather shallow, broad, often russeted, furrowed,
 lipped; calyx large, open; lobes separated at the base, broad,
 acute; basin shallow, wide, obtuse, gently furrowed and wrinkled;
 skin thin, tender, smooth except for the russet nettings; color pale
 yellow, occasionally with a mottled pinkish-red blush on the exposed
 cheek, more or less netted with russet; dots numerous, small, russet,
 conspicuous; flesh white, tender and melting, buttery, very juicy,
 briskly acid; quality good. Core large, closed, axile, with meeting
 core-lines; calyx-tube very short, wide, broadly conical; seeds black,
 narrow, long, flattened, often abortive.


[Illustration: DOYENNE DU COMICE]

                           DOYENNE DU COMICE

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =18=:168, fig. 16. 1852. =2.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_
 =8=:47, Pl. 1860. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68. 1862. =4.= _Pom.
 France_ =2=: No. 58, Pl. 58. 1864. =5.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1,
 7, fig. 2. 1866-73. =6.= _Downing Fr. Trees Am._ 744, fig. 1869. =7.=
 _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =17=:440, fig. 1869. =8.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
 =2=:60, fig. 1869. =9.= _Hogg Fruit Man._ 565. 1884. =10.= Rev. Hort.
 447, Pl. 1908.

 _Beurre Robert._ =11.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:418, fig. 1867. =12.=
 _Ibid._ =2=:775. 1869.

 _Comice._ =13.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1883.

 _Vereins Dechantsbirne._ =14.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 293. 1889. =15.=
 Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 68, Pl. 36. 1894. =16.= _Deut.
 Obstsorten_ =5=: Pt. 14, Pl. 1909.

This pear has been esteemed long and justly for the beauty and high
quality of its fruits. If its tree-characters were better the variety
would take high place in commercial orcharding as well as for the
home orchard, to which it is now almost wholly confined. The fruits
are very large, smooth except for russet markings, clear handsome
yellow at maturity, sometimes brightened by a delicate blush, with
yellow, fine-grained flesh which is tender, melting, very juicy, sweet,
piquant, perfumed. The quality is so good that the fruits of this
variety are called by many the best of all pears. The list of faults
for the trees is as long as the list of merits for the fruits. The
young trees make a poor growth in the nursery; young or old, the trees
must be humored in soil, climate, and care; they are subject to blight;
while usually productive, they are not always so even where vigorous,
healthy, and hardy; lastly, they are a little below the average in
hardihood to cold. The variety is seldom at home in New York, but where
it thrives, as on the Pacific slope, it is a valuable commercial pear,
and is always worthy a place in the home orchard or in the collection
of the pear-fancier. In Europe, it is reported as doing especially well
on the quince.

The parent tree of Doyenne du Comice was taken from the first seed bed
made in the fruit-garden of the Comice Horticole, Angers, Department
of Maine-et-Loire, France. In November, 1849, it produced its first
fruit, which was at once so highly esteemed that it was named Doyenne
du Comice. It was placed on the market with unusual promptitude and
rapidly distributed in foreign lands, reaching America about 1850.
The variety was recommended for general cultivation by the American
Pomological Society in 1862.

 Tree vigorous, characteristically upright, dense, usually productive;
 branches smooth, dull gray mingled with greenish-brown, marked with
 large lenticels; branchlets long, brown tinged with red, glabrous,
 with many small, slightly raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, medium to long, conical, pointed, nearly free;
 leaf-scars prominent. Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, oval,
 leathery; margin finely serrate; petiole 2 in. long. Flower-buds
 short, conical, free; blossoms open late; flowers 1-1/4 in. across,
 in dense clusters, about 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 7/8 in. long,
 slender, pubescent, light green.

 Fruit ripe in late October and November; large, 3 in. long, 2-3/4 in.
 wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform or roundish, with unequal sides; stem
 1-1/4 in. long, very thick, usually curved; cavity obtuse, shallow,
 narrow, russeted and wrinkled, often with a fleshy ring around the
 base of the stem; calyx open; lobes separated at the base, long,
 narrow, acuminate; basin medium to wide, obtuse, often furrowed; skin
 tough and granular, smooth except for the russet markings, dull; color
 clear yellow, often with a very faint russet-red blush on the exposed
 cheek, the surface heavily covered with large patches and nettings
 of attractive russet; dots many, very small, dark brown, obscure;
 flesh tinged strongly with yellow, fine-grained near the outside but
 granular toward the core, melting, tender, buttery, very juicy, sweet
 and vinous, aromatic; quality very good to best. Core closed, with
 clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large,
 wide, long, rather plump, acute, often abortive.


[Illustration: DUCHESSE D'ANGOULEME]

                         DUCHESSE D'ANGOULEME

 =1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 171. 1832. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 381.
 1845. =3.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =1=:21, Pl. 1853. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Rpt._ 68. 1862. =5.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 17, Pl. 17. 1863. =6.=
 Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 2, 79, fig. 136. 1866-73. =7.= Leroy _Dict.
 Pom._ =2=:98, figs. 1869. =8.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =24=:26. 1873. =9.=
 _Guide Prat._ 59, 267. 1876. =10.= _Hist. Mass. Hort. Soc._ 1829-78.
 224. 1880. =11.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 569. 1884.

 _Duchess of Angouleme._ =12.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 371. 1831.

 _Angouleme._ =13.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1883.

 _Herzogin von Angouleme._ =14.= Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 46, Pl.
 43. 1894.

The fruits of Duchesse d'Angouleme excite admiration and wonder by
their enormous size. They may always be known by their great size,
squat pyriform shape, and uneven knobby surfaces. Well grown, the
pears have other virtues than size, as the flesh is buttery and
melting with a rich and delicious flavor; but poorly grown, and
on unfavorable soils, the flesh is granular, coarse-grained, but
half-melting and nearly devoid of the richness that characterizes
the fruits in happier situations. Size shrinks also when poorly grown,
so that one may say that a small pear of this variety is seldom fit
for dessert and too insipid for a good product in cookery. The trees
are vigorous, hardy, and healthy, bear abundantly under favorable
conditions, and succeed either as a standard or a dwarf. Possibly it
is best grown as a dwarf, and in America at least is more often worked
on the dwarfing quince than on the pear. In fact, this variety is
the favorite dwarf-pear for garden and home orchard, and commercial
orchards of dwarfed trees of it are not uncommon. On either stock, the
tree makes a beautiful, symmetrical pyramid, comes in bearing early,
and bears regularly. This variety is more popular in New York than in
any other part of America, and while less planted than formerly, is
still regarded as a standard late autumn variety. It is a particularly
desirable sort for the pear-fancier.

The original tree of Duchesse d'Angouleme was a wilding growing in a
garden near Angers, Maine-et-Loire, France. About 1808, M. Audusson, a
nurseryman at Angers, appreciating the beauty and excellent quality of
the pear, obtained the right to propagate it. In 1812 he began selling
trees of the variety under the name of "Poire des Eparonnais." In 1820,
M. Audusson sent a basket of the fruit to the Duchesse d'Angouleme
with a request for permission to name the pear in her honor, a request
which was granted. At the exhibition of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society held in 1830, Samuel G. Perkins showed a specimen which
measured eleven and three-tenths inches. It was the only one that grew
on the tree, and was considered to be the first fruit of this variety
produced in America. The American Pomological Society added Duchesse
d'Angouleme to its catalog-list of fruits in 1862.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright-spreading, dense-topped,
 slow-growing, usually hardy, productive; trunk thick; branches stocky,
 shaggy, zigzag, dull reddish-brown overspread with scarf-skin, marked
 with small lenticels; branchlets thick, short, dull light brown,
 streaked with gray scarf-skin, smooth, glabrous, with many small,
 raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, pointed, nearly free; leaf-scars
 prominent. Leaves 2-3/4 in. long, 1-5/8 in. wide, oval, thick,
 leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin marked with minute dark brown
 glands, crenate or nearly entire; petiole 1-3/4 in. long. Flower-buds
 large, long, conical, plump, free, arranged singly or in small
 clusters on short branches and spurs; flowers 1-3/8 in. across, 7 or 8
 buds in each cluster; pedicels 1 in. long, slender, lightly pubescent,
 greenish.

 Fruit ripe October to November; large, often very large, 4 in. long, 3
 in. wide, uniform in size, oblong-obovate-pyriform, with irregular and
 uneven surface and with sides often unequal; stem frequently 1-1/2 in.
 long, very thick, curved; cavity acute, deep, furrowed, irregular,
 often lipped; calyx partly open, small; lobes short, narrow, acute;
 basin medium to deep, abrupt, furrowed and uneven, often corrugated;
 skin thick, granular, roughened with russet; color dull yellow,
 streaked, spotted and netted with dull russet; dots numerous, russet,
 conspicuous; flesh white, firm becoming somewhat melting and quite
 tender when fully mature, granular, juicy, sweet, rich and delicious
 when fully mature; quality good to very good. Core closed, with
 clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds small,
 narrow, flat, acute, very often abortive.


[Illustration: DUCHESSE D'ORLEANS]

                          DUCHESSE D'ORLEANS

 =1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 143. 1841. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68.
 1862. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 749. 1869. =4.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
 570. 1884.

 _Duchess of Orleans._ =5.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:91, Pl. 1851.

 _Saint-Nicolas._ =6.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 33, Pl. 33. 1863. =7.=
 _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 343, fig. 1906.

 _Beurre de Saint-Nicolas._ =8.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1, 137, fig.
 67. 1866-73. =9.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:426, fig. 1867.

 _Butterbirne von Saint-Nicolas._ =10.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 191. 1889.

In the middle of the last century this pear was heralded as one of the
best of the French varieties which were then coming to this country in
great numbers, but it is now almost lost to cultivation. While in no
way remarkable, the variety is too valuable to be discarded. As the
color-plate shows, the fruits are prepossessing in appearance. The
pears are bright yellow, with a brilliant cheek, the whole fruit being
more or less mottled with golden russet. Few pears are smoother of skin
or more symmetrical in shape, and the fruits are more uniform in size
than those of most varieties. The quality, as well as the appearance,
is pleasing. While the flesh is a little dry and not as rich in flavor
as that of most other varieties of its season, it is so crisp and
refreshingly piquant in contrast to the sweeter, buttery pears with
which it ripens, its season being just after that of Bartlett, that the
variety finds favor with all who like pears. The variety fails in its
tree-characters. Thus, the trees are late in coming in bearing; are not
very vigorous; are somewhat tender to cold; and do not resist blight
well. The variety has little value for commercial places, but if the
trees can be obtained, is well worth planting in the home orchard.

This pear is a chance seedling found by M. Maurier near Angers,
Maine-et-Loire, France, nearly a century ago. It was propagated by M.
Flon, a nurseryman of Angers and fruited first in 1839. In England
and America the variety has been chiefly known as Duchesse d'Orleans,
but many French horticulturists have used the name Saint-Nicolas. The
variety was added to the fruit-catalog list of the American Pomological
Society in 1862, but was dropped from the list in 1871.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, spreading, moderately productive;
 trunk slender, shaggy; branches medium in thickness and smoothness,
 reddish-brown partly overspread with thin gray scarf-skin, with few
 indistinct lenticels; branchlets short, with short internodes, light
 brownish-red mingled with green and partly covered with thin, gray
 scarf-skin, dull, smooth, glabrous, with conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds long, narrow, sharply pointed, plump, free. Leaves 3 in.
 long, 1-1/2 in. wide; apex taper-pointed; margin tipped with small,
 brownish glands, coarsely serrate; petiole 2 in. long, glabrous,
 reddish-green. Flower-buds long, conical, sharply pointed, free,
 singly on numerous short spurs; flowers showy, 1-3/8 in. across,
 in dense clusters, average 7 buds in a cluster, the petals widely
 separated at the base; pedicels 7/16 in. long, slender, lightly
 pubescent.

 Fruit matures in late September and October; medium in size, 2-7/8
 in. long, 2-1/4 in. wide, obovate-acute-pyriform, symmetrical; stem 1
 in. long, thick; cavity lacking, the flesh drawn up in a symmetrical
 fold about the stem; calyx small, open; lobes separated at the base,
 narrow, acute; basin very shallow, narrow, obtuse, smooth or slightly
 wrinkled; skin thin, tender, smooth; color yellow overlaid with a red
 blush, faintly mottled with golden russet; dots numerous, whitish or
 russet, conspicuous; flesh tinged with yellow, firm, granular, crisp,
 juicy, subacid; quality good. Core small, closed, axile, with meeting
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, conical; seeds long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: DUHAMEL DU MONCEAU]

                          DUHAMEL DU MONCEAU

 =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:114, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
 Am._ 2nd App. 146, fig. 1876. =3.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 118.
 1881.

 _Duhamel's Butterbirne._ =4.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 207. 1889.

 _Duhamel._ =5.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:241. 1903.

The unattractive little fruits of this pear would have small value were
it not for the fact that they are delicious in quality and come into
edible condition late. The fruits are of the type of those of Winter
Nelis, differing in shape somewhat, but are even better in quality and
keep longer. The fruits are further distinguished by a musky taste and
perfume, which make them especially agreeable to those who like rich,
sweet, perfumed pears. The trees, while in no characters remarkable,
are better than most of their orchard associates, and far superior to
the unmanageable trees of Winter Nelis with which this variety must
compete. After a probationary period of a half century in America,
Duhamel du Monceau has not found favor with commercial orchardists,
but pear fanciers value it for its delectable late-keeping fruits.
Nurserymen find the trees rather difficult to grow.

Duhamel du Monceau was obtained from seed by Andre Leroy, the eminent
author and pomologist at Angers, France. In naming the variety, M.
Leroy said that his purpose was to do honor to the memory of the
illustrious professor who filled an important place in pomology, and
who, in giving us the _Traite des arbres fruitiers_ published in
1768, rendered and still renders valuable services to horticulturists.
The original tree began to fruit in 1862 and was cataloged by Leroy
in 1865. The variety seems to have been described first in America by
Downing in 1876.

 Tree vigorous, upright, dense, hardy; trunk stocky; branches thick,
 zigzag, dull brownish-red, covered with ash-gray scarf-skin, marked
 with numerous large lenticels; branchlets very thick, short, with
 short internodes, brownish-red, tinged with green, dull, smooth,
 glabrous, with many conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds long, obtuse, appressed; leaf-scars prominent. Leaves 3
 in. long, 1-7/8 in. wide, long, folded lengthwise with the margins
 curled under, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin entire or coarsely
 crenate; petiole 2 in. long, slender. Flower-buds large, long,
 conical, plump, free, singly on short spurs; blossoms open late;
 flowers 1 in. across, well distributed, averaging 7 buds in a cluster;
 pedicels 1-3/16 in. long, slender, pubescent, pale green.

 Fruit ripe October to November; above medium in size, 3-1/8 in.
 long, 2-1/2 in. wide, uniform in size, roundish-pyriform or at times
 oblong-pyriform, symmetrical, with equal sides; stem 1 in. long,
 slightly curved, thick; cavity lacking, the stem being attached to
 the smooth, flat surface; calyx open; lobes separated at the base,
 short, obtuse or acute; basin shallow, obtuse, gently furrowed,
 small; skin thin, tender, roughened by the russet skin, dull; color
 greenish-yellow overspread with solid russet, or splashed, spotted
 and sprinkled with russet, the cheek often solid russet; dots many,
 small, russet, obscure because of the russet color, slightly raised;
 flesh yellowish-white, granular especially around the core, melting,
 buttery, very juicy, vinous; quality very good. Core variable in size,
 closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical;
 seeds elongated-oval, wide, plump, acute.


[Illustration: EARLY HARVEST]

                             EARLY HARVEST

 =1.= _Neb. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 129. 1890. _2._ Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort.
 Man._ =2=:243. 1903. _Chambers_. =3.= _Horticulturist_ =25=:263, fig.
 1870. =4.= Tilton _Jour. Hort._ =8=:293. 1870. =5.= _Mass. Hort. Soc.
 Rpt._ 157. 1874. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 32. 1875. =7.= Downing _Fr.
 Trees Am._ 3rd App. 174. 1881. =8.= _Can. Hort._ =26=:130. 1903. =9.=
 Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 151, fig. 1914.

The fruits of Early Harvest are so poor in quality and rot at the
core so soon after ripening, that the variety is hardly worth growing
in New York, where there are many better pears of its season. To
offset these defects, the pears are large and handsome for early
fruits, and the trees are healthy and regular and heavy bearers. The
pear is characterized by a thick, fleshy stem and a large closed
core. Nurserymen report that the tree is difficult to propagate, and
fruit-growers find that it is slow in coming in bearing; the growth is
usually straggling and difficult to manage in nursery or orchard. The
variety is more popular in the Middle West than in any other part of
the country.

This variety appears to have been brought to Middletown, Kentucky,
from Maryland by Captain William Chambers about 1800, with several
other varieties. According to the rules of pomological nomenclature,
this pear should be called Chambers as it was first known. The name
Early Harvest was given the variety by Kentucky growers because of its
extreme earliness, and became so closely associated with the variety
that today it is the only one with which the public is familiar. In
1875 this variety was added to the fruit catalog-list of the American
Pomological Society under the name Chambers.

 Tree large, very vigorous, upright-spreading, dense-topped, very
 hardy, productive with age, long-lived; trunk very stocky, shaggy;
 branches thick, shaggy, zigzag, dull reddish-brown mingled with green
 and heavily covered with grayish scarf-skin, marked with numerous,
 large, elongated lenticels; branchlets very thick, straight, long,
 with long internodes, dull olive-green mingled with light brown,
 smooth, glabrous, with numerous very conspicuous, raised lenticels,
 variable in size.

 Leaf-buds small, short, obtuse, appressed; leaf-scars prominent.
 Leaves 3-1/8 in. long, 2-3/8 in. wide; apex very abruptly pointed;
 margin glandless, varying from finely serrate to entire; petiole 1-5/8
 in. long, slender. Flowers open early, showy, 1-1/8 in. across, well
 distributed, average 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1 in. long, thinly
 pubescent.

 Fruit ripens in August; large, 3-1/2 in. long, 3 in. wide,
 obovate-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical; stem very thick, fleshy at
 its juncture with the cavity; cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow, often
 slightly wrinkled and drawn up in fleshy folds around the base of the
 stem; calyx small, open; lobes short, obtuse; basin shallow, narrow,
 obtuse, slightly wrinkled; skin thin, smooth; color pale yellow, more
 or less overspread on the exposed cheek with a pinkish blush, with
 stripes of carmine; dots numerous, small, greenish-russet, obscure;
 flesh yellowish, firm, granular, crisp, somewhat tough, variable in
 juiciness; quality poor. Core large, closed, axile, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube very long, narrow; seeds wide, short, plump,
 obtuse.


[Illustration: EASTER BEURRE]

                             EASTER BEURRE

 =1.= _Pom. Mag._ =2=:78, Pl. 1829. =2.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._
 397. 1831. =3.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 160. 1841. =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees
 Am._ 425, fig. 196. 1845. =5.= _Gard. Chron._ 168, fig. 1845. =6.=
 _Mag. Hort._ =16=:73. 1850. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 157. 1854. =8.=
 _Ibid._ 66. 1862. =9.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 751, fig. 1869. =10.=
 Hogg _Fruit Man._ 572. 1884. =11.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 159,
 figs. 1914.

 _Bergamote de la Pentecote._ =12.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:41, Pl. 1856.

 _Doyenne d'Hiver._ =13.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:43, fig. 28. 1866-73.
 =14.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:72, fig. 1869. =15.= _Guide Prat._ 61,
 265. 1876.

 _Beurre Rouppe._ =16.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:87, fig. 236. 1879.

 _Winter Dechantsbirne._ =17.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 300. 1889. =18.=
 Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 71, Pl. 34. 1894.

The fruit-books of Europe have so much to say in praise of Easter
Beurre that the variety has been tried time and time again in America,
but nearly always with unfavorable results. The variety grows well
only in comparatively warm climates and on light, warm, limy soils, and
refuses to ripen its crop in any others. There are occasional places
in eastern America where Easter Beurre can be well grown, but for most
part it is at home only on the Pacific slope. The fruits are of first
rate excellence when at their best, and add much to the winter supply
of pears, the product of few other winter pears surpassing that of this
sort from January to March in regions where it does well. The pears are
excellent shippers, keep well in common or cold storage, so that where
the variety succeeds it is valuable for home, and distant and foreign
markets. The trees are in every way satisfactory except that they bloom
a little earlier than other sorts, and are somewhat more susceptible
to the scab fungus in both fruit and foliage than a commercial variety
should be. Although a little too susceptible to blight, the trees are
above the average in immunity, and are hardy, vigorous, and productive.
The variety is well worth planting in soils and climates where the crop
matures properly.

In the gardens of the Capucin Monastery at Louvain, Belgium, there
was, about 1823, an old pear tree known to the monks as the _Pastorale
de Louvain_, which attracted the attention of Van Mons. He propagated
the pear and in due course distributed it. By the year 1853, it was
to be found pretty generally in the gardens of Belgium under the name
of _Pastorale_. Since that time it has been very widely disseminated,
but unfortunately has received a confusing variety of names, Leroy
mentioning twenty-four and Mathieu fifty-five. The leading authorities,
however, of England and this country have uniformly adopted the name
Easter Beurre. It was received in the former country soon after its
first dissemination, and it was brought to this country not later than
1837. Since 1862, Easter Beurre has appeared in the list of pears
recommended for general cultivation by the American Pomological Society.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright-spreading, open-topped,
 slow-growing, hardy; branches reddish-brown overspread with gray
 scarf-skin, sprinkled with inconspicuous lenticels; branchlets
 variable in length, with short internodes, greenish-brown mingled with
 red, rough, glabrous, with small, round, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, very short, obtuse, free. Leaves 2-1/8 in. long,
 1-1/8 in. wide, thin; apex abruptly pointed; margin finely serrate,
 the teeth very short, tipped with red; petiole 2 in. long, slender.
 Flower-buds small, short, conical, plump, free, singly on short
 spurs; flowers 1-1/4 in. across, occasionally tinged with pink in the
 bud, becoming white when open, well distributed, average 9 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 3/4 in. long, slender, pubescent.

 Fruit in season late December to February; 3 in. long, 2-3/8 in. wide,
 obovate-pyriform, with a short, thick neck; stem 3/4 in. long, thick,
 woody; cavity acute, very deep, narrow, furrowed, uneven, compressed;
 calyx open; lobes narrow, acute; basin deep, narrow, abrupt, furrowed
 and wrinkled; skin thick, tough, roughened by the dots, the surface
 uneven; color yellow, marked with many russet dots and with patches
 and veinings of russet, often with a dull brownish-red blush; dots
 numerous, small, very conspicuous, russet; flesh tinged with yellow,
 granular near the center and toward the calyx, tender and melting,
 juicy, buttery, sweet, with a rich, pleasant flavor, very aromatic;
 quality very good. Core large, closed, axile, with meeting core-lines;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: ELIZABETH]

                               ELIZABETH

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:57. 1842. =2.= _Ibid._ =13=:63, fig. 6. 1847.
 =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:126, fig. 1869. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._
 23. 1897.

 _Manning's Elizabeth._ =5.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 385. 1845. =6.=
 Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:41, Pl. 1851. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 231. 1854.
 =8.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 810, fig. 1869.

 _Elizabeth de Manning._ =9.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:105, fig. 51.
 1866-73. =10.= _Guide Prat._ 93, 269. 1876.

 _Nina._ =11.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 623. 1884. =12.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._
 258. 1889.

Elizabeth is among the best summer pears for eastern America, either
for home consumption or for the markets. The characters which commend
it are: handsome, well-flavored fruits; and vigorous, hardy, productive
trees, which are as resistant to blight as those of any other European
pear, and which come in bearing early and bear annually. Faults
are: the fruits are small, a fault that can be overcome somewhat by
thinning; they are a little coarse in texture of flesh, which is a
little too gritty; and the flavor, while good for an early pear, is not
as sweet and rich as might be desired. The trees are nearly flawless,
failing, if at all, in not attaining as great size as some other
inhabitants of pear orchards. The crop is often borne in clusters--a
defect by reason of which the fruits are so often small. But even with
these defects, we must end as we began with the statement that this is
one of the best summer pears.

In the year 1819, Van Mons established his famous nursery at Louvain,
Belgium, and in the years 1830 and 1831 he sent from there two
consignments of pear cions to the Massachusetts Horticultural Society,
both of which were unfortunately lost in turn on the way. Three years
later, Kenrick, Manning, and Dearborn, Massachusetts horticulturists,
requested him to forward another collection. In the successive springs
of 1835 and 1836, he sent two more collections which safely arrived
in due course, though a large proportion of the cions died. These
collections comprised originally about 150 named and 100 seedling
unnamed varieties, and Van Mons granted Manning permission to name
any of the latter that might prove worthy of cultivation. No. 154 of
these, Mr. Manning[28] named _Elizabeth_ (_Van Mons_). Later on it
was disseminated as _Manning's Elizabeth_, and soon after the name
was shortened to i. The variety was placed in the fruit-list of the
American Pomological Society in 1854.

 Tree small, upright, dense-topped, hardy, very productive; trunk
 slender; branches brownish-green, partly overspread with thin, gray
 scarf-skin, marked by conspicuous, oval lenticels; branchlets slender,
 long, reddish-brown mingled with green, new growth exceptionally red,
 dull, smooth, glabrous except on the younger wood, with obscure,
 raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, plump, free. Leaves 3 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide, stiff; apex variable; margin almost entire; petiole
 2 in. long, slender, reddish-green; stipules very small and slender
 when present. Flower-buds small, short, conical, plump, free, singly
 on short spurs; flowers early, showy, 1-5/8 in. across, in dense
 clusters, average 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1 in. long, lightly
 pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late August; small, 2-3/8 in. long, 2-1/2 in. wide,
 obovate-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical, uniform; stem 1 in. long,
 thick, curved; cavity acuminate, shallow, narrow, symmetrical, often
 lipped; calyx large, almost closed; lobes separated at the base,
 short, narrow, acuminate; basin shallow, obtuse, gently furrowed and
 wrinkled; skin tough, characteristically rough, glossy; color bright
 yellow, with a lively, red cheek, mottled with brownish, minute
 specks; dots numerous, very small, conspicuous, russet or brown;
 flesh tinged with yellow, slightly granular under the skin, strongly
 granular at the center, tender and melting, very juicy, sweet, vinous,
 aromatic; quality very good. Core large, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds wide, plump, acute.


[Illustration: FLEMISH BEAUTY]

                            FLEMISH BEAUTY

 =1.= _Pom. Mag._ =3=:128, Pl. 1830. =2.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._
 373. 1831. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 386, fig. 167. 1845. =4.=
 _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr. Gr._ 51. 1848. =5.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:51, Pl.
 1851. =6.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 760, fig. 1869. =7.= Hogg _Fruit
 Man._ 578. 1884.

 _Belle de Flanders._ =8.= _Kenrick Am. Orch._ 172. 1832.

 _Fondante des Bois._ =9.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:41, Pl. 1858. =10.=
 _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 25, Pl. 25, 1863. =11.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:
 Pt. 2, 55, fig. 124. 1866-73. =12.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:166, fig.
 1869. =13.= _Guide Prat._ 58, 272. 1876. =14.= _Soc. Nat. Hort. France
 Pom._ 412, fig. 1904.

 _Holzfarbige Butterbirne._ =15.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 235. 1889. =16.=
 Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 49, Pl. 38. 1894.

At one time Flemish Beauty was a leading commercial variety in the
pear regions of eastern America, but it has been supplanted by other
varieties because the toll of blighted trees is too great, and the
fruits are too often disfigured by the scab fungus. Perhaps the latter
is the greater fault as in some seasons no applications of spray give
the pears a clean cheek, and they are blackened, scabbed, cracked and
malformed with this fungus. Not infrequently the scab-infected foliage
drops before the crop matures. To offset these defects, the trees
have to their credit great vigor, unusual fruitfulness and as great
hardihood to cold as those of any other variety. The trees do not come
in bearing early, and are not suitable for dwarfing as they overgrow
the quince stock. The fruits are nearly perfect if scab-free and
properly matured. To make sure of perfect maturity, the pears must be
picked as soon as they attain full size and be permitted to ripen under
cover. So treated, a bright-cheeked Flemish Beauty is as handsome as
any pear, and is almost unapproachable in quality; the flavor is nicely
balanced between sweetness and sourness, very rich, and has a pleasing
muskiness. Blight and scab condemn tree and fruit for commercial
orchards, but a lover of good pears should combat these troubles for
the sake of the choice fruits.

The parent tree of this variety is said to have been a wilding found
in a wood near Alost, East Flanders, Belgium, about the beginning of
the nineteenth century. It was cultivated under the Flemish name of
_Bosc Peer_ or _Pear of the Woods_. About 1810, the propagation of
the variety was taken up by Van Mons who introduced it a few years
later under the name _Fondante des Bois_ by which name it was known in
Europe for many years. Lindley, writing in 1831, described this variety
under the name _Flemish Beauty_, and it appeared then to be in pretty
general cultivation in England. Styling it _Barnard_, Hovey wrote, in
1851, that Flemish Beauty "had been known in Dorchester, Massachusetts,
for nearly twenty years," so that it is to be inferred that the variety
was introduced to this country prior to 1830 and possibly by some
one by the name of Barnard. The rapid distribution of this pear was
promoted by Van Mons who gave numerous grafts of it to his friends
and correspondents. The fact that the variety has over sixty synonyms
may be taken as some testimony to its popularity and excellence. At
the first meeting of the American Pomological Society held in 1848,
Flemish Beauty was placed in the list of pears recommended for general
cultivation, a place it has since retained.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, spreading, with drooping branches,
 hardy, productive; trunk smooth; branches thick, shaggy, bright
 reddish-brown, with dull gray scarf-skin, large lenticels; branchlets
 thick, short, with short internodes, reddish-brown, smooth, glabrous,
 with many large, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, long, obtuse, pointed, nearly free; leaf-scars
 prominent. Leaves 3-1/2 in. long, 1-3/4 in. wide, oval, thick,
 leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate; petiole 2
 in. long, usually slender. Flower-buds very large, long, conical
 or pointed, very plump, free; flowers 1-1/4 in. across, in dense
 clusters, usually 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/4 in. long,
 slender, slightly pubescent, light green.

 Fruit ripe in late September and early October; large, nearly 2-3/4
 in. long, 2-1/2 in. wide, uniform in size and shape, roundish or
 obovate-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical, with nearly equal sides; stem
 1-1/8 in. long, thick; cavity acute, shallow to deep, narrow, slightly
 russeted, a little furrowed; calyx open; lobes partly separated at
 the base, short, obtuse; basin shallow, narrow, abrupt, symmetrical;
 skin thick, tough, roughish, dull; color clear yellow, overspread
 on the exposed cheek with a dotted and marbled red blush; dots
 numerous, russet, small, conspicuous; flesh yellowish-white, firm,
 becoming melting and tender, granular, juicy, sweet, aromatic, with
 a slight musky flavor; quality very good. Core closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds rather long, plump,
 acute.


                           FONDANTE DE NOEL

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =21=:267, fig. 9. 1855. =2.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_
 =7=:67, Pl. 1859. =3.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 14, Pl. 14. 1863. =4.=
 Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:65, fig. 39. 1866-73. =5.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
 764. 1869. =6.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 580. 1884.

 _Belle apres Noel._ =7.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:459. 1855.

 _Weihnachtsbirne._ =8.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:62. 1856. =9.=
 Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 296. 1889.

 _Belle de Noel._ =10.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:209, fig. 1867.

It is doubtful whether this rather rare European pear can be purchased
from American nurserymen now, but possibly it may be had, and at least
it could be re-propagated from old trees. The fruit is distinguished by
its trim, top-shaped form and handsome coat, usually enlivened with a
dull color on the sunny side. The flesh, while gritty near the core,
is tender, juicy, buttery, very rich, sweet, and aromatic. It is just
the pear for those who prefer sweetness to vinousness or piquancy, and
who object to even a trace of astringency. The trees, while only medium
in size, are vigorous, hardy, healthy, and productive. If the variety
grows elsewhere as well as it does on the grounds of the New York
Agricultural Experiment Station it is too good to be lost. The fruits
are in season and at their best for Christmas.

This pear was raised from seed by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Belgium.
The tree fruited first in 1842 and was given the name _Fondante de
Noel_ to indicate the day on which it was tasted for the first time.
In 1862 a pear called _Souvenir d'Esperen_, attributed to seed grown
by Berckmans, a noted Belgian horticulturist living in the United
States, was put forth, but after examination there did not appear to
be any difference in either the fruit or the wood of this tree from
that of the variety grown by Major Esperen. Because the name _Souvenir
d'Esperen_ appears in connection with _Fondante de Noel_, the variety
has been confused with another pear which was raised by Major Esperen
and named _Souvenir d'Esperen_. The two, however, are entirely distinct
and the last-named sort has long been known and is still found growing
in certain pear orchards of the eastern United States.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, upright, hardy, productive; trunk
 thick, smooth; branches brownish-green, nearly covered with gray
 scarf-skin; branchlets slender, with long internodes, smooth,
 glabrous, marked with conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, long, conical, plump, free. Leaves 3-1/2 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide; apex taper-pointed; margin glandless, finely serrate;
 petiole 2-7/8 in. long. Flower-buds large, long, plump, free, singly
 on short spurs; flowers showy, 1-1/2 in. across, white often tinged
 pink on the edges of the petals, average 9 buds in a cluster; pedicels
 7/8 in. long.

 Fruit matures December to January; large, 2-1/2 in. long, 2-3/4 in.
 wide, roundish-turbinate, irregular; stem 3/4 in. long, thick, woody,
 obliquely set; cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow, furrowed, often lipped;
 calyx small, nearly closed; basin narrow, obtuse, furrowed; skin
 roughened by russet dots and patches; color dull greenish-yellow, with
 many dots, flecks and patches of russet, often with a faint trace of
 brownish-red on the sunny side; dots numerous, small, russet, rather
 conspicuous; flesh white, gritty only near the core, tender, buttery,
 juicy, sweet, highly aromatic; quality good to very good; core large,
 with meeting core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide; seeds large, long,
 plump, acute.


[Illustration: FONTENAY]

                               FONTENAY

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 38. 1883.

 _Jalousie de Fontenay Vendee._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 396, fig.
 173. 1845. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68. 1862.

 _Belle de Esquermes._ =4.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:135. 1854.

 _Jalousie de Fontenay._ =5.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 44, Pl. 44. 1863.
 =6.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 303. 1866. =7.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 2,
 157, fig. 175. 1866-73. =8.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:295, fig. 1869.
 =9.= _Guide Prat._ 64, 281. 1876.

 _Birn von Fontenay._ =10.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 215. 1889. =11.= Lucas
 _Tafelbirnen_ 87, fig. 1894.

The reader will discover no noteworthy characters in the description
of this pear; nor does the accompanying illustration make the variety
particularly alluring, although the color-plate scarcely does the
fruits justice in either size or color. The variety is to be found in
many old orchards in eastern America, but was long since relegated by
pear-growers to the limbo of nurserymen's catalogs. The only reason
for giving it a place in _The Pears of New York_ is that the variety
was once prominent, and references to it and comparisons with it are
so common in horticultural literature that pear-growers are certain to
want to know something about it. As the following description shows,
the variety is but mediocre in tree and fruit.

Early in the eighteenth century M. Leveque, an architect, acquired
possession of an estate near Fontenay, France. A number of pear
seedlings were growing upon this property, one of which was so good as
to attract M. Leveque's attention and he began propagating it in 1828.
Later he distributed cions of the variety to his friends under the name
_Poire de Fontenay_. Soon afterward the name was changed to _Jalousie
de Fontenay_, Leroy took the variety to the garden of the Horticultural
Society of Angers about 1835, from which place it was still more
widely disseminated. It soon found its way to America where it gained
early popularity. In 1862 the American Pomological Society listed this
variety in its fruit-catalog under the name _Jalousie de Fontenay_, but
shortened the name, in 1883, to _Fontenay_. In 1899, however, the name
disappeared from this catalog and has never been replaced.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright, dense-topped, hardy; trunk
 slender, smooth; branches slender, brown mingled with green, partly
 covered with thin, gray scarf-skin; branchlets thick, long, with
 short internodes, light brownish-green, faintly tinged with red,
 dull, the new growth pubescent near the ends, smooth, with numerous,
 conspicuous, small, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds very small, short, sharply pointed, free; leaf-scars with
 large, prominent shoulders. Leaves 3 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, very
 thick; apex taper-pointed; margin almost glandless, finely serrate;
 petiole 2 in. long, variable in size, glabrous; stipules very slender,
 tinged red. Flower-buds small, short, conical, free, singly on
 very short spurs; flowers late, showy, 1-3/4 in. across, in dense
 clusters, average 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 5/8 in. long, lightly
 pubescent.

 Fruit matures in October; small, 2-5/8 in. long, 2 in. wide,
 oblong-acute-pyriform, symmetrical, with equal sides; stem 3/4 in.
 long, curved; cavity lacking, the flesh folded around the base of
 the stem, often lipped; calyx partly open; lobes broad, acute; basin
 shallow, narrow, obtuse, slightly wrinkled, symmetrical; skin thick,
 tough, smooth; color dull yellowish-green, netted and patched with
 russet, with a tinge of red on the exposed cheek; dots numerous,
 small, russet, obscure; flesh strongly granular at the center,
 tender and melting, very juicy, subacid; quality good. Core large,
 closed, axile, with meeting core-lines; calyx-tube short, narrow,
 funnel-shaped; carpels emarginate; seeds large, wide, long, plump,
 acute.


                                FORELLE

 =1.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =5=:408, Pl. XVII. 1824. =2.= _Pom.
 Mag._ =3=:112, Pl. 1830. =3.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 399, 1831.
 =4.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:130. 1831. =5.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
 389, fig. 169. 1845. =6.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:339, fig. 27. 1847. =7.=
 Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 765. 1869. =8.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:183,
 figs. 1869. =9.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:115, fig. 58. 1872.

 _Forellenbirne._ =10.= Christ _Handb._ 514. 1817. =11.= Dochnahl
 _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:12. 1856. =12.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No.
 23, Pl. 23. 1882.

 _Florelle._ =13.= Prince _Treat. Hort._ 13. 1828.

 _Trout Pear._ =14.= _Gard. Chron._ 804, fig. 1846.

The pear fancier prizes Forelle for its singularly handsome and
distinctive fruits, which are also of very good quality. Forelle
pleases the eye as well as any pear for bright colors, and is
distinguished among fruits of its kind by its trout-like specklings
from which comes the name _Forelle_, the German name for trout. Looks
do not belie taste for the flesh is delicate and buttery, is highly
flavored, and satisfies those who regard high quality a prime requisite
in a pear. The trees are very satisfactory in warm soils and exposures,
but fail in heavy clays and cold climates. The variety is worth growing
for its beautiful and distinctive fruits.

Nothing is very certainly known of the origin of this pear, but it
seems highly probable that it had its birth in northern Saxony at
the beginning of the eighteenth century. From Germany it was taken
to Flanders, and from there introduced into England. In the latter
country, it was first fruited by Thomas Andrew Knight, President of
the Horticultural Society of London, who, in 1823, sent cions to the
Honorable John Lowell, President of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society. Forelle became quite widely disseminated in the eastern
United States during the first half of the eighteenth century, and was
considered by many pomologists a pear of merit. At the present time,
however, the variety has almost disappeared from cultivation. Its place
has been filled by Vermont Beauty, a pear introduced from Vermont more
than forty years ago. It is not improbable that these two varieties are
identical. Vermont Beauty may be the old German pear renamed.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright, very hardy and very
 productive; branches few, dark brownish-red, sprinkled with numerous
 lenticels; branchlets long, pubescent on the youngest shoots. Leaves
 small, flat, roundish-ovate; flowers open early.

 Fruit ripens November to December; medium in size, 3 in. long, 2 in.
 wide, oblong-obovate-pyriform, with a neck variable in length; stem
 1 in. long, slender; cavity shallow, oblique, narrow, often lipped;
 calyx small, open; lobes broad; basin shallow, narrow, abrupt; skin
 smooth; color yellow, more or less overlaid with red, deepening to
 rich crimson next to the sun, profusely covered with grayish-russet
 dots which are margined or rayed with crimson; dots numerous, large
 and small, russet or grayish; flesh white, fine-grained, although
 slightly granular at the center, melting, buttery, juicy, aromatic,
 with a rich, vinous flavor; quality good. Core medium in size; seeds
 nearly black, of medium size.


                                  FOX

 =1.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:245. 1903. =2.= Ragan _Nom.
 Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:123. 1908. _B. S. Fox._ =3.= Downing _Fr.
 Trees Am._ 2nd App. 154. 1876. =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 42, fig.
 1877. =5.= _Gard. Mon._ =22=:369. 1880. =6.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._
 170. 1883.

Fox seems to have failed in the pear-growing regions of America,
in spite of its having several excellent characters in both fruit
and tree. The fruits are not quite attractive enough to sell on the
markets or to grace the table of the amateur, their rough, russet skins
detracting greatly from their appearance. When the skin is removed,
however, a better late fall pear cannot be found. The flesh is white,
fine in texture, very juicy, melting, and has a brisk, vinous flavor
and a pleasant aromatic smell and taste that at once place the quality
very high. The trees are but mediocre in the prime characters of a good
orchard plant, and condemn the variety for any purpose other than the
collector's plantation.

Fox is one of many seedlings originated by B. S. Fox,[29] San Jose,
California. Most of these seedlings were raised from seed of Belle
Lucrative and Fox is among this number. The exact date of origin
cannot be determined, but it is assumed to have been in the early
seventies. The variety is considered to be one of the best of Fox's
seedlings.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, upright-spreading, round-topped,
 moderately productive; trunk slender; branches stocky, smooth,
 greenish-brown overspread with grayish scarf-skin; branchlets thick,
 short, with short internodes, zigzag, glabrous, sprinkled with small,
 raised lenticels. Leaf-buds long, obtuse, pointed, free. Leaves 2-1/8
 in. long, 1-1/4 in. wide, thick; apex abruptly pointed; margin nearly
 entire to finely serrate. Flower-buds conical, pointed, free; flowers
 open early.

 Fruit ripens October to November; large, 3-1/8 in. long, 2-1/8 in.
 wide, oblong-obovate-pyriform; stem 1-1/2 in. long, very thick,
 curved, obliquely set; cavity very shallow or lacking, the flesh
 folded up around the base of the stem; calyx closed or slightly open,
 variable in size; lobes much separated at the base, short, broad,
 acute; basin shallow, narrow, very small, furrowed and compressed;
 skin thick, granular, tough, roughened by the russet dots; color
 russet-yellow, often with a russet-red blush on the side next to
 the sun, almost entirely overspread with russet; dots numerous,
 conspicuous, russet; flesh white, granular near the core, melting,
 very juicy, sweet mingled with a brisk, vinous flavor, richly
 aromatic; quality very good. Core large, closed; calyx-tube short,
 wide; seeds wide, plump, acute.


[Illustration: FREDERICK CLAPP]

                            FREDERICK CLAPP

 =1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 2nd App. 148, fig. 1876. =2.= _Mass.
 Hort. Soc. Rpt._ Pt. II, 94. 1876. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 34. 1877.
 =4.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:245. 1903.

 _Clapp No. 22._ =5.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 90. 1872. =6.= _Ibid._
 Pt. II, 153. 1874. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 38, 66, 119. 1875.

Frederick Clapp has a place on the pear list, because it is one
of the few good varieties with acidulous fruits. The refreshing,
piquant flavor, the tender, melting, very juicy flesh, and the bright
lemon-yellow color with only a trace of red give sufficient charm
and character to the fruits to make the variety desirable in every
collection of good pears. The fruits come in season with those of
Beurre Superfin, and surpass them in quality at least. The trees are
vigorous and healthy and form open, shapely, wide-spreading heads
that commend them for orchard management. They grow with rapidity and
vigor, come in bearing early, and are unusually fruitful. The variety
is seldom planted in commercial orchards, but it has a welcome place in
every home orchard fortunate enough to have it.

This pear was raised about 1870 by Lemuel Clapp, Dorchester,
Massachusetts, brother of Frederick and Thaddeus Clapp, all of whom
were the producers of large numbers of pear seedlings, several of which
have been named. In all probability this variety is a cross between
Urbaniste and Beurre Superfin. At various exhibitions and meetings of
the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in the years 1872, 1874, 1875,
and 1876 it was shown and favorably reported on, and in 1875 received
high praise in a report of the Massachusetts State Fruit Committee
to the American Pomological Society. In 1877 the latter Society
added Frederick Clapp to its list of fruits recommended for general
cultivation.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright-spreading, with open top, hardy; trunk
 thick, shaggy; branches stocky, shaggy, zigzag, dull reddish-brown,
 overspread with thick ash-gray scarf-skin, marked with many small
 lenticels; branchlets thick, dull reddish-brown, tinged with green,
 smooth except for the lenticels, glabrous, with many small, raised
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical or pointed, plump, usually free.
 Leaves 3 in. long, 1-3/4 in. wide, ovate, stiff; apex taper-pointed;
 margin finely serrate, tipped with very fine, sharp-pointed,
 reddish-brown glands; petiole 1-1/2 in. long, slender, glabrous.
 Flower-buds small, short, conical, plump, free; flowers cup-shaped,
 often with a disagreeable odor, 1 in. wide, averaging 9 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 1 in. long, thick, pubescent, pale green.

 Fruit ripe in October; medium in size, more than 2 in. long, 2-3/8
 in. wide, variable in size, roundish or obovate, irregular in shape;
 stem 3/4 in. long, thick; cavity variable in outline and smoothness,
 often with a fleshy fold drawn up around the base of the stem; calyx
 open; lobes short, broad, obtuse; basin deep, wide, abrupt, usually
 smooth, symmetrical; skin thin, tender, smooth; color lemon-yellow,
 often marked with flecks and mottlings of russet; dots numerous,
 small, russet, obscure; flesh with a very faint tinge of yellow,
 fine, tender, melting, characteristically juicy, sweet, with a rich
 sprightliness; quality very good. Core closed, axile, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube very short, wide, broadly conical; carpels
 obovate; seeds large, wide, long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: GANSEL SECKEL]

                             GANSEL SECKEL

 =1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 502. 1857. =2.= _Ibid._ 770. 1869.

 _Gansel-Seckle._ =3.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =20=:30, fig. 1871. =4.=
 Hogg _Fruit Man._ 585. 1884. =5.= _Jour. Hort._ 3rd Ser. =23=:464.
 1891. =6.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 177. 1920.

There are no good reasons why this pear should be grown, it having
received much more attention than it deserves during the half century
it has been in America. Perhaps it suffices to say that the fruits and
trees are in no way equal, except in size of fruit, to those of Seckel,
with which variety it would compete, although the crop ripens a little
later. While the pears are larger than those of Seckel, the yield is
not as great as the trees do not bear as regularly, nor abundantly.
The fruits are not as well flavored, nor as attractively colored. The
variety is still offered by many nurserymen, most of whom, however,
condemn it with faint praise.

According to Bunyard, Gansel Seckel was raised from seed a century ago
by a Mr. Williams of Pitmaston, Worcester, England. It was obtained by
crossing Seckel with Gansel Bergamot, whence its name.

Tree medium in size and vigor, upright-spreading, variable in yield;
branches slender, zigzag, sprinkled with numerous lenticels; branchlets
thick, light reddish-brown mingled with green, smooth, glabrous, with
small, roundish, raised, conspicuous lenticels. Leaf-buds small,
short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 2-1/4 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide; apex
taper-pointed; margin tipped with few reddish glands, coarsely serrate;
petiole 1-1/4 in. long. Flower-buds small, short, conical, plump, free;
flowers open early, 1-1/4 in. across; pedicels 1/2 in. long.

Fruit ripens in late October and November; small to medium, 2-1/2
in. long, 2-3/8 in. wide, irregular, oblate-pyriform; stem 3/4 in.
long, stout; cavity variable in width, shallow, irregular; calyx
small, closed; lobes erect, acute; basin variable in width, deep; skin
roughened with russet, uneven; color pale yellow, overspread with thin
cinnamon-russet, sometimes faintly blushed on the exposed cheek; dots
distinct, cinnamon-russet; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, melting,
buttery, juicy, highly aromatic, with a rich perfume, sweet, but
without the spicy flavor of the Seckel; quality very good.


                                GARBER

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 48. 1891. =2.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._
 =2=:247. 1903. =3.= _Chico Nur. Cat._ 12. 1904. =4.= _Cornell Sta.
 Bul._ =332=:481. 1913.

 _Garber's Hybrid._ =5.= Black _Cult. Peach and Pear_ 229, 242. 1886.
 =6.= Harcourt _Fla. Fruits_ 255. 1886. =7.= Hood Cat. 25. 1905.

A few trivial differences separate Garber from Kieffer--the fruits of
both are poor. The pears ripen a week or two earlier than those of
Kieffer, are a little rounder, flatter at the ends, and some say are
a little better in quality--certainly they are no worse to eat out of
hand. The tree is hardy to heat and cold, and is much planted in the
southern states, and in the Mississippi Valley, North and South. The
variety might be sparingly planted in New York as an ornamental.

Garber is one of many seedlings of the Chinese Sand pear, raised by J.
B. Garber, Columbia, Pennsylvania, sometime previous to 1880. It is
supposed to be of hybrid origin. The variety was added to the American
Pomological Society's list of recommended fruits in 1891 where it has
since remained.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright-spreading, hardy, productive
 with age; branches smooth, zigzag, reddish-brown partly covered
 with grayish scarf-skin; branchlets thick, with long internodes,
 smooth, glabrous, sprinkled with small, round, very conspicuous,
 raised lenticels. Leaf-buds small, short, pointed and with curved
 tips, appressed. Leaves 3-1/2 in. long, 2-1/4 in. wide, thick; apex
 taper-pointed; margin with very minute and reddish tips, finely
 serrate; petiole 2-1/4 in. long, thick. Flower-buds small, conical,
 sharply pointed, free.

 Fruit ripe September to October; large, usually roundish-oblong and
 tapering toward both ends; stem 1 in. long, stout, obliquely set;
 cavity small, narrow, often deep and furrowed; calyx variable in size,
 partly open; lobes slender; basin broad, abrupt, deep, furrowed;
 color pale yellow, often with a brownish-red blush on the exposed
 cheek; dots small, numerous, russet; flesh white, granular, crisp but
 tender, juicy, neither sweet nor sour but with a peculiar, pleasant
 flavor; quality inferior.


[Illustration: GLOU MORCEAU]

                             GLOU MORCEAU

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =21=:143. 1855. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 503.
 1857. =3.= _Ibid._ 773. 1869. =4.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 586. 1884. =5.=
 _Jour. Hort._ 3rd Ser. =14=:203. 1887. =6.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._
 178. 1920.

 _Gloux Morceau._ =7.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ 2nd App. =5=:6. 1824.
 =8.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 194. 1832.

 _Hardenpont's Winter Butterbirne._ =9.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 104.
 1825. =10.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:99. 1856. =11.= Lauche
 _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 11, Pl. 11. 1882. =12.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._
 231. 1889.

 _Glout Morceau._ =13.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 400. 1831. =14.=
 _Gard. Chron._ 716, fig. 1. 1844. =15.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 437,
 fig. 201. 1845. =16.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:5, Pl. 1851. =17.= Elliott
 _Fr. Book_ 325. 1854. =18.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68. 1862.

 _Beurre d'Hardenpont._ =19.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 12, Pl. 12. 1863.
 =20.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:5, fig. i. 1866-73. =21.= _Guide Prat._ 60,
 246. 1876. =22.= _Soc. Nat. Hort. France Pom._ 370, fig. 1904.

 _Beurre d'Arenberg._ =23.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:301, fig. 1867.

This old winter pear is nearly lost to cultivation, but is worth
growing because of the high quality of the fruit and because the
pear comes in season in early winter when there are few others. The
pears are not attractively colored, although in this character the
illustration does not do the fruit justice. The fruits are rich and
sugary without the least trace of acid, but when poorly grown are
often astringent. All agree that the quality is better in fruit from
dwarf trees in which form the variety grows very well; and that it is
better, also, when grown on heavy soils than on light ones. The fruits
keep and ship remarkably well. The trees are neither very large nor
vigorous, but are usually productive. The variety is in disrepute in
many localities because the crop does not always ripen well.

The Abbe of Mons, M. Hardenpont, a pioneer in pear-raising and a worthy
forerunner of Van Mons, raised this pear from seed about 1750 in his
garden at Mons, Belgium. The variety was introduced into France in
1806 by Louis Noisette, who had found it in the gardens of the Duc
d'Arenberg. In France it was known, therefore, as _Beurre d'Arenberg_,
and consequently became much confused with the true _Beurre d'Arenberg_
raised by Monseigneur Deschamps. In order to overcome this confusion
the name of the variety raised by M. Hardenpont was changed by a number
of prominent Frenchmen to Beurre d'Hardenpont, but the variety has
always been grown under both names in France. In 1820, M. Parmentier
of Enghien, Belgium, sent this pear to England under the name _Glou
Morceau_. (Glou, in the Walloon language, meaning _delicious_ or
_dainty_; morceau, French, _morsel_ or _bit_; hence, the translation
may be Delicious Morsel or Dainty Bit.) _Glou Morceau_ has long been
the popular name of the variety in England and America although, as
Bunyard says, "It is regrettable that the memory of the pioneer of
Pear raising, l'Abbe Hardenpont, is not commemorated in this fruit."
Glou Morceau was brought to America within a few years after its
introduction in England and rapidly found favor here as attested by
leading American pomologists. In 1862 the American Pomological Society
added the variety to its catalog-list of fruits under the name _Glou
Morceau_ as it has since remained.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, spreading, dense-topped, rapid-growing,
 productive; trunk stocky; branches thick, reddish-brown, nearly
 covered with gray scarf-skin, marked with numerous large lenticels;
 branchlets slender, short, light greenish-brown, overspread with gray
 scarf-skin, smooth, glabrous, with numerous, small, conspicuous,
 raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, very short, pointed, plump, appressed. Leaves 2-3/4
 in. long, 1-3/4 in. wide, thick, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin
 occasionally with very few, small glands, coarsely or finely serrate;
 petiole 2 in. long, thick, glabrous, greenish. Flower-buds small,
 short, conical, plump, free, singly on very short spurs; flowers late,
 showy, 1-1/4 in. across, in dense clusters, 8 to 11 buds in a cluster;
 pedicels 7/8 in. long, pubescent.

 Fruit matures November to December; large, 3-1/8 in. long, 2-3/4 in.
 wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, irregular, sides unequal, somewhat
 ribbed; stem 7/8 in. long, thick and woody, curved; cavity deep,
 narrow, russeted, deeply furrowed, compressed, lipped; _calyx_ open;
 lobes long, narrow, acute; basin deep, smooth, broadly furrowed;
 skin tender, very gritty, dull, roughened by russet; color pale
 greenish-yellow, covered with large and small patches and mottlings of
 light russet; dots numerous, small, conspicuous, light russet; flesh
 tinged with yellow, fine-grained except near the core and under the
 skin, tender, buttery, sweet, with a rich, pleasant, aromatic flavor,
 astringent near the skin; quality good to very good. Core closed,
 axile, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, broad, conical;
 seeds large, wide, long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: GUYOT]

                                 GUYOT

 =1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear_, _B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:139. 1908.

 _Dr. Jules Guyot._ =2.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 71, Pl. 71.
 1883. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 562. 1884. =4.= _Ga. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 54.
 1892. =5.= _Garden_ 52:248. 1897. =6.= _Deut. Obstsorten_ =5=: Pt. 5,
 Pl. 1906. =7.= _Garden_ =73=:564, fig. 1909.

 _Docteur Jules Guyot._ =8.= Lucas _Tafelbirnen_ 73, fig. 1894. =9.=
 _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 234. 1906.

The fruits of Guyot bear strong resemblance to those of Bartlett, but
differ in being larger and rather more handsomely colored, ripen a
little earlier, have coarser flesh, and are very differently flavored.
The product can seldom compete with that of Bartlett, or even with
that of Clapp Favorite with which it ripens, because its season is
exceedingly transitory. Unless picked quite green and ripened indoors,
the pears rot at the center, and even when ripened under the best
conditions quickly become mealy and insipid. Taken at the proper
moment, the pears are better flavored than those of Bartlett, as they
are richer and have a more delicate taste and perfume than the musky
fruits of Bartlett. The trees are quite as satisfactory as those of
Bartlett, unless, possibly, they fall short somewhat in productiveness.
The variety is well worth planting in collections for its early,
handsome, well-flavored fruits.

Guyot was raised in the nurseries of the Baltet Brothers, Troyes,
France, about 1870. Within the next decade it was quite widely
distributed in France and England where it has since been esteemed as a
pear of the Bartlett type. It was first brought to America about 1885.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright, hardy, productive, a regular
 bearer; branches brownish, overlaid with thick scarf-skin, marked by
 small, round, indistinct lenticels; branchlets slender, very long,
 curved, with long internodes, reddish-brown mingled with green,
 smooth, glabrous, sprinkled with raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, very short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 2-7/8 in.
 long, 1-3/4 in. wide; apex taper-pointed; margin glandular, variable
 in serration; petiole 2 in. long, thick, reddish-green. Flower-buds
 small, short, conical, plump, free, singly on very short spurs;
 flowers open late, showy, 1-1/4 in. across, in dense clusters, from 5
 to 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 7/8 in. long, pubescent.

 Fruit ripens in early September; large, 3-1/4 in. long, 2-5/8 in.
 wide, oblong-obtuse-pyriform, irregular, with unequal sides; stem
 1-1/4 in. long, thick, curved; cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow,
 slightly russeted, drawn up on one side of the stem in a prominent
 lip; calyx large, open; lobes separated at the base, short, broad,
 acute; basin shallow, narrow, obtuse, furrowed; skin very thin,
 tender, roughish; color yellow, more or less mottled and with traces
 of russet, with a red blush on the exposed cheek; dots numerous,
 small, russet, conspicuous; flesh yellowish-white, granular, tender,
 moderately juicy, sweet mingled with sprightliness, aromatic; quality
 good. Core closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide,
 conical; seeds large, long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: HOWELL]

                                HOWELL

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =15=:69, fig. 12. 1849. =2.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:75,
 Pl. 1851. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 210. 1856. =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees
 Am._ 510, fig. 1857. =5.= Hoffy _N. Am. Pom._ =1=: Pl. 1860. =6.=
 _Pom. France_ 3: No. 105, Pl. 105. 1865.

 _Howell's Seedling._ =7.= _Mag. Hort._ =14=:519. 1848.

Howell is everywhere condemned by faint praise. The variety is a little
too good to be discarded and not quite good enough to be generally
recommended. Its characters in tree and fruit are faulty by reason
of their mediocrity. After having said that the trees are not above
the average in vigor, healthfulness, hardiness, and fruitfulness, it
remains only to be said that their spreading tops make them desirable
orchard inhabitants and handsome dooryard ornamentals. The fruits
cannot be praised for attractive appearance or good quality, but they
are preeminently meritorious in that they are probably more often
uniform in appearance, quality, and freedom from the ravages of the
scab fungus than those of almost any other pear. These qualities make
Howell a most estimable variety for the home orchard where intensive
care cannot be given. The variety further commends itself to amateur
growers, because the trees bear early, annually, and abundantly. Howell
seems to be better suited to the middle western states than to the
eastern states.

In 1829 or 1830, Thomas Howell, New Haven, Connecticut, planted in his
garden seeds from a variety of pear known locally as the Jonah, a hard
and tough winter sort which seldom matures sufficiently to be regarded
as a dessert fruit. One of the trees resulting from these seeds came
into bearing in 1842 or 1843. Specimens were exhibited in Faneuil Hall
by the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1848 and were considered
to be "of the first class and worthy of cultivation in every place
where the soil and climate are congenial." In 1856, the Howell pear was
recommended for general cultivation by the American Pomological Society.

 Tree large, vigorous, spreading, open-topped; trunk thick; branches
 stocky, reddish-brown, overspread with gray scarf-skin, with few
 small lenticels; branchlets thick, short, dull reddish-brown, smooth,
 glabrous, with a few large, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, long, conical, free. Leaves 2 in. long, 1-1/8 in.
 wide, oval, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate,
 hairy, tipped with very minute glands; petiole 1-1/2 in. long.
 Flower-buds large, long, conical, rather plump, free; flowers open
 early, 1-3/8 in. across, in dense clusters, from 7 to 15 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 1-1/16 in. long, pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit ripe in late September and October; medium in size, 2-3/8 in.
 long, 2-1/4 in. wide, uniform in size and shape, round-obovate,
 symmetrical; stem 1 in. long, thick, straight; cavity obtuse, very
 shallow and narrow, often with almost no cavity, smooth, symmetrical;
 calyx open, small; lobes separated at the base, short, narrow, obtuse;
 basin obtuse, slightly furrowed, nearly symmetrical; skin smooth,
 dull; color pale lemon-yellow, marked on the side exposed to the sun
 with a trace of blush and with patches and tracings of russet; dots
 many, small, russet, very conspicuous; flesh yellowish-white, firm but
 tender, granular, melting, very juicy, sweet, with a rich, somewhat
 brisk, almost vinous flavor, aromatic; quality very good. Core rather
 large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide,
 conical; seeds long, plump, acute, frequently abortive.


[Illustration: IDAHO]

                                 IDAHO

 =1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._ 572, Pl. II. 1888. =2.= _Can. Hort._ =12=:2,
 fig. 1, Pl. 1889. =3.= Wickson _Cal. Fruits_ 341. 1889. =4.= Thomas
 _Am. Fruit Cult._ 477, fig. 691. 1897. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36.
 1899. =6.= _Rev. Hort._ 60. 1901. =7.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._
 =2=:249. 1903.

There is much difference of opinion as to the value of Idaho in
America. Without question, the variety is of considerable worth in
parts of the Pacific Northwest, and especially in regions where
hardihood is a prime requisite. There, presumably, the fruits are
larger and better flavored than in the East. As the accompanying
plate shows, the pears are only medium in size on the grounds of this
Station, but they are attractive in color and of excellent taste. The
core is small, and the seeds are often abortive and sometimes wanting.
The flesh is tender, buttery and almost free from granulation, with
a rich, sweet, vinous flavor which make the rating for this fruit
"good to very good." In many regions the pears are large, rough, and
gross--sometimes a facsimile of Duchesse d'Angouleme. The trees are
dwarf and fruitful to a fault so that the pears often run small; they
are hardier than those of almost any other pear and bear annually. To
offset these good characters, however, the trees have the fatal fault
of blighting, so that the variety is of value only in regions where
blight is not an annual scourge of this fruit.

Idaho was raised from seed of an unknown variety about the year 1867
by a Mrs. Mulkey, Lewiston, Idaho, and, having been propagated by the
Idaho Pear Company, was first brought to public notice in the autumn
of 1886 by John H. Evans of Lewiston. In 1888 it was introduced to
Europe and was shown at the congress of fruit growers held at Geneva,
Switzerland, in 1899. Idaho is included in the American Pomological
Society's list of fruits recommended for general cultivation, having
been added to this list in 1899.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright-spreading, hardy, very
 productive; trunk smooth; branches slender, smooth, reddish-brown
 overspread with much gray scarf-skin, sprinkled with many small
 lenticels; branchlets dull brownish-red, overlaid with scarf-skin,
 smooth, glabrous, with small lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, pointed, free; leaf-scars prominent.
 Leaves 2-3/4 in. long, 1-4/5 in. wide, leathery; apex abruptly
 pointed; margin glandular, finely serrate; petiole 2 in. long.
 Flower-buds short, conical, very plump, free, singly on short spurs;
 flowers showy, 1-1/8 in. across, in dense racemes, average 8 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 1-1/8 in. long, pubescent.

 Fruit matures in late September and October; medium in size, 2 in.
 long, 2-1/8 in. wide, roundish, slightly pyriform, symmetrical; stem
 1 in. long, thick, slightly curved; cavity acute, narrow, furrowed,
 slightly lipped; calyx closed; lobes broad, acute; basin shallow,
 obtuse, somewhat furrowed; skin thick and granular, tough, roughish;
 color dull lemon-yellow, tinged with green, dotted and streaked with
 russet, splashed with russet patches; dots numerous, small, russet,
 conspicuous; flesh dull white, tinged with yellow, firm, tender,
 buttery, juicy, sweet, rich, almost vinous; quality good to very
 good. Core closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide,
 conical; seeds wide, acute.


                              JARGONELLE

 =1.= Knoop _Pomologie_ 101, fig. 1771. =2.= Coxe _Cult. Fr. Trees_
 183, fig. 13. 1817. =3.= _Pom. Mag._ =3=:108, Pl. 1830. =4.= Lindley
 _Guide Orch. Gard._ 341. 1831. =5.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:363, fig. 30.
 1843. =6.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 758. 1869.

 _Gergonell._ =7.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

 _Epargne._ =8.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:133. Pl. VII. 1768. =9.=
 Coxe _Cult. Fr. Trees_ 181, fig. 10. 1817. =10.= Prince _Pom. Man._
 =1=:152. 1831. =11.= _Pom. France_ =2=: No. 85, Pl. 85. 1864. =12.=
 Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:19, fig. 8. 1866-73. =13.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
 =2=:135, fig. 1869. =14.= _Guide Prat._ 62, 269. 1876.

 _Sparbirne._ =15.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:131. 1856. =16.=
 Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 286. 1889.

 _Waelsche Birne._ =17.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:144. 1856.

At one time the best second early pear, Jargonelle is now little grown
in America, native varieties having crowded it out. The crop ripens
two or three weeks before that of Bartlett, so that the pears come
on the market with those of Bloodgood and Dearborn, which, for most
situations, are better sorts. The fruits are as attractive as any of
their season and are unique in shape and in having a long, curved stem.
The quality leaves much to be desired. The flesh is coarse, rather
gritty, and the flavor lacks the rich sugary taste on the one hand, or
the refreshing piquancy on the other hand, of good pears. The fruits
rot at the core and the season is short. The crop should be picked
early and ripened in the house. The trees are large, vigorous and
sometimes very productive, but are coarse, untidy bearers, especially
when young, and are often uncertain in bearing. After setting the
faults against the merits of this variety, one must conclude that is it
too worthy to discard, but hardly good enough for a recommendation for
other than the home orchard or in the plantings of collectors.

Jargonelle is a patriarch among pears, being one of the oldest of
all varieties. Its name appears to be derived from Jargon, anciently
Gergon, a corruption of Groecum; whence Merlet, writing in 1675, infers
that the Jargonelle was the _Pyrum Tarentinum_ of Cato and Columella,
the _Numidianum Groecum_ of Pliny, and the _Groeculum_ of Macrobius.
So far as we know the earliest mention of the Jargonelle in England
is by John Parkinson, who, writing in 1629, mentions sixty-five
varieties of pears, among them being the _Peare Gergonell_. Stephen
Switser, who wrote in 1731, also names it. The vitality of the English
Jargonelle is remarkable; the trees, it is said, often live for 200
years. In Scotland the variety is cultivated as far north as pears will
grow. William Coxe, Burlington, New Jersey, writing in 1817 of the
Jargonelle, said, "This pear has not been much cultivated in America,
and almost always under false names."

 Tree large, vigorous, spreading, open-topped, rapid-growing, hardy,
 very productive, long-lived; trunk shaggy; branches reddish-brown
 overlaid with heavy gray scarf-skin, with large lenticels; branchlets
 slender, short, reddish-brown overlaid with gray, new growth brownish,
 dull, smooth, with numerous small, raised, very conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, plump, appressed or free. Leaves
 3-1/4 in. long, 2 in. wide, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin
 tipped with few small, black glands, finely serrate; petiole 3 in.
 long, slender, tinged with red, glabrous; flower-buds small, very
 short, conical, plump, singly on short spurs; flowers late, showy,
 1-1/2 in. across, in dense clusters, from 8 to 14 buds in a cluster;
 pedicels 1-3/8 in, long, pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late August; large, 3-3/8 in. long, 2-3/16 in. wide,
 oblong-obovate-pyriform, with an acute neck; stem characteristically
 long and curved, 1-5/8 in. long; cavity lacking, the flesh folding
 up around the base of the stem, russeted, lipped; calyx open; lobes
 separated at the base, long, broad, acute; basin very shallow and
 narrow, obtuse, gently furrowed, compressed; skin smooth; color
 yellow, with a bright blush laid thinly over the exposed cheek in
 streaks and splashes; dots numerous, greenish-russet, very small,
 obscure; flesh yellowish-white, granular under the skin, gritty at the
 center, melting, very juicy, subacid, aromatic, vinous; quality very
 good. Core large, open, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube long,
 narrow, conical; seeds large, wide, long, plump, acute.

[Illustration: JARGONELLE]


                          JARGONELLE (FRENCH)

 =1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:123. 1768. =2.= Prince _Pom. Man._
 =1=:154. 1831. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 339. 1845. =4.= _Ibid._
 767. 1869. =5.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:303, fig. 1869. =6.= Mathieu
 _Nom. Pom._ 237. 1889.

 _Bellissime d'Ete._ =7.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:203, Pl. XLII.
 1768. =8.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:193, fig. 95. 1866-73. =9.= Leroy
 _Dict. Pom._ =1=:216, fig. 1867. =10.= _Guide Prat._ 70, 235. 1876.

 _Cuisse Madame._ =11.= Coxe _Cult. Fr. Trees_ 181, fig. 11. 1817.

 _Red Muscadel._ =12.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 346. 1831.

 _Bassin._ =13.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 491. 1884.

 _Schoenste Sommerbirne._ =14.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 280. 1889.

This old sort, very different from Jargonelle, is worthy of description
only to distinguish it from the much better and older pear of the
same name. A generation ago this French Jargonelle was much grown in
America, but has given way to better sorts. The pears are handsome, but
are poor in quality and are edible only a day or two after maturity
as they quickly rot at the center and become dry and mealy toward the
periphery.

The name Jargonelle is used in France to denote a group of pears.
This fact accounts for the confusion which exists among the names and
synonyms of several varieties of this class. The French Jargonelle is
said to have originated in Anjou, a former province in France, where it
was much cultivated and highly esteemed toward the end of the fifteenth
century.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright, the younger branches inclined to droop,
 very productive; branches stocky, dark reddish-brown; branchlets often
 curved and drooping, short, sprinkled with elongated, inconspicuous
 lenticels. Leaf-buds large, conical, appressed. Leaves oval, enlarged
 at the base; apex abruptly pointed; margin coarsely serrate; petiole
 long, thick. Flower-buds large, long-conic; flowers medium in size.

 Fruit ripens in August and September; medium to sometimes large, 3-1/2
 in. long, 2-1/2 in. wide, obtuse-pyriform to oblong-pyriform; stem 1
 in. long, slender, obliquely inserted; cavity obtuse, very shallow;
 calyx small, open; lobes long, projecting; basin variable in depth,
 small, irregular, furrowed; skin smooth, glossy; color lemon-yellow,
 blushed with red on the sunny side, occasionally marbled with thin
 orange-russet about the neck; dots light greenish or russet; flesh
 white, coarse, juicy, sweet, aromatic; quality good. Core large; seeds
 dark brown, small, narrow, long, often abortive.


[Illustration: JOSEPHINE DE MALINES]

                         JOSEPHINE DE MALINES

 =1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:461. 1855. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68.
 1862. =3.= _Pom. France_ =2=: No. 50, Pl. 50. 1864. =4.= _Jour. Hort._
 N. S. =14=:67. 1868. =5.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 793, fig. 1869. =6.=
 Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:310, fig. 1869. =7.= _Guide Prat._ 61, 282.
 1876. =8.= _Jour. Hort._ 3rd Ser. =5=:565, fig. 96. 1882. =9.= Hogg
 _Fruit Man._ 599. 1884. =10.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 182. 1920.

 _Josephine von Mecheln._ =11.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:93.
 1856. =12.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 239. 1889. =13.= Gaucher _Pom. Prak.
 Obst._ No. 50, Pl. 31. 1894.

 _Malines._ =14.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 24. 1897.

This is another of the few good winter pears. The fruit-characters
are so distinctive and meritorious that the variety should be grown
in every home orchard, and it possesses much merit for commercial
plantations. The fruits have a marked peculiarity. Cut through the
shaded yellow-russet skin, flesh with a faint, rosy tint is displayed.
Several red or rosy-fleshed pears are grown in Europe, but this is
the only one described by American pomologists. The tree also, has a
marked peculiarity; it thrives amazingly well on the white-thorn as
well as on pear and quince stocks. But it is the quality of the fruits
that commends the variety most highly. The flesh is buttery, juicy,
sweet, and perfumed--pleasing in every character that gratifies the
palate. The season is exceedingly variable, and is given by different
pomologists from December to March and January to May. The fruits are
not very pleasing in appearance, but the accompanying illustration
scarcely does them justice in either size or color. In the orchard, the
trees are satisfactory, but the nurserymen find them rather difficult
to grow, this, no doubt, being the chief reason for the apparent
neglect of this splendid pear. The trees thrive in almost any soil or
situation suitable to pears, and are everywhere prodigiously fruitful,
hardy, and resistant to blight. The variety deserves wider recognition
than it now receives.

This pear originated about 1830 in the seed beds of Major Esperen,
the well-known pomologist of Mechlin (Malines), Belgium, who named it
Josephine de Malines in honor of his wife. It was introduced in America
prior to 1850, and in 1862 was added to the fruit-list of the American
Pomological Society, a place it has since retained.

 Tree large, vigorous, spreading, tall, dense-topped, rapid-growing,
 hardy, very productive; trunk stocky; branches thick, shaggy,
 reddish-brown overlaid with gray scarf-skin, marked with few
 lenticels; branchlets thick, dull reddish-brown, smooth, glabrous,
 with small, raised, inconspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds short, obtuse, plump, appressed. Leaves 2-1/4 in. long,
 1-1/4 in. wide, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate;
 petiole 1-3/4 in. long. Flower-buds short, plump, free; flowers
 early, 1-3/8 in. across, white, occasionally tinged with pink, well
 distributed, average 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 3/4 in. long,
 slender, thinly pubescent.

 Fruit ripe December to February; medium in size, 2-1/2 in. long, 2-3/8
 in. wide, turbinate, inclined to truncate; stem long, very thick;
 cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow, slightly furrowed; calyx large, open;
 lobes short, broad, obtuse; basin narrow, obtuse, smooth; skin thick,
 tough, dull; color pale greenish-yellow, netted and patched more or
 less with russet; dots numerous, small, brown or russet, conspicuous;
 flesh light salmon, granular, melting, buttery, very juicy, sweet,
 slightly aromatic; quality good. Core large, closed, axile, with
 clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide; carpels pyriform; seeds
 large, wide, long, plump, acuminate.


[Illustration: KIEFFER]

                                KIEFFER

 =1.= _Gard. Mon._ =22=:49, fig. 1880. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 38.
 1883. =3.= _Jour. Hort._ 3rd Ser. =12=:131. 1886. =4.= _Garden_
 =68=:398. 1905. =5.= _Ibid._ =69=:68. 1906. =6.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._
 =332=:483. 1913. =7.= _Country Gent._ =84=:26, fig. 1919.

 _Kieffer's Hybrid._ =8.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 53. 1879.

 _Keiffer._ =9.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 3rd App. 179. 1881. =10.=
 Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 240. 1889. =11.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 178. 1909.

Although the most pretentious cheat in the orchard, Kieffer is grown
more commonly than any other pear in North America. Its popularity can
be accounted for only by accepting Barnum's dictum that "Americans
love to be fooled." Pears are grown to eat, but those of Kieffer
are fit to eat only in culinary preparations, dire necessity alone
compelling their consumption uncooked. Yet, pleased by a bright cheek
and a fair form, regardless of the potato-like flavor, people buy and
eat Kieffer pears and persist in doing so. There are several reasons
why Kieffer is popular. No pear has been advertised so widely and so
unqualifiedly, growers of trees often supplying virtues to the variety
which Nature denies it, because of all pears the trees of Kieffer are
most easily grown. Besides this virtue in the trees there are several
others that commend the variety more highly. Thus, of all pears grown
in America, the trees are uniformly the most vigorous, fruitful,
endure heat best, are least susceptible to blight, and withstand best
the ravages of San Jose scale. There are several faults, however; the
trees are tender to cold, in some soils refuse to set fruit, are often
self-sterile, and sometimes with the best of care bear only pears of
small size. Worthless for dessert, much can be said for the fruits of
Kieffer for culinary preparation. Cooking removes the disagreeable
natural taste of the raw pear, and leaves a good product. Canned,
the pears retain their shape, color, and flavor well; therefore, and
because white and inviting, canned Kieffers are preferred by commercial
canners. Use in the cannery is the true place for Kieffer pears in
regions where better sorts can be grown for dessert. Now that the
first flush of popularity is past, it would seem a wise precaution on
the part of pear-growers to grow this fruit chiefly for the cannery,
supplying the demands for dessert pears with worthier varieties,
although as long as consumers buy it to eat out of hand, growers cannot
be blamed for growing it in commercial orchards.

The seed parent of Kieffer was the Sand pear of China. Peter
Kieffer,[30] who lived at Roxborough, near Philadelphia, for many
years grew the Chinese Sand pear and sold the trees for ornamental
purposes. In his garden there were also trees of Bartlett. Among chance
seedlings, Mr. Kieffer observed one of peculiar growth which he saved.
This tree bore fruit first in 1863. Later, it was exhibited at the
Massachusetts Horticultural Society, and finally at the Centennial
Exposition where in 1876 it was named Kieffer. The variety was added to
the fruit-list of the American Pomological Society in 1883.

 Tree of medium size, vigorous, upright, dense-topped, hardy, very
 productive; branches slender, nearly smooth, reddish-brown, covered
 with dull ash-gray scarf-skin, marked with few small lenticels;
 branchlets medium to long, reddish-brown mingled with green, smooth,
 slightly pubescent, with numerous, large, raised, very conspicuous
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, obtuse, slightly pointed, appressed.
 Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 1-3/4 in. wide, oval, thick, leathery; apex
 taper-pointed; margin often finely serrate; petiole 1-7/8 in. long.
 Flower-buds conical to pointed, free; flowers open early, 1-5/8 in.
 across, fairly well distributed, varying from 3 to 11 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 1-1/8 in. long, thick, very slightly pubescent,
 green, rarely tinged red.

 Fruit matures in late October and November; above medium to large,
 2-3/4 in. long, 2-1/4 in. wide, oval, narrowing at both ends,
 symmetrical, uniform; stem 1 in. long, thick; cavity very small,
 smooth; calyx open; lobes separated at the base, short, narrow, acute;
 basin shallow, narrow, obtuse, nearly smooth; skin thick, tough,
 smooth; color yellow, blushed with dull red on the exposed cheek;
 dots numerous, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh yellowish-white,
 very granular and coarse, crisp, juicy, not sweet, often astringent;
 quality poor. Core large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube
 short, wide, conical; seeds wide, plump, acute.


                              KINGSESSING

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:450. 1847. =2.= _Ibid._ =19=:453, 516, fig. 32.
 1853. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 231. 1858. =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees
 Am._ 795. 1869.

A summing up of the characters of Kingsessing, as is so often the
case with varieties of fruits, makes it appear a most desirable sort.
Nevertheless, its culture does not make headway. Growers rate it as a
"good pear," but will not grow it, for the reason, no doubt, that it
has no outstanding characters for any region, season, or purpose. As
the pears grow on the grounds of the New York Agricultural Experiment
Station they are a little under size for a good commercial fruit, and
while the sweet, perfumed flavor is pleasant, it lacks individuality.
The variety is grown chiefly along the Atlantic Coast from Long Island
to Maryland.

This is a natural seedling which sprang up in the family burial ground
of Isaac Leech, Kingsessing, a suburb of Philadelphia, about 1833.
The tree first fruited about 1843. Dr. Brinckle, who introduced the
variety, thought from its close resemblance to Chapman that it was
probably a seedling from it, or of its parent, the Petre, as trees of
both these varieties stood in the vicinity of the Kingsessing. The
American Pomological Society placed Kingsessing on its fruit-list in
1858 but dropped it in 1899.

 Tree very large and vigorous, upright-spreading, dense-topped,
 rapid-growing, hardy, medium in yield; trunk very thick; branches
 very stocky, grayish-brown, sprinkled with numerous large lenticels;
 branchlets thick, long, glossy, smooth, glabrous, with numerous rather
 small, raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, long, conical, free. Leaves 2-1/4 in. long, 1-3/8 in.
 wide; apex abruptly pointed; margin glandular, finely serrate; petiole
 1-3/4 in. long. Flower-buds large, conical, free.

 Fruit ripens in September and October; medium in size, 2-3/8 in.
 long, 2-1/8 in. wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform; stem 1/2 in. long,
 thick, usually curved, fleshy at the point of insertion in the fruit;
 cavity obtuse, shallow, slightly furrowed, occasionally lipped; calyx
 partly open; lobes separated at the base, short, narrow, acute; basin
 shallow, gently furrowed, usually symmetrical; skin granular, tender,
 roughish; color yellow, sprinkled and netted with russet, with a thin
 brownish-red blush on the exposed cheek; dots numerous, grayish or
 russet, small, conspicuous; flesh white, granular, tender and melting,
 sweet, aromatic; quality good. Core closed, with clasping core-lines;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds wide, long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: KOONCE]

                                KOONCE

 =1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 159. 1889. =2.= _Ibid._ 55. 1895. =3.=
 _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1897. =4.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._
 =2=:251. 1903. =5.= _Chico Nur. Cat._ 12. 1904. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Cat._ 41. 1909. =7.= Ont. Dept. _Agr. Fr. Ont._ 168. 1914.

Koonce is a popular early variety grown rather commonly in nearly
every pear region in the United States. It is listed by nearly all
nurserymen. Its tree-characters are more notable than those of its
fruits. The trees make a splendid showing in the nursery and are hardy
and productive in the orchard, although of but medium size and rather
straggling at maturity. The pears are better in quality than those of
Early Harvest or Lawson, with which it often competes, but are hardly
as attractive in appearance, being rather small and often irregular in
shape. The color is unusually bright, especially on the red cheek. The
pears decay quickly after maturity and are suitable only for home and
local markets.

This pear originated in southern Illinois but no one seems to know by
whom, or at what time, or in what locality in the State. The variety
has been grown for more than thirty years. The American Pomological
Society added Koonce to its list of fruits in 1909.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, upright-spreading, scraggly,
 open-topped, hardy, productive; trunk shaggy; branches zigzag,
 dark brownish-red, covered with thick grayish scarf-skin, with few
 lenticels; branchlets thick, long, with long internodes, dull light
 brown, smooth, glabrous, sprinkled with small, raised, elongated
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, pointed, plump, appressed; leaf-scars
 prominent. Leaves 2-1/2 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, stiff; apex
 taper-pointed; margin glandular, finely serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in.
 long. Flower-buds short, obtuse or conical, plump, free; flowers
 showy, 1-1/4 in. across, in dense clusters, average 5 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 7/8 in. long, slender, pubescent.

 Fruit ripens in August; medium in size, 2-3/8 in. long, 2-1/4 in.
 wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, with unequal sides; stem 1-1/4 in.
 long, thick; cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow, compressed, lipped
 or often drawn up in a wrinkled fold about the base of the stem;
 calyx open; lobes separated at the base, narrow, acuminate; basin
 obtuse, gently furrowed; skin thick, tough, roughish; color pale
 greenish-yellow, with a dull reddish-brown blush spreading over
 the exposed cheek; dots numerous, very small, greenish-russet,
 conspicuous; flesh whitish, granular especially at the center, medium
 tender, juicy, aromatic, sweet but vinous; quality good. Core small,
 closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical;
 seeds small, narrow, short, plump, acute.


[Illustration: LAMY]

                                 LAMY

 =1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear_, _B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:161. 1908.

 _Comte de Lamy._ =2.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 141. 1841. =3.= Downing
 _Fr. Trees Am._ 371, fig. 158. 1845. =4.= _Gard. Chron._ 20, fig.
 1846. =5.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 727. 1869. =6.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S.
 =38=:359, fig. 52. 1880. =7.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 553. 1884.

 _Poire Dingler._ =8.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:69, Pl. 1854.

 _Beurre Curtet._ =9.= _Pom. France_ =2=: No. 77, Pl. 77. 1864. =10.=
 Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:341, figs. 1867. =11.= _Guide Prat._ 65, 243.
 1876.

 _Curtet's Butterbirne._ =12.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 200. 1889.

As the history shows, this is an old European pear which had its
probationary period in America many years ago, and which never got out
of the limbo of nurserymen's catalogs and collections. On the grounds
of the New York Agricultural Experiment Station, however, the pears are
so handsome and so delectable in quality that the variety seems quite
worth while describing and illustrating among the major sorts. It is
a splendid pear for the home orchard, but the tree is not large nor
robust enough for a commercial plantation. A few nurserymen still list
it.

This variety was raised from seed about 1828 by M. Bouvier, Jodoigne,
Belgium. It was first named _Beurre Curtet_ in honor of M. Curtet, a
physician and professor at Brussels. The London Horticultural Society
first obtained the variety under the name _Comte de Lamy_, by which
name it has best been known in England. Lamy was early introduced to
America where trees have long been found in collections.

 Tree small, spreading, open-topped, hardy, productive; trunk slender,
 shaggy; branches slender, shaggy, dull brown, overspread with thick
 scarf-skin, sprinkled with numerous lenticels; branchlets slender,
 curved, short, with short internodes, brown changing to reddish-brown
 on the newer growth, glossy, smooth, glabrous, with small, raised,
 conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, pointed, plump, free. Leaves 2-3/4
 in. long, 1-3/4 in. wide, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin finely
 serrate to nearly entire, tipped with few minute glands; petiole 1-7/8
 in. long, pinkish. Flower-buds large, thick, long, conical, very
 plump, free, singly as lateral buds or on very short spurs; flowers
 late, very showy, 1-3/4 in. across, in dense clusters, average 9 buds
 in a cluster; pedicels 5/8 in. long, thick, lightly pubescent.

 Fruit matures in late October and early November; medium in size,
 2-1/8 in. long, 2 in. wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, often irregular
 and with unequal sides; stem 1-1/8 in. long, thick; cavity almost
 lacking, very obtuse and shallow, narrow, russeted, often lipped;
 calyx open; lobes broad, acute; basin rather deep, obtuse or abrupt,
 gently furrowed, compressed; skin thin, smooth except for the russet
 dots, dull; color yellow, with a solid, dark red blush on the exposed
 cheek; dots numerous, large, brownish-russet, very conspicuous; flesh
 tinged with yellow, granular at the center, tender and melting,
 buttery, juicy, sweet, with a faint, vinous flavor, pleasantly
 aromatic; quality good to very good. Core large, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, very wide, conical; seeds large, wide,
 plump, acute.


[Illustration: LAWRENCE]

                               LAWRENCE

 =1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 169. 1841. =2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 4.
 1843. =3.= _Mag. Hort._ =10=:212. 1844. =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
 442. 1845. =5.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:432, fig. 29. 1846. =6.= Hovey _Fr.
 Am._ =2=:13, Pl. 1851. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 230. 1854. =8.=
 Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 440, fig. 1857. =9.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._
 480. 1897.

There is great diversity of opinion as to the value of Lawrence for a
market pear, but no one denies it a place as one of the very best early
winter pears for the home orchard. A generation ago it was held in
high esteem as a market pear, but the more showy Kieffer, kept in cold
storage, has elbowed the less conspicuous Lawrence off the fruit-stands
and almost out of the markets. The tree is hardy, moderately vigorous
and fruitful, an early, annual, and uniform bearer, and has the
reputation of being one of the longest lived of all pear trees. The
fruits are of but medium size, but are shapely in form, trim in
contour, and are distinctive in shape because of the rounded, truncate
stem end. In color, the pear is a bright, clean lemon-yellow marked
with patches of russet and faintly blushed on the side to the sun. No
yellow pear is more attractive. The fruits come in season in early
winter and have the excellent character of keeping well under ordinary
care for a full month or longer. The melting flesh abounds with a rich,
sugary, perfumed juice, by virtue of which it is justly esteemed as the
best-flavored pear of its season. Lawrence finds congenial soils and
climates in nearly every part of New York, and should have a place in
every home orchard in the State.

Lawrence is a native of Flushing, Long Island, and was first introduced
to growers by Wilcomb and King of Flushing, who sent specimens of it
in 1843 to the Massachusetts Horticultural Society, saying that it
appeared to be a cross between the old Saint Germain and White Doyenne,
"as it resembles both of them in wood, foliage, and fruit, and there
is no other variety in the neighborhood." The variety rapidly found
favor among pear growers and was soon widely disseminated. The American
Pomological Society added Lawrence to its fruit-catalog in 1854.

 Tree of medium size, vigorous, spreading, with drooping branches,
 very hardy, productive; trunk shaggy; branches smooth, zigzag,
 reddish-brown mingled with ash-gray scarf-skin, with numerous large
 lenticels; branchlets reddish-brown, glossy, smooth, glabrous, with
 slightly raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds short, obtuse, plump, nearly free. Leaves 2-1/2 in. long,
 1-1/4 in. wide, oval, leathery; margin finely serrate; petiole 1-3/4
 in. long, slender; stipules rudimentary. Flower-buds hardy, conical
 or pointed, free; flowers open early, 1-3/8 in. across, in rather
 dense clusters, from 8 to 12 buds in a cluster; pedicels 7/8 in. long,
 lightly pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit ripe November to December; medium in size, 2-5/8 in. long,
 2-1/8 in. wide, uniform in size and shape, obovate-obtuse-pyriform,
 generally symmetrical; stem 1 in. long, thick, slightly curved;
 cavity small, obtuse, shallow, narrow, russeted, furrowed and
 irregular, often lipped; calyx large, partly open; lobes separated
 at the base, long, broad, acute; basin wide, obtuse, furrowed and
 sometimes corrugated; skin thick and granular, tough, roughish; color
 lemon-yellow, marked with occasional patches of russet and with a
 faint russet-red blush on the exposed cheek; dots numerous, small,
 russet, inconspicuous; flesh yellowish-white, firm, granular, tender
 and melting when fully mature, juicy, rich, sweet; quality very good.
 Core large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide,
 conical; seeds large, long, plump, acute.


                                LAWSON

 =1.= _Rural N. Y._ =43=:651, fig. 385. 1884. =2.= _Gard. Mon._
 =27=:282. 1885. =3.= _Rural N. Y._ =44=:693. 1885. =4.= _Gard. & For._
 =5=:414. 1892. =5.= Van Lindley _Cat._ 22. 1892. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Cat._ 36. 1899. =7.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 168. 1914. =8.= Cal.
 Com. Hort. _Pear Grow. Cal._ =7=:266, fig. 67. 1918.

 _Comet._ =9.= _Gard. Mon._ =27=:144. 1885.

 _Cometbirne._ =10.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 198. 1889.

Of all early pears, the fruit of Lawson best satisfies the eye for
bright colors. It is as brightly colored as the brilliant Vermont
Beauty or as Mount Vernon. Another outstanding character is the
small core, which, though the pears ripen early and quickly, seldom
softens unduly. The pears are sometimes nearly or quite seedless.
Unfortunately, the fruits are often irregular in shape, and in quality
are never more than mediocre. The tree is fairly healthy, vigorous,
hardy, and free from blight, and is characterized by its tall, upright
growth. Although grown for more than a hundred years in New York,
the variety has never made headway in this State, but seems to be
attracting much attention on the Pacific slope.

This pear originated on the farm of a Mr. Lawson in Ulster County, New
York, about 1800, judging from the appearance of the original tree
which was standing in 1900. The variety was introduced toward the end
of the nineteenth century under the name _Comet_ by reason of its
color, so that it is sometimes known as _Lawson Comet_. The American
Pomological Society added Lawson to its fruit-catalog in 1899.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright, dense-topped, very productive;
 branches slender, zigzag, reddish-brown overlaid with grayish
 scarf-skin, marked with numerous raised, large lenticels; branchlets
 slender, very long, with characteristically long internodes, rough,
 zigzag, marked with numerous large, raised, conspicuous lenticels.
 Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 1-3/4 in. wide; apex abruptly pointed; margin
 glandless, serrate; petiole 2 in. long. Flowers early, showy, 1-1/2
 in. across, in dense clusters, 6 or 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1
 in. long, thick.

 Fruit ripens in August; large, 2-3/4 in. long, 3-1/4 in. wide,
 varies from obovate-obtuse-pyriform to globular-obtuse-pyriform,
 with unequal sides; stem 7/8 in. long, thick, curved, woody; cavity
 very small and narrow, often with a lip drawn up around one side of
 the stem; calyx partly open; lobes narrow, often reflexed; basin
 narrow, obtuse, gently furrowed; skin thin, tender, smooth; color
 pale yellow, overspread on the exposed cheek with a bright red blush;
 dots numerous, small, greenish or russet, obscure; flesh whitish or
 often salmon-color, firm, tough, medium juicy, lacking sweetness;
 quality poor. Core unusually small, closed, with clasping core-lines;
 calyx-tube short, wide; seeds short, wide, plump, obtuse, few in
 number.


[Illustration: LE CONTE]

                               LE CONTE

 =1.= _Ga. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 8, 29. 1878. =2.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._
 303. 1879. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 38. 1883. =4.= _Gard. Mon._
 =27=:282. 1885. =5.= _Ga. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 55. 1885. =6.= Black _Cult.
 Peach & Pear_ 234. 1886. =7.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:484. 1913.
 =8.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 169. 1914.

Le Conte is a hybrid between the Chinese Sand pear and a European sort,
therefore similar in parentage to Kieffer which it greatly resembles
in both tree and fruit. The fruits are rather poorer in quality than
those of Kieffer, if that be possible for an edible fruit, and the tree
is in no way superior to that of its better-known rival, but seems to
succeed better in warm climates and light soils. There is, therefore, a
place for Le Conte in the South, and possibly on parts of Long Island,
if a pear is wanted for culinary purposes only. The fruits sometimes
rot badly at the core, and should usually be harvested as soon as
they attain full size. The trees are more susceptible to blight than
those of Kieffer. In the South, the trees are often, if not usually,
propagated from cuttings.

Le Conte originated in America, and is probably a hybrid between the
Chinese Sand pear and some native. It is supposed to have been carried
from Philadelphia to Georgia about 1850 by Major Le Conte, and has
since been extensively cultivated in the southern States for northern
markets. In 1885 it was recommended by the Georgia Horticultural
Society for cultivation in the middle region of that State. The
American Pomological Society added Le Conte to its fruit-catalog in
1883.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright, very productive, a regular
 bearer; branches strongly zigzag, brownish-red mingled with green
 and covered with scarf-skin; branchlets thick, reddish-brown mingled
 with green, smooth, pubescent on the new growth which later becomes
 glabrous, with numerous very small, conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 3-1/4 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide, long-ovate or long-oval, leathery; apex taper-pointed;
 margin finely serrate; petiole pale green, glabrous. Flower-buds
 small, short, conical, plump, free, arranged singly on very short
 spurs; flowers open very early, 1-1/4 in. across, in dense clusters,
 7 to 10 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1 in. long, slender, lightly
 pubescent, pale green.

 Fruit ripe late October to November; large, 3-1/16 in. long, 2-5/8 in.
 wide, uniform in size and shape, roundish-oval, tapering at both ends,
 ribbed, symmetrical; stem 1-1/8 in. long, very thick, often curved;
 cavity obtuse, very shallow and narrow, smooth, slightly furrowed
 and wrinkled, often compressed; calyx partly open; lobes usually
 dehiscent, separated at the base, short, narrow, acute; basin usually
 very deep, abrupt, gently furrowed; skin thick, tough, smooth; color
 pale yellow, occasionally marked with russet; dots numerous, small,
 russet, conspicuous; flesh white, firm, granular, stringy, tender,
 juicy, sweet, with a strong and disagreeable flavor; quality poor.
 Core very large, closed, axile, with meeting core-lines; calyx-tube
 short, wide, broadly conical; seeds large, 2 in each carpel, wide,
 long, very plump, acute.


                              LE LECTIER

 =1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 246. 1889. =2.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895. =3.=
 _Rev. Hort._ 466. 1899. =4.= _Garden_ =59=:14, 93, 124. 1901. =5.=
 _Soc. Nat. Hort. France Pom._ 420, fig. 1904. =6.= _Cat. Cong. Pom.
 France_ 287, fig. 1906.

In size and beauty of fruit, Le Lectier surpasses most of its
associates, and the quality is first rate in soils and climates to
which the variety is suited. Unfortunately the tree, while very
satisfactory in some situations, is capricious to both soils and
climates, and is seldom at home on this side of the Atlantic. The
season is December and January, when good pears are scarce, and it
would seem that the fine, large fruits of this pear would be most
acceptable for either home or market if it could be made to thrive. In
Europe, it grows best on warm, rich soils.

Auguste Lesueur, a horticulturist at Orleans, France, obtained this
late winter pear about 1882 as a cross between Bartlett and Fortunee.
It was named after Le Lectier, the great pomologist of Orleans,
who was growing in the year 1628 about 260 varieties of pears. The
variety was introduced about 1889. In France, Le Lectier has been
described as greatly superior in flavor, aroma, and sweetness to
varieties of the same class having established reputations. In 1894,
the Royal Horticultural Society of London recommended this variety for
cultivation in England.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright, dense-topped, very productive;
 trunk and branches medium in thickness and smoothness; branchlets
 thick, curved, light brownish-red, tinged with green and overspread
 with grayish scarf-skin, glabrous, sprinkled with numerous raised,
 conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds very small, short, pointed, plump, free. Leaves 2-7/8 in.
 long, 1-1/2 in. wide, thick; apex taper-pointed; margin glandular,
 finely serrate; petiole 2-1/4 in. long, slender. Flower-buds short,
 conical, plump, free, singly on very short spurs; flowers showy, 1-1/2
 in. across, 8 or 10 buds in a cluster; pedicels 7/8 in. long.

 Fruit ripens December to January; large, elongated-obovate-pyriform,
 often with a narrow neck; stem slender, rather short, enlarged at
 both ends, inserted obliquely; cavity irregular, often lipped;
 calyx variable in size, partly open; basin variable in size,
 abrupt, irregular; skin glossy, thin, with uneven surface;
 color yellow, mottled and faintly blushed on the exposed cheek
 with yellowish-bronze; dots inconspicuous, small; flesh white,
 fine-grained, melting, juicy, sweet, pleasantly aromatic; quality very
 good.


[Illustration: LEON LECLERC (VAN MONS)]

                        LEON LECLERC (VAN MONS)

 =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 3. 1843. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
 419, fig. 192. 1845. =3.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:9, Pl. 1851. =4.= _Ann.
 Pom. Belge_ =5=:51, Pl. 1857. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 70. 1862.
 =6.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 29, Pl. 29. 1863. =7.= _Jour. Hort._ N.
 S. =10=:366. 1866. =8.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1, 127, fig. 62.
 1866-73. =9.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:722, fig. 1869. =10.= _Jour.
 Hort._ 3rd Ser. =1=:573, fig. 103. 1880. =11.= _Cat. Cong. Pom.
 France_ 361, fig. 1906.

 _Van Mons Butterbirne._ =12.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 65, Pl.
 65. 1883. =13.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 292. 1889.

A century ago this pear was being heralded in Europe as the best of
all pears, and shortly afterward was introduced into the United States
with highest praise. The variety is still popular in Europe, but its
reputation there is not sustained here. The pear deserves a place among
major varieties only because it fills a particular niche in the pear
season, the crop coming in season between late fall and early winter
at a time when there are few other good varieties. Were it not for one
serious fault, however, the variety might take high rank in America.
The fault is great susceptibility to the scab fungus. After Flemish
Beauty, no other variety suffers as much both in fruit and foliage.
Well grown in a congenial environment, on standard or quince stock,
the pears are often as large as those of Duchesse d'Angouleme, with
which they compare rather closely in shape. On well-grown specimens,
also, the color is rich and beautiful. The flavor is sprightly and
refreshing, which, with good flesh-characters, give the variety high
rank for quality. There are no remarkable characters in the trees
to recommend them, although they are quite up to the average in all
characters either on pear or quince stocks. They are said to prefer a
rich, deep soil. The variety is suitable only for collections.

This pear was obtained by M. Leon Leclerc, a distinguished pomologist
living at Laval, France, who dedicated it to his friend Van Mons.
Desiring to couple his own name with that of his friend, he gave it the
name of _Van Mons Leon Leclerc_, by which appellation it has been known
by most authors. The variety first fruited in 1828. There has been a
good deal of confusion as to the identity of this pear, owing to the
fact that Van Mons raised a pear in 1816 which he dedicated to Leon
Leclerc. The proper name of the latter pear is _Leon Leclerc de Laval_.
There is also a _Leon Leclerc de Louvain_. The variety under discussion
was fruited in this country previous to 1843 by Marshall P. Wilder. The
American Pomological Society added the variety to its fruit-catalog in
1862 but dropped it in 1869.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, spreading, open-topped, productive;
 trunk shaggy; branches roughish, reddish-brown, overspread with
 heavy, dull scarf-skin, with conspicuous, numerous, large lenticels;
 branchlets very slender and curved, short, with short internodes,
 light brown streaked with gray and tinged with green, dull, smooth,
 glabrous, with numerous small, conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds very small, short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 1-1/2 in.
 long, 3-1/4 in. wide, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin glandless,
 entire; petiole 1-1/2 in. long, glabrous, reddish-green. Flower-buds
 small, short, conical, plump, free, singly on short spurs; flowers
 showy, 1-1/4 in. across, in dense racemes, 7 or 8 buds in a cluster;
 pedicels 5/8 in. long, pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late September and October; large, 3-3/8 in. long,
 2-1/4 in. wide, oblong-pyriform, tapering to a very long, narrow
 neck; stem 1 in. long, thick, curved; cavity very small, compressed,
 usually lipped; calyx large, open; lobes separated at the base, broad,
 acute; basin shallow, narrow, obtuse, symmetrical; skin thick, tough,
 roughened by russet specks; color dull yellow, covered with dots and
 tracings of russet and occasionally with a faint russet-red blush;
 dots numerous, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh granular under the
 skin, nearly melting, juicy, subacid or with a peculiar sprightliness;
 quality good. Core large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube
 short, narrow, conical; seeds large, wide, long, acute.


[Illustration: LINCOLN]

                                LINCOLN

 =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 88. 1845. =2.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._
 196, Pls. 1894. =3.= _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 141. 1894. =4.= _Ill.
 Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 42. 1889. =5.= _Rural N. Y._ =48=:754, figs. 275 and
 276. 1889. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 36. 1899. =7.= Budd-Hansen _Am.
 Hort. Man._ =2=:253. 1903.

Nearly a hundred years old without having received favorable mention
from pear growers, Lincoln has been brought from the limbo of lost
fruits in recent years to take high rank in the list of pears for the
Mississippi Valley. The variety is spoken of in such superlative terms
for that region that judging from its behavior in New York, it would
seem that western pear-growers give it attributes which Nature denies
it. At best, in the East, the fruits are but mediocre in appearance
and quality, falling below those of a dozen other varieties of the
same season whether judged by the eye or the palate. In Illinois and
Missouri, however, the fruits are spoken of as the handsomest and best.
These are not regions in which many good pears grow, since the cold of
winter, heat of summer, and pear-blight take toll from all but pears
of the strongest constitution. Lincoln seems to possess a constitution
to withstand these ills. At its best, the fruits of Lincoln seem
comparable to those of Bartlett, which the western admirers of the
variety say it resembles. In New York, comparisons of the fruits are
all in favor of Bartlett, as are the trees in all characters excepting
hardiness to heat and cold, and resistance to blight. The variety is
valuable only in the Middle West.

This pear had its origin in a seedling grown in the spring of 1835
by Mrs. Maria Fleming, Corwin, Illinois, The original tree proved to
be a vigorous grower as well as a heavy cropper, and was ultimately
given the name of Lincoln. Augustine and Company of Normal, Illinois,
propagated and distributed the variety about 1895. Young trees of the
variety appear to be vigorous growers, free from blight and of high
quality. The American Pomological Society added Lincoln to its list of
fruits in 1899.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright-spreading, open-topped, hardy, very
 productive; trunk stocky, smooth; branches zigzag, greenish-brown,
 partly overspread with thin gray scarf-skin, marked on the younger
 wood with very numerous large, round lenticels; branchlets slender,
 very long, willowy, brownish-green overlaid with thin gray, dull,
 the new growth reddish-green, with numerous large, roundish, raised
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds very small, short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 3-1/2 in.
 long, 1-1/2 in. wide, stiff; apex variable; margin glandless,
 finely serrate; petiole 2-5/8 in. long, glabrous, tinged with red;
 stipules very long and slender, pinkish. Flower-buds small, short,
 conical, free, singly on short spurs; flowers 1-3/8 in. across, well
 distributed, average 5 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/8 in. long,
 slender, pubescent.

 Fruit matures in late August and September; medium in size, about
 2-1/4 in. in length and width, roundish, with an obtuse neck, tapering
 very slightly; stem 1-1/8 in. long, slender; cavity a slight, narrow
 depression, occasionally lipped; calyx large, open; lobes separated at
 the base, long, acuminate; basin shallow, obtuse, smooth, symmetrical;
 skin thick, tender, roughish; color yellow, sprinkled with few russet
 lines and nettings; dots numerous, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh
 tinged with yellow, firm, coarse and granular, tender, very juicy,
 sweet, aromatic, pleasing but not richly flavored; quality good. Core
 unusually large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short,
 wide, conical; seeds large, very wide, long, plump, acuminate.


[Illustration: LINCOLN CORELESS]

                           LINCOLN CORELESS

 =1.= Parry _Cat._ 9, fig. 1891. =2.= _Ann. Hort._ 185. 1892. =3.=
 _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 137. 1894. =4.= _Ibid._ 52, 178. 1896. =5.=
 _Rural N. Y._ =64=:256. 1905.

The product of Lincoln Coreless is worthless for dessert, and but a
coarse makeshift for culinary purposes. The variety receives attention
only because the pear is a monstrosity and a curiosity. The fruits
are enormous in size, outweighing all other pears unless it be those
of the Pound. They are unique in having a very small core and few
or sometimes no seeds. They are further characterized by very late
maturity, ripening later than those of any other pear on the grounds
of this Station and keeping until April. While usually rather dull
greenish-yellow in color, the cheek is often enlivened by a bright
blush which makes the fruits rather attractive despite their grossness.
The catalogs describe the trees as "blight proof," but they blight on
the grounds of this Station. The variety is worth growing only as an
interesting curiosity.

According to William Parry, Parry, New Jersey, Lincoln Coreless
originated in Lincoln County, Tennessee, near the Alabama line, about
1830. The original tree was rated as productive and free from blight,
and young trees propagated from it have been unusually healthy and
vigorous. The variety was introduced about 1890 by William Parry.

 Tree small, vigorous, upright, very dense, pyramidal, hardy, an
 uncertain bearer; trunk shaggy; branches smooth, zigzag, reddish-brown
 mingled with ash-gray, marked with small lenticels; branchlets short
 to medium, dull brown, smooth, glabrous, with conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, obtuse, plump, appressed. Leaves 3 in. long, 1-5/8
 in. wide, elongated-oval, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin
 finely serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in. long, reddish; stipules very long.
 Flower-buds short, obtuse, plump, free; flowers 1-3/4 in. across, very
 large and showy, average 6 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-5/8 in. long,
 thick, pubescent, pale green.

 Fruit ripe in February; very large, 4-3/4 in. long, 3 in. wide,
 uniform in size, obovate-acute-pyriform, somewhat ribbed, with unequal
 sides; stem 1-3/8 in. long, thick, curved; cavity obtuse, shallow,
 narrow, russeted, furrowed, often lipped; calyx open, large; lobes
 separated at the base, narrow, acute; basin very shallow, narrow,
 obtuse, furrowed; skin very thick, tough, coarse and granular, smooth,
 dull; color greenish-yellow, with a handsome blush on the cheek
 exposed to the sun; dots many, brownish-russet, very conspicuous;
 flesh yellowish-white, very firm, granular at the core, crisp, tough,
 medium juicy, rather bitter and astringent; quality poor. Core closed,
 with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube long, wide, conical; seeds few,
 narrow, often abortive, acute.


[Illustration: LOUISE BONNE DE JERSEY]

                        LOUISE BONNE DE JERSEY

 =1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 148. 1841. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 53.
 1852. =3.= Field _Pear Cult._ 218, fig. 81. 1858.

 _Louise Bonne of Jersey._ =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 397, fig. 174.
 1845. =5.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:39, Pl. 1851. =6.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S.
 =38=:161, fig. 26. 1880. =7.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 606. 1884.

 _Gute Louise von Avranches._ =8.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:138.
 1856. =9.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 229. 1889.

 _Bonne Louise d'Avranches._ =10.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:29, Pl. 1858.
 =11.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 21, Pl. 21. 1863. =12.= Mas _Le Verger_
 =3=: Pt. 1, 67, fig. 32. 1866-73. =13.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:482,
 fig. 1867. =14.= _Guide Prat._ 286. 1876.

 _Louise._ =15.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 23. 1897. =16.= Ont. Dept. Agr.
 _Fr. Ont._ 170, fig. 1914.

Now known in America as Louise, a name given it by the American
Pomological Society, this variety is described under the name given
it in England to distinguish it from at least eight other varieties
having Louise as the whole or a part of the name. The pear is an old
one, having many excellent qualities of fruit and tree, which, however,
are not sufficiently above the average to give it high place in the
list of pears for the market. The pears are medium to large, handsome,
of excellent quality, and keep and ship well. These qualities have
given it some preeminence as a pear for the export trade. The trees are
precariously hardy and somewhat subject to blight, but very vigorous,
productive, and long-lived. In Europe, the testimony of prominent
pomologists agrees that the fruits are better and the trees more
productive when worked on the quince, and in America the variety is
considered one of the best for dwarfing. This pear is a standard one
for home collections, and finds favor in many commercial orchards in
New York.

The parent tree of this pear was raised from seed about 1780 by M. de
Longueval, Avranches, Normandy. Some authorities say that the variety
was first named Bonne de Longueval; others, that M. de Longueval
immediately dedicated the pear to his wife and called it _Bonne Louise
de Longueval_. Later still, the Pomological Congress adopted the name
of _Bonne Louise d'Avranches_, by which it became more generally known,
though in England, it rather unfortunately became widely disseminated
as _Louise Bonne de Jersey_, having, presumably, found its way there
through the Channel Islands. The variety was brought to the United
States early in the nineteenth century, and in 1852 was entered in the
recommended list of fruits of the American Pomological Society. In
1897, this Society shortened the name to Louise.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright, very tall, dense-topped, hardy,
 productive, long-lived; trunk stocky; branches slightly zigzag,
 reddish-brown mingled with very dark grayish scarf-skin, with numerous
 raised lenticels; branchlets slender, long, dark reddish-brown, nearly
 smooth, glabrous, with few small, slightly raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds pointed, semi-free. Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 1-3/4 in. wide,
 much curled under at the margins, oval, leathery; apex slightly
 taper-pointed; margin glandless, finely serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in.
 long, slender. Flower-buds small, conical or pointed, free; flowers
 with a disagreeable odor, 1-1/2 in. across, white or tinged with pink
 along the edge of the petals, averaging 6 buds in a cluster; pedicels
 1-1/2 in. long, slender, pubescent, light green.

 Fruit matures in October; medium to large, 2-7/8 in. long, 2-1/4 in.
 wide, uniform in size and shape, oblong-pyriform, somewhat irregular,
 with unequal sides; stem 1 in. long, slender, usually curved; cavity
 obtuse, very shallow and very narrow, furrowed and wrinkled, often
 lipped, the flesh folded up around the stem; calyx open, large; lobes
 broad, acute; basin obtuse, furrowed and uneven; skin granular,
 smooth; color pale yellow, marked on the exposed cheek with a dull red
 blush and with streaks of russet; dots numerous, small, grayish or
 russet, conspicuous; fruit yellowish-white, somewhat granular, tender
 and melting, very juicy, sweet and vinous, aromatic, rich; quality
 very good. Core closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short,
 wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long, plump, acute.


                               LUCY DUKE

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 153. 1885. =2.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._
 65. 1889. =3.= Van Lindley _Cat._ 22, Pl. 1892. =4.= _N. Y. Sta. Bul._
 =364=:182. 1913.

Why Lucy Duke is neglected is hard to see. Tree and fruit are highly
praised, Charles Downing thought the pear "not quite so fine as a
first-class Seckel, but I must aver it is not far behind." The pear
has a rich, juicy, spicy, melting flesh that makes it one of the best.
In form, the fruits resemble those of Bartlett, which is probably one
of the parents; they are of but medium size, but are of a beautiful
golden-russet color, which makes them as handsome as the handsomest.
The skin is thick and the pears stand shipping well. The variety can be
recommended for home and local markets, but the trees are a little too
unproductive and too irregular in bearing for commercial orchards. The
tree is hardy but only moderately vigorous and resembles Winter Nelis,
supposed to be the other parent, in habit of growth. The variety is
relatively free from blight.

Lucy Duke was grown about 1880 by Mrs. Lucy Duke, Beaufort County,
North Carolina, from seed of a Bartlett pear which she had received
from California, Its tree-characters are so nearly like those of Winter
Nelis that the other parent is supposed to be that variety. Lucy Duke
was introduced about 1892 by J. Van Lindley, Pomona, North Carolina.

 Tree medium to large, variable in vigor, upright becoming slightly
 spreading, dense-topped, hardy, productive; trunk shaggy; branches
 thick, zigzag, marked by numerous elongated lenticels; branchlets
 strongly curved, with short internodes, dark brownish-red mingled
 with green, mottled with scarf-skin, smooth, glabrous, with small,
 elongated or roundish, conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, plump, usually free; leaf-scars
 prominent. Leaves 3 in. long, 1-3/8 in. wide, thin; margin
 occasionally glandular, finely serrate or entire; petiole 1-1/2 in.
 long, slender. Flower-buds large, long, pointed, plump, free, singly
 on short spurs; flowers open late, with an unpleasant odor, 1-5/8 in.
 across; pedicels 1-1/8 in. long.

 Fruit ripens in late October and November; medium in size,
 acute-pyriform to oblong-pyriform, symmetrical; stem short, thick,
 curved; cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow, russeted, often wrinkled
 and occasionally lipped; calyx large, open, rounded and with a
 deeply-set center; basin obtuse, smooth, symmetrical; skin very tough,
 roughened with thick russet; color greenish-yellow, usually entirely
 overspread with solid, dark russet, changing to golden russet on
 the cheek exposed to the sun, with mottlings and flecks of russet;
 dots numerous, small, russet, obscure; flesh yellowish-white, fine,
 melting, rich, juicy, sweet; quality very good. Core large, closed,
 axile; calyx-tube short, wide, broadly conical; seeds large, wide,
 long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: MADELEINE]

                               MADELEINE

 =1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:124, Pl. IV. 1768. =2.= _Pom. Mag._
 =2=:51, Pl. 1829. =3.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:13. 1831. =4.= Downing
 _Fr. Trees Am._ 341, fig. 138. 1845. =5.= _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr. Gr._
 51. 1848. =6.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 331, fig. 1854. =7.= Mas _Le Verger_
 =2=:59, fig. 28. 1866-73. =8.= _Guide Prat._ 62, 287. 1876.

 _Sainte Madelaine._ =9.= Knoop _Pomologie_ 76, Tab. 1, fig. 1771.

 _Gruene Sommer-Magdalene._ =10.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:150.
 1856. =11.= Lucas _Tafelbirnen_ 47, fig. 1894.

 _Citron des Carmes._ =12.= _Pom. France_ =3=: No. 101, Pl. 101. 1865.
 =13.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:563, fig. 1867. =14.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
 548. 1884. =15.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 212, fig. 1906.

 _Gruene Magdalene._ =16.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 228. 1889.

Madeleine has long been a dependable summer variety, the crop of which
ripens just before that of Bloodgood. Many consider it the best very
early summer pear, and if the product alone were to be considered
it might well be called the best, but, unfortunately, the faults of
the trees more than offset the virtues of the fruits. The pears are
attractive in appearance, and very good in quality; but their season
is short, their skins are tender, and the flesh quickly softens at the
core. While the trees are productive, they are not resistant to blight,
do not hold their crop well, are tender to cold, and are short-lived.
The variety is worth planting only for the sake of succession in crop,
and in large collections of pears. The variety is recommended on the
Pacific slope for local markets.

The Madeleine pear is of ancient and somewhat uncertain origin. It was
cultivated by M. Le Lectier in his garden at Orleans in 1628, but
previously no other author had made mention of it, though M. Leroy,
writing in 1867, deemed it presumable that it had originated in France.
Besides its original names this pear has been known by some fifty
others in different localities and at different times, but Madeleine is
now its recognized name in this country. In England, it is known as the
_Citron des Carmes_. When and by whom it was introduced to America is
not clear, but it was a standard variety as early as 1831 when Prince
first described it. At the national convention of fruit-growers held in
1848, Madeleine was recommended for general cultivation, and ever since
this time the variety has appeared in the fruit-catalog of the American
Pomological Society.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright, open-topped, tender, productive; trunk
 shaggy; branches zigzag, light greenish-brown covered with gray
 scarf-skin; branchlets slender, long, reddish-brown mingled with
 green, mottled with ash-gray near the tips, smooth, glabrous, with
 small, raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, very short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 3 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide, thin; apex taper-pointed; margin glandless, finely
 serrate; petiole 1-3/4 in. long, glabrous, reddish-green. Flower-buds
 small, thick, short, conical, plump, free, distributed as lateral buds
 or on very short spurs; flowers showy, 1-3/8 in. across, in dense
 clusters, average 11 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/4 in. long,
 slightly pubescent.

 Fruit ripens in early August; inferior in size, 2-1/8 in. long, 2 in.
 wide, roundish-obtuse-pyriform; stem 1-1/2 in. long, thick, curved;
 cavity very shallow and narrow, or lacking, the flesh folded in a
 lip on one side of the stem; calyx partly open; lobes separated at
 the base, short, narrow, acuminate; basin shallow, narrow, obtuse,
 gently furrowed, symmetrical; skin thin, smooth, very tender; color
 dull green, occasionally with a faint, dotted, brownish blush; dots
 numerous, greenish, obscure; flesh slightly tinged yellow, granular
 at the center, tender and melting, very juicy, sweet, vinous; quality
 good to very good. Core closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube
 short, wide, conical; seeds wide, short, plump, acuminate.


[Illustration: MARGARET]

                               MARGARET

 =1.= _Horticulturist_ =21=:172, 245, fig. 80. 1866. =2.= _Am. Pom.
 Soc. Rpt._ 53. 1869. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 811. 1869. =4.= _Mo.
 Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 35, 36. 1890. =5.= _Guide Prat._ 68, 279. 1895.

 _Mary._ =6.= _Horticulturist_ =21=:78, figs. 43 and 44. 1866.

The fruits of Margaret are early and attractive in color and shape.
This is about all that can be said for them, as they run small in size,
and in neither flesh nor flavor can they compete with the product of
several other varieties of the same season. The trees are hardly more
desirable than the fruits, since they are tender to cold, blight badly,
and are short-lived, seldom attaining full size. Despite these defects
of fruit and tree, the variety is a one-time favorite still rather
commonly planted. Better summer pears can be found for New York, and
for almost every part of the country.

In the middle of the nineteenth century, Christopher Wiegel, a German
nurseryman of Cleveland, Ohio, planted some seeds which he believed
to have been from a Seckel pear. Out of the trees grown from these he
selected two for further trial "because of their early coming into
bearing, their upright, vigorous habits of growth, profuse bearing, and
good quality of fruit." In 1866, Mr. Wiegel named one of these _Mary_
but later changed the name to Margaret.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, spreading, somewhat drooping,
 open-topped, productive; trunk shaggy; branches brown mingled with
 much red, overspread with thin gray scarf-skin, marked by numerous
 lenticels; branchlets slender, long, with long internodes, light
 reddish-brown, streaked with ash-gray scarf-skin, glossy, smooth,
 glabrous except on the newer growth, with numerous small, roundish,
 raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, very short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 3 in. long,
 1-3/4 in. wide, thin; margin tipped with few pinkish glands, finely
 serrate; petiole 1-3/4 in. long, green; stipules of medium size.
 Flower-buds small, short, conical, pointed, free, singly on short
 spurs; flowers showy, 1-3/4 in. long, large, in dense clusters, 6 or 8
 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/8 in. long, thick, pubescent.

 Fruit matures in late August and early September; medium in size,
 3 in. long, 2-3/4 in. wide, oblong-obovate-pyriform, irregular;
 stem 1-1/4 in. long, thick, curved; cavity acuminate, deep, narrow,
 russeted, furrowed and compressed, often with a pronounced lip; calyx
 open, large; lobes separated at the base, broad, acute, reflexed;
 basin deep, abrupt, furrowed, often compressed; skin thin, tender,
 smooth; color dull greenish-yellow, often with a deep but dull
 reddish-brown blush and occasional patches of russet; dots numerous,
 small, green or russet, obscure; flesh fine under the skin but
 granular and gritty near the center; tender, buttery, very juicy,
 faintly vinous, slightly aromatic; quality good. Core large, closed,
 with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube long, wide, funnel-shaped; seeds
 large, wide, plump, obtuse or acute.


[Illustration: MARIE LOUISE]

                             MARIE LOUISE

 =1.= _Pom. Mag._ =3=:122, Pl. 1830. =2.= Prince _Pom. Mag._ =1=:131.
 1831. =3.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 179. 1832. =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees
 Am._ 399. 1845. =5.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:37, Pl. 1851. =6.= Dochnahl
 _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:59. 1856. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 70. 1862.
 =8.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:399, fig. 1869. =9.= _Guide Prat._ 59,
 287. 1876. =10.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 38, Pl. 38. 1882. =11.=
 Hogg. _Fruit Man._ 613. 1884. =12.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 251. 1889.

 _Marie-Louise Delcourt._ =13.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 19, Pl. 19.
 1863. =14.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1, 163, fig. 80. 1866-73.

The fruits of Marie Louise are among the perfections of Nature,
and were the tree more certain in bearing and less fastidious as
to environment and care, the variety would rank as one of the best
of all pears. Pomologists generally agree that its fruits are the
finest flavored of their season. The flesh is tender and melting,
very juicy, and the flavor is a most delectable commingling of
refreshing piquancy and scented sweetness. In shape, the pears resemble
those of Beurre Bosc, having the same trim contour, but the color
is very different--rich yellow, netted and sprinkled with russet,
and sun-flecked with red on the sunny side. The fruit is somewhat
susceptible to the scab fungus, and even the most careful spraying
fails to give it a fair cheek in some seasons. The trees are hardy
but only moderately vigorous, somewhat susceptible to blight, rather
uncertain in bearing, and vary much from season to season in abundance
and quality of product. Not at all suited for a commercial plantation,
Marie Louise is one of the choicest sorts for a home collection or in
the hands of a pear fancier.

The Abbe Duquesne, Mons, Belgium, raised this pear from seed in 1809
and dedicated it to Marie Louise, the second consort of Napoleon the
First. The Abbe passed the pear on to Van Mons, who in 1816 sent it
without a name to a Mr. Braddick of Thames Ditton, England, where
in time it became one of the best-known pears. Thomas Andrew Knight
sent cions of the variety from England to John Lowell, Roxbury,
Massachusetts, in 1823, whence it became widely disseminated in
America. The American Pomological Society placed Marie Louise in its
list of fruits in 1862.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, spreading, open-topped, hardy,
 productive; trunk slender; branches dark reddish-brown mingled with
 thin gray scarf-skin, marked with many large lenticels; branchlets
 very slender and very short, with short internodes, light brown,
 tinged with brownish-red, glossy, smooth, glabrous, with very small,
 slightly raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, sharply pointed, plump, free. Leaves 2-1/2
 in. long, 1-1/4 in. wide, narrow, short, oval or somewhat elongated,
 leathery; apex obtusely or slightly taper-pointed; margin glandless,
 entire; petiole 2 in. long, greenish, glabrous, slender. Flower-buds
 small, conical, free, arranged singly as lateral buds or on short
 spurs; flowers very showy, 1-3/4 in. across, in dense clusters, 7 to
 9 buds in a cluster; pedicels often 1-1/8 in. long, slender, slightly
 pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit ripe in late September and early October; above medium in size,
 3-1/8 in. long, 2-5/16 in. wide, variable in size, oblong-pyriform,
 irregular, usually with sides unequal; stem 1-1/8 in. long, thick,
 curved; cavity very small and one-sided, russeted, often lipped;
 calyx large, open; lobes separated at the base, narrow, acuminate;
 basin obtuse, considerably furrowed; skin thin, tender, smooth, dull;
 color yellow, netted and sprinkled with russet especially on the
 exposed cheek; dots numerous, small, russet, somewhat obscure; flesh
 yellowish-white, granular, tender, buttery, very juicy, aromatic, with
 a rich, vinous flavor; quality very good. Core closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, narrow, conical; seeds wide, acute.


[Illustration: MOUNT VERNON]

                             MOUNT VERNON

 =1.= _Am. Jour. Hort._ =3=:144, figs. 1868. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
 Am._ 818. 1869. =3.= _Horticulturist_ =24=:367, fig. 1869. =4.=
 _Ibid._ =26=:361. 1871. =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 20. 1871. =6.=
 _Horticulturist_ =27=:204. 1872. =7.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._
 =2=:256. 1903.

As a distinct type, and because the pears ripen at a season when there
are few other varieties of this fruit, Mount Vernon has a prominent
place in the list of worthy American pears. The top-shaped form and
reddish-russet color give the pear a unique appearance, and with
the greenish-yellow, granular, spicy, piquant flesh constitute very
distinct characters in its quality. Unfortunately, the russet color
is not well brought out in the accompanying color-plate. Lack of
uniformity in shape and size are the chief defects in the appearance
of the pears. The variety is valuable because it ripens its crop in
early winter from which time, under good conditions, it may be kept
until mid-winter, a season in which there are few good pears. The trees
are unusually satisfactory in most of the characters of importance in
a good pear-tree. The tree is vigorous but the head is small, with
numerous, short, stocky branches, many of which droop. The aspect given
the top by these peculiarities is quite distinct. The variety is worthy
when a winter pear is wanted whether for home or market.

This pear, which is very distinct from any other variety, originated
from a chance seedling in the garden of Samuel Walker, Roxbury,
Massachusetts, at the end of the first half of the nineteenth century.

 Tree large, vigorous, spreading, with many drooping branches,
 dense-topped, hardy, productive, long-lived; trunk stocky; branches
 thick, shaggy, reddish-brown, overcast with gray scarf-skin, marked
 by few large lenticels; branchlets thick, with short internodes,
 grayish-brown, smooth, glabrous, with a few large, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds variable in shape, usually free. Leaves 2-1/2 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide, oval, medium to thick, leathery; apex taper-pointed;
 margin crenate, tipped with rudimentary glands; petiole 1-1/4 in.
 long. Flower-buds large, long, conical or pointed, free; flowers 1-3/8
 in. across, in dense clusters, 7 to 9 buds in a cluster; pedicels 3/4
 in. long, slender, lightly pubescent, pale green, with a faint tinge
 of red.

 Fruit ripe in late October and November; medium in size, 2-1/2 in.
 long, 2-1/8 in. wide, uniform in size, roundish-obtuse-pyriform,
 irregular, with unequal sides, variable in shape; stem 1 in. long,
 thick, usually curved; cavity obtuse, very shallow and narrow,
 russeted, furrowed, often very heavily lipped, so that the stem
 appears to be inserted under a fleshy enlargement; calyx open; lobes
 short, narrow, acute to acuminate; basin narrow, obtuse, smooth,
 usually symmetrical; skin granular, roughened by russet, dull;
 color light russet overspreading a greenish-yellow ground, with a
 brownish-red blush on the exposed cheek, dotted and netted with
 russet; dots numerous, small, russet, obscure; flesh white, with
 a faint tinge of yellow, often with a green tinge under the skin,
 granular, tender and melting, juicy, sweet, aromatic, with a vinous
 tendency; quality good to very good. Core large, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds variable in size,
 wide, long, plump, acute, many abortive.


                           OLIVIER DE SERRES

 =1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:67, fig. 40. 1866-73. =2.= Downing _Fr.
 Trees. Am._ 822. 1869. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:477, fig. 1869.
 =4.= Tilton _Jour. Hort._ =9=:377, fig. 1871. =5.= Oberdieck
 _Obst-Sort._ 316. 1881. =6.= _Jour. Hort._ 3rd Ser. =4=:15, fig. 4.
 1882. =7.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 624. 1884. =8.= Gaucher _Pom. Prak.
 Obst._ No. 58, Pl. 51. 1894. =9.= _Deut. Obstsorten_ =5=: Pt. 15, Pl.
 1909.

This variety is rated in Europe as a delicious late-winter pear, and
the pomological writers of the last century give it all of the virtues
on this side of the Atlantic ascribed to it by Europeans. A closer
study of the variety as grown in America shows that it does not possess
the merits in this country given it by the French and English. The
quality of the pear as grown in New York is below that of several other
sorts of its season. The flesh is coarse and gritty and the flavor is
mediocre. The tree-characters are good, but are not sufficiently good
to offset the faults of the fruits.

Olivier de Serres was raised from seed of Fortunee about the middle
of the nineteenth century by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, France. It fruited
a few years later, but did not receive attention until about 1862.
At that time it was brought to the notice of the French Society of
Horticulture, and was pronounced a fruit of merit. At the suggestion
of M. Boisbunel, it was named after the illustrious Frenchman, Olivier
de Serres, who in France is called "The Father of Agriculture." It was
brought to America about 1865.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, dense-topped, upright-spreading,
 productive; trunk and branches marked with numerous lenticels;
 branchlets slender, short, curved, with short internodes, light
 reddish-brown, tinged with green, sprinkled with scattering,
 inconspicuous, very small, raised lenticels. Leaf-buds small, short,
 sharply pointed, free; leaf-scars with prominent shoulders. Leaves
 2-3/4 in. long, 1-1/4 in. wide; apex taper-pointed; margin glandular,
 finely serrate; petiole 2 in. long, slender. Flower-buds small,
 short, sharply pointed, free, singly on short spurs; flowers with an
 unpleasant odor, showy, 1-9/16 in. across; pedicels 1 in. long, thinly
 pubescent.

 Fruit ripens January to March; medium in size, 2-1/2 in. long, 2-3/4
 in. wide, roundish-obtuse-pyriform, truncate at both ends, irregular
 in outline; stem variable in length, averaging 3/4 in. long, thick,
 enlarged at the top, curved; cavity broad, slightly furrowed; calyx
 large, slightly open; basin variable in depth, furrowed; skin tender;
 color greenish-yellow, partly overspread with cinnamon-russet and
 sometimes with a dull blush on the exposed cheek; flesh whitish,
 variable in texture, juicy, varying from sweet to a brisk, vinous
 flavor; quality poor unless grown under the most favorable conditions.


[Illustration: ONONDAGA]

                               ONONDAGA

 =1.= _Horticulturist_ =1=:322, fig. 77. 1846-47. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Rpt._ 231. 1858. =3.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1, 179, fig. 88.
 1866-73. =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 823. fig. 1869. =5.= Leroy
 _Dict. Pom._ =2=:480, fig. 1869. =6.= _Guide Prat._ 74, 292. 1876.
 =7.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 625. 1884.

 _Swan's Orange._ =8.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:243, fig. 19. 1847. =9.= Hovey
 _Fr. Am._ =1=:21, Pl. 1851.

Some seventy or eighty years ago this pear was widely introduced under
the names _Onondaga_ and _Swan's Orange_, and for a generation and
more was much grown in eastern pear regions. It has now practically
passed from cultivation in commercial orchards, but is still to
be found in collections and home plantings. The fruits are large,
handsome, and of very good quality, resembling those of Bartlett in
flavor and with even better flesh-characters. The trees are vigorous,
hardy, fruitful--almost ideal in every character but one. The tree is
so susceptible to blight that the variety can never have commercial
value in American orchards. Whether or not it is worth planting in home
orchards depends upon the planter's willingness to suffer loss from
blight.

It seems impossible to trace this variety to its ultimate source.
We know, however, that Henry Case, Liverpool, New York, cut a graft
during the winter of 1806 from a tree growing on land of a Mr. Curtiss
at Farmington, Connecticut. In the spring of the same year, Mr. Case
grafted this cion into a tree about three miles west of Onondaga Hill,
New York, and in 1808 moved the tree to Liverpool where it grew and
bore fruit. Many grafts were taken from this tree before it died in
1823. Up to this time, the variety appears to have received no name nor
had it been generally disseminated. We hear nothing further of it until
about 1840 when it was brought to notice by a Mr. Swan of Onondaga
Hollow, who exhibited specimens of the variety in Rochester. Ellwanger
and Barry were so impressed with the fruit that they secured cions and
propagated it under the name _Swan's Orange_ which they changed later
to _Onondaga_. Onondaga was given a place in the American Pomological
Society's fruit-catalog in 1858.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, spreading, open-topped, very
 productive; branches zigzag, reddish-brown, overspread with thin gray
 scarf-skin, marked with many large lenticels; branchlets slender,
 short, light brown, tinged with green and lightly streaked with
 ash-gray scarf-skin, dull, smooth, the new growth slightly pubescent,
 with small, raised, pinkish lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, sharply pointed, plump, free. Leaves 3-1/16
 in. long, 1-1/4 in. wide, narrow, oval, stiff, leathery; apex
 taper-pointed; margin coarsely but shallowly serrate, tipped with
 many reddish glands; petiole 1-7/8 in. long, light green mingled with
 red; stipules often lacking but when present very small, pale green.
 Flower-buds small, short, conical, plump, free, arranged singly on
 very short spurs; blossoms 1-1/8 in. across, in dense clusters, 7 to 8
 buds in a cluster; pedicels pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit ripe in early October; above medium to large, 2-3/4 in. long,
 2-1/2 in. wide, ovate or obovate-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical, with
 unequal sides; stem 5/8 in. long, thick, curved; cavity a slight
 depression, with a fleshy enlargement at one side of the stem; calyx
 closed; lobes narrow, acute; basin narrow, obtuse, furrowed, uneven;
 skin granular, tender, smooth, dull; color pale yellow, with few lines
 of russet and with many russet spots; dots numerous, small, russet,
 conspicuous; flesh yellowish, granular both near the skin and at the
 center, melting, buttery, very juicy, aromatic, with a sweet, rich,
 vinous flavor; quality very good. Core large, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube long, conical; seeds narrow, long, acute.


[Illustration: ONTARIO]

                                ONTARIO

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 200, fig. 1856. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
 529. 1857. =3.= _Horticulturist_ N. S. =7=:112, fig. 1857. =4.= _Mag.
 Hort._ =23=:110, fig. 3. 1857. =5.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 2, 85,
 fig. 139. 1866-73. =6.= _Horticulturist_ =23=:331, fig. 102. 1868.
 =7.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 824. 1869. =8.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._
 463, fig. 672. 1897.

This variety was introduced nearly seventy years ago with the
expectation that the crop would follow that of Bartlett and be in as
great demand. While the variety did not come up to expectations, it
seems to have been too good to discard, and is to be found in many
collections in New York. The fruits are of the type of Bartlett, but
are smaller and usually lack the blush found on the fruits of Bartlett.
The trees are very satisfactory. The variety fails chiefly in the small
size of the fruits, although these are not as small as the rather poor
specimens illustrated in the accompanying plate, which were grown on
the grounds of this Station where the pears run below the average.

This variety was raised from seed of Canandaigua in the nurseries
of W. and T. Smith, Geneva, Ontario County, New York, and was first
introduced at the meeting of the American Pomological Society,
Rochester, New York, in 1856.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright, open-topped, hardy, productive; trunk
 stocky; branches thick, roughish, dull reddish-brown, overspread with
 dark ash-gray scarf-skin, marked by small lenticels; branchlets thick,
 very short, with short internodes, light brown mingled with green,
 smooth, glabrous, with small, raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, free. Leaves 2 in. long, 1-1/2 in.
 wide, oval, thin, leathery, slightly curled under along the margins;
 apex abruptly pointed; margin glandular toward the apex, very finely
 serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in. long. Flower-buds small, short, conical or
 pointed, plump, free, singly or in small clusters on short branches or
 very short spurs; flowers 1-1/8 in. across, in a scattering raceme,
 from 8 to 10 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/4 in. long, slender,
 pubescent, light green.

 Fruit in season from the middle to the last of September; medium in
 size, 2-1/2 in. long, 1-7/8 in. wide, uniform in size and shape,
 oblong-pyriform, with sides usually unequal; stem 3/4 in. long, thick;
 cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow, often russeted and lipped; calyx open;
 lobes separated at the base, narrow, acute; basin shallow to medium,
 obtuse, gently furrowed, sometimes compressed; skin smooth, dull;
 color pale yellow, with small patches and streaks of light-colored
 russet; dots numerous, very small, russet, obscure; flesh whitish,
 with a yellow tinge at the core, granular, firm but tender, juicy,
 sweet, slightly aromatic; quality good. Core closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long,
 plump, acute.


[Illustration: P. BARRY]

                               P. BARRY

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 38. 1875. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 2d
 App. 152, fig. 1876. =3.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 18. 1882. =4.=
 Wickson _Cal. Fruits_ 340. 1889. =5.= Ellwanger & Barry _Cat._ 20.
 1892. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 17, 68. 1895. =7.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Cat._ 41. 1909. =8.= Wickson _Cal. Fruits_ 273. 1919.

The fruits of P. Barry are among the latest of all the pears grown on
the grounds of the New York Agricultural Experiment Station. They do
not ripen here until mid-winter and then keep until spring. A serious
defect is that they sometimes refuse to ripen but shrivel until decay
sets in late in the spring. To make certain that the pears ripen
properly, the fruit-room must not be too cold. The pears are excellent
in flavor, have good flesh-characters, and when properly ripened are
excelled in quality by no other winter pear. The variety should have a
place in the collection of every pear fancier to extend the season for
this fruit, and commercial pear growers might find it a profitable sort
for local market. Unfortunately, the trees are small, fastidious as to
environment, and somewhat uncertain in bearing.

Bernard S. Fox, San Jose, California, raised many pears from seed of
Belle Lucrative. Among these seedlings was one which fruited in 1873
and was named P. Barry, in honor of Patrick Barry,[31] an eminent
nurseryman and horticulturist of Rochester, New York. Of many scores
of seedlings raised by Mr. Fox only this one, Fox, and Colonel Wilder
were considered by the originator to be worthy of propagation. All
these received Wilder medals from the American Pomological Society in
1875 and 1881. In 1909, this Society added P. Barry to its catalog-list
of fruits.

 Tree variable in size, lacking in vigor, spreading, open-topped,
 unusually hardy, medium in productiveness; trunk slender; branches
 stocky, zigzag, reddish-brown mingled with gray scarf-skin, marked
 with large lenticels; branchlets slender, long, with long internodes,
 reddish-brown, smooth, glabrous, with few small, very slightly raised
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, free. Leaves 1-3/4 in. long, 1-1/8
 in. wide, leathery; apex abruptly pointed; margin finely serrate,
 tipped with few glands; petiole 1-1/2 in. long. Flower-buds small,
 short, somewhat obtuse, free; flowers open late, 1-1/4 in. across,
 well distributed, averaging 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1 in. long,
 slender, slightly pubescent, pale green.

 Fruit matures in late December to February; variable in size,
 averaging 2-3/4 in. long, 2-1/4 in. wide, oblong-obtuse-pyriform,
 irregular, with unequal sides; stem 1 in. long, thick, curved; cavity
 obtuse, narrow, furrowed, compressed, often lipped; calyx small, open;
 lobes separated at the base, short, narrow, obtuse; basin shallow,
 narrow, obtuse, smooth and regular; skin variable in smoothness,
 dull; color rich yellow, many specimens almost entirely overspread
 with russet or with russet coating around the cavity and with russet
 nettings and patches; dots numerous, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh
 yellowish-white, fine, melting, sweet, juicy, with a rich, vinous,
 aromatic flavor; quality good. Core large, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, conical; seeds large, wide, long, plump,
 acute.


[Illustration: PASSE COLMAR]

                             PASSE COLMAR

 =1.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =5=:410. 1824. =2.= Lindley _Guide
 Orch. Gard._ 403. 1831. =3.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:101. 1831. =4.=
 Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ =444=, fig. 205. 1845. =5.= _Gard. Chron._
 185, fig. 1845. =6.= _Mag. Hort._ =15=:445, fig. 39. 1849. =7.= _Gard.
 Chron._ 989. 1861. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 70, 1862. =9.= _Pom.
 France_ =1=: No. 2, Pl. 2. 1863. =10.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:121, fig.
 59. 1866-73. =11.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:499, figs. 1869. =12.=
 _Guide Prat._ 60, 293. 1876. =13.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 627. 1884. =14.=
 _Soc. Nat. Hort. France Pom._ 436, fig. 1904.

 _Preul's Colmar._ =15.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ =104=. 1825.

 _Regentin._ =16.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:103. 1856. =17.=
 Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 268. 1889. =18.= Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No.
 =61=, Pl. 88. 1894.

Little known in America, this is one of the standard winter pears
in England. The fruits are exceedingly sugary, mildly spiced with
cinnamon, a flavor so unique, especially when compared with the piquant
flavor most common in winter pears, that the variety is worth growing
where it succeeds for the sake of diversity. The chief fault of the
variety is variability of product. On unsuitable soils and under
indifferent care, the pears are unattractive and poor in quality. The
accompanying illustration, it is to be feared, shows the variety at its
worst rather than at its best, since it does not thrive on the heavy,
cold clay of the Station lands. Under conditions at this Station, the
flesh is crisp and gritty, rather than buttery and fine as it seems
to be under more suitable conditions. The trees are very vigorous
on standard stocks and heavy soils, with the result that the fruits
are many but small and poor; checking vigor by dwarfing on quince or
planting on poor soil suits the variety. The trees are hardy and as
free as the average pear from blight. The variety is a good winter sort
for home or market.

This variety was raised in 1758 at Mons by the Abbe Hardenpont, the
Belgian priest and horticulturist. Extensively cultivated in Belgium,
it acquired a great diversity of names in different localities.
From that country it passed first to Germany toward the end of the
eighteenth century, and early in the nineteenth was taken to France.
Soon after the close of the Napoleonic wars, about 1817, it was
received in England. Within a few years after its introduction in
England, the variety found its way to America where, for a time, it was
quite extensively grown. The American Pomological Society added Passe
Colmar to its fruit-list in 1862 but dropped it in 1899.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright, tall, rapid-growing,
 productive; trunk slender; branches medium in thickness and
 smoothness, reddish-brown almost entirely overspread with thick, gray
 scarf-skin, marked by large, conspicuous lenticels; branchlets thick,
 long, light brown mingled with green, dull, smooth, pubescent only
 near the ends of the new growth, sprinkled with few small, raised,
 inconspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds short, plump, free, thick at the base; leaf-scars with
 prominent shoulders. Leaves 3 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, leathery;
 apex taper-pointed; margin tipped with few small glands, finely
 serrate to nearly entire; petiole 2 in. long, glabrous, pinkish-green.
 Flower-buds small, short, thick, conical, plump, free, singly as
 lateral buds or on very short spurs; flowers late, showy, 1-3/4 in.
 across, unusually large, in dense clusters, average 6 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 3/4 in. long, thick, thinly pubescent.

 Fruit ripe December to January; medium in size, 2-1/2 in. long, 2-1/8
 in. wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, somewhat irregular; stem 1 in.
 long, very thick; cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow, russeted, slightly
 furrowed; calyx partly open; lobes separated at the base, rather
 narrow, acute; basin shallow, narrow, obtuse, gently furrowed; skin
 thick, granular, tender, roughish; color greenish-yellow, sprinkled
 with reddish-brown and russet patches and nettings; dots numerous,
 small, russet, obscure; flesh tinged with yellow, granular, tender,
 buttery, very juicy, sweet, vinous, aromatic; quality very good. Core
 large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide,
 conical; seeds large, wide, plump, acute.


[Illustration: PITMASTON]

                               PITMASTON

 =1.= _Can. Hort._ =26=:129, fig. 2564. 1903. =2.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr.
 Ont._ 173, fig. 1914.

 _Pitmaston Duchesse d'Angouleme._ =3.= _Gard. Chron._ 1108, fig. 1864.
 =4.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 55. 1871.

 _Pitmaston Duchess._ =5.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =18=:11, fig. 1870. =6.=
 Tilton _Jour. Hort._ =7=:239, fig. 1870. =7.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S.
 38:201, fig. 30. 1880. =8.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 631. 1884. =9.= _Gard.
 Chron._ 3rd Ser. =4=:608. 1888. =10.= _Rev. Hort._ 196, 651. 1900.
 =11.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 193. 1920.

Although this fine old English pear has more than ordinary merit, it
seems to be little grown in America. In appearance, the pears are
unsurpassed. The accompanying color-plate shows the shape and color
very well, but not the size, as, well grown, the pears are larger. From
the illustration, all must agree that the pears are handsome, fruits of
few other sorts being so alluring in shape and color. On warm soils or
in warm seasons, the flavor is choicely good giving the pears a rating
of "good to very good;" but in cold soils and seasons, the flavor is
often austere, or even acid and astringent. The season prolongs that
of Bartlett, and as the fruits are flavored very differently, being
more piquant and refreshing, and are ordinarily larger and handsomer,
Pitmaston ought to make a good market variety where it thrives. The
subacid flavor makes this one of the very best pears for culinary
purposes. Such reports as are at hand state that the fruits keep and
ship well. The variety seems not to have been grown widely in America,
so that one cannot speak with assurance of the tree-characters; but on
the grounds of this Station, the trees have fewer faults than those of
most of the standard varieties. They are hardy, vigorous, fairly immune
to blight, and while but moderately productive, bear annually, and the
large size of the fruits makes them high yielders. The variety should
be put on probation by those who grow for the markets, and is well
worthy a place in all home orchards.

Pitmaston was raised by John Williams at Pitmaston, near Worcester,
England, in 1841. It has been generally stated that it originated
from a cross between Duchesse d'Angouleme and Glou Morceau, although
an old gardener, who was employed by Mr. Williams, stated that there
was no record whatever of its parentage, but that it was the best of
a number of seedlings. For some time it was known as the _Pitmaston
Duchesse d'Angouleme_ on account of the theory of its derivation in
part from the Duchesse d'Angouleme; but in 1870 its name was simplified
in England to _Pitmaston Duchess_. In 1874 it obtained a first-class
certificate from the Royal Horticultural Society, England. In this
country it was first fruited by John Saul, Washington, District of
Columbia, in 1870, and was noted and illustrated by Elliott in the
_Rural New Yorker_ under the name _Pitmaston Duchesse d'Angouleme_.
Although favorably mentioned several times by the American Pomological
Society, the variety has never received a place in the Society's
fruit-catalog.

 Tree large, vigorous, spreading, dense-topped, moderately productive;
 trunk stocky, shaggy; branches thick, slightly zigzag, reddish-brown,
 overlaid with very dark grayish scarf-skin, marked with numerous
 large lenticels; branchlets long, dull, dark reddish-brown, roughish,
 glabrous, with numerous small, raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds short, obtuse, appressed; leaf-scars prominent. Leaves 2-1/2
 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, leathery; apex abruptly pointed; margin
 finely serrate; petiole 1-3/4 in. long. Flower-buds short, conical,
 pointed, free; flowers showy, 1-3/4 in. across, well distributed,
 average 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1 in. long, pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in October; large, 3-3/4 in. long, 3 in. wide,
 oblong-obovate-pyriform, symmetrical; stem 1 in. long, thick, often
 curved; cavity very shallow and very narrow, or lacking, the flesh
 drawn up in a wrinkled fold around the base of the stem, often lipped;
 calyx closed, large; lobes long, broad, acute; basin shallow, obtuse,
 furrowed and wrinkled; skin thin, granular, smooth, tender, dull;
 color pale lemon-yellow, dotted and somewhat patched with light russet
 especially around the stem, without blush; dots numerous, small,
 russet, conspicuous; flesh tinged with yellow, somewhat granular,
 melting, buttery, very juicy, piquant and vinous; quality good to very
 good. Core large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short,
 wide, conical; seeds narrow, long, flat, acute, very often abortive.


[Illustration: POUND]

                                 POUND

 =1.= Coxe _Cult. Fr. Trees_ 209, fig. 63. 1817. =2.= Prince _Pom.
 Man._ =1=:149. 1831. =3.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 151. 1832. =4.= Downing
 _Fr. Trees Am._ 445. 1845. =5.= _Ibid._ 835. 1869. =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Cat._ 22. 1871. =7.= Wickson _Cal. Fruits_ 326, 338, 344. 1889.

 _Pickering._ =8.= Langley _Pomona_ 133, Pl. 71, fig. 1. 1729.

 _Union._ =9.= Miller _Gard. Kal._ 31, 54. 1734. =10.= Miller _Gard.
 Dict._ =2=: Pt. 1. 1807.

 _Uvedale's St. Germain._ =11.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 413. 1831.
 =12.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 70. 1862. =13.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 657.
 1884. =14.= _Jour. Hort._ 3rd Ser. =13=:465. 1886. =15.= Bunyard
 _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 202. 1920.

 _Bruderbirne._ =16.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:148. 1856.

 _Winter Bell._ =17.= Watson _Am. Home Gard._ 404, fig. 264. 1859.

 _Belle Angevine._ =18.= _Gard. Chron._ 979. 1860. =19.= Mas _Le
 Verger_ =1=:31 bis, fig. 22. 1866-73. =20.= _Gard. Chron._ 138. 1869.
 =21.= _Guide Prat._ 61, 233. 1876.

 _Schoene Angevine._ =22.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 279. 1889.

Pound is grown in collections for its monstrous fruits, which have few
virtues other than large size. The pears not infrequently weigh three
pounds, and one is noted in the next paragraph weighing four pounds,
nine ounces. The pears are coarse in form, texture and flavor--but one
degree better in flavor than the potato-like fruits of Kieffer and even
more sappy. The pears keep well and are said to be fairly good for
culinary purposes. The trees are unusually satisfactory, because of
which the variety should make a good parent from which to breed.

The name "Pound" has been applied to a number of varieties, notably
Black Worcester, Angora, Verulam, and others. The variety now known as
Pound in America is more generally known in Europe as _Belle Angevine_
or _Uvedale's St. Germain_. This sort appears to have been raised by a
Dr. Uvedale, who was a schoolmaster at Eltham, England, in 1690. Miller
in his Dictionary, in 1724, speaks of him as a Dr. Udal of Enfield,
"a curious collector and introducer of many rare exotics, plants and
flowers," and Bradley, in 1733, speaks of the pear as "Dr. Udale's
great pear, called by some the _Union_ pear." William Robert Prince
mentions the Pound pear in 1831 saying that "it often weighs from
twenty-five to thirty ounces, and one was exhibited in New Jersey about
four years since, weighing forty and a half ounces." In 1870, according
to Wickson, a Pound pear sent from Sacramento to the late Marshall P.
Wilder, President of the American Pomological Society, weighed four
pounds and nine ounces. In 1862, the American Pomological Society
added this variety to its fruit-catalog under the name _Uvedale's St.
Germain_, but in 1871 changed the name to Pound. The name continued to
appear in the Society's catalogs until 1909 when it was dropped.

 Tree medium in size, upright, dense-topped, hardy, very productive;
 trunk stocky, shaggy; branches thick, shaggy, zigzag, dull
 reddish-brown, heavily covered with gray scarf-skin, marked with
 many large lenticels; branchlets short, with short internodes,
 brownish-red, mottled with gray scarf-skin, smooth, glabrous, with few
 small, elongated lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, long, conical or pointed, plump, free; leaf-scars
 prominent. Leaves 4-1/4 in. long, 3-3/4 in. wide, ovate, thin, stiff;
 apex taper-pointed; margin glandular, finely serrate; petiole 1-3/4
 in. long, slender. Flower-buds large, long, conical or pointed, very
 plump, free, usually singly on short spurs; flowers open early, 1-3/8
 in. across, large, well distributed, average 7 buds in a cluster;
 pedicels 1-1/2 in. long, pubescent, pale green.

 Fruit matures in February; large, 4 in. long, 2-7/8 in. wide, uniform
 in size and shape, obovate-acute-pyriform, with unequal sides; stem
 long, thick, curved; cavity obtuse, very shallow, narrow, russeted,
 furrowed, drawn up in a fleshy ring about the stem; calyx large, open;
 lobes separated at the base, obtuse; basin shallow, narrow, obtuse,
 slightly furrowed, symmetrical; skin thick, tough, with patches of
 russet, dull, roughened by the dots and by the russet markings;
 color golden-yellow, often marked on the exposed cheek with a bronze
 or pinkish blush; dots numerous, russet, very conspicuous; flesh
 yellowish, firm, granular, very tough, subacid, inferior in flavor;
 quality very poor. Core large, closed, axile, with meeting core-lines;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; carpels pear-shaped; seeds very
 large, brownish-black, wide, long, acuminate.


[Illustration: PRESIDENT DROUARD]

                           PRESIDENT DROUARD

 =1.= _Gard. Chron._ N. S. =25=:431. 1886. =2.= _Guide Prat._ 51. 1895.
 =3.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 331, fig. 1906.

 _Praesident Drouard._ =4.= Lucas _Tafelbirnen_ 211, fig. 1894.

 _Drouard._ =5.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 35. 1899. =6.= Budd-Hansen _Am.
 Hort. Man._ =2=:241. 1903. =7.= _Mich. Sta. Sp. Bul._ =27=:22. 1903.

President Drouard has been on probation in the United States for nearly
thirty years, but does not seem to be in great demand in any part of
the country. In the pear-growing region of New York to which it first
came, it is scarcely known. The accompanying description shows that
the fruits contain all of the requisites of a good pear. The flesh is
juicy, melting, saccharine, rich, and perfumed. The trees, however,
are not satisfactory. They lack vigor, blight badly, and are niggardly
in bearing. With these faults, there is no place for the variety in
commercial plantations, but it may well be planted in home orchards and
in collections.

President Drouard is a chance seedling found in the suburbs of
Pont-de-Ce, Maine-et-Loire, France, by M. Olivier, gardener at the
Fruit-Garden at Angers. It was sent out by M. Louis Leroy of Angers and
was described in 1886 as a new pear. It seems to have been introduced
in this country by Charles A. Green, Rochester, New York. The American
Pomological Society added the variety to its list of fruits under the
name _Drouard_ in 1899.

 Tree of medium size, spreading, open-topped, usually hardy; branches
 reddish-brown, nearly covered with gray scarf-skin, marked with
 small lenticels; branchlets thick, long, greenish-brown mingled with
 red, dull, smooth, pubescent on the new growth, with numerous small,
 brownish, raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, plump, free; leaf-scars with very
 prominent shoulders; Leaves 3 in. long, 1-3/4 in. wide, oval, thick,
 leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin glandless or with but few
 glands, entire or closely serrate; petiole glabrous, greenish, thick,
 1-5/8 in. long, tinged red; stipules very short, tinged with pink.
 Flower-buds short, conical, very plump, free, arranged singly on short
 spurs; flowers 1-3/8 in. across, in dense clusters, 6 to 9 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 1-1/8 in. long, lightly pubscent, greenish.

 Fruit in season from late November to December; large, 3-1/2 in. long,
 3 in. wide, oblong-obovate-pyriform, with unequal sides, uniform
 in shape; stem 1 in. long, very thick and woody; cavity obtuse,
 deep, irregular, furrowed, usually lipped; calyx large, open; lobes
 separated at the base, long, narrow, acuminate; basin deep, abrupt,
 usually smooth but sometimes gently furrowed; skin thick, tough,
 rough, dull; color clear lemon-yellow, with nettings and streaks of
 russet; dots numerous, small, russet, obscure; flesh tinged with
 yellow, very granular at the core, tender and melting, buttery,
 juicy, aromatic, sweet; quality good. Core large, closed, axile, with
 clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large,
 wide, long, plump, acute, occasionally abortive.


[Illustration: REEDER]

                                REEDER

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 40. 1883. =2.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._
 =2=:260. 1903.

 _Reeder's Seedling._ =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 150. 1867.

 _Doctor Reeder._ =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 739, fig. 1869. =5.=
 _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 20. 1871.

 _Docteur Rheder._ =6.= _Rev. Hort._ 87. 1889.

Reeder is another of the pears too good to discard, and not quite good
enough to give an ardent recommendation. In quality, the fruits rank
but little below those of Seckel; are about the same size as grown
under average conditions; but are even duller and less attractive in
color than the modest fruits of Seckel, which is probably one of its
parents. The fruits have a place in the home and markets as a pear to
follow Seckel, the crop coming in season just after that of Seckel
passes out. The trees do poorly in the nursery, as they make but a
short, slender growth until well established in the orchard, after
which they become of medium size but very vigorous. The branches
droop as do those of Winter Nelis, the other parent, although not
so markedly. The variety is as nearly blight-proof as either of its
parents.

Reeder is a seedling raised about 1855 by Dr. Henry Reeder, Varick, New
York, from seed of Winter Nelis. The parent tree stood near a Seckel
and it is considered that Reeder is a cross between the two varieties.
The American Pomological Society added the variety to its fruit-catalog
in 1871 under the name _Doctor Reeder_, but in 1883 changed the name to
Reeder.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, spreading, drooping, open-topped,
 productive; branches zigzag, reddish-brown partly overspread with gray
 scarf-skin, sprinkled with numerous lenticels; branchlets slender,
 willowy, long, reddish-brown mingled with gray, the new growth
 reddish-green, dull, smooth, glabrous except near the tips of the new
 growth, with few very small, inconspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 2-3/4 in. long,
 1-1/4 in. wide, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin crenate to nearly
 entire; petiole 2 in. long, tinged with red; stipules few, very small,
 reddish-green. Flower-buds small, short, conical, free, singly on
 short spurs; flowers 1-1/4 in. across, in dense clusters, average 9
 buds in a cluster; pedicels 3/4 in. long, slender.

 Fruit ripe in October and November; small, 1-3/4 in. long, 1-7/8 in.
 wide, globular-obtuse-pyriform, slightly ribbed and irregular; stem
 1-1/4 in. long, slender, curved; cavity a very small depression in
 which is inserted the base of the stem, symmetrical; calyx large,
 open; lobes separated at the base, long, narrow, reflexed, acuminate;
 basin very shallow and narrow, smooth; skin thick, smooth, tender;
 color dull greenish-yellow, mottled and streaked with russet, blushed
 faintly on the exposed cheek with brownish-red; dots few, small,
 obscure, greenish or russet; flesh white, granular toward the center
 but fine-grained near the skin, tender, somewhat stringy, very juicy,
 aromatic; quality good. Core large, closed, with clasping core-lines;
 calyx-tube long, narrow, funnel-shaped; seeds unusually large, wide,
 long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: RIEHL BEST]

                              RIEHL BEST

 =1.= Stark Bros. _Cat._ 18. 1912. =2.= _Ibid._ 55. 1916.

Riehl Best is described among the major varieties because it is as
nearly blight-proof as any other European pear. It might well be
tried in localities where standard sorts cannot be raised because of
blight, and is worth growing in breeding work as a parent to obtain
blight-resistant varieties. The pears are rather unattractive in
appearance, but are excellent in quality. The flesh is juicy, tender,
vinous, free from grittiness and seldom rots at the core. The trees,
besides being nearly free from blight, are hardy to heat and cold, and
bear annually. The fruits fall far short of those of standard varieties
in New York.

This pear was discovered by Edwin H. Riehl, Godfrey, Illinois, and was
introduced by Stark Brothers, Louisiana, Missouri. Mr. Riehl says: "The
farm on which the original tree stood was owned by a pioneer nurseryman
who evidently imported from France a number of varieties, some perhaps
without name. Riehl Best trees and several hundreds of other varieties
represent the remains of three old orchards planted fifty years ago.
Trees of other varieties are ruined by blight while Riehl Best is
in perfect health and bears every season." From this history it is
probable that Riehl Best is an old European pear renamed.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright, dense-topped, rapid-growing,
 productive; trunk stocky; branches thick, light reddish-brown,
 overspread with thin scarf-skin, marked with large, conspicuous,
 numerous lenticels; branchlets slender, often willowy, long,
 greenish-brown, dull, smooth, pubescent only near the ends of the new
 growth, sprinkled with small, slightly raised, inconspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, plump, free; leaf-scars with
 prominent shoulders. Leaves 3 in. long, 1-3/4 in. wide, thick; apex
 abruptly pointed; margin glandless, variable in serrations; petiole 2
 in. long. Flower-buds small, short, conical, plump, free, singly on
 short spurs; flowers 1-5/8 in. across, in dense clusters, average 6
 buds in a cluster; pedicels 7/8 in. long, lightly pubescent.

 Fruit ripens in October; medium in size, 2-1/2 in. long, 2 in. wide,
 obovate-conic-pyriform, irregular, with unequal sides; stem 1-1/8 in.
 long; cavity very shallow and narrow when present, or lacking, the
 flesh drawn up in a lip on one side of the stem; calyx open; lobes
 separated at the base, broad, obtuse; basin obtuse, furrowed; skin
 thick, roughened with russet; color dull yellow, largely overlaid
 with patches of russet, marked with distinct russet dots and with a
 faint trace of a pinkish-red blush on the cheek next the sun; dots
 numerous, russet, conspicuous; flesh tinged with yellow, granular
 under the skin, tender, moderately juicy, vinous; quality good. Core
 large, closed, axile, with meeting core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide,
 conical; carpels ovate; seeds medium in size, width, and plumpness,
 obtuse.


[Illustration: ROOSEVELT]

                               ROOSEVELT

 =1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =37=:243, fig. 92. 1905. =2.= _Rev.
 Hort._ 454. 1905. =3.= _Rural N. Y._ =54=:826, fig. 352. 1905. =4.=
 Bunyard _Cat._ 43. 1913-14. =5.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 195. 1920.

This variety is still on probation in America, with the chances
strongly against it proving worthy to bear the name of the man after
whom it was called. On the grounds of the New York Agricultural
Experiment Station, the fruits are too small, too poorly colored, and
too poor in quality to compete with those of a score of other sorts
of the same season. The core is remarkably small, and the seeds are
few and small, but these are insufficient merits to count against the
several defects named. The tree is robust and generally satisfactory.
The variety may not be at its best on the grounds of this Station, as
in Europe it was heralded as a most remarkable sort--one "destined to
bring about a revolution in pear-growing." It may be worth further
trial in New York.

This pear was introduced in 1905 by the noted French pomologist Charles
Baltet, Troyes, France, after he had tested it for several years.
He named it after President Roosevelt. The variety was approved at
Horticultural Congresses in Paris, Lyons, and Orleans, as well as by
the Royal Horticultural Society of London. It was received in America
shortly after its dissemination in France.

 Tree medium to large, vigorous, very upright, dense-topped,
 rapid-growing, productive; trunk slender, smooth; branches slender,
 smooth, glossy reddish-brown, mottled and overlaid with gray
 scarf-skin, marked with numerous small, raised lenticels; branchlets
 characteristically thick, with blunt ends, long, with short
 internodes, dull reddish-brown mingled with gray scarf-skin, smooth,
 glabrous, with many large, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds long, conical, sharply pointed, plump, free; leaf-scars with
 prominent shoulders. Leaves 3 in. long, 1-3/8 in. wide, stiff; apex
 taper-pointed; margin usually glandless, finely serrate to almost
 entire; petiole 2 in. long, slender, curved. Flower-buds large,
 long, conical, pointed, free, singly on short spurs; flowers with a
 disagreeable odor, early, showy, 1-5/8 in. across, in dense clusters,
 average 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/8 in. long, thick, pubescent.

 Fruit ripens in late September and October; medium in size, about
 2-7/16 in. in length and width, roundish-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical;
 stem 1 in. long, thick; cavity very shallow, or lacking, faintly
 lipped; calyx very open, large; lobes separated at the base, narrow,
 acute; basin shallow, wide, obtuse, smooth, symmetrical; skin
 unusually thick, tough, smooth, dull; color pale lemon-yellow, mottled
 and netted with russet, with a faint blush; dots numerous, small,
 light russet, obscure; flesh light salmon, fine-grained except at
 the center which is granular, tender and melting, very juicy, mildly
 sweet, without much character; quality medium. Core small, closed,
 axile, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube long, very wide, conical;
 carpels cordate; seeds wide, acute.


[Illustration: RUTTER]

                                RUTTER

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 151. 1867. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 24.
 1869. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 848, fig. 1869.

Rutter does not seem to have made a very high place for itself in the
country at large, but about Geneva, New York, it is a most excellent
late autumn variety. The pears are good or very good in quality,
rather attractive, keep well, ship well, and sell well to those who
know the variety. The trees have a combination of good characters
that commend them most highly. Thus, they are comparatively immune to
blight, enormously productive, bear early, grow rapidly, live long, and
are hardy. The fruits hang exceptionally well to the trees, so that
the variety is a valuable one for exposed situations. Rutter can be
recommended for both home and market plantations.

This variety was raised by John Rutter, West Chester, Pennsylvania,
from seed of Leon Leclerc (Van Mons) about sixty years ago. It was
approved by the Committee on New Native Fruits of the American
Pomological Society in 1867. This Society placed the variety on its
list of recommended fruits in 1869.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright, dense-topped, rapid-growing,
 productive; trunk stocky; branches thick, reddish-brown, covered
 with gray scarf-skin, sprinkled with very conspicuous lenticels;
 branchlets long, light brown mingled with green and streaked with
 ash-gray scarf-skin, smooth, glabrous, with small, conspicuous, raised
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds long, conical, pointed, plump, free. Leaves 3-3/8 in. long,
 1-5/8 in. wide, thick, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin nearly
 glandless, almost entire; petiole 2 in. long, glabrous, reddish-green.
 Flower-buds medium in size and length, conical, plump, free, singly on
 short spurs; flowers very showy, 1-3/8 in. across, almost in racemes,
 6 or 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/4 in. long, pubescent.

 Fruit matures in late October and early November; large, 3-1/8 in.
 long, 3 in. wide, roundish-obtuse-pyriform, with a very thick, blunt
 neck, with unequal sides; stem 3/4 in. long, thick, woody; cavity
 acuminate, unusually large, deep, russeted, occasionally furrowed and
 wrinkled, slightly lipped; calyx small, open; lobes separated at the
 base, short, narrow, acute; basin deep, obtuse, smooth, symmetrical;
 skin thick, gritty, roughish, dull; color yellow, overspread with
 light russet, mottled and flecked with russet; dots numerous, small,
 russet, conspicuous; flesh whitish, granular at the center, tender and
 melting, juicy, aromatic, sweet but refreshing; quality good to very
 good. Core small, closed, abaxile, with meeting core-lines; calyx-tube
 long, conical; seeds small, roundish, plump, obtuse.


[Illustration: SECKEL]

                                SECKEL

 =1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:139. 1831. =2.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 183.
 1832. =3.= _Gard. Chron._ 708, fig. 1842. =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
 415, fig. 188. 1845. =5.= _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr. Gr._ 51. 1848. =6.=
 Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:33, Pl. 1851. =7.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:457, fig.
 34. 1853. =8.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1, 29, fig. 13. 1866-73. =9.=
 Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:656, figs. 1869. =10.= _Guide Prat._ 63, 303.
 1876.

 _Seckle._ =11.= Coxe _Cult. Fr. Trees_ 189, fig. 25. 1817. =12.=
 _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =3=:256, Pl. 9. 1820. =13.= _Pom. Mag._
 =2=:72, Pl. 1829. =14.= _Hort. Reg._ (Eng.) =1=:488. 1833. =15.=
 _Pom. France_ =2=: No. 64, Pl. 64. 1864. =16.= _Jour. Hort._ 3rd
 Ser. =4=:128. 1882. =17.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 644. 1884. =18.= Bunyard
 _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 197. 1920.

Seckel is an American pear distinct in type from any European variety.
Among the several hundred pears that are grown on this side of the
Atlantic, Seckel stands almost alone in vigor of tree, productiveness,
and immunity to blight, and is equalled by no other variety in high
quality of fruit. If the fruits were larger, Seckel would challenge
the world as a pear for the markets as it now does as a pear for the
home orchard. After Bartlett and the disreputable Kieffer, it is now
more grown than any other variety in America, everywhere being used as
the standard for excellence. The fruits are small, not highly colored,
but attractive because clean and trim in contour. But it is the
flesh-characters that give the fruits their high standing. The flesh is
melting, juicy, perfumed and most exquisitely and delicately flavored,
with the curious character of having much of its spicy, aromatic
flavor in the skin, which should never be discarded in eating. The
reddish-brown color of the fruit is another distinguishing character
of Seckel. Unlike most other dessert pears, the fruits of this one are
excellent for culinary purposes. Still another distinctive character
is that the fruits do not lose much in quality by ripening on the
tree. Besides being nearly iron-clad in resistance to blight and very
productive, the trees are almost as hardy as those of any other pear,
and are remarkable for their large, low, compact, broadly pyramidal
tops. The tree is further distinguished by its short-jointed, stout,
olive-colored wood, and its habit of bearing fruits in clusters on the
ends of the branches. The trees do best in fertile soils which must
not be a heavy clay. Its blossoms are markedly self-fertile. There
are several faults of fruit and tree. The fruits are small and do not
keep after maturity; it costs twice as much to pick them as it does
the large-fruited Bartlett; fruit and foliage are susceptible to scab;
the pears are too small for commercial canning; and the trees are late
in coming in bearing. With these several faults, however, Seckel is
usually a profitable commercial variety as a well-grown crop almost
always commands a fancy price. For the home orchard, Seckel has no
rival in any part of North America where European varieties are grown.

Toward the close of the eighteenth century, there lived in Philadelphia
a well-known sportsman and cattle dealer known as "Dutch Jacob."
Every autumn, upon returning from shooting excursions, Dutch Jacob
distributed among his neighbors pears of exceedingly delicious flavor.
The place of their growth he kept secret. In time, a tract of land
south of Philadelphia was disposed of in parcels, and Dutch Jacob
secured the ground on which his favorite pear tree stood, a neck of
land near the Delaware river. Shortly afterwards this land became the
property of a Mr. Seckel, who gave the pear his name and introduced
it. Later, the property was added to the estate of Stephen Girard,
and the original tree long remained vigorous and fruitful. The new
variety was soon widely disseminated and everywhere became popular.
As early as 1819, Dr. Hossack of New York sent trees of the variety
to the London Horticultural Society, whence it was later distributed
in England. There is much difference of opinion as to the spelling of
the name of this pear. Coxe, who lived in Philadelphia and probably
knew the introducer of the pear, writing in 1817, spelled the name
_Seckle_. English pomologists have followed Coxe. Nearly all of Coxe's
contemporaries, however, spelled it _Seckel_, the spelling now in
common use. At the first meeting of the American Pomological Society,
held in 1848, Seckel was recommended for general cultivation and the
variety has ever held its place among the pears recommended by the
Society.

 Tree large and very vigorous, upright-spreading, dense-topped, hardy,
 very productive, long-lived; trunk very stocky; branches thick,
 reddish-brown mingled with dull gray scarf-skin, covered with small
 lenticels; branchlets thick, long, dark reddish-brown, dull, smooth,
 glabrous, with small, slightly raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, obtuse or pointed, appressed; leaf-scars
 prominent. Leaves 2-1/2 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, oval, leathery;
 apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in. long;
 stipules very long when present. Flower-buds small, short, conical,
 free; flowers 1-1/4 in. across, in dense clusters, 7 or 8 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 5/8 in. long, slender, lightly pubescent, light
 green, slightly streaked with red.

 Fruit ripe in October; small, 2-1/4 in. long, 2 in. wide, uniform
 in size and shape, obovate, symmetrical; stem 1/2 in. long, short,
 thick, often curved; cavity obtuse, with a very shallow, narrow
 depression, symmetrical; calyx small, partly open; lobes separated
 at the base, short, variable in width, acute; basin very shallow
 and narrow, strongly obtuse, symmetrical; skin smooth, dull; color
 yellowish-brown, lightly marked with pale russet and often with a
 lively russet-red cheek; dots numerous, very small, russet or grayish;
 flesh white, with a faint tinge of yellow, slightly granular, melting,
 buttery, very juicy; sweet, with an exceedingly rich, aromatic, spicy
 flavor; quality very good to best. Core small, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, conical; seeds small, short, not very
 plump, obtuse.


[Illustration: SHELDON]

                                SHELDON

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =17=:252, fig. 25. 1851. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._
 151. 1854. =3.= _Ibid._ 210. 1856. =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 444,
 fig. 1857. =5.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 347. 1859. =6.= Hoffy _N. Am.
 Pom._ =1=: Pl. 1860. =7.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 2, 119, fig. 156.
 1866-73. =8.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 855, fig. 1869. =9.= Leroy
 _Dict. Pom._ =2=:662, fig. 1869.

Were the fruits alone to be considered, Sheldon would take rank as
one of the best of all pears. The fruits please both the eye and the
palate. Those of no rival in season surpass them either in appearance
or in characters that satisfy taste. While not large, the fruits are of
sufficient size to meet the demands of a good dessert pear. The shape
is a perfect turbinate, truncated at the base of the fruit, usually
very symmetrical, and the fruits run uniform in shape. In color, the
pears are distinctive in their russeted skin, with a handsome ruddy
cheek. The accompanying color-plate does not do justice to the fruit
in illustrating size, shape, or color. The flesh is melting and juicy,
and deserves, more than that of almost any other pear, the adjective
luscious. The flavor is sweet, vinous, and highly perfumed. The
fruits keep well, ship well, and sell well during their season, and
are esteemed both for dessert and for culinary purposes. The list of
faults in the trees is as long as the list of virtues in the fruits.
The trees, while large, vigorous, and hardy, blight as badly as any
pear-tree in the orchard, are reluctant in coming in bearing, niggardly
in production, and seldom hold their crop well. With these faults of
the tree, Sheldon is not a commercial variety of high rank, but the
splendid fruits make it worth growing by the pear-fancier, in the home
orchard, or for the markets where the faults of the trees are not too
marked. The variety grows better in New York, possibly, than in any
other part of the United States.

This pear is a native of the town of Huron, New York. The original tree
stood on the premises of Major Sheldon, having sprung from seed brought
by his father from Washington, New York, about 1815. The fruit was
first exhibited at the Pomological Convention in Syracuse in the autumn
of 1849. In 1854, Sheldon was mentioned by the American Pomological
Society as promising well, and in 1856 it was given a place in the
Society's fruit-catalog.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright-spreading, rapid-growing, hardy,
 moderately productive; trunk stocky; branches thick, reddish-brown,
 overlaid with dull gray scarf-skin, marked with large lenticels;
 branches thick, dull brown, glabrous, with numerous slightly raised,
 conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, above medium in length, obtuse or somewhat pointed,
 appressed. Leaves 2-1/2 in. long, 1-1/4 in. wide, oval, leathery;
 apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in. long.
 Flower-buds conical or pointed, free; flowers 1-1/8 in. across, in
 dense clusters, 13 or 14 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1/2 in. long,
 thick, pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit matures in October; large, 2-3/4 in. long, 2-1/2 in. wide,
 uniform in size and shape, turbinate, often with a tendency to
 oblateness, symmetrical; stem 3/4 in. long, thick, nearly straight;
 cavity obtuse, deep, slightly furrowed, occasionally lipped;
 calyx large, open; lobes very broad, obtuse; basin wide, obtuse,
 symmetrical; skin thick, granular, tender, roughish; color dull
 greenish-yellow, with a brownish-red blush, overspread with russet
 nettings and streaks; dots numerous, small, russet; flesh whitish,
 somewhat granular, tender and melting, very juicy, sweet, and vinous,
 with a rich and pleasantly aromatic flavor; quality very good to best.
 Core large, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide,
 conical; seeds acute.


[Illustration: SOUVENIR DU CONGRES]

                          SOUVENIR DU CONGRES

 =1.= _Pom. France_ =4=: No. 162, Pl. 162. 1867. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
 Cat._ 34. 1875. =3.= _Flor. & Pom._ 37, Pl. 1875. =4.= _Jour. Hort._
 N. S. =38=:120, fig. 19. 1880. =5.= _Hogg Fruit Man._ 647. 1884. =6.=
 _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 350, fig. 1906.

 _Andenken an den Congress._ =7.= _Oberdieck Obst-Sort._ 237. 1881.
 =8.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 168. 1889. =9.= _Deut. Obstsorten_ =6=: Pt.
 16, Pl. 1910.

 _Souvenir._ =10.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 24. 1897. =11.= Ont. Dept. Agr.
 _Fr. Ont._ 179. 1914.

Very similar to Clapp Favorite and Bartlett, and not as good as either
in fruit-characters, Souvenir du Congres hardly merits a place in
American pomology. The crop ripens between those of the two sorts
with which it has been compared, and the fruits are larger and often
handsomer. The fruits are said to be larger and of better quality when
the tree is double-worked on the quince. The tree is remarkable for
vigor, hardihood to cold, and healthfulness; and bears so abundantly
that the crop must be thinned to prevent breaking of branches. The
variety grows especially well in New York, and is deserving a place in
home orchards and in fruit-collections. The accompanying color-plate
illustrates the size, shape, and color of this pear remarkably well.

Souvenir du Congres owes its origin to M. Francois Morel, Lyons,
France. M. Morel grafted one of his pear-trees with cions taken from
several other varieties, including Bartlett, and from the tree thus
grafted he obtained fruit, seeds of which he sowed in 1852. One of the
resultant trees bore fruit in 1863, and the pears had so many earmarks
of Bartlett that it was at once assumed to be a seedling of that
variety. The tree continued to do well and in due course the variety
was judged to be worthy of dissemination by the Rhone Horticultural
Society. Later, M. Morel dedicated the new pear to the Pomological
Congress of France. The variety was introduced in the United States
about 1870. The American Pomological Society placed Souvenir du
Congres on its fruit-catalog list in 1875.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, upright-spreading, open-topped, very
 productive; branches zigzag, dull reddish-brown, heavily overspread
 with ash-gray scarf-skin, marked by small, raised lenticels;
 branchlets thick, long, reddish-brown, overspread with dull gray
 mingled with green, smooth, glabrous, with few small, slightly raised
 lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, plump, free. Leaves 1-7/8 in. long,
 1-1/2 in. wide, roundish-oval, leathery; apex abruptly pointed; margin
 tipped with very few glands, finely serrate; petiole 1-1/2 in. long,
 glabrous, tinged with red. Flower-buds short, conical or pointed,
 plump, free, arranged singly on very short spurs or branchlets;
 flowers with a disagreeable odor, 1-1/8 in. across, pinkish-white as
 the buds unfold, becoming whitish, in dense clusters, 6 to 8 buds in a
 cluster; pedicels 3/4 in. long, thick, heavily pubescent, light green.

 Fruit ripe in September; large, 3-7/16 in. long, 2-11/16 in. wide,
 uniform in size and shape, oblong-acute-pyriform, symmetrical, with
 unequal sides; stem 1 in. long, short, thick, curved; cavity obtuse,
 almost lacking, very shallow, narrow, russeted, slightly furrowed,
 often with the stem inserted beneath a pronounced irregular lip; calyx
 open; lobes separated at the base, narrow, acute; basin wide, obtuse
 and flaring, slightly furrowed, symmetrical, smooth except for the
 thick, russet covering; color yellow, with a reddish blush on the
 exposed cheek, covered with nettings of russet and yellow patches;
 dots numerous, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh white, with a faint
 tinge of yellow, firm, granular, tender, very juicy, sweet, with a
 musky flavor; quality good. Core closed, with clasping core-lines;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, plump, acute.


[Illustration: SOUVENIR D'ESPEREN]

                          SOUVENIR D'ESPEREN

 =1.= Barry _Fr. Garden_ 318. 1851. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 857.
 1869. =3.= Tilton _Jour. Hort._ =6=:14, fig. 1869.

Downing, in 1869, noted this old French pear as one of the best for
either amateur or commercial grower, and at that time it was rather
widely planted. Now, however, growers seldom set it. The trees are
vigorous, hardy, healthy, and productive, and the fruits are attractive
in appearance and rather good in quality, but neither tree nor fruit
rise much above mediocrity, and the variety has no outstanding
character to give it individuality. The crop comes in season in
December, the pears keeping well until ripe, after which they quickly
decay. The variety is worth planting only for the sake of diversity.

Major Esperen, Mechlin, Belgium, raised this pear from seed about the
middle of the nineteenth century. The name _Souvenir d'Esperen_ was
at one time applied to _Fondante de Noel_ in consequence of which
confusion has existed as to the identity of the two sorts. The pear
reached America about 1850.

 Tree medium in size, upright, slightly spreading, dense-topped,
 productive; branches reddish-brown overlaid with thin scarf-skin,
 marked with very conspicuous but scattering lenticels; branchlets very
 thick and long, with long internodes, light brown mingled with green,
 dull, glabrous, sprinkled with small, conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds very small, short, pointed, plump, free. Leaves 3 in. long,
 1-5/8 in. wide; apex abruptly pointed; margin uneven, finely serrate;
 petiole 2-5/8 in. long, tinged red. Flower-buds small, short, conical,
 plump, free, singly on very short spurs; flowers open late, showy,
 1-3/8 in. across, average 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/4 in.
 long, slender.

 Fruit ripe the last of November and December; large, 3-1/2 in. long,
 2-5/8 in. wide, oblong-obovate-pyriform, the surface uneven; stem
 1-1/4 in. long, slender; cavity very obtuse and shallow or lacking,
 the flesh drawn up about the base of the stem in a lip; calyx partly
 open, small; lobes separated at the base, short, narrow, acute; basin
 shallow, narrow, obtuse, wrinkled; skin thick, roughened with russet;
 color greenish-yellow, mottled and patched with russet, sprinkled with
 many russet dots and often with russet overspreading nearly the entire
 surface; dots numerous, russet, small; flesh yellowish, very granular
 near the center, firm, crisp but tender, juicy, with a pleasant,
 aromatic, vinous flavor; quality good to very good. Core large,
 closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical;
 seeds small, short, plump, acute, light brown.


[Illustration: SUDDUTH]

                                SUDDUTH

 =1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 144, Pl. 1894. =2.= _Mich. Hort. Soc.
 Rpt._ 141. 1894. =3.= _Can. Hort._ =19=:126, figs. 936 and 937. 1896.
 =4.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =19=:108. 1896. =5.= _Ill. Hort. Soc.
 Rpt._ 9. 1897. =6.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:264. 1903.

Sudduth has little to recommend it for New York or eastern pear
regions, but it is a standard sort in parts of the Mississippi Valley.
The characters which give it a place in the pear flora of the region
just named are remarkable freedom from blight, hardiness to cold
and heat, capacity to withstand drought, early bearing, and great
productiveness. The fruits are neither attractive in appearance nor
high in quality--hardly fit for dessert, being but a grade or two
better than the disreputable Kieffer. Like those of the Kieffer,
however, the fruits do very well for all culinary purposes. They do not
keep well as they soften at the center soon after becoming edible. The
trees are said to be nearly as hardy as those of the wild crab-apple.
The variety is desirable only where hardiness and freedom from blight
are prime requisites.

The Sudduth pear was introduced about 1895, although the parent tree
was at that time fully seventy years old. It originated from seed
planted by Thomas Constant in 1820, in Sangamon County, Illinois.
Later, Judge Stephen A. Logan of Springfield, Abraham Lincoln's first
law partner, acquired the property on which the tree stood and from
him Titus Sudduth bought the place in 1862. Sudduth was so impressed
with the fruit that he had trees propagated by Augustine and
Company, Normal, Illinois, and disseminated under his name.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright becoming quite spreading, open-topped,
 hardy, productive; trunk stocky, shaggy; branches thick, smooth, dull
 reddish-brown, almost entirely covered with gray scarf-skin, sprinkled
 with numerous large, raised lenticels; branchlets slender, curved,
 long, with long internodes, dull reddish-brown, overspread with thin
 gray scarf-skin which is mingled with green, dull, smooth, glabrous,
 with conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, pointed, appressed, somewhat flattened. Leaves 3
 in. long, 1-5/8 in. wide, thin, velvety; apex taper-pointed; margin
 glandless, finely serrate; petiole 2 in. long, slender, tinged red,
 glabrous. Flower-buds small, short, conical, free, singly on very
 short spurs; flowers late, 1-1/8 in. across, in dense clusters,
 average 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 7/8 in. long, thick, pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late September and October; medium or below in size,
 2-1/4 in. long, 2-3/8 in. wide, roundish-oblate, slightly conical
 toward the apex; stem 7/8 in. long, slender; cavity acute, deep,
 narrow, smooth, sometimes lipped; calyx large, open; lobes separated
 at the base, long, acute; basin very shallow, narrow, obtuse,
 occasionally wrinkled; skin thin, tough, smooth, dull; color light
 green, without blush; dots very small, russet or greenish, very
 obscure; flesh greenish-white, firm, crisp, rather dry, subacid;
 quality medium to poor. Core large, closed, axile, with meeting
 core-lines; calyx-tube wide, conical; carpels ovate; seeds variable in
 size, wide, flat, obtuse.


[Illustration: SUMMER DOYENNE]

                            SUMMER DOYENNE

 =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 40. 1883. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 651. 1884.
 =3.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 180, fig. 1914.

 _Doyenne d'Ete._ =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 336. 1845. =5.= _Gard.
 Chron._ 508, fig. 1847. =6.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:66, fig. 8. 1847. =7.=
 Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:59, Pl. 1851. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 53. 1852.
 =9.= _Horticulturist_ N. S. =3=:491, fig. 1853. =10.= Downing _Fr.
 Trees Am._ 742, fig. 1869.

 _Sommerdechantsbirne._ =11.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:20. 1856.

 _Doyenne de Juillet._ =12.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:77, fig. 1869.
 =13.= _Guide Prat._ 57, 266. 1876.

 _Juli Dechantsbirne._ =14.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 239. 1889. =15.=
 Gaucher _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 51, Pl. 108. 1894.

The extremely early and highly flavored fruits, which are borne in
prodigious quantities, make this a very desirable pear for the home
garden. The fruits have no value for the markets, as they are small, do
not keep well, and are unattractive. The tree, while never large, is of
medium size, comes in bearing early, is hardy, and is as free as most
of its orchard associates from blight. Both fruit and foliage suffer
badly from pear-scab, and no amount of spraying can give the fruits a
fair cheek in seasons when this fungus is epidemic.

Van Mons is supposed to have originated this variety about 1800 as Diel
mentioned it among his best pears in 1812. Summer Doyenne was first
brought to the notice of American pomologists by William Kenrick, who
compiled a description of it as early as 1836. It does not, however,
appear to have been introduced until 1843. It was recommended for
general culture in the United States by the American Pomological
Society in 1852.

 Tree variable in size, upright, vigorous, very productive; trunk
 slender; branches slender, slightly zigzag, brownish, overlaid
 with gray scarf-skin, marked with numerous conspicuous lenticels;
 branchlets slender, long, light brown mingled with green, the new
 growth tinged with red, smooth, glabrous except near the ends of the
 new growth, with numerous raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, sharply pointed, plump, free; leaf-scars with
 prominent shoulders. Leaves 2-7/8 in. long, 1-1/8 in. wide, thin,
 leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate; petiole 1-3/4
 in. long, tinged with pink. Flower-buds small, short, plump, free,
 singly on very short spurs; flowers showy, 1-1/4 in. across, in dense
 clusters, 7 to 9 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1-1/4 in. long, slender,
 pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in early August; small, 1-1/2 in. long, 1-5/8 in. wide,
 obovate-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical; stem 1-1/8 in. long, slender;
 cavity obtuse, shallow, narrow, slightly furrowed, often lipped; calyx
 small, closed; lobes separated at the base, short, narrow, acuminate;
 basin shallow, obtuse, furrowed; skin thin, smooth, tender, waxen
 yellow, washed or blushed with bright red, deepening on the exposed
 cheek to crimson; dots numerous, small, russet, obscure; flesh tinged
 with yellow, fine-grained, tender and melting, juicy, variable in
 flavor and quality, pleasantly sprightly under favorable conditions;
 quality variable, good under the best conditions. Core closed, axile,
 with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, narrow, urn-shaped;
 carpels roundish-ovate; seeds small, narrow, flat, acute.


[Illustration: TYSON]

                                 TYSON

 =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:433, fig. 30. 1846. =2.= _Horticulturist_
 =1=:433. 1846-47. =3.= _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr. Gr._ 51. 1848. =4.= Hovey
 _Fr. Am._ =1=:33, Pl. 1851. =5.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 444, fig.
 1857. =6.= _Ibid._ 870, fig. 1869. =7.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:710,
 fig. 1869. =8.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 333. 1881. =9.= Lauche _Deut.
 Pom._ =II=: No. 95, Pl. 95. 1883. =10.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._
 182, fig. 1914.

Tyson competes with Clapp Favorite as the precursor of the pear season
which is really opened by Bartlett. In every character of fruit and
tree excepting size and color of fruit, Tyson excels Clapp Favorite.
The quality of the fruit far excels that of Clapp Favorite and it is
better than that of Bartlett. Indeed, of commonly grown pears, the
characters of flesh and flavor are second only to those of the fruits
of Seckel. The flesh is melting and juicy, with a spicy, scented
sweetness that gives the fruit the charm of individuality. The pears
keep longer and ship better than those of Clapp Favorite; their season
in New York is from the middle of August to the middle of September.
Unfortunately, the pears are but medium in size, and are often poorly
colored, both of which defects appear on the fruits of this variety
as grown on the grounds of this Station and shown in the accompanying
illustration. The tree is the most nearly perfect of that of any pear
grown in America--the Kieffer, praiseworthy only in its tree, not
excepted. The tree is certainly as hardy as that of any other variety,
if not hardier, and resists better than that of any other sort the
black scourge of blight. Add to these notable characters large size,
great vigor, and fruitfulness, and it is seen that the trees are nearly
flawless. The only fault is, and this a comparatively trifling one,
that the trees are slow in coming in bearing. Tyson is the best pear
of its season for the home orchard, and has much merit for commercial
orchards. Were the fruits larger, it would rival Bartlett for the
markets. No other variety offers so many good starting points for the
pear-breeder.

Tyson originated as a wilding found about 1794 in a hedge on the land
of Jonathan Tyson, Jenkintown, Pennsylvania. The tree first bore fruit
in 1800. The pears proved to be so good that Mr. Tyson distributed
cions among his neighbors, but the variety was not generally
disseminated. About 1837, a Doctor Mease of Philadelphia sent cions
to B. V. French, Braintree, near Boston, who in turn distributed them
among his friends. The variety fruited here about 1842, and the fruit
was exhibited before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society under the
name Tyson. In 1848, at the National Convention of Fruit-Growers, Tyson
was recommended for general cultivation, and since that date the name
has appeared continuously in the catalogs of the American Pomological
Society.

 Tree very large, vigorous, upright-spreading, tall, dense-topped,
 hardy, productive; trunk very stocky, rough; branches thick, dull
 reddish-brown, overspread with gray scarf-skin, with few lenticels;
 branchlets slender, short, light brown mingled with green, smooth,
 glabrous, sprinkled with few small, inconspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, conical, pointed, plump, appressed or free.
 Leaves 2-3/4 in. long, 1-1/2 in. wide, thin; apex abruptly pointed;
 margin finely and shallowly serrate; petiole 1-5/8 in. long.
 Flower-buds small, short, conical, pointed, plump, free, singly on
 short spurs; flowers medium in season of bloom.

 Fruit matures in late August; medium in size, 2-1/8 in. long, 1-3/4
 in. wide, roundish-acute-pyriform, with unequal sides; stem 1-3/4 in.
 long, curved; cavity very shallow, obtuse, roughened, usually drawing
 up as a lip about the base of the stem; calyx open, small; lobes
 separated at the base, short, narrow, acute; basin shallow, narrow,
 flaring, slightly furrowed, compressed; skin tough, smooth, slightly
 russeted, dull; color deep yellow, usually blushed; dots numerous,
 very small, obscure; flesh tinged with yellow, granular around the
 basin, otherwise rather fine-grained, tender and melting, very juicy,
 sweet, aromatic; quality very good. Core small, closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube, short, wide, conical; seeds medium in size and
 width, plump, acute.


[Illustration: URBANISTE]

                               URBANISTE

 =1.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =5=:411. 1824. =2.= Lindley _Guide
 Orch. Gard._ 384. 1831. =3.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 186. 1832. =4.=
 _Mag. Hort._ =10=:131, fig. 1844. =5.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 417,
 fig. 190. 1845. =6.= _Gard. Chron._ 68, fig. 1847. =7.= Hovey _Fr.
 Am._ =2=:21, Pl. 1851. =8.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 53. 1852. =9.= _Pom.
 France_. =1=: No. 32, Pl. 32. 1863. =10.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1,
 193, fig. 95. 1866-73. =11.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 871, fig. 1869.
 =12.= _Guide Prat._ 59, 308. 1876. =13.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 657. 1884.

 _Urbanister Saemling._ =14.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:116. 1856.

 _Poire des Urbanistes._ =15.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:712, fig. 1869.

 _Coloma's Herbst Butterbirne._ =16.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 197. 1889.
 =17.= Lucas _Tafelbirnen_ 109, fig. 1894.

Urbaniste is another variety desirable for home use because of its
highly-flavored fruits--so sweet, rich, perfumed, and luscious as to
be a natural sweetmeat. The fruits are of but medium size and not
particularly handsome, but the taste excels the looks. The flesh is
as tender, sweet, juicy, and as delicately perfumed as that of Seckel
or White Doyenne, but with a distinct flavor and scent which give the
fruits the added charm of individuality. The crop ripens in October,
in a season when there are many other pears, but the fruits stand
comparison with those of any other variety and are welcome additions
to the fruit-basket. The trees have several defects, chief of which is
tardiness in coming in bearing, to remedy which grafting on the quince
is recommended. They are also susceptible to blight, and are not as
hardy as might be wished. Of all pears, the tree of this variety is one
of the handsomest--clean and tidy, slender and graceful, yet robust
and productive. Fruit and tree make this a valuable variety for home
plantings.

Urbaniste originated as a wilding in the gardens of the religious order
of Urbanistes, Mechlin, Belgium. After the suppression of this order in
1783, their gardens remained uncultivated for some time and produced
new seedlings of considerable merit. The beauty of one of these
attracted the attention of Count de Coloma, a well-known pomologist,
who acquired this property in 1786, and in due course propagated
and disseminated the variety under the name Urbaniste. Early in the
nineteenth century, Count de Coloma sent specimens of the pear to the
London Horticultural Society, which organization afterwards distributed
it in England about 1823. Thomas Andrew Knight sent cions to John
Lowell, Roxbury, Massachusetts, through whom it became disseminated in
the United States. The American Pomological Society added Urbaniste to
its fruit-catalog list in 1852.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright-spreading, slow-growing,
 productive with age; trunk slender, shaggy; branches stocky, shaggy,
 zigzag, reddish-brown, overspread with gray scarf-skin, sprinkled
 with numerous lenticels; branchlets long, reddish-brown mingled with
 grayish scarf-skin, smooth, zigzag, glabrous, marked with conspicuous,
 raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, obtuse, semi-free. Leaves 2-1/4 in. long, 7/8 in.
 wide, thin, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate;
 petiole 1-1/2 in. long, slender. Flower-buds short, variable in shape,
 free.

 Fruit ripe in late October and early November; medium in size,
 2-3/8 in. long, 2 in. wide, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, with unequal
 sides; stem 5/8 in. long, short, thick; cavity obtuse, shallow,
 narrow, faintly russeted, furrowed, slightly lipped; calyx open;
 lobes separated at the base, narrow, obtuse; basin shallow, narrow,
 obtuse, slightly furrowed; skin thick, tough, roughened by the russet
 nettings, dull; color pale yellow, often with a faint russet-red blush
 on the exposed cheek and marked with nettings and patches of russet;
 dots numerous, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh tinged with yellow,
 granular especially around the core, tender and melting, buttery,
 juicy, sweet, pleasantly aromatic; quality very good. Core closed,
 with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds
 medium in size and width, long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: VERMONT BEAUTY]

                            VERMONT BEAUTY

 =1.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 65. 1889. =2.= _Ibid._ 176. 1890. =3.=
 _Ibid._ 134. 1891. =4.= _Can. Hort._ =16=:184. 1893. =5.= _Am. Pom.
 Soc. Cat._ 37. 1899. =6.= Ellwanger & Barry _Cat._ 18. 1900. =7.=
 Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:267. 1903.

The fruits of Vermont Beauty elicit praise from all who see or taste
them. The bright-cheeked pears are as alluring to the eye as those of
any other, and are almost as delectable as those of Seckel, which they
resemble in shape, but are larger and handsomer. Of all pears, those
of this variety (or of Forelle, with which it may be identical) best
satisfy the eye for bright color. The crop ripens a little later and
keeps longer than that of Seckel, and for these reasons, and because of
the handsome appearance, should sell better. The pears will probably
be most used to grace the table and for dessert, but the somewhat more
sprightly flavor makes them better suited for all culinary purposes
than those of Seckel. The trees are scarcely less satisfactory than
the fruits. They are preeminent among their kind by virtue of large
size, rapidity of growth, productivity, and hardiness, the region
from which the variety came bespeaking greater hardihood to cold than
that possessed by the average variety. The trees rejoice in vigor and
health as do those of almost no other variety, and while hardly as
productive as those of Seckel, yet because of greater size the pears
fill the basket nearly as quickly. Vermont Beauty is one of the best of
the pears of its season, and deserves a place in the orchards of the
country for home and market.

Vermont Beauty is supposed to have originated in the nursery of
Benjamin Macomber, Grand Isle, Vermont, more than forty years ago.
Macomber maintained a small nursery, and this pear was one of several
hundreds planted for stock. The tree was budded in the usual manner,
but the bud failed to grow, and the original tree was allowed to stand
without another budding. After the variety fruited, it attracted so
much attention that Macomber propagated it. Later, it was introduced
by W. P. Rupert and Son, Seneca, New York. The American Pomological
Society, recognizing its worth, added the variety to its fruit-catalog
in 1899. There has long been doubt in the minds of the writers as to
whether Vermont Beauty is distinct from Forelle. Careful comparison has
been made of the fruit- and tree-characters of the two sorts, and it is
found that they are so closely allied as to be indistinguishable. It is
possible that a tree of the old German pear may have found its way into
Macomber's nursery and received the new name.

 Tree medium in size, vigorous, upright-spreading, dense-topped, hardy,
 productive; trunk stocky, shaggy; branches zigzag, reddish-brown,
 thinly overspread with gray scarf-skin, with numerous large lenticels;
 branchlets very thick, long, reddish-brown mingled with green, thickly
 covered with ash-gray scarf-skin near the tips, smooth, glabrous
 except near the ends of the new growth, sprinkled with numerous small,
 roundish, conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, plump, free. Leaves 2-3/4 in. long,
 1-3/8 in. wide, leathery; apex abruptly-or taper-pointed; margin
 glandless, finely serrate; petiole 2 in. long, glabrous, slender,
 pinkish-green. Flower-buds small, short, conical, plump, free,
 singly on short spurs; flowers characteristically small, average 1
 in. across, in dense clusters, about 6 buds in a cluster, the petals
 unusually small; pedicels 7/8 in. long, slender, pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late October and November; medium in size, 2-1/2 in.
 long, 2 in. wide, obovate-acute-pyriform, symmetrical; stem 3/4 in.
 long, curved; cavity extremely small or lacking, the flesh folded up
 around the base of the stem, occasionally lipped; calyx small, open;
 lobes separated at the base, short, narrow, acute; basin shallow,
 narrow, obtuse, smooth, symmetrical; skin thick, tough, smooth or with
 slight russet markings; color clear pale lemon-yellow, with a broad
 and brilliantly blushed cheek, fading at the sides into pinkish-red
 dots; dots numerous, very small, light russet, conspicuous; flesh
 tinged with yellow, granular at the center but fine-grained near the
 skin, tender and melting, very juicy, with a rich, vinous flavor;
 quality very good. Core closed, axile, with meeting core-lines;
 calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, plump, acute.


[Illustration: VICAR OF WINKFIELD]

                          VICAR OF WINKFIELD

 =1.= _Card. Chron._ 20, fig. 1843. =2.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:129, 269.
 1843. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 448, fig. 208. 1845. =4.= _Am. Pom.
 Soc. Rpt._ 53. 1852. =5.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 344, fig. 1854. =6.=
 _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =7=:414. 1864. =7.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 875,
 fig. 1869. =8.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 660. 1884.

 _Vicar._ =9.= Mawe-Abercrombie _Univ. Gard. Bot._ 1778. =10.= _Am.
 Pom. Soc. Cat._ 40. 1883. =11.= _Ont._ Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 183.
 1914. Clion. =12.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 159. 1841.

 _Le Cure._ =13.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:47, Pl. 1851.

 _Cure._ =14.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 18, Pl. 18. 1863. =15.= Leroy
 _Dict. Pom._ =1=:610, fig. 1867. =16.= _Guide Prat._ 61, 261. 1876.
 =17.= _Soc. Nat. Hort. France Pom._ 396, fig. 1904. =18.= _Cat. Cong.
 Pom. France_ 221, fig. 1906.

 _Pastorenbirne._ =19.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 262. 1889. =20.= Gaucher
 _Pom. Prak. Obst._ No. 59, Pl. 49. 1894.

Though large and handsome, the pears of this variety vary so much in
quality, often being wretchedly poor, that trees of it are now seldom
planted in America. The variety is not liked, also, because the trees
blight badly. The fruits, besides being large and handsome, keep well,
and are excellent for all culinary purposes. They are in season from
November to January. The pears have a strong musky smell, and are
more or less astringent. The quality depends largely on the soil, and
is best when the trees stand in a deep, warm loam. The fruits are
long-pyriform, usually one-sided, and are further characterized by
the peculiarity that the calyx is not in line with the axis, as in
other pears, but is on one side, generally opposite to that in which
the stalk is inserted as shown in the accompanying illustration. The
trees, barring susceptibility to blight, are about all that could be
desired--large, vigorous, handsome, and thrive both as standards and
dwarfs. Many old trees of largest size of this variety are still to be
found in New York, but young stock is now seldom set.

In 1760, this pear was found as a wilding by a French curate at
Villiers-en-Brenne. In due course it was introduced into England by
the Rev. W. L. Rahm, Vicar of Winkfield, in Berkshire, and from this
circumstance it lost its proper name, _Cure or Le Cure_, and wrongly
acquired that by which it is now known here and in England. The variety
was introduced to America early in the nineteenth century. It was
placed on the list of recommended fruits by the American Pomological
Society in 1852.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright-spreading, dense-topped, hardy, very
 productive, long-lived; trunk and branches stocky; branches zigzag,
 greenish-brown overspread with grayish scarf-skin, with lenticels
 variable in number and size; branchlets curved, thick, long and
 willowy, with long internodes, light greenish-brown which is mingled
 with red on the newer growth, smooth, glabrous except near the ends of
 the new growth, sprinkled with conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, free. Leaves 3 in. long, 2-1/4 in.
 wide, thick, leathery; apex abruptly pointed; margin tipped with
 minute scattering glands, finely serrate; petiole variable in length,
 pinkish-green; stipules short, tinged with pink. Flower-buds small,
 short, conical, plump, free, singly on very short spurs.

 Fruit ripe December to January; large, 4-1/4 in. long, 3 in. wide,
 oblong-pyriform, with a long, tapering neck, with unequal sides; stem
 1-1/8 in. long, slender, curved; cavity lacking, with stem obliquely
 set without a depression and often with a fleshy fold around the
 base in the form of a lip; calyx large, open; lobes long, unusually
 broad, obtusely pointed; basin very shallow, narrow, obtuse, smooth,
 symmetrical; skin thick, tough, smooth, dull; color pale yellow,
 often with a faint trace of a brownish-red blush over the exposed
 cheek, marked with light russet around the calyx, and occasionally
 with russet flecks scattered over the surface; dots numerous, small,
 conspicuous, brownish-russet; flesh white, granular only near the
 center, tender and melting, juicy, somewhat astringent or with a
 sprightly muskiness, with no pleasant aroma; quality inferior for
 dessert but good for cooking. Core small, closed, axile, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube long, narrow, funnel-shaped; carpels long-oval;
 seeds large, long, not very plump, often abortive.


[Illustration: WHITE DOYENNE]

                             WHITE DOYENNE

 =1.= _Pom. Mag._ =2=:60, Pl. 1829. =2.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._
 385. 1831. =3.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:43. 1831. =4.= Downing _Fr.
 Trees Am._ 378, fig. 162. 1845. =5.= _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr. Gr._ 51.
 1848. =6.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:85, Pl. 1851. =7.= _Horticulturist_ N.
 S. =4=:158, Pl. 1854. =8.= _Ibid._ N. S. =6=:406. 1856. =9.= Downing
 _Fr. Trees Am._ 880, fig. 1869. =10.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 663. 1884.

 _Warwicke._ =11.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

 _Doyenne._ =12.= Langley _Pomona_ 132. 1729. =13.= Duhamel _Trait.
 Arb. Fr._ =2=:205, Pl. XLIII. 1768. =14.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =2=:
 Pt. 1. 1807. =15.= Brookshaw _Pom. Brit._ =2=: Pl. 49. 1817. =16.=
 Brookshaw _Hort. Reposit._ =2=:175, Pl. 92. 1823. =17.= Leroy _Dict.
 Pom._ =2=:52, fig. 1869. =18.= _Rev. Hort._ 51. 1898.

 _Virgalieu._ =19.= Prince Cat. 1771.

 _White Beurre._ =20.= Mawe-Abercrombie _Univ. Gard. Bot._ 1778.

 _Weisse Herbst Butterbirne._ =21.= Christ _Handb._ 511. 1817. =22.=
 Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 100. 1825. =23.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
 =2=:84. 1856. =24.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 16, Pl. 16. 1882.
 =25.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 296. 1889.

 _Saint-Michael._ =26.= Coxe _Cult. Fr. Trees_ 191, fig. 38. 1817.

 _Doyenne Blanc._ =27.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =5=:135. 1824. =28.=
 Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 121. 1841. =29.= _Pom. France_ =1=: No. 74, Pl.
 74. 1863. =30.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 2, 19, fig. 106. 1866-73.
 =31.= _Guide Prat._ 63, 264. 1876. =32.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 236,
 fig. 1906.

 _Thorp._ =33.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 553. 1857. =34.= _Mag. Hort._
 =24=:516. 1858.

 _Bonne-Ente._ =35.= Noisette _Man. Comp. Jard._ =2=:532. 1860.

This ancient and world-renowned pear, its fruits the most delectable of
any that come from a pear orchard, is now rarely planted in America.
It is being discarded because the small and comparatively unattractive
fruits fail to satisfy commercial demands. In the middle of the last
century, when there was almost a mania for the best of the European
pears, when fruits were judged by the palate rather than the eye as
now, White Doyenne was one of the most commonly planted varieties.
Proof of its popularity at home and abroad is found in the great
number of names under which it has been grown. A more serious fault
than small and unattractive pears is that the fruits and foliage
are inviting prey to the scab-fungus, which often cracks and scabs
the pears and defoliates the trees. Except in susceptibility to
scab, the trees are nearly perfect when grown in the soil which they
prefer--a rich clay, heavy rather than light. On such a soil, tree
and fruit attain perfection. The accompanying illustration shows this
pear at its best in color and size--a handsome fruit rather than
the unattractive product so often seen. Grown in a light soil, and
when scab is unchecked, the fruits are small, green, cracked, and
cankered--intolerable to sight and taste. Unfortunately, also, the
trees are ravaged by blight when that disease is epidemic. The faults
named have made the variety an outcast, but it should still receive
attention for the superb quality of its fruits where scab and blight
can be controlled.

This pear is one of the oldest of all varieties. It is impossible to
state whether it originated in France or was brought to that country
from Italy. A German, Henri Manger, who studied the origin of fruits,
states in his _Systematische Pomologie_, 1780, that the White Doyenne
originated with the Romans; he considered it to be their _Sementinum_.
Agostino Gallo, 1559, called the variety _Pera Ghiacciuola_. In 1660,
Claude Saint-Etienne described a _Poire de Neige_. Both of these
descriptions represent White Doyenne. In the sixteenth century and
for part of the seventeenth, the name _Ghiacciuola_ was accepted for
the variety in France with the synonym _Saint-Michel_. Leroy states
that Le Lectier, in his catalog of the fruit trees which he grew at
Orleans in 1628, changed the name to _Giaccole de Rome_, and Nicholas
de Bonnefonds modified it in the first edition of his _Jardinier
Francais_, 1652, to _Giacciola di Roma_. English pomologists have
mentioned this pear under a variety of names since early in the
seventeenth century. The names _Poire Doyenne_ and _White Doyenne_
have been most generally applied to it. The date of its introduction
to America is not known, but it was probably brought to this country
by the earliest French settlers. The first American catalogs mentioned
the variety, and it was extensively grown in the vicinity of New York
and Long Island where it was commonly called the _Virgalieu_ pear. In
the neighborhood of Boston, the name _Saint-Michael_ was applied to it;
while around Philadelphia it was called the _Butter Pear_. For nearly
a century, however, the variety has been most generally known in this
country as White Doyenne. At the Convention of Fruit-Growers held in
New York, in 1848, White Doyenne was included in a short list of pears
recommended for general cultivation. Since that date, the American
Pomological Society has given the variety a place in its fruit-catalog.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright, vasiform, hardy, very productive; trunk
 stocky, somewhat smooth; branches thick, dark gray, with many large
 lenticels; branchlets thick, reddish-brown, smooth, glabrous, with
 small, very slightly raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds obtuse, pointed, appressed. Leaves 2-1/2 in. long, 1-3/4 in.
 wide, flattened, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate;
 petiole 1-1/2 in. long, slender. Flower-buds large, long, conical or
 pointed, free; flowers early, 1-1/8 in. across, in dense clusters, 7
 or 8 buds in a cluster; pedicels 7/8 in. long, slender, pubescent,
 light green.

 Fruit matures in early October; medium in size, 2-1/4 in. long,
 2-1/8 in. wide, uniform, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical;
 stem 3/4 in. long, thick, slightly curved; cavity obtuse, shallow,
 narrow, russeted, usually symmetrical; calyx small, open or closed;
 lobes short, narrow, obtuse; basin shallow, obtuse, nearly smooth,
 symmetrical; skin thick, tough, smooth, dull; color clear pale yellow,
 with a small, bright red blush on the exposed cheek; dots numerous,
 small, russet, conspicuous; flesh yellowish-white, granular, firm
 at first but becoming melting when fully ripe, juicy, sweet, with a
 rich, aromatic flavor; quality very good. Core closed, with clasping
 core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide, conical; seeds wide, plump, obtuse.


[Illustration: WILDER EARLY]

                             WILDER EARLY

 =1.= _Can. Hort._ =12=:286, fig. 73. 1889. =2.= _Ibid._ =13=:251, Pl.
 1890. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 37. 1899. =4.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort.
 Man._ =2=:268. 1903.

 _Early Wilder._ =5.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1896.

 _Wilder._ =6.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 183, fig. 1914.

This is one of the good, early pears for the markets. It is more highly
prized in the Mississippi Valley than in New York and the Eastern
states where summer pears are raised in greater variety. The pears
are very attractive in size, shape, and particularly in the bright
lemon-yellow color, with a flaming cheek to the sun, the whole pear
being characteristically marked with small, russet dots set in a
pinkish circle. Of all summer pears the fruits of this one seem least
inclined to rot at the center, and usually keep longer and ship better,
although the skin is tender and bruises easily. The flesh is buttery,
moderately juicy, sweet and rich, with a faint, pleasant perfume. The
fruits are small but are usually larger than those of the well-known
Seckel, and are edible almost to the very center. The tree is large,
vigorous, prodigiously productive, as healthy as any, and a remarkably
handsome ornamental. Despite this catalog of virtues, Wilder Early is
not largely planted in New York.

Wilder Early is a chance seedling found by Charles A. Green, Rochester,
New York, about 1884, in Chautauqua County, New York. At the time of
its discovery the tree was already in bearing. The variety was named
after Marshall P. Wilder, President of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society. The name first appeared in the fruit-catalog of the American
Pomological Society in 1899.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright, dense-topped, rapid-growing, hardy,
 very productive; branches zigzag, reddish-brown overspread with gray
 scarf-skin, with numerous lenticels; branchlets thick, very long,
 light greenish-brown, lightly streaked with ash-gray scarf-skin, dull,
 smooth, glabrous except near the tips of the new growth, sprinkled
 with many conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds small, short, pointed, appressed; leaf-scars prominent.
 Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 1-7/8 in. wide, leathery; apex taper-pointed;
 margin very finely serrate; petiole 2 in. long, glabrous. Flower-buds
 small, short, conical, plump, free, singly on short spurs; flowers
 late, 1-3/16 in. across, white or tinged with pink, in dense clusters,
 average 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1/2 in. long, pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in late August; large, 2-3/4 in. long, 2-3/8 in. wide,
 oblong-pyriform, symmetrical; stem 3/4 in. long, very thick; cavity
 acute, narrow, russeted and with rays of russet extending over the
 sides, slightly compressed, rarely lipped; calyx large, open; lobes
 separated at the base, long, narrow, acuminate; basin very shallow,
 narrow, obtuse, wrinkled; skin thin, tender, smooth, dull; color
 pale lemon-yellow, with a pinkish blush on the exposed cheek often
 deepening to dark pink; dots characteristically distinct, very
 numerous, small, russet or russet-red; flesh white, stringy, tender
 and melting, buttery, moderately juicy, sweet, faintly aromatic;
 quality good. Core small, closed, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube
 long, narrow, conical; seeds long, narrow, acute.


[Illustration: WINTER BARTLETT]

                            WINTER BARTLETT

 =1.= _Ore. Bd. Hort. Rpt._ 42. 1895. =2.= _Ore. Nur. Cat._ 19. 1903.
 =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 41. 1909. =4.= Cal. Com. Hort. _Pear Grow.
 Cal._ =7=: No. 5, 278, fig. 94. 1918.

Winter Bartlett is heralded from the Pacific Coast as a winter variety
bearing fruits similar to those of Bartlett. As the fruits grow in New
York there is a suggestion of Bartlett in the shape, color, and flavor
of the fruits, but in size, as the color-plate shows, the newcomer
falls far short of the older pear. The season is December and January,
a time when there are a half-dozen other good pears, and since this one
has no outstanding characters to make it notable, it is doubtful if
it will outlive a brief period of probation in eastern orchards. The
westerners say that the tree is very resistant to blight, a statement
neither proved nor disproved in the East as yet. The variety is worth
trying in a small way in New York.

This pear seems to have originated at Eugene, Oregon, some time prior
to 1880, and to have been introduced by D. W. Coolidge of Eugene,
although it must have been grown to some extent before Mr. Coolidge
brought it to the front. Because of its resemblance to Bartlett, it is
assumed that it is a seedling of that variety. The American Pomological
Society added Winter Bartlett to its catalog of fruits in 1909.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright, scraggly, open-topped, hardy,
 productive; branches stocky, smooth, light-brown overlaid with gray
 scarf-skin, with few lenticels; branchlets thick, curved, long, with
 long internodes, brownish-red, streaked with gray scarf-skin, glossy,
 smooth, glabrous, sprinkled with conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds large, long, conical, pointed, plump, free; leaf-scars with
 very prominent shoulders. Leaves 3-1/4 in. long, 1-3/8 in. wide,
 stiff; apex taper-pointed; margin finely serrate; petiole 2-1/4 in.
 long. Flower-buds conical, plump, free, singly on spurs variable
 in length; flowers very late, 1-1/2 in. across, in dense clusters,
 average 5 buds in a cluster; pedicels 1 in. long, thick, thinly
 pubescent.

 Fruit ripe in December and January; large, 3 in. long, 2-3/8 in.
 wide, oblong-obovate-pyriform; stem 1 in. long, thick, curved; cavity
 narrow, shallow, smooth, oblique; calyx small, nearly closed; lobes
 short; basin small, shallow, irregular; skin uneven in surface;
 color yellow, splashed with russet and often blushed on the exposed
 cheek with bright red; dots numerous, small, brownish-russet;
 flesh yellowish-white, fine-grained, tender, juicy, sweet,
 pleasant-flavored; quality good to very good. Core small, nearly
 closed, with meeting core-lines; calyx-tube short, wide; seeds large,
 long, plump, obtuse.


[Illustration: WINTER NELIS]

                             WINTER NELIS

 =1.= _Pom. Mag._ =3=:126, Pl. 1830. =2.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._
 409. 1831. =3.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 199. 1832. =4.= _Mag. Hort._
 =10=:127. 1844. =5.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 450, fig. 208. 1845. =6.=
 _Gard. Chron._ 20, fig. 1845. =7.= _Proc. Nat. Con. Fr. Gr._ 51. 1848.
 =8.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:15, Pl. 1851. =9.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
 884, fig. 1869. =10.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 339. 1881. =11.= Lauche
 _Deut. Pom._ =II=: No. 49, Pl. 49. 1882. =12.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 667.
 1884. =13.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 301. 1889. =14.= _Deut. Obstsorten_
 =5=: Pt. 15, Pl. 1909.

 _La Bonne Malinoise._ =15.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =4=:276. 1822.
 =16.= _Ibid._ =5=:408. 1824.

 _Thouin._ =17.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:23. 1856.

 _Bonne de Malines._ =18.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:77, Pl. 1858. =19.=
 _Pom. France_ =2=: No. 53, Pl. 53. 1864. =20.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
 =1=:484, figs. 1867. =21.= _Guide Prat._ 60, 252. 1876. =22.= _Cat.
 Cong. Pom. France_ 202. 1906.

 _Nelis d'Hiver._ =23.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:29 bis, fig. 21. 1866-73.

Winter Nelis is the standard winter pear in the United States.
Both fruits and trees possess several serious faults, but these
are outmatched by virtues which make the variety preeminent in its
season. The fruits are small and are often so poorly colored as to be
unattractive, but well grown they are sufficiently large for dessert
fruits and are very handsome in a much-russeted coat and a ruddy
cheek. Flesh and flavor are the chief assets of the fruits. The flesh
is tender, melting, juicy, luscious, with a rich, sweet, aromatic
flavor--one of the most delectable of all pears. The fruits keep, ship,
and sell well. The season is from Christmas to March, but the pears can
be kept until late spring in cold-storage. The trees begin badly, for
no variety is more difficult to grow well in the nursery. They thrive
only on standard stocks, refusing to do well on the quince unless
double worked. In the orchard, the trees are among the unmanageables.
They are small or of but medium size, with straggling, wayward tops
with habits of growth so self assertive that no art nor skill of the
pruner can bring the branches under control. The limbs are always
crooked; some bend inward toward the main stem, some are upright, some
droop, and no two behave in quite the same way. Notwithstanding the
illy-shaped tops, the trees are often enormously productive so that
the crop usually requires thinning. They bear almost annually; come in
bearing young; are fairly hardy; and are adapted to almost any soil or
situation provided, only, that the soil is fertile or well fertilized.
They are as nearly immune to blight as those of any other European
pear. The trees are characterized by two marked peculiarities: the
old wood is thickly set with small, short spurs; and they are about
the latest of all their kind in leafing out in the spring. There is
no better winter pear for either the commercial pear-grower or the
amateur, and the variety grows especially well in New York.

Winter Nelis was raised from seed by Jean Charles Nelis, Mechlin,
Belgium, early in the nineteenth century. It was introduced into
England by the London Horticultural Society under the name _La Bonne
Malinoise_. Subsequently this name was cancelled and that of Winter
Nelis adopted, the name which had been given the variety by Van Mons
in honor of the originator. In 1823, Thomas Andrew Knight, President
of the London Horticultural Society, sent cions of the variety to
John Lowell, Roxbury, Massachusetts, who, in his turn, shared them
with Robert Manning, Salem, Massachusetts, whence the sort was very
generally disseminated in this country and attained great popularity.
At the National Convention of Fruit-Growers held in New York in 1848,
Winter Nelis was included in a short list of pears recommended for
general cultivation. For more than half a century the name has appeared
in the fruit-catalogs of the American Pomological Society.

 Tree medium in size and vigor, spreading, hardy, very productive;
 trunk stocky; branches thick, zigzag, reddish-brown mingled with
 gray scarf-skin, marked with small lenticels; branchlets with short
 internodes, reddish-brown, dull, smooth, glabrous, with numerous
 raised, conspicuous lenticels.

 Leaf-buds medium to large, long, conical or pointed, free. Leaves
 3 in. long, 1-1/8 in. wide, elongated-oval, leathery; apex
 taper-pointed; margin varies from crenate to serrate; petiole 1-1/2
 in. long, slender. Flower-buds conical or pointed, free; flowers open
 late, 1-3/4 in. across, 6 or 7 buds in a cluster; pedicels 7/8 in.
 long, rather slender, lightly pubescent, greenish.

 Fruit ripe late November to early January; medium in size, 2-1/4
 in. long, about 2-1/4 in. wide, uniform in size and shape,
 roundish-obovate to obtuse-obovate-pyriform, quite symmetrical except
 for the unequal sides; stem 1-3/8 in. long, thick, curved; cavity
 obtuse, shallow, narrow, russeted, gently furrowed, occasionally
 lipped; calyx large, open; lobes separated at the base, short, broad,
 acute; basin shallow, obtuse, lightly furrowed, symmetrical; skin
 thick, tender, roughened with much russet, dull; color yellow with
 a tinge of green, dotted with grayish-russet and with many russet
 streaks and patches on the exposed cheek which is usually blushed
 with bright red; dots numerous, small, russet, conspicuous; flesh
 yellowish-white, quite granular at the center and underneath the skin,
 tender and melting, buttery, very juicy, sweet, aromatic; quality very
 good. Core large, closed, axile, with clasping core-lines; calyx-tube
 short, wide, conical; seeds large, wide, long, plump, acute.


[Illustration: WORDEN SECKEL]

                             WORDEN SECKEL

 =1.= _Rural N. Y._ =50=:888, figs. 326 and 327. 1891. =2.= Thomas _Am.
 Fruit Cult._ 465, fig. 675. 1897. =3.= _Franklin Davis Nur. Cat._ 23.
 1901. =4.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:268. 1903. =5.= Banker
 _Cat._ 19. 1915.

 _Worden._ =6.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 41. 1909.

Possibly no pear has been more widely advertised during the last
quarter-century than Worden Seckel. Nurserymen and pear-growers alike
describe it as a better variety than Seckel, and say that it ought to
take the place of that good old sort of which it is a seedling. But
it is not driving Seckel out in most pear regions, though in many it
is considered the more profitable pear of the two. It is a splendid
pear, but falls short of Seckel in not being quite as dependable in
different soils and climates; the trees are not as vigorous, though
just as productive in many places, they are not quite as resistant to
blight, and the fruits are not as high in quality. On the other hand,
the pears are larger and handsomer. Well grown, the fruits of Worden
Seckel are voluptuously handsome in form and color. The pears are
smooth, glossy, trim of contour, well turned, unusually uniform, with
a beautifully blushed cheek on a handsome green and yellow background.
The accompanying illustration does not do the pear justice in size or
color and shows a lack of symmetry not usually present. When the crop
is thinned so that the fruits attain their largest size, no pear is
handsomer or will bring a higher price on the fruit-stands. The crop
comes in with Seckel, but keeps longer, lasting until December in
cold-storage. The tree is very hardy and bears young, but does poorly
in the nursery. Commercial growers should give this variety a thorough
test, and amateurs everywhere will find it worth planting.

Worden Seckel, as its name suggests, is a seedling of Seckel, raised by
Sylvester Worden, Minetto, Oswego County, New York, about 1881. Smiths
and Powell, Syracuse, New York, placed it on the market about 1890.
The American Pomological Society added the variety to its fruit-list in
1909.

 Tree large, vigorous, upright-spreading, rapid-growing, very
 productive; trunk thick; branches reddish-brown, nearly covered with
 thin, gray scarf-skin, marked with numerous lenticels; branchlets
 short, with internodes variable in length, light greenish-brown,
 dull, glabrous except near the ends of the new growth, sprinkled with
 numerous small, conspicuous, raised lenticels.

 Leaf-buds very small, short, pointed, appressed. Leaves 2-1/2 in.
 long, 1-1/2 in. wide, thick, leathery; apex taper-pointed; margin
 tipped with few minute glands, finely or coarsely serrate; petiole
 1-1/2 in. long, glabrous, slender, tinged with red; stipules very
 small when present. Flower-buds small, short, conical, sharply
 pointed, plump, free, singly on very short spurs; flowers showy, 1-1/2
 in. across, in dense clusters, 8 or 10 buds in a cluster; pedicels
 1-1/4 in. long, slightly pubescent.

 Fruit ripe late September to October; medium in size, 2-1/2 in. long,
 2-1/8 in. wide, obovate-acute-pyriform, symmetrical; stem 3/4 in.
 long, thick; cavity very shallow and obtuse or lacking, the flesh
 folded up around the base of the stem and often lipped; calyx open,
 large; lobes narrow, acute; basin shallow, narrow, obtuse, smooth
 or gently furrowed, symmetrical; skin thin, tender, smooth, glossy;
 color pale golden-yellow, blushed on the exposed cheek with solid
 bright red, becoming almost crimson in highly colored specimens;
 dots numerous, small, russet, obscure; flesh yellowish-white or dull
 white, fine-grained near the skin, granular at the center, tender and
 melting, buttery, very juicy, characteristically spicy and aromatic;
 quality very good. Core closed, axile, with meeting core-lines;
 calyx-tube conical; carpels ovate; seeds wide, plump, obtuse.




                               CHAPTER V

                       MINOR VARIETIES OF PEARS


=A. J. Cook.= =1.= Cal. Com. Hort. _Pear Grow. Cal._ =7=:No. 5, 247,
figs. 25 to 31. 1918. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 134. 1920.

Seedling of Bartlett which originated with J. E. Hassler, Placerville,
Cal., and was introduced by Loma Rice Nursery in 1916. Tree similar
to Bartlett but branches more slender and whip-like, vigorous. Fruit
medium to very large, shaped like Bartlett but irregular, yellow; flesh
rather coarse; flavor sweet, pleasant; Dec.

=Aarer Pfundbirne.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:184. 1856.

A German Pound pear originated in Nassau, Hesse, about 1826. Fruit
large, pyriform, smooth, greenish-yellow turning to light yellow, often
blushed and dotted densely with light brown and covered with patches of
russet; fleshy pulpy, semi-melting, sweet and musky; Oct.

=Abbe Fetel.= =1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 166. 1889.

_Calebasse Abbe Fetel._ =2.= _Guide Prat._ 61. 1895.

Fruit very large, very elongated, bright red on the side next the sun;
flesh melting, very juicy, sugary; first; Nov.

=Abbe Perez.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:83, fig. 1867. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 654. 1869.

The parent tree of this variety was found in a garden of the Abbe
Perez, Lectoure, Department Gers, Fr. It was grafted and distributed
in 1859. Fruit above medium, ovate, flattened at both ends,
yellowish-green, dotted and streaked with russet; flesh whitish, fine,
melting, juicy, sugary, acidulous, delicately perfumed; first; Nov. to
Feb.

=Abbott.= =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:472. 1854. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 654. 1869.

Raised from seed by Mrs. T. Abbott, Providence, R. I. First fruited
in 1845 or 1846. Fruit medium, obovate, inclining to pyriform,
smooth, deep green changing to yellow, strewed all over with gray and
crimson dots, with blush of crimson on the side to the sun; flesh
yellowish-white, buttery, melting, juicy, slightly coarse and gritty,
with a rich, sweet and slightly perfumed flavor; second; Sept. and Oct.

=Abdon Birne.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:45. 1856

Fruit small, short, obtuse, ventriculous; skin smooth and tender,
lemon-yellow with a soft, rosy blush; flesh granular, semi-melting,
sweet, with an aroma of cinnamon; first for dessert; July and Aug.

=Abele de St Denis.= =1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:459. 1855.

Described in 1855 as a "comparatively new or recently introduced pear"
in England. Fruit large; excellent for dessert.

=Abercromby.= =1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 654. 1869.

A wilding found in Tallapoosa County, Ala. Fruit medium,
obtuse-pyriform, greatest breadth at center; skin rough,
greenish-yellow, russeted, with a mottled, red cheek; flesh whitish,
coarse, moderately juicy, sweet, slightly vinous; good; Aug.

=Achalzig.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:180. 1856. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 467. 1884.

A Russian variety sent from the Crimea into Europe by a Mr. Hartwiss,
superintendent of the royal garden at Nikita, where it originated in
1851. Fruit large, abruptly pyramidal, green changing at maturity to
lemon-yellow, strewn with white and gray dots; flesh yellowish, rather
gritty, melting, sweet, rich; good; Oct.

=Achan.= =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:130. 1843. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 467.
1884.

This well-known Scotch dessert pear is probably of Norwegian origin. It
is suitable only to a northern climate. Fruit below medium, turbinate
but often obovate when grown to a large size, greenish-yellow on the
shaded side, strewed with gray-russet patches and dots; on the exposed
cheek it is of a dull, ferruginous red; flesh tender, buttery, sugary,
juicy, with a rich, aromatic flavor; Nov. and Dec.

=Acidaline.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:164. 1856. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 468. 1884.

A seedling of Van Mons. It was in 1833 sent to the Horticultural
Society of Paris under the number 1253 and acquired the name Acidaline
from its extreme acidity. Fruit above medium, obovate, shining bright
green changing to yellow-green at maturity, mottled with red on the
side next the sun and dotted all over with reddish-brown specks; flesh
whitish-yellow, semi-buttery, semi-melting, gritty around the middle,
sourish, very juicy; third for dessert, first for cooking; Oct.

=Acme.= =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68. 1895.

Raised by A. Block, Santa Clara, Cal. Fruit large, pyriform, yellow,
russeted, red cheek; flesh breaking, melting, juicy and vinous.

=Adams.= =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:464, fig. 21. 1854. =2.= Hovey _Fr.
Am._ =2=:91, Pl. 1851.

Raised from seed of Seckel planted in 1836 by Dr. H. Adams, Waltham,
Mass. It first bore fruit in 1848. Fruit large, obovate-pyriform,
yellow, shaded with crimson; flesh white, vinous; first; early Sept.

=Adelaide de Reves.= =1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 469. 1884.

_Madame Adelaide de Reves._ =2.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:97, fig. 1855.

A seedling, found about 1850 in the gardens of the Society Van Mons,
Belgium. Fruit medium, turbinate; skin smooth, bright green changing
to lemon-yellow, dotted with fawn and marked with brown-black patches,
slightly colored with reddish-brown on the side next the sun; flesh
white, semi-fine, melting, full of sugary juice, vinous, well perfumed;
first; late Oct.

=Adele Lancelot.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:86, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =3=:95, fig. 144. 1878.

Alexandre Bivort obtained this pear in 1851 at Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit
variable in size but generally above medium, turbinate, swelled,
obtuse, greenish-yellow, dotted all over and streaked with russet and
often covered with black stains; flesh white, semi-fine, rather soft,
melting, gritty at center; juice abundant, sugary, acidulous, with a
delicate, buttery flavor; first.

=Adele de Saint-Denis.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:85, fig. 1867. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 469. 1884.

_Adele._ =3.= Le Bon Jard. 356. 1882.

Raised by M. Gueraud, Saint-Denis, near Paris, about 1840. Fruit
medium, obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, strongly dotted and marked
with fawn-colored russet; flesh yellowish, fine, melting, juicy, rather
gritty around core, sugary, acidulous; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Admirable. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =25=:207, fig. 13. 1859. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am_. 655. 1869.

Raised by Francis Dana, Boston, Mass., and first exhibited before the
Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1853. Mr. Dana considered it one
of his best seedlings. Fruit medium to large, globular-oval, largest
diameter in middle, tapering to each end, rather swollen on one side,
smooth, fine, yellow at maturity, with a circle of russet at the base
of the stem and more or less traced and thickly dotted with russet;
flesh yellowish-white, slightly coarse, melting, buttery, with a
delicious perfume; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Admiral Farragut. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 655. 1869.

_Farragut._ =2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

Raised by Dr. Shurtleff, Boston, Mass., and fruited first in 1862.
Fruit large, pyriform, greenish-yellow, with many dots and mottled
with fawn, blushed on the sunny side; flesh fine, melting, subacid,
refreshing; good, handsome but rather lacking in quality; late Sept.

=Admiral Foote. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

Originated in Brookline, Mass. First fruited in 1862 or 1863. Fruit
large, obovate, green; flesh melting, fine, with juice abundant,
exceedingly rich, sweet, vinous; first; Sept.

=Adolphe Cachet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:88, fig. 1867.

Obtained from seed in the trial grounds of Andre Leroy, Angers, France,
and first fruited in 1864. Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse, irregular,
very bright brilliant yellow, dotted with russet and stained similarly
on the side next the sun and around the stem; flesh white, fine,
melting, gritty at center, juicy, sugary, acid, fresh, with a delicious
savor of musk; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Adolphe Fouquet. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:67, fig. 226. 1879.

Raised by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit nearly medium,
turbinate-conic, uniform in contour, water-green dotted with
grayish-brown, often freely russeted, changing at maturity to dull
citron-yellow; flesh white, with slight yellowish tint, rather fine,
buttery, melting, with juice sufficient, sugary and vinous; good; Oct.

=Adolphine Richard. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =26=:218. 1860. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =1=:89, fig. 1867.

Reported by M. Bivort in the garden of the Van Mons Society,
Geest-Saint-Remy, Bel. Fruit small or medium, pyriform-obtuse, golden
yellow, spotted, striped and mottled with russet; flesh whitish, firm,
without grit, semi-melting, wanting in quality, with sugary juice,
acidulous, aromatic, without any after-flavor; second; Oct. and Nov.

=Aehrenthal. 1.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =11=: No. 51, Pl. 51. 1883.

Dedicated by Dr. Diel of Stuttgart to the Baron von
Aehrenthal of Prague sometime previous to 1833. Fruit medium,
ventriculous-obovate-pyriform, bright green passing to yellow; flesh
white, melting, juicy, buttery, aromatic; good; mid-Sept.

=Agathe de Lescourt. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:90, fig. 1867.

_Agathe de Lescours._ =2.= Mas. _Pom. Gen._ =5=:39, fig. 308. 1880.

Origin obscure. Cultivated in France in the middle of the last century
and believed to have been introduced there from Belgium. Fruit medium
and frequently very large, obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, dotted
and streaked with russet; flesh white, sweet, rather insipid; second;
mid-Sept.

=Aglae Adanson.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:91, fig. 1867.

_Adanson Apothekerbirne._ =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:181. 1856.

Obtained from seed by Van Mons in 1816. Fruit small, pyriform but
irregular, obtuse, greenish-yellow, finely dotted with russet, and
washed with bright rose on the cheek next the sun; flesh white, coarse,
breaking, with sufficient juice, scarcely any sugar but full of perfume
and flavor; third; Aug. and Sept.

=Aglae Gregoire.= =1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:69, fig. 1860. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:92, fig. 1867.

Obtained from seed about 1852 by X. Gregoire, Jodoigne,
Bel., and placed on the market in 1855. Fruit below medium,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform and often nearly round, dark green changing to
yellow at maturity; flesh melting, sugary, semi-fine and melting; juice
abundant, vinous, with an agreeable perfume; first; Feb. and Mar.

=Agnes.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:183, fig. 575. 1881.

Raised by M. Pariset, Curciat-Dongalon, Fr. First report of it given
in 1869. Fruit medium or nearly large, turbinate-pyriform, even in
outline, bright lively green sprinkled with brown dots all over,
changing at maturity to clear yellow on the shaded side and warm gold
on the side next the sun; flesh white, fine, altogether melting; juice
sufficient, sweet, sugary, pleasantly perfumed; first; Dec. and Jan.

=Agricola.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 84. 1895.

Attributed to Mortillet, 1873. Fruit medium, turbinate, intense green,
changing to decided yellow; flesh very fine, melting, highly aromatic;
Sept. Tree vigorous and prolific. Recommended for wind-exposed
situations.

=Ah-Mon-Dieu.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:93, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 470. 1884.

This pear has had various names and is of ancient and obscure origin.
Ah-Mon-Dieu is attributed to the exclamation of those words by King
Louis XIV, who when visiting his gardens saw this pear tree heavily
laden with fruit. Fruit small, obovate, lemon-yellow, dotted with
russet, washed with lively rose on the side next the sun; flesh
yellowish-white, coarse, breaking, not very juicy nor sugary, but
full of perfume and flavor; good, but does not keep long after being
gathered; Sept.

=Agua de Valence= (See page 250).

=Aigue.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:95, fig. 1867.

This variety is thought to have originated in the commune of
Saint-Germain, Vendee, Fr., where the trees are to be found in
abundance from 100 to 200 years old. Fruit small, ovate, generally a
little pointed at the top, bronzed all over and rough to the touch,
wrinkling freely at maturity; flesh yellowish, firm, breaking, somewhat
gritty; juice sufficient, acidulous, deficient in sugar, almost insipid
and sometimes having a delicate, musky flavor; third for dessert,
second for kitchen use, but very variable; Nov. to Mar.

=Aiken.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:69, fig. 35. 1872.

This is believed to be an American variety. Mas received it from
Downing and thought it had been raised in the suburbs of Aiken, S. C.
Fruit medium, obovate, entirely covered with a fine russet on which are
some dots, but at maturity the russet changes to a rich gold and the
cheek next the sun sometimes becomes blushed; flesh white, buttery,
melting, free from granulations at the center, fairly sugary and
vinous; not first class but good for preserving; Oct. and Nov.

=Aime Ogereau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:96, fig. 1867.

Raised in the nurseries of Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr. It fruited for
the first time in 1862. Fruit medium or small, obovate-obtuse,
lemon-yellow, sprinkled with brown dots, seldom colored on the
sun-exposed side; flesh white, melting, remarkable especially for its
extreme fineness; juice abundant, sugary, acidulous, flavored with a
delicious savor of musk; first; mid-Sept.

=Aimee Adam. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 75. 1895.

Raised by Simon Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit rather large,
obtuse-pyriform; skin fawn; flesh yellowish, semi-melting, sugary,
sprightly; third; latter half of Oct. Tree vigorous and fertile.

=Akatsupo. 1.= _Am. Gard._ =12=:10, fig. 6. 1891.

Japanese and common in neighborhood of Tokio. It is rather elongated in
shape compared with other Japanese varieties, and heavily speckled with
large dots; Aug.

=Alamo. 1.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:232. 1903.

Originated by A. L. Bruce, Grayson County, Tex. Fruit medium to large,
pale yellow, blushed with red; flesh buttery, melting; early.

=Albertine. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:115. 1856. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =6=:131, fig. 450. 1880.

This seedling, raised by Van Mons, was sent by him to Poiteau, author
of the _Pomologie Francaise_, who, in 1833, named it after his wife.
Fruit small, pyriform-obovate; skin rather thick, firm, water-green,
sprinkled with numerous very small gray-brown specks, the basic green
changing to bright lemon-yellow on the side next the sun; flesh yellow,
very fine, dense, buttery, melting; juice abundant, vinous, perfumed;
first; Oct.

=Alexander. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 449. 1857.

Originated at the village of Alexander, Genesee County, N. Y., from
seed planted about 1820 by a Mrs. Churchill. It was shown at the Fruit
Growers' Society Exhibition held at Buffalo, N. Y., on Sept. 13, 1855.
Although very similar to Gray Doyenne, it is distinct. Fruit medium,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform, yellowish-green, nearly overspread with
cinnamon-russet except in the shade, and having occasionally a faint
brownish blush in the sun; flesh white, rather coarse and somewhat
gritty at the center, melting and very juicy, sugary; very good; Dec.
to Feb.

=Alexander Lucas. 1.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soct. Rpt._ 22. 1884. =2.= _Gard.
Mon._ =28=:366. 1886.

_Beurre Alexandre Lucas._ =3.= Bunyard _Cat._ 37. 1913-14.

This pear was found in a forest in the department of Loire-et-Cher,
Fr., in 1871. It was imported to the United States by Ellwanger &
Barry, Rochester, N. Y., but never widely disseminated. Fruit large,
golden yellow at maturity; flesh half-melting, juicy, vinous; quality
good; Nov. to Jan.

=Alexandre Bivort. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:37, fig. 25. 1866-73. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:97, figs. 1867.

Obtained in 1848 by Louis Berckmans and named after Alexandre Bivort,
founder of the Society of Van Mons, in Belgium. Fruit small to medium;
the two types are spherical, or turbinate inclining to pyriform,
respectively; skin smooth, shining green changing to yellow, dotted
with russet; flesh white, fine-grained, tender, full of juice, sugary,
with perfume of almond; variable in quality; Nov. to Jan.

=Alexandre Chomer. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 167. 1889.

Raised by M. Liabaud; introduced in 1887. Fruit large; in form similar
to Bartlett shortened, clear green passing into yellow at maturity;
flesh very fine, melting, juicy; first; Dec. and Jan.

=Alexandre de la Herche. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 167. 1889.

Raised by M. Sannier who named it after M. de la Herche, a merchant of
Beauvais, Oise, Fr. Fruit medium, globular-obtuse-pyriform, sometimes
slightly cylindrical; flesh fine, with a pleasant perfume; late Oct.
Tree is fairly vigorous and very fruitful and resisted the phenomenal
frost in France in the winter of 1879-80.

=Alexandre Lambre. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:94, fig. 1854. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 472. 1884.

A seedling of Van Mons which did not fruit until 1844, two years
after the death of the great pomologist. Fruit medium, oblate,
obtuse-pyriform, bright yellowish-green, sprinkled with minute russety
dots and slight markings of russet, brownish-red on the side next the
sun; flesh white, a little soft, melting, juicy, sweet, acid, free from
grit and possessing a delicate, musk flavor; Nov.

=Alexandre de Russie. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 363. 1831.

Raised by M. Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel., and named in honor of the
Emperor Alexander of Russia. Fruit above medium, rather pyramidal,
with an uneven surface, light green changing to yellowish-green, with
a tinge of brownish-red on the side exposed to the sun where also it
is somewhat stained with a fine, pale brown-russet, either in streaks
or patches; flesh white, gritty, very juicy, buttery, with a rich,
aromatic flavor. A good dessert pear; late Oct.

=Alexandrina. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =25=:41, 502, fig. 50. 1859. =2.= Mas
_Le Verger_ =2=:27, fig. 12. 1866-73.

Raised by M. Bivort, Haelen and Louvain, Bel. Published in 1847. Fruit
medium, rather variable, globular-ovate, bright green changing to a
fine yellow at maturity, tinged with crimson on the side next the sun,
strewed irregularly with minute, russet dots; flesh yellowish-white,
fine-grained, melting, juicy, sugary and perfumed; Sept.

=Alexandrine Douillard. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:41, fig. 1854.

Raised by M. Douillard, Nantes, Fr., first harvested in 1849; placed in
commerce in November, 1852. Fruit large, pyriform, turbinate or ovate;
skin smooth and glossy, citron-yellow at maturity, nearly covered with
russet-fawn, stained with dark brown and dotted with black and gray;
flesh white, fine, melting; juice abundant, sugary and deliciously
perfumed; excellent; Nov. and Dec.

=Alexandrine Mas. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:89, fig. 51. 1866-73.

This pear came from a seed of the Passe Colmar sown by M. Mas in
1850. Fruit medium, pyriform, irregular, with protuberances, obtuse,
bright green changing at maturity to pale yellow, covered with very
numerous and regularly spaced small, dark brown spots; flesh whitish,
transparent, melting; juice sufficient and rich in sugar, perfumed
after the manner of Passe Colmar; first; Apr. and May.

=Alfred de Madre. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

A new variety sent out in 1895 by Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit
medium, yellow, dotted with fawn, carmined on the side next the sun;
flesh semi-melting, sweet, acidulous, with a very agreeable perfume;
Oct.

=Alice Payne. 1.= Van Lindley _Cat._ 23. 1892.

Originated about 1843 near Salem, N. C. In 1892 the original tree
was still growing when the variety was introduced by J. Van Lindley,
Pomona, N. C. Fruit medium to large, yellow-white; good; winter.

=Allerton. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., and submitted
by him to the fruit committee of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society in 1866, it having first fruited in 1862. Fruit large and
handsome, long-pyriform, bright yellow; flesh fine-grained, high
flavor, rather acid; always markets well; late Oct.

=Alliance franco-russe. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 116. 1900.

Raised from seed by Florimond Robitaille, a horticulturist at Seclin,
Fr., and placed on the market, in 1897. Recommended for trial by
amateurs in 1900 by the President of the Pomological Society of France.
Fruit medium to large, obovate-pyriform, rather similar to the Duchesse
d'Angouleme, pale yellow sprinkled with red dots, deeper yellow on the
side next the sun, and mottled with fawn and numerous russet dots at
the base; flesh white, fine, melting, very juicy, sugary, acidulous,
agreeably perfumed; almost very good; Oct. to Dec.

=Alouette. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:101, fig. 1867.

A chance seedling found by Andre Leroy in 1850 in the commune of
Saulge-l'Hopital, Maine-et-Loire, Fr. The parent tree appeared at that
time to be about 80 years old. The fruit was introduced in 1855. Fruit
small, nearly obtuse, globular-pyriform, greenish-yellow, sprinkled
with ash-colored spots, and slightly washed with carmine on the side
toward the sun; flesh coarse, white, breaking and rather gritty;
second; mid-Sept.

=Alpha. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:123. 1843.

Raised by Van Mons, Louvain, Bel., and named and described in the
London Horticultural Society's catalog of fruits in 1842. Fruit medium,
obovate, slightly oblong; skin smooth, yellowish-green on the shaded
side, and pale brown speckled with minute reddish dots on the cheek
next the sun; flesh white, fine-grained, buttery; second quality
dessert; Oct. Tree well adapted for standard or half-standard.

=Alphonse Allegatiere. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

Described by Simon-Louis Brothers, Metz, Lorraine, in 1895, as a
new variety. Fruit large, clear yellow passing to butter-yellow at
maturity; flesh white, very fine, melting, sugary; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Alphonse Karr. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:102, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =3=:187, fig. 190. 1878.

Raised in the seed beds of Major Esperen. It was dated 1849 and in 1853
was included among trees of the Society Van Mons. Fruit above medium,
pyriform-obtuse, depressed at the base, golden yellow, dotted and
veined with fawn, stained with the same tint round the stem and calyx;
flesh whitish, very fine, very melting, free from grittiness, juicy,
fresh, sugary, acidulous, delicately perfumed; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Amadotte. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:104, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =7=:37, fig. 499. 1881.

The Amadotte is of ancient origin and more than one variety appears
to have borne the name. The one here described is that discussed by
Le Lectier, 1620. Fruit medium and sometimes larger, pyriform-ovate,
variable, orange-yellow, marbled and dotted with fawn, especially
around the calyx and the stalk, and generally washed with carmine on
the side of the sun; flesh slightly yellow, fine, buttery, gritty
around the core; juice abundant, sweet, with a slight flavor of musk;
third for eating as dessert, second for cooking; Oct. to Jan.

=Amande Double. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 353. 1845.

_Walker._ =2.= _Ibid._ 877. 1869.

The name Amande signifies almond and has reference to its flavor.
Amande Double is a seedling of Van Mons which probably derives its
qualifying name from the fact that it has double kernels. In 1834-5 Van
Mons sent it to Robert Manning of Salem, Mass., under the number 135,
and how it acquired the name of _Walker_ in this country is not known.
Fruit medium, pyriform, slightly obtuse, golden yellow, slightly dotted
with fawn, washed with carmine on the side exposed to the sun; flesh
white, semi-fine, melting, gritty at center, juice sufficient, sugary,
slightly acid, with a delicious flavor of almond; first; late Sept. to
Nov.

=Amandine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:109, fig. 1867.

Obtained about 1857 by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr., from a seed-bed made
in 1846. It was presented to the Horticultural Society of Rouen,
September 19, 1858. Fruit medium to small, pyriform, obtuse, having one
side more swelled than the other, greenish-yellow, speckled with fawn;
flesh very white, semi-fine, melting, rarely gritty; juice abundant,
sugary, full of flavor; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Ambrette. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 131, fig. IV. 1729. =2.= Duhamel
_Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:186, Pl. XXXI. 1768.

_Ambrette d'Hiver._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:112, fig. 1867.

A French dessert pear of ancient but uncertain origin. It was mentioned
by M. Le Lectier of Orleans in 1628 in his catalog, and was shown by
him to have been cultivated under the name of _Trompe-Coquin_. It has
also been thought to be the pear _Myrapia_ mentioned by Pliny, and to
have been so named because of the myrrh-like perfume. The name Ambrette
was given to the variety on account of its musk-like flavor, resembling
the scent of the flower which in France is called Ambrette. Fruit below
medium, globular-oval, tapering toward stalk, yellowish-olive; flesh
yellowish or greenish-white; formerly held in high esteem but now
ranking only as second-rate; Nov. to Jan.

=Ambrette d'Ete. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:111, fig. 1867.

This variety was first mentioned in 1628 by Le Lectier under the name
_Besi de Mouilleres_. Fruit small, spherical, narrowing a little at the
summit, yellowish, often rough to the touch, speckled with gray dots
and always washed with clear brownish-red on the side next the sun;
flesh dull white, breaking, containing some grit around the core; juice
sufficient, sugary, acidulous, rather delicately musky; second; Aug.
and Sept.

=Ambrosia. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =14=:326, fig. 1868. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 177. 1884.

Switser, writing in England in 1724, said that this variety was
introduced to that country from France "among that noble collection of
fruit that was planted in the Royal Gardens in St. James's Park soon
after the Restoration, but is now cut down." No French author, however,
appears to mention it under this name. It was formerly to be found in
many old English gardens but now seems to have dropped out of favor.
Fruit medium, globular-obovate, greenish-yellow, slightly russeted
and covered with small, gray specks; flesh buttery and in England
possessing a high flavor, melting, rich, sugary, perfumed; first for
dessert; Sept. but does not keep long.

=Amedee Leclerc. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:113, fig. 1867.

Raised by Leon Leclerc, Laval, Mayenne, Fr. It first bore fruit in
1849. Fruit medium, conic-cylindrical, often irregular in form and
bossed, pale yellow, dotted, streaked and veined with russet; flesh
white, fine, semi-melting; second; Feb.

=Amelie Leclerc. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 2, 1, fig. 97. 1866-73.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:114, fig. 1867.

This excellent pear was raised by Leon Leclerc, Laval, Mayenne, Fr.
The original tree first bore fruit in 1850, and appeared then to be
12 years old. Introduced to this country about 1868. Fruit medium,
globular-ovate, somewhat uneven in outline, obtuse, pale yellow, dotted
and veined with russet and washed with rose-carmine on the cheek next
the sun; flesh white, fine, melting, full of juice, sugary, acidulous,
perfumed; first; Sept. and Oct.

=America. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =25=:205, fig. 12. 1859. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 658. 1869.

It was said of Francis Dana, the indefatigable pomologist of
Boston, that he saved the seed of all good pears that he ate, and
that from these he produced sixteen new, good varieties of which
America was one. It is a handsome pear and in 1859 was considered
an important acquisition because it ripens in the early part of the
winter when the number of choice varieties is limited. Fruit very
large, globular-ovate, somewhat angular, with an uneven surface,
dull greenish-yellow, much clouded with dull russet, and sprinkled
heavily with large russet dots; flesh yellowish-white, rather coarse,
semi-melting, sugary, buttery, pleasant, rich in flavor and having a
refreshing aroma; good; keeps well; Dec.

=Amie Verdier. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 40. 1871.

One of a collection of 42 new varieties of pears exhibited by Marshall
P. Wilder at the annual exhibition of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society in 1871, for which Mr. Wilder obtained the "first prize for
new pears." Fruit medium, obovate, inclining to turbinate, yellow,
with brownish-red cheek and some traces of russet; flesh white, very
melting, juicy and rich. Promised to be fine.

=Amiral. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:115, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 478. 1884. _Cardinale._ =3.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:90. 1831.

A fine old French pear of unknown origin but mentioned by Olivier de
Serres in his Theatre d'agriculture in 1600. Fruit large, pyramidal,
rather uneven in outline, dark greenish-yellow and washed with
brilliant red on the side next the sun; flesh white, fine, tender,
melting, free from grit, very juicy, rich and perfumed with anis; first
rate dessert pear; seeds usually abortive; Sept. and Oct.

=Amiral Cecile. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:117, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 478. 1884.

_Admiral Cecile._ =3.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 166. 1889.

Raised by M. Boisbunel, nurseryman at Rouen, from seed sown in 1846;
fruited for the first time in 1858. Fruit medium, globular-obovate,
yellowish-green changing to lemon-yellow, thickly dotted and mottled
with gray-russet; flesh fine, whitish, melting, gritty at core, juicy,
sweet and delicately perfumed; first rate dessert pear; Oct. to Dec.

=Amire Joannet. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:125, 1768. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 478. 1884.

An ancient pear written of in 1660 by Claude Mollet. It bears the
name of Joannet because in some parts of France it ripens about St.
John's Day, the 24th of June. Fruit small, regularly pyriform, slightly
obtuse, smooth, pale greenish-yellow changing to a deep waxen-yellow,
washed with pale rose; flesh white, semi-fine, tender, juicy, sugary,
impregnated with a perfume of musk, quite agreeable; second; June and
July.

=Amlisberger Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 72, fig. 1913.

A perry pear found in Switzerland and first published in 1885. Fruit
medium, globular, yellowish-green changing at maturity to light yellow,
dotted with dark russet; excellent but not good for transportation;
Sept. and Oct.

=Amour. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:120, fig. 1867.

_Tresor._ =2.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:236. 1768.

M. Duhamel du Monceau styled this the largest of all pears and
sufficiently sweet to be eaten raw by those whose taste is not too
exacting, but very good for cooking and far superior to the Catillac
and Pound pears. Origin obscure. Fruit very large; form like that of
the quince, much swelled at the middle, extremely mammillate at each
pole; skin rough to the touch, dull yellow, dotted, striped and mottled
with fawn and showing some brownish spots; flesh white, semi-melting,
free from grit, juicy, very saccharine and well perfumed; second for
dessert, first for the kitchen; Nov. to Feb.

=Amstettner Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 30, fig. 1913.

Lower Austria; perry pear. Fruit rather large, long-pyriform, obtuse,
somewhat irregular, smooth, bright green turning yellow at maturity;
flesh whitish, rather granular and sometimes rather bitter; Oct.

=Ananas. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 532. 1817. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=1=:122, fig. 1867.

Ananas was originally introduced to Holland from France where it had
been cultivated for many years under the name _De Bouchet_, a name
given to it during the reign of Louis XIV, 1643-1715, by La Quintinye,
Director of the Royal Gardens. Fruit medium; form rather variable,
generally globular, height and breadth being equal; color bright green
changing to yellowish-green at maturity, with some tinge of red on
the side next the sun, strewed with brown-russet dots; flesh white,
melting, somewhat gritty, juicy, sugary; first for dessert; Sept.

=Ananas de Courtrai. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:13, fig, 1854. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:124, fig. 1867.

_Ananas de Courtray._ =3.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:79, fig. 40. 1872.

The origin of this variety is unknown, but it is believed to have
been a chance seedling raised at Courtrai, Flanders, as M. Six, who
established himself in that town in the business of a gardener about
the year 1784, found it already extensively grown there. Fruit large,
pyramidal and often inclining to oval, bright yellow changing to
lemon-yellow and much dotted and splashed with light-colored russet;
flesh white, fine, juicy, well perfumed and with a flavor suggestive of
cinnamon and musk; very good; Aug. and Sept.

=Ananas d'Ete. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 480. 1884.

This is not the Dutch variety of Knoop but rather the type known in
the British Isles as Ananas d'Ete or _King William_ Pear. Fruit above
medium, obtuse-pyriform, yellowish-green with brownish tinge next the
sun and covered with large, rough, brown-russet dots; flesh delicate,
buttery, melting, with a pleasant, perfumed flavor; first; mid-Sept.

=Andouille. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:126, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =6=:111, fig. 440. 1880.

The origin of this variety is unknown beyond the fact that it was
cultivated near Montfaucon, Maine-et-Loire, Fr., previous to 1850. At
first it was known as the "_Polyforme_" owing to its very variable
shape but was subsequently given its present name which is that of a
twist of tobacco. Fruit medium or rather large, conic-pyriform, but
often irregular and variable, sometimes much swelled below the middle,
mammillate around the calyx, yellow, washed with fawn; flesh white,
rather fine and buttery, gritty, melting; juice sweet and perfumed;
second; late Sept.

=Andrew Murray. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 80. 1895.

Fruit small, ovate, yellow; flesh fine, melting, juicy; good; end of
winter and spring. Tree fertile and moderately vigorous.

=Andrews. 1.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:97, Pl. 1851. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 451, fig. 1857.

Samuel Downer introduced this pear soon after the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society was organized in 1829. He stated "that it
originated in Dorchester, and that the original tree was purchased
about 60 years ago by John Andrews of Boston." Fruit rather large,
pyriform, one-sided, pale yellowish-green, with a dull red cheek; flesh
greenish-white, full of juice, melting, having a vinous flavor; first;
early Sept.

=Ange. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:138. 1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =1=:131, fig. 1867. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 480. 1884.

This is one of the most ancient varieties in France. At a very early
date it was dedicated to the "_Angels_" and later to the "Virgin Mary"
and was known by the two names simultaneously from the sixteenth to the
nineteenth century. Fruit small to medium, variable but generally more
globular-turbinate than oblong or ovate, deep green changing to yellow,
dotted with gray, washed with red-brown on the side to the sun; flesh
white, melting, very juicy, sugary, acidulous, having a strong perfume
of anis; first for dessert and also for preserves; Aug. and Sept.

=Angel. 1.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 693. 1897.

Originated at Ghent, N. Y. Fruit large, handsome; poor, early.

=Angeline. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:134. 1856.

A seedling of Van Mons, 1852. Fruit medium, often rather ovate, light
green changing to light yellow, somewhat blushed, finely dotted; flesh
very fine, white, buttery, sweet, tartish, juicy; first for table and
market; late Aug. The tree is best grown as a dwarf.

=Angelique de Bordeaux.= =1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:214, Pl.
XLVII, fig. 5. 1768. =2.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 391. 1831. =3.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:133, figs. 1867.

_St. Martial._ =4.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:79. 1831.

Henri Manger thought this pear identical with the pear _Liceriana_ or
_Liciniana_ of which Pliny spoke and which bears the name of Licinius,
the Roman tribune and consul. In 1690 Jean Merlet described a pear
under the name _Angelique_ which appears to be the same, and said it
was much esteemed in Languedoc under the name _Saint-Martial_. It
remains that its origin is ancient and uncertain, though it seems
quite likely, as M. Leroy thought, that it originated in Languedoc,
Gironde, Fr. Switser considered it was introduced into England about
1708. For upwards of 100 years it was grown there under the name _Saint
Martial_. It does not appear when it was first brought to this country.
Fruit above medium to large, obtuse-pyriform, uneven in outline,
glossy green changing as it ripens to pale yellow or greenish-yellow,
the whole strewed with brown dots and a few patches of russet; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, sweet and sugary, breaking, agreeable, not rich in
perfume; second for dessert and cooking; Jan. to Apr.

=Angelique Cuvier.= =1.= Mathieu _Norm. Pom._ 169. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 72. 1895.

Fruit medium, acute-pyriform, almost entirely covered with fawn on a
yellow ground; flesh fine, melting, juicy; good; Sept. and Oct. Tree
vigorous and fertile.

=Angelique Leclerc.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =11=:137, fig. 1867. =2.=
Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:7, fig. 100. 1878.

This variety was raised from seed by Leon Leclerc, Laval, Mayenne,
Fr., about 1848. Fruit medium and often large, regular, long-ovate,
greenish-yellow, shaded with pale rose on the cheek next the sun and
dotted with russet; flesh white, very closely grained, melting, rough
or gritty round the core, juicy, sugary, acidulous, having a delicate
aroma; first; Oct. to Dec.

=Angelique de Rome.= =1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:239. 1768. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:136, fig. 1867.

With the exception of M. Duhamel du Monceau, no pomologist of the
sixteenth or seventeenth century mentioned this pear. Henri Manger
writing in 1783, thought it identical with the "_pira Tiberiana_," a
variety which Pliny tells us was a favorite with the Emperor Tiberius.
Fruit medium, globular, obtuse-pyriform, darkish yellow, dotted with
fine gray spots, always washed with rose on the side next the sun;
flesh whitish, a little coarse, gritty around the core, full of rich,
sugary juice; second; Oct to Dec.

=Angleterre d'Hiver.= =1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:198. 1768.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:138, fig. 1867.

According to Leroy this variety was grown in France in the middle of
the seventeenth century, its grafts having been brought from England.
Fruit medium, oblong-obovate-pyriform, pale yellow, spotted with fawn
and slightly washed with red; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, rather
gritty around the core, juicy, sugary, with a sweet and agreeable
flavor; a good kitchen pear; Dec. to Mar.

=Angleterre Nain.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:140, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 661. 1869.

This variety was raised from seed in 1832 at Paris by Edouard Sageret.
It appeared first under the name _Angleterre parfumee_ and was so
published in 1835, but for some reason was renamed. Fruit rather above
than below medium, turbinate, obtuse, swelled and always more enlarged
on one side than on the other; skin rough to the touch, dull green,
uniformly dotted with clear russet; flesh whitish, fine, breaking,
gritty at the center; juice abundant, fresh, sweet, with a musky savor;
first; Sept. and Oct.

=Angobert.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:142, fig. 1867. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 661. 1869.

_A Gobert._ =3.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:191. 1768.

Toward the end of the eighteenth century, 1780-83, Henri Manger claimed
that he had identified the Angobert with the _Signina_ or _Testacea_
of Columella and Pliny. Fruit very large, variable but generally
obovate-pyriform, distorted, enlarged around the calyx end, dull
yellow, dotted and streaked with fawn, washed with red on the side of
the sun; flesh white, coarse, juicy, sweet, having a rather agreeable
after-flavor of musk; third for the table but first for the kitchen.

=Angoisse.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:145, fig. 1867.

_Winter Bon Chretien._ =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 666. 1884.

This is one of the most ancient French pears having been described in
the year 1094 in a chronological manuscript attributed to Geoffroy,
the Prior of the Benedictine monastery of Vigeois in the Diocese of
Limoges, in which it was stated to have derived its name from the
village of Angoisse in the old Province of Limonsin, Fr. Fruit small
to medium, turbinate, obtuse, swelled, golden-yellow, dotted, marbled
with fawn and washed with brownish-red on the side to the sun; flesh
whitish, slightly melting, coarse, always very gritty at the center;
juice excessively abundant, acidulous, sugary; third for dessert,
second for cooking, first for cider; Dec. to Apr.

=Angora.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:147, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =5=:35, fig. 306. 1880.

This is a member of a group of pears rather loosely termed Pound Pears.
By some authors Angora is given as a synonym for _Belle Angevine_ or
_Uvedale's St. Germain_. In an account of a voyage he undertook in
1700 on command of King Louis XIV of France, M. Tournefort, the noted
botanist, states that he saw at Beibasas, Asia Minor, the pears known
in Constantinople as Angora. In 1832, Leon Leclerc imported it into
France from Constantinople, having obtained it with difficulty through
the French Ambassador at the Golden Horn. Fruit above medium to large,
pyriform, obtuse, swelled around the center, rather irregular in form;
skin thick, hard to cut, pale yellow, finely dotted with fawn and
bearing some patches of fawn; flesh white, rather coarse, semi-melting,
gritty at the center; juice plentiful and rich in sugar after the
manner of sweet wine, little perfume; second; Oct. and Nov.

=Angoucha.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 82. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:43,
fig. 502. 1881.

Originated in the Department of the Aube, France. In the arrondisements
of Troyes and Bar-sur-Seine it is also called _Courte queue_ i. e.
"Short Stem;" and by M. Baltet-Petit, it was described in the "Annales
de Flore et Pomone," under the name _Belle Chaouce_, the name of
the canton where it was very generally cultivated. Fruit medium,
obtuse-conic-ovate, regular in contour, dark green sprinkled with
numerous regularly spaced, brown dots often comingled under a cloud of
russet of same color, at maturity the green becomes an intense yellow,
the russet golden, and on the side of the sun is a wash of light
orange-red; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine, dense, breaking; juice
sufficient and rich in sugar; good for cooking, winter.

=Anna Audusson.= =1.= _Pom. France_ =3=:No. 110, Pl. 110. 1865. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:149. 1867.

=Anna Audisson.= =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 661. 1869.

In 1828 or 1830, M. Audusson, a nurseryman at Angers, Fr., obtained
this variety from a bed of mixed seeds. Fruit medium or rather less,
single or in pairs, rarely in clusters, turbinate-obtuse, always rather
swelled, irregular, yellowish-green dotted with fawn and splashed with
reddish markings on the side next the sun; flesh whitish, buttery,
fine, melting, often mealy, gritty around the core, juicy, acidulous,
only slightly saccharine or perfumed; third; Nov. to Jan.

_Anna Nelis._ =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:150. 1867.

M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., raised this pear from a bed of mixed seeds
made in 1835. It was first reported in 1849. Fruit second quality for
dessert; maturity Apr. to May.

=Anne de Bretagne.= =1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 169. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 84. 220. 1895. _Anne of Brittany_. =3.= =Gard. Chron.= 3rd Ser.
=5=:18. 1889.

On trial with Simon-Louis Brothers, Metz, Lorraine, 1895. Fruit medium
to large, yellow, glossy, sometimes colored with vermilion where
exposed to the sun; flesh fine, melting, slightly acidulous; first;
Nov. to Jan.

=Anthony Thacher.= =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 102. 1875. =2.= _Ind.
Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 42. 1875.

One of four varieties exhibited by Robert Manning at the Chicago
meeting of the American Pomological Society in 1875 as the "Centennial
Pears." The fruit grew upon a tree which was 235 years old that season.
Fruit medium in size, ovate-pyriform, green, changing, to yellow at
maturity; of tolerable quality; ripening early in Sept.

=Antoine.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:180, fig. 572. 1881.

A seedling raised by M. Pariset in France in 1852 and first published
in 1867. Fruit large, nearly cylindrical, truncated at both ends;
bright green sown with numerous large, brown dots, a network of russet
covering most of the surface, the basic green passing at maturity to
lemon-yellow, the russet changing to gold, with the side next the sun
often sprinkled with small specks of blood-red; flesh yellowish-white,
fine, melting yet a little gritty near the core, full of saccharine
juice richly perfumed; first; mid-winter.

=Antoine Delfosse.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 82. 1876. =2.= Baltet _Cult.
Fr._ 320, 331, 332. 1908.

Raised by M. Gregoire of Jodoigne, Bel., about 1870. Fruit medium,
ovate, truncated, dull green passing into dull yellow, covered with
fawn spots; flesh fine, melting, juicy, saccharine, exquisite; late Nov.

=Antoinette.= =1.= _U. S. D. A. Pat. Off. Rpt._ 397. 1858. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 82. 1876.

The parent tree was found in the commune of Camsegret, Fr., and is not
to be confused with Beurre Antoinette, another and probably earlier
variety. Fruit medium size, handsome; flesh perfumed; Oct. and Nov. In
the report of the Department of Agriculture for 1858 it was said in
Massachusetts to make "a handsome pyramidal tree, promising well."

=Anversoise.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 84. 1895.

Introduced by Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel., prior to 1895. Fruit
rather large and very similar to Marie-Louise; flesh fine, juicy,
sugary, pleasantly perfumed; Oct. and Nov. The tree is moderately
vigorous and very prolific.

=Apfelblaettrige Azerolbirne.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:197.
1856.

An apple-leaved variety; German. Fruit small, globular, yellow, blushed
with red; flesh white, rather gritty, sweet, melting; seedless; third
for dessert, first for kitchen; Aug.

=Apothekerbirne.= =1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 238. 1881.

To be found in the Rhine country and especially at Nueremberg. Fruit
medium; ovate, smooth and shining, green changing to yellow, often with
some light russet, and numerous russet dots; flesh yellowish-white,
breaking, very tender, sweet, with an aroma of cinnamon and sweet
flavor; very good for household purposes; Oct.

=Apple.= =1.= Griffing Bros. _Cat._ 12, fig. 1909.

Said to have originated near Palatka, Fla., from a Japanese sort and
introduced about 1909. Fruit large, roundish, light green becoming
lemon-yellow; flesh white, crisp, juicy; ripens with Le Conte.

=Apple Pear.= =1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:1831. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 662. 1869. _Poire-Pomme._ =3.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:173, fig. 87.
1872.

This variety is of ancient but unknown origin. Several varieties have
been described under this name, but the pear here described is the
German variety spoken of by J. V. Sickler about 1800 and extensively
grown in the environs of Sachsenburg and Kanneburg. Fruit below medium,
globular-oblate, not regular, olive-yellow, much dotted and russeted,
and moderately washed with brownish-red on the side exposed to the sun;
flesh yellowish-white, watery, fine and melting, granular around the
core, without much perfume; second; Nov. and Dec.

=Appoline.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 82. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:161,
fig. 369. 1880.

Obtained from seed by President Parigot of Poitiers in 1845. It was
propagated by M. Larclause but the date of its first introduction is
unknown. Fruit rather small, nearly round or globular-ovate in form;
color rather deep and dull green with a few small dots, and some traces
of brown russet on both the summit and the base of the fruit; flesh
white, tinted with green, fine, very melting, a little gritty about the
core, full of sugary juice, slightly acid with an agreeable flavor.

=Agua de Valence.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:25, fig. 397. 1880.

M. Mas received this pear from Adrien Seneclauze, a nurseryman at
Bourg-Argental, Loire, Fr. Fruit medium, irregular, globular, bright
green passing to lemon-yellow, speckled with large and numerous deep
green spots which are the more apparent on the side next the sun,
well-exposed fruits washed with blood-red round the spots which become
yellowish; flesh white, fine, tender, melting, juicy, sweet; good; Aug.

=Aqueuse d'Esclavonie.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:63, fig. 128. 1878.

Count Bressler, Fernsee, Hung., sent this variety in 1842 to Liegel.
Two years later Mas received it from Mr. Hartwill, Director of the
gardens at Nikita in the Crimea, Rus., under the name _Achalzig I_.
Fruit medium, obovate, acute-pyriform; color pale green, sown with
numerous and distinct very small dots of a deeper shade; flesh whitish,
rather coarse, melting, gritty around the core, abundant sweet juice,
sugary, but without any appreciable perfume; Sept. and Oct.

=Aqueuse de Meiningen..= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:77, fig. 231. 1879.

This variety is cultivated in the neighborhood of Meiningen, central
Germany, but its origin appears to be unknown. Fruit medium or nearly
medium, globular, turbinate, very regular in contour; skin thick, very
bright green sprinkled with numerous small dots of a darker shade,
changing at maturity to pale yellow and more golden on the side exposed
to the sun; flesh whitish, coarse, melting, fairly juicy, saccharine
and only slightly perfumed; third; Sept.

=Arabella.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:134. 1856.

A seedling from Van Mons, 1852. Fruit below medium, pale green,
slightly rough, much dotted with greenish cinnamon-russet; flesh
whitish, very fine, sweet, vinous; first for dessert; Sept. and Oct.

=Arbre Courbe.= =1.= _Gard. Chron._ 68. 1848. =2.= _Pom. France_
=2=:No. 59, Pl. 59. 1864.

_Krummholzige Schmalzbirne._ =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:67.
1856.

Bivort, successor of Van Mons in the Society's gardens at Louvain,
stated that this variety was gained by Van Mons about 1830. Fruit
large, oblong-obtuse-pyriform; skin rough to the touch, being
considerably covered with rough, scaly russet; color bright yellow or
greenish-yellow, freely dotted with russet spots; flesh white, rather
fine, melting, juicy, gritty around the core; a dessert pear, but
hardly first-rate; Sept. and Oct.

=Archduke of Austria.= =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =3=:50. 1837.

Manning in the Pomological Notices in the _Magazine of Horticulture_
said: "This tree bears well every year; the fruit is handsome, but very
dry and of inferior quality. Ripe in September. It may prove to have
been received under a wrong name."

=Archiduc Charles.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:153, fig. 1867.

Raised by M. Duval, Hainaut, Bel. Fruit medium to large,
short-pyramidal, bright yellow in France, brown-red next the sun,
covered with large, dark-brown russet dots and patches; flesh fine,
yellowish-white, juicy, with a very agreeable savor; first; Nov. and
Dec.

=Archiduc d'Ete.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:155, fig. 1867.

_Ognonet._ =2.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:135, Pl. VIII. 1768.

An old French variety described under various names at different
times and places, the earliest being by Merlet in 1675. It acquired
the synonym of _Ognonet_ in the eighteenth century from its swelled
onion-like form. Fruit small, obovate-obtuse-pyriform; pale lively
green changing to yellowish-green as it ripens and covered with dark
red next the sun with numerous russety dots and some patches of russet;
flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine, juicy, gritty, sugary, acid, with a
slight flavor of anis; second; July and Aug.

=Archiduc Jean d'Autriche.= =1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 159. 1832. =2.=
_Mag. Hort._ =21=:146. 1855.

Originated by Van Mons about 1817 and characterized by him as
"admirable;" otherwise undescribed.

=Archiduchesse d'Autriche.= =1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 483. 1884.

Raised by Van Mons. Fruit medium or below, globular-turbinate, green,
yellowish-green when ripe, blushed with brownish-red, dots and stains
of cinnamon-russet; flesh white, semi-melting, slightly gritty at
core, juicy, sugary and rather rich flavor; second rate dessert; Sept.

=Arendt Dechantsbirne.= 1. Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obsikunde_ =2=:92. 1856.

Raised from seed by Van Mons at Louvain, Bel. Reported in 1833. Fruit
small, globular, uniformly greenish-yellow, thickly dotted; flesh
aromatic, vinous; first for dessert; late Nov.

=Argent.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:156, fig. 1867.

Adrianus Junius, a Dutch botanist of the sixteenth century, identified
the _pear of silver_ or _the money pear_ with the _Nardina_ of the
Romans, though his contemporary, Jacques Dalechamp of Normandy in his
"_Histoire des plantes_," 1585, connected it with the _Liceriana_
mentioned by Pliny. _Nardina_ or _Nard_ was an ointment smelling
strongly of musk and lavender, from which the ancient pear no doubt
took its name, but the flesh of Argent does not give out any such
aroma. Henry Manger writing in 1783 thought that the _Poire d'Argent_
which we have today is the _Liceriana_ of Pliny, agreeing with
Dalechamp. Fruit small; form globular-obtuse-pyriform but usually
mammillate at the summit, greenish-yellow, dotted with russet all over;
flesh dead white, fine and melting, juicy, gritty at core; quality
second; Aug. and Sept.

=Argusbirne.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:73. 1856.

Raised from seed by Von Muckenheim in Barmen, Rhenish Prussia, in 1832.
Fruit medium, light green to citron-yellow without any red blush but
rust-colored on the cheek next the sun, densely spotted with fine brown
dots, without perfume; flesh granular, melting, acidulous, sweet, with
cinnamon savor; second for dessert, first for kitchen use; late Oct.

=Arkansas.= =1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:25. 1908.

_Arkansas Mammoth._ =2.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 37. 1896.

It has been suggested that this may be the _Uvedale's St. Germain_ or
_Pound_ pear. Fruit large, long, obtuse-pyriform, tapering at both
ends, green, tinged with yellow, very much marked with dots and patches
of russet; stem medium long, stout, curved, inserted without cavity;
calyx large, open; basin shallow; flesh white, moderately juicy, tough
but crisp, astringent; quality poor; a late keeper.

=Arlequin Musque.= =1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =1=:105, fig. 1853. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:158, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed by Van Mons and noted in his catalog of 1825 under
the number 1737. Fruit large, globular-obovate, even and regular in
outline, dull or olive-green which changes to lemon-yellow on maturity,
dotted all over with brown spots, washed with fawn on the side next the
sun; flesh white, buttery, melting, very sweet, acid, rather gritty
around the core, juicy and having a savory perfume, sometimes of musk;
second; in France Sept. and Oct.

=Arlingham Squash.= =1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 484. 1884.

An English pear deriving its name from the village of Arlingham. It
is in demand for the making of perry in the neighborhood of Hereford,
Eng. Fruit globular, acute-pyriform, rather irregular in outline, dark
green, with a brownish tinge on the side next the sun, a good deal
russeted all over; flesh white, juicy, crisp, aromatic.

=Armand Prevost.= =1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 484. 1884.

Origin unknown. Fruit medium, oblong-obovate, narrowing from the bulge
to the calyx; even and regular in contour; a fine golden-yellow, with
an orange cheek minutely dotted with russet; flesh half-melting, juicy,
without much flavor; poor; Oct.

=Armenie.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:159, fig. 1867. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 82, 231. 1876.

Believed to have originated in Asia. Merlet wrote of it in 1675 and
in 1690 when it had probably only recently been introduced into
France. Fruit medium, globular, slightly flattened at the base and
nearly always mammillate at the summit, clear green, passing into
greenish-yellow at maturity, dotted all over with brown-russet and
streaked with the same around the calyx; flesh yellowish, fine, tender,
semi-breaking, gritty at the center, with juice sufficient, sugary,
slightly musky, savory; second for dessert, first for cooking; Feb. to
May.

=Arnold.= =1.= _Ind. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 103. 1892. =2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc.
Rpt._ 249. 1893. =3.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 142. 1898.

Raised from seed by Arnold & Frazier, Dansville, Ind. The name Arnold
was conferred upon it at the meeting of the Indiana Horticultural
Society, December, 1892, and in November, 1893, it received a first
class certificate of merit from the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society. In 1898, at the December meeting of the Illinois State
Horticultural Society it was reported "a winter pear of good quality,
apparently not ripe at this season; of local origin; a good keeper;
an abundant bearer," and was recommended for trial in the experiment
station of the State. Fruit medium size, oblong-pyriform, yellow
russeted; flesh buttery, juicy, melting; good; very late.

=Arthur Bivort.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:85, fig. 427. 1880. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:160, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed by Van Mons who died in 1842. The variety did not
fruit till 1850. Fruit above medium, pyramidal, very long, obtuse, even
and regular in contour, yellowish-green, slightly dotted with fawn,
washed with pale red on the side next the sun; flesh whitish, a little
coarse, juicy, melting, sugary, acid, delicately perfumed; first; Oct.

=Arthur Chevreau.= =1.= _Rev. Hort._ 39. 1916.

Arthur Chevreau of Montreuil, a distinguished French horticulturist,
obtained this variety and exhibited it to the Horticultural Society
of France in December, 1915. It was described in the Journal of the
Society after official testing and approval. Fruit large to very
large, long and regular in form, very slightly bossed; stem short and
set obliquely, greenish-yellow passing to dark yellow, sprinkled with
large, russet dots; flesh rather fine; firm, very juicy, slightly
acidulous, with a very agreeable flavor; good or very good.

=Arundell.= =1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

A very old English pear described by Parkinson as "most plentiful in
Suffolke, and there commended to be a verie good peare."

=Aspasie Aucourt.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 84. 1895.

Origin unknown but thought to be European. Fruit medium,
globular-obtuse, pale yellow; flesh fine, melting, very juicy, primrose
in color, saccharine, slightly perfumed; one of the best of its season
for the private garden; late July and Aug.

=Aston Town.= =1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 352. 1831. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 485. 1884.

An old English variety raised at Aston in Cheshire, and largely
cultivated there and in the neighboring counties, especially that
of Hereford. Fruit medium sized, globular-turbinate, pyriform, pale
green but changing on ripening to pale yellow, covered with numerous
gray-russety specks; flesh yellowish-white, tender, buttery, and
full of a most excellent saccharine, perfumed juice; it is a rich
highly-flavored pear of the first rank; Oct. and Nov. A peculiarity of
its growth is a tendency of the branches to twist.

=Audibert.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:163, fig. 1867.

_Belle Audibert._ =2.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:119. 1831.

An old French pear raised in the Department of Bouches-des-Rhone, Fr.,
previous to the year 1814. Fruit medium, oblong-obovate-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, extensively dotted with fawn, washed with tender rose
on the side next the sun and often bearing some small brownish stains
on the shaded side; flesh very white, fine, juicy, melting, sugary,
vinous, slightly acid, wanting in perfume; third as a fruit for dessert
but first for the kitchen.

=Augier.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ 164, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=6=:119, fig. 1880.

Raised in 1828 by M. Feraut, Cognac, Chareute, Fr. Fruit medium or
nearly medium, ovate-pyriform, sometimes a little deformed, but more
often regular in its contour, dark green, spotted with blackish-gray
dots which are both numerous and prominent; flesh white, rather fine,
breaking, with abundant sweet juice, often too astringent; medium; late
winter.

=Augustbirne.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:56. 1856.

Meiningen, in central Germany, 1847; classed among the Zuckerbirne
or sugar pears. Fruit small, obtuse-conic, greenish-yellow turning
to yellow, often having a shining blush, gray and green dots; flesh
semi-melting, gritty near the core, honey-sweet; second for dessert,
first for kitchen and market; Aug.

=Auguste de Boulogne.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:166, fig. 1867. =2.=
Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:179, fig. 474. 1880.

Probably a seedling of Van Mons. Fruit small, globular-ovate, bossed
and generally contorted, clear yellow dotted with fawn around the stem
and calyx; flesh white, semi-fine, extremely melting, very gritty
around the core, juicy, saccharine, acidulous, with an excellent
buttery flavor; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Auguste Droche.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 84. 1895.

Fruit rather large, globular, acute-pyriform, somewhat obovate; flesh
fine, melting; Jan. and Feb. Tree vigorous and fertile.

=Auguste Jurie.= =1.= _Pom. France_ =1=:No. 4, Pl. 4. 1863. =2.= Mas
_Le Verger_ =2=:61, fig. 29. 1866-73.

Raised from a seed of the Beurre Giffard sown at the School of
Horticulture, 1851. Fruit small, growing in clusters, sometimes ovate,
sometimes short-pyriform, pale green speckled with numerous gray dots,
lemon-yellow at maturity, washed with deep blood red, shaded with
violet on the side next the sun; flesh white, slightly veined with
yellow, fine, buttery; juice sufficient, sugary, vinous, musky; first;
Aug.

=Auguste von Krause.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:127. 1856.

Raised from seed by Van Mons; fruited in 1852. Fruit large,
obtuse-conic; skin rough, greenish turning to yellow; flesh very juicy;
good; late Oct.

=Auguste Miguard.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 82. 1876. =2.= _W. N. Y. Hort.
Soc. Rpt._ 25. 1896.

Introduced in France by M. Gregoire. Fruit rather large, oblong,
somewhat resembling Louise Bonne de Jersey in shape and color, yellow,
with dull red cheek on the sunny side; flesh melting, vinous, very
juicy and of a pleasing flavor; first; Oct. to Dec.

=Auguste Royer.= =1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:11, fig. 1855. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:168, fig. 1867.

Raised by Van Mons and when brought under the notice of the royal
Commission of Pomology in 1853 it was given the name of the President
of the Commission. Fruit medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, one side
being habitually more swelled out than the other; color dull yellow,
dotted with gray, and almost entirely covered with fawn; flesh whitish,
fine, melting, juicy, gritty around the core, sugary, acid, with
pleasant perfume; first; Nov. Tree very vigorous.

=Augustine.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:110. 1856. =2.= Mas
_Le Verger_ =2=:189, fig. 93. 1866-73.

Originated by Van Mons, 1823. Fruit medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform,
light green changing to yellowish-green, blushed with rose on the
side next the sun, dotted with gray-green specks; flesh nearly white,
slightly veined with yellow, fine, melting, full of sweet juice,
delicately perfumed and refreshing; good; early Aug.

=Augustine Lelieur.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:169, fig. 1867. =2.=
Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:43, fig. 310. 1880.

This variety is considered to be of Belgian origin. Leroy received it
from the garden of the Society of Van Mons, Louvain, in 1854, and Mas
received it at Bourg from a nurseryman at Wetteren, East Flanders, in
1859. Fruit above medium, oblong-obovate-pyriform, a little swelled,
bossed, stalk bearing spines and implanted obliquely, greenish-yellow,
russet and brown spots, stripes of fawn around the stalk; flesh white,
fine, melting, gritty, sufficiently juicy, sugary, acid and delicate in
flavor; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Augustus Dana.= =1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 663. 1869.

Originated by Francis Dana of Boston, Mass. Fruit medium to
rather large, globular-obtuse and varying from acute-pyriform to
obtuse-pyriform, yellow, russeted; flesh whitish, juicy, melting,
sweet, slightly aromatic; first; Oct.

=Aurate.= =1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:122, Pl. III. 1768. =2.=
Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:26. 1856.

This ancient French pear appeared under the name _Muscat de Nancy_ in
Le Lectier's _Catalogue de son verger et plant_ in 1628, and was sold
in Nancy over 300 years ago. It is extensively grown in Germany in the
valleys of the Rhine and in the plains of Coblenz and Mayence under
the name of _Petit-Muscat rouge_, _Muscat d'ete_, _Goldbirne_, etc.
Fruit small, growing in clusters, turbinate, ventriculous, obtuse,
regular in contour, dark green at first, dotted with fawn, streaked
with brownish-red in the cavity and washed with rose where exposed to
the sun; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine and semi-melting, juicy,
generally gritty, saccharine, vinous, delicately musky; first; late Aug.

=Auray.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:171, fig. 1867.

This was a chance seedling which originated in Brittany. Leroy states
that he cultivated it in Anjou and first entered it in his catalog
in 1851. Fruit rather large, ovoid, often more swelled on one side
than on the other, bronze, with some greenish dots and patches, the
skin rough to the touch; flesh whitish, semi-fine, semi-melting,
gritty around the core; juice very abundant, sugary, vinous, sometimes
astringent and sometimes also delicate and perfumed; second only on
account of its variability, for in the same season it may produce some
exquisite fruit, some only good and some only medium in quality.

=Autocrat.= =1.= _Jour. Hort._ 3rd Ser. =3=:260. 1881.

Described in the Journal of Horticulture, London, as a new and very
large pear ripening at the end of October. It was a seedling from
Beurre Capiaumont and is very hardy, robust and free, and quite
distinct in growth and fruit.

=Autumn Bergamot= (English). =1.= _Pom. Mag._ =3=:120, Pl. 1830. =2.=
Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 352. 1831.

The English Autumn Bergamot or _Common Bergamot_ is a distinct variety
and not synonymous with the _Bergamotte d'Automne_ of France. Writing
in the early part of the eighteenth century, Switzer stated, and his
statement was endorsed by Lindley in 1831, that the Autumn Bergamot
was introduced into England in the days of Julius Caesar, that it was
possibly the _Assyrian Pear_ of Virgil, and was in that case to have
been found in the "once celebrated and famous gardens of Alcinoeus."
This is a doubtful conjecture, though without doubt the variety is of
very ancient origin. Fruit small, globular-obtuse, yellowish-green,
dull brown where exposed to the sun and profusely speckled with gray
russet; flesh greenish-white, tender, melting, somewhat gritty at the
core, juicy, and of a rich flavor; a dessert pear of first quality;
Oct. Tree vigorous, prolific, forms a handsome standard and succeeds on
either quince or pear.

=Autumn Colmar.= =1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 363. 1831. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 487. 1884.

_De Bavay._ =3.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 1, 175, fig. 86. 1866-73.
=4.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:184, fig. 1867.

This seedling of Van Mons was described in 1830 in the London
Horticultural Society's Garden as a new Flemish pear. It was received
there from Van Mons without a name and so became known in the
collection as Autumn Colmar from a fancied resemblance of its flavor
to that of the old Colmar. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, rounded at
the base, lemon-yellow, strewed with dots and patches of russet; flesh
coarse, sweet, juicy, astringent, rather gritty at the core; second;
Sept. and Oct.

=Autumn Josephine.= =1.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =20=:29, fig. 1871. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 488. 1884.

Obtained from seed of Josephine de Malines by W. E. Essington,
Ribbesford House, Bewdley, Eng. It first produced fruit in 1869. Fruit
large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform; somewhat flattened at the crown,
greenish-yellow when quite ripe, russeted in patches, flesh yellowish,
with pale salmon tinge like that of Josephine de Malines, tender,
fine-grained, very juicy, juice rich, sugary, aromatic; first, though a
little uncertain; Oct.

=Autumn Nelis.= =1.= _Gard. Chron._ 124. 1864. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 664. 1869. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 488. 1884.

_Graham Autumn Nelis._ =4.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =5=:331. 1863.

Raised from seed by F. J. Graham, Cranford, Eng., about 1852 and
exhibited before the British Pomological Society in 1858 under the
name _Graham's Bergamot_. It was granted a first class certificate from
the Royal Horticultural Society. Prior to being placed on the market in
1863 it was renamed Autumn Nelis because of the similarity of the tree
and fruit to Winter Nelis. Fruit rather above medium and equal to a
large Winter Nelis, obovate-pyriform, greenish-yellow, almost entirely
covered with brown-russet; flesh yellowish, very tender, melting and
buttery, with abundance of rich, aromatic, sugary juice and having an
exquisite flavor; a first class dessert fruit; Oct.

=Avocat Allard.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:173. 1867. =2.= _Jour.
Hort._ N. S. =19=:284, 328. 1870.

Raised from seed of Doyenne Gris in 1842 by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel.
Fruit small to medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, lemon-yellow, much
marbled and spotted with russet; flesh yellowish-white and melting;
juice very abundant, rich, spicy and very delicious; first rate for
cooking; Oct. and Nov.

=Avocat Nelis.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:173, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =5=:47, fig. 312. 1880.

Originated from the seed beds of M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., in 1846.
Fruit medium, oblong-obovate-pyriform, compressed toward the summit,
golden-yellow, dotted and veined with fawn or russet, slightly colored
on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine, semi-melting, juicy,
apt to be gritty around the core, sweet and perfumed; second-rate; Jan.
to Apr.

=Avocat Tonnelier.= =1.= _Rev. Hort._ 19. 1893.

The parent tree of Avocat Tonnelier was raised at Nancy, Fr., about the
year 1848. Fruit medium and above, globular-obtuse-pyriform, swelled at
base, good yellow-orange at maturity, finely dotted with rose; flesh
very dense, white, slightly tinted, melting or slightly breaking,
juicy, very sugary, of sweet savor, rather recalling that of Bon
Chretien d'Hiver; first for cooking; all winter.

=Ayer.= =1.= _U. S. D. A. Yearbook_ 428, Pl. 52. 1911.

Originated about 1880 from a chance seedling which sprang up in a
vineyard owned by O. H. Ayer, Sibley, Kan. It came into bearing about
1888. Fruit medium, obovate, light greenish or pale lemon-yellow,
frequently having a light scarlet blush on the exposed side, and
numerous minute russet dots; flesh whitish or yellowish-white, fine,
buttery, melting, juicy; very good; July and Aug.

=Aylton Red.= =1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 489. 1884.

A perry pear cultivated in Herefordshire, Eng., and described as
"growing in popularity." Fruit small, globular, turbinate; skin covered
with rough, russet dots.

=Azerole.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:174, fig. 1867.

Azerole is an ancient pear though the date and the circumstances of
its origin are unknown. Jean Bauhin mentioned it in his "_Historia
Plantarum_" published in 1650. Fruit very small, oblong or turbinate,
yellowish-orange, very finely dotted with fawn, and blushed on the
cheek exposed to the sun; flesh yellowish, tender, fine, soft,
perfumed, rather gritty around the core, juicy, sugary; third; Sept.

=Baguet.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:15, fig. 200. 1879.

The origin of this pear is uncertain but a bulletin of the Society of
Van Mons, 1866, placed the name of Baugniet in parenthesis, suggesting
thereby that it was raised by M. Baugniet in Belgium. Fruit large to
very large, oblong-obovate-pyriform, very bright green with grayish
dots passing on ripening to bright lemon-yellow; flesh whitish,
semi-fine, rather buttery, fair amount of sweet juice, acidulous,
sprightly; of good quality when its acidity is not too much developed;
Nov. and Dec.

=Bakholda.= =1.= _Can. Hort._ =17=:291. 1894.

Described as a new Canadian variety in 1894. Fruit large; oblong,
yellow; flesh subacid; middle season.

=Baking.= =1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:28. 1908.

Originated in Massachusetts; an old baking variety. Season late.

=Baldschmiedler.= =1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 74, fig. 1913.

A perry pear found in Switzerland and the Austrian Tyrol. Fruit small
to medium, globular-conic, greenish changing at maturity to yellow,
dotted and speckled with russet; flesh granular, white and aromatic;
good for transportation; beginning of Oct.

=Balduinsteiner Kinderbirne.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:165.
1856.

Originated in Nassau, Ger. Published in 1806 by Diel. Fruit small;
ovate, light straw-yellow changing to lemon-yellow at maturity, finely
dotted, and russeted on the side next the sun; flesh firm, breaking,
juicy, very musky; first for kitchen use and market; beginning of Oct.
for two weeks.

=Balosse.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:176, fig. 1867. =2.= _Le Bon
Jard._ 362. 1882.

For many centuries Balosse has been grown in France on the banks of the
Marne, especially in the neighborhood of Chalons where there existed
in 1862 a specimen which was considered to be more than 300 years of
age. On account of its abundant crops yielded without cultivation, the
tree has been a favorite with the farmers of France. Fruit moderate
size, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, orange-yellow dotted with fawn, washed
with dull red on the side to the sun; flesh whitish, coarse, breaking,
gritty, juicy, saccharine; second for the table, first for the kitchen;
Jan. to April.

=Balsambirne.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:15. 1856.

Raised from seed in the old German duchy of Franconia in 1801. Fruit
medium, pyriform, yellow, blushed and russeted; flesh firm, juicy, mild
and tender, musky; first for dessert and household; Aug.

=Bankerbine.= =1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 349. 1854.

Said to be of foreign origin. Fruit medium, obovate, greenish-yellow,
with small, russet dots; flesh breaking, coarse; Oct.

=Banks.= =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1866.

A seedling raised by Dr. S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., which first
fruited in 1863. Fruit 2-3/4 in. in diameter, turbinate, rich yellow,
with sunny side bright red; flesh melting, juicy, very sweet, with much
character; keeps remarkably for an early pear, valuable for its great
beauty and fine qualities and time of ripening; Aug.

=Baptiste Valette.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 85. 1895.

Fruit medium; flesh white, buttery, very fine, melting, juicy; matures
early in the season. Tree vigorous, fertile, and pyramidal in form.

=Barbancinet.= =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =26=:126. 1860. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =1=:177, fig. 1867.

Found by Leroy in 1849 in the commune of Saulge-l'Hopital,
Maine-et-Loire, Fr., and was introduced by him in 1852. Fruit medium,
long, slightly obtuse, irregular pyriform, contorted at the upper end,
greenish, mottled and dotted with fawn, washed with rose on the side
to the sun; flesh greenish, melting, fine, rather gritty around the
core; juice sufficient, acidulous, saccharine, with a pleasant buttery
flavor; first; Sept.


=Barbe Nelis.= =1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:63, fig. 30. 1866-73. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:178, fig. 1867.

M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., obtained this variety in 1848. Fruit small
to medium, globular-turbinate-obtuse, bright greenish-yellow dotted
with gray and fawn, the basic green becoming lemon-yellow at maturity
and washed with purple-red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh
white, fine, very melting; juice saccharine, acidulous, and agreeably
perfumed; first; Aug.

=Barker.= =1.= Hooper _W. Fr. Book_ 121. 1857.

An American variety introduced about 1856. Fruit medium, obovate,
greenish-yellow; medium quality both for table and kitchen use; coarse;
Sept. and Oct.

=Barland.= =1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 414, 1831. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 489. 1884.

The parent tree of this variety grew in the parish of Bosbury,
Hereford, Eng., and about 1830 was supposed to be 200 years old. It
appears to have been extensively cultivated as early as 1674. Fruit
small, obovate, dull green, much covered with gray russet; first class
for perry; autumn.

=Barnadiston.= =1.= _Gard. Chron._ 193. 1843. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=17=:472. 1851.

The original tree grew in the grounds of Kedington Hall, Eng. The fruit
was stated to be of good quality, and to keep till June, being about
the size and form of a large Swan Egg. In September, 1851, Messrs.
Hovey & Co. exhibited it at the twenty-third annual exhibition of the
Massachusetts Horticultural Society.

=Baron Deman de Lennick.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:179, fig. 1867.
=2.= _Guide Prat._ 108, 232. 1876.

The parent tree was raised in the grounds of the Society Van Mons at
Geest-Saint-Remy, Bel. In 1856 it was admitted by their pomological
committee and was named after Baron Deman de Lennick. Fruit medium,
globular, generally mammillate at summit, brilliant yellow, dotted and
mottled with fawn; flesh whitish, a little coarse, melting, gritty
around the core; juice excessively abundant, saccharine, vinous,
acidulous, and delicately perfumed; second; Nov. and beginning of Dec.

=Baron Leroy.= =1.= _Garden_ =62=:387. 1902. =2.= Bunyard-Thomas _Fr.
Gard._ 132. 1904. _Poire Baronne Leroy._ =3.= _Rev. Hort._ 61. 1889.

Raised from seed of Louise-Bonne de Printemps in 1859; first published
in 1869 and placed in commerce in 1871. Fruit small to medium,
globular-oval, dark green passing to bright yellow; flesh fine, white,
juicy, very melting, sugary, with an agreeable flavor and perfume;
first; Nov. and Dec.

=Baron Trauttenberg.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 82. 1876.

Fruit medium or rather large, globular, golden-yellow, spotted with
russet; flesh rose-tinted, juicy, perfumed and of delicate flavor;
first; Nov.

=Baron Treyve.= =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 96. 1873.

Exhibited at the annual meeting of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society, Aug., 1873, by W. C. Strong, the President. Fruit medium,
obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, russeted with cinnamon; flesh juicy,
melting, very sweet; good to very good; medium early season; shows a
disposition to rot at the core.

=Baronne de Mello.= =1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=: Pt. 2, 137, fig. 165.
1866-73. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:180, fig. 1867.

A variety said to have been raised by Van Mons about 1830. Fruit rather
large, globular-turbinate, tapering on one side with a dipping curve
toward the stalk, sometimes the surface is bossed but generally even;
color yellow-green, dotted with gray and mottled with russet; flesh
yellowish-white or greenish, semi-fine, semi-melting, gritty at the
center; juice very abundant, sugary, rich, vinous, delicately acid;
first; Oct.

=Baronsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:143. 1856. =2.=
Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 242. 1881.

_Baron d'hiver._ =3.= _Guide Prat._ 82, 232. 1876.

Groeningen, Saxony, 1819. Fruit rather large; globular-conic, uneven,
light yellow changing to golden-yellow, finely dotted; flesh breaking,
fine, often semi-melting, sweet, highly aromatic; third for dessert,
first for culinary use; Jan. to April.

=Barry.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:181. 1867. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 665. 1869.

This variety was found in his nurseries but was not originated by
Leroy, Angers, Fr. It bore fruit first in 1851 and was then dedicated
to P. Barry, Rochester, N. Y. Fruit medium to large, long, nearly
cylindrical, narrowed toward the stalk, contorted, greenish-yellow,
dotted, streaked and stained with fawn, washed with bright red on the
side next the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, rather gritty
at the center, extremely juicy, saccharine, vinous and deliciously
perfumed; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Barseck. 1.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 175. 1890.

_Bar Seckel._ =2.= _Can. Hort._ =16=:184. 1893.

_Columbia._ =3.= Chase Bros. _Cat._ 15. 1907.

Originated with Jacob Moore, Brighton, N. Y., as a cross between
Bartlett and Seckel. Tree hardy, vigorous, productive; fruit above
medium in size, oblong-pyriform; skin yellow shaded with bright red;
flesh juicy, melting, with a pleasant vinous flavor; quality good; Aug.
and Sept.

=Barthelemy du Mortier.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 85. 1895.

Sent out by M. Daras de Naghin in 1886. Fruit large and handsome; flesh
buttery, juicy, sweet, with a fine aroma; first; Nov. Tree moderately
vigorous, holding its fruit well.

=Bartram. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =5=:395. 1839. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
667. 1869.

A chance seedling which originated in the grounds of Miss Ann Bartram,
Philadelphia. Fruit rather large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, pale
lemon-yellow, with numerous russet dots and occasional russet markings
on the side; flesh white or greenish-yellow, fine grained, melting,
rich, slightly vinous; very good; Sept.

=Bartranne.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:18, fig. 1867.

Believed to have originated in the garden of the Horticultural Society
of Angers, Fr., date unknown. Fruit small, globular, obtuse-pyriform,
very irregular; bright yellow, sprinkled with russet dots, and often
stained with large patches of fawn; flesh white, fine, juicy, melting,
containing some grit around the core; juice excessive, not much sugar
or flavor; third; Aug. and Sept.

=Baseler Sommer-Muskatellerbirne.= =1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:34. 1856.

Raised in Switzerland, 1809. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, tender
skin, of a uniform yellow-green, dotted with green, often flecked with
russet; fresh semi-melting, tender, aromatic; first for table, culinary
uses and market; July.

=Basiner.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:155, fig. 558. 1881. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 491. 1884.

Raised by M. J. de Jonghe, Brussels, in 1845 and first produced fruit
in 1857. Hogg, the English pomologist, described it as "one of the best
very late pears I have met with." Fruit medium, globular-turbinate,
greenish-yellow much covered with pale cinnamon-brown russet,
distributed in patches, particularly around the stalk and in dots
which are interspersed with green dots over the surface; flesh
yellowish-white, fine-grained, breaking, sweet, saccharine, wanting
in perfume; good for kitchen use and recommended on account of its
extraordinarily long season, spring into the summer.

=Baudry.= =1.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:234. 1903. =2.= Ont.
Dept Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 147. 1914.

_Bon Chretien Fred Baudry._ =3.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1893.

Listed as a promising winter pear in Ontario, Can. Fruit large,
oblong-pyriform, yellowish with russet patches; flesh yellow, tender,
granular at the center, juicy, sweet, with a pleasant flavor; quality
good; Feb. and Mar.

=Beacon.= =1.= Ellwanger & Barry _Cat._ 20. 1892. =2.= Bunyard-Thomas
_Fr. Gard._ 132, 456. 1904.

Fruit medium, long-ovate, very regular, smooth and shining, pale green,
some russet, turning yellow, with a brown cheek; flesh firm, sweet; not
first, but passable for its season; late July.

=Beadnell.= =1.= _Gard. Chron._ 692. 1852. =2.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 357.
1854.

Raised by John Beadnell, West Green Road, Tottenham, Middlesex,
Eng., and fruited for the first time about 1840. Fruit below medium,
turbinate, even and regular in outline, bright green, with a dull red
cheek where exposed to the sun; on ripening the basic green becomes
yellow and the dull red crimson; where the two colors blend there are
some stripes of crimson and on the colored side are numerous minute,
gray dots; flesh melting, extremely juicy, sweet and richly flavored; a
fine early pear; late Sept. but does not keep long.

=Beau de la Cour.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:109, fig. 535, 1881.

Mentioned in the Bulletin of the Society Van Mons in 1855. Fruit small
or nearly medium, globular-ovate, even in outline, light green covered
with very numerous dark green spots changing at maturity to a brilliant
pale yellow, though the spots remain green but less visible; the
side next the sun is stained with vermilion; flesh coarse, dry, very
saccharine, musky; good for cooking; Aug.

=Beau Present d'Artois.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:185, fig. 1867.
=2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:175, fig. 88. 1872.

_Present Royal of Naples._ =3.= _Mag. Hort._ =4=:395. 1838.

Prevost, who died at Rouen in 1849, wrote of this pear that he
considered it identical with the _Present royal de Naples_ which it
is said obtained its name from the fact that the King of Naples
about the end of the eighteenth century sent a number of these pears
to Prince Charles of Wuerttemberg to remind him to forward a promised
white stag. Fruit large, by error classed by some as a Pound pear,
oblong-obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, covered with patches and dots
of brown russet; flesh melting, juicy, sweet, and agreeably flavored
and perfumed; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Beaufort. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 153. 1885. =2.= Van Lindley _Cat._
36. 1899.

Raised by Lucy Duke, Beaufort County, N. C., about 1884 probably from
seed of Winter Nelis crossed with Bartlett. It is a twin of Lucy Duke,
having been raised from seed of the same pear. Fruit medium to large,
globular-obovate, dull green changing to yellow-green, russeted and
dotted; flesh firm and sweet; first; late Oct.

=Beauvalot. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:1, fig. 97. 1878.

This variety was obtained by M. Sageret from seed beds made from 1816
to 1820. Fruit medium, obovate-turbinate-pyriform; skin thick, rough to
the touch, firm, intense green sown with spots of greenish-brown, at
maturity turning more yellow and the side next the sun golden; flesh
white, slightly tinged with yellow, fine, melting; juice sufficient,
saccharine, but sometimes having little flavor; second; Nov.

=Beier Meissner Eierbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:52. 1856.

Disseminated in Saxony and Bavaria in 1823. Fruit medium, ovate-acute,
often ventriculous-conic, somewhat uneven, yellow-green changing to
light yellow, no blush but often dotted with red; flesh coarse-grained,
semi-melting, sweet, with a rose-water savor; third for dessert, first
for household and market; early Sept.

=Belle Angevine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:188, 189, fig. 1867.

The Belle Angevine described by Leroy is a very beautiful pear,
brilliant in color, of large size and handsome shape, but,
unfortunately, not good for dessert and only second class for the
kitchen. Properly Belle Angevine is a synonym of Pound or Uvedale's St.
Germain, yet Leroy holds this Belle Angevine as distinct.

=Belle des Arbres. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 108. 1876. =2.= Mathieu _Nom.
Pom._ 172. 1889.

Introduced by M. Houdin, Chateaudun, Fr., about 1876. Fruit very large,
of beautiful form, slightly washed with rose; flesh fine and smooth;
first for cooking; Mar. to June.

=Belle de Beaufort. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 85. 1895.

Sent out by M. Louis Leroy of Angers and on trial with Messrs.
Simon-Louis of Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. Tree fairly vigorous, a good
grower. Fruit very large, of beautiful form and color; Oct. to Nov.

=Belle Bessa. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:120. 1831. =2.= _Le Bon Jard._
363. 1882.

The editors of the "New Duhamel," 1825, said of this pear that it
was of recent origin and as it had not been previously named they
"dedicated it to M. Bessa as a testimony of satisfaction for the
assiduity evinced by him in the completion of the designs of that
work." In _Le Bon Jardinier_ it is classed among pears "remarkable for
their size." Fruit large, globular, the two extremities diminishing
very perceptibly, especially that next the stem, very light green
faintly approaching yellow at full maturity and interspersed by some
small, russet specks; flesh somewhat firm, bland and agreeable, not
highly flavored; Nov. to Dec.

=Belle de Bolbec.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 109. 1876.

A French pear on trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis of Metz, Lorraine, in
1876. Reported at that time to be rather large and of first quality,
but in 1895 it was placed by the firm on their list of varieties of
doubtful or small merit; Oct. to Nov.

=Belle et Bonne de Hee.= =1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 135. 1841. =2.= _Mag.
Hort._ =8=:165. 1842.

Fruit medium; flesh melting and perfumed; of superior excellence;
ripens at Paris in Sept.

=Belle et Bonne de la Pierre.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:197, fig.
1867. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:81, fig. 233. 1879.

This variety was obtained by M. A. de la Farge, Salers, Fr., at the
foot of the mountains of the high Auvergne; it first bore fruit
in 1861. Fruit medium, sometimes rather large, globular or ovate,
with protuberances, always larger on one than on the other side,
yellow-ochre dotted with gray and some stains of brown russet; flesh
whitish, fine, melting, scented, without grit; juice sufficient,
acidulous, extremely saccharine, full of delicate flavor; first; Nov.
and Dec.

=Belle de Brissac.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:192, fig. 1867.

Jean-Henri Benoist, Brissac near Angers, Fr., obtained this variety
from seed in 1832 or 1833. Fruit medium to large, oblong, extremely
obtuse and ventriculous, always having one side more enlarged than the
other, with pale yellow skin, thick and rough to the touch, dotted with
russet and much covered with brown patches; flesh white, semi-fine,
breaking, rather gritty; juice sufficient, saccharine, acidulous,
perfumed; second for dessert, first for cooking; Feb. to April.

=Belle de Bruxelles sans Pepins.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:193, 194,
fig. 1867.

Notwithstanding its name this variety is not certainly of Belgian
origin. It was known in Normandy at the beginning of the nineteenth
century under the name _Fanfareau_. In Germany it was cultivated before
1789 where it was called _Grosse-Bergamotte d'Ete_. It appears most
probably to have been of German origin. Fruit large and sometimes
medium, spherical, depressed at both poles, generally more swelled
on one side than on the other, yellow-green dotted and streaked with
russet; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, interspersed with greenish
specks, slightly gritty at the center, free from seeds or core; juice
sufficient, saccharine, acidulous, slightly musky; second for the
reason that it so easily becomes soft; Aug. and Sept.

=Belle de Craonnais.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:195, 196, fig. 1867.

This variety originated in the neighborhood of Craon in Mayenne, Fr.
It was listed in the collection of the Horticultural Society of Angers
in 1848, and in the following year was propagated for commerce by A.
Leroy. Fruit large but sometimes smaller, oblong-pyriform, irregular,
obtuse, golden-yellow, sown with gray dots more numerous and larger on
the side next the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, juicy, rather
gritty about the core; juice abundant, sweet and musky, without much
savor; second for the table, first for cooking; Dec. to March.

=Belle de la Croix Morel.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 83. 1876.

Mentioned in the _Revue Horticole_ of 1868. Fruit large,
pyriform-ventriculous, greenish-yellow; flesh semi-melting, juicy, of
an agreeable flavor; first; Dec.

=Belle de Decembre. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

A very large and superb fruit; good to eat raw but first class for
cooking. Listed as a new variety in 1895.

=Belle de Feron. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:198. 1867.

Probably originated in the town of Feron near Avesnes, Fr., and was
considered to be a new fruit by the Horticultural Society of Angers
in 1840. Fruit large to very large, globular-turbinate, bossed, one
side always more swelled than the other, yellowish-green, dotted with
gray, and stained with patches of brown-russet; flesh white, coarse,
semi-melting; juice sufficient, fresh, sugary, vinous, and with a very
agreeable tartness; second; Oct. and Nov.

=Belle du Figuier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:199, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed in 1860 by M. Robert, Angers, Fr., and submitted to
the Horticultural Society of Maine-et-Loire in December, 1861, when it
was declared excellent. Fruit above medium, ovate, regular in form, but
with protuberances, often depressed at the base, greenish-russet, rough
to the touch and covered with well-marked fawn dots; flesh fine, white,
very melting and very juicy, saccharine, acidulous, aromatic; first;
Dec. and Jan.

=Belle-Fleurusienne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:200, fig. 1867. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 493. 1884.

Raised by M. Alexandre Bivort in 1849 at Saint-Remy, Bel. Fruit medium,
obtuse-pyramidal; skin smooth and somewhat shining, greenish-yellow,
the whole surface being thickly strewed with large russet dots and
specks, and washed with rose on the side next the sun; first; Dec. to
Feb.

=Belle Fondante. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 454. 1857.

Originated by Robert Manning, Salem, Mass. Fruit medium,
pyramidal-turbinate; skin pale yellow, clouded with green, irregularly
patched with russet especially around the eye; flesh juicy, buttery,
very fine grained, rich, with some astringency; Oct.

=Belle de Forets. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 83, 234. 1876.

_Esperen Waldbirne._ =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 212. 1889.

Fruit medium, pyriform, bright green; Sept. and Oct.

=Belle de Guasco. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:57, fig. 125. 1878. Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:202, 203, fig. 1867.

Cultivated in the garden of the Society of Van Mons in Belgium but
did not originate there. It was sent out from there to France for
further distribution in 1853. Fruit medium, oblong-obtuse-pyriform,
lemon-yellow, greenish on the shaded side and washed with vermilion on
the side exposed to the sun; flesh white, fine, melting, juicy, vinous,
acid; third; late Aug. and early Sept.

=Belle Guerandaise. 1.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 143, fig. 1906. =2.=
_Rev. Hort._ 136, Pl. 1907.

M. Dion, Guerande, Fr., sowed in 1869 a bed of mixed seeds from which
he obtained the variety here described. It first fruited in 1893 and
was placed on the accepted list by the Pomological Society of France in
1904,. Fruit large, ovate, lemon-yellow, often covered with fawn; flesh
fine, very saccharine, juicy, with a slight perfume of orange blossom;
good; Oct. and Nov.

=Belle Hugevine. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:459. 1855.

Fruit large and handsome; of excellent quality; Mar. and April.

=Belle Isle d'Angers. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 494. 1884.

Fruit medium, globular-oval, almost entirely covered with a coat
of greenish dark brown russet which is very fine and smooth to the
touch and covered with large, gray dots; on the shaded side the
greenish-yellow ground-color is exposed, covered with large, russet
dots; flesh white, rather coarse, semi-buttery, very juicy, sweet and
slightly perfumed; second or third; Dec.

=Belle d'Ixelles. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =26=:218. 1860. =2.= _Guide Prat._
83. 1876.

First reported by Millet. On trial with the Society Van Mons in 1860.
Fruit large, golden-yellow skin; flesh very melting and perfumed; Oct.

=Belle de Juillet. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 109. 1876.

Gained by M. Lampe at Pecq, Bel., about 1870, and reported to be
superior to all other early pears and in particular to Beurre Giffard;
fruit handsome and delicious, ripening about mid-July.

=Belle Julie. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 350. 1854. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=1=:204, 205, fig. 1867.

_Alexandrine Helie._ =3.= _Guide Prat._ 81. 1876.

Raised by Van Mons and fruited first in 1842. Fruit medium,
long-obovate-pyriform, greenish-yellow, much patched and netted with
russet, dotted with bright fawn; flesh rather greenish-yellow, coarse,
semi-melting, juicy, sugary, vinous, with a fine perfume; first; Oct.
and Nov.

=Belle de Kain. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 83. 1876.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis of Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit
large, pyriform-truncate, brilliant lemon-yellow; flesh semi-melting; a
good market variety.

=Belle de Lorient. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:205, 206, fig. 1867.

_Belle de l'Orient._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 668. 1869.

This variety was growing in the old garden of the Horticultural Society
of Angers about 1835, and probably originated in the environs of
Lorient, Fr. Fruit large, oblong-ovate-pyriform, bossed at the summit,
greenish-yellow, dotted all over with large and numerous specks of
fawn; flesh wanting in fineness, half-breaking, white, gritty, fairly
juicy, without perfume, sourish; second for the kitchen; Sept. and Oct.

=Belle de Malines. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:207, fig. 1867.

Received by Leroy, Angers, Fr., from Belgium in 1863 as a new variety
and without statement of its origin. Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse,
ventriculous, having one side larger than the other, bright yellow,
dotted, streaked and stained with russet, washed with delicate rose on
the side next the sun; fresh dull white, semi-fine, melting, gritty at
center; juice sufficient, sweet, fresh, saccharine, musky; first; Aug.
and Sept.

=Belle de Martigny. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:431. 1842.

Exhibited by Mantel at the first annual meeting of the New York
Horticultural and Floricultural Society, held in New York, September,
1842. One fruit of this variety was reported as weighing 9 oz.

=Belle-Moulinoise. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:208, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed by Groler-Duriez, Lille, Fr.; it was placed on
the market in 1864. Fruit large, oblong-obtuse-pyriform, somewhat
ventriculous and bossed, greenish, rough to the touch, spotted with
russet, washed with dark rose on the side next the sun; flesh whitish,
fine, firm, scented, breaking, juice extremely abundant, saccharine,
musky, with a delicious flavor; first; Feb. and Mar.

=Belle de Noisette.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:17, fig. 393. 1880.

A French pear of unknown origin. Fruit large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform,
short and thick, attaining its greatest breadth around its center; skin
thick and rather rough, at first green sown with dots of grayish-brown,
numerous and scattered regularly; at maturity the green passes into
lemon-yellow and the side next the sun is clouded with red; flesh
white, rather fine, breaking, with a small amount of sugary juice, acid
and slightly perfumed; suited only for culinary purposes; keeps well
through the winter; the tree is equally vigorous on quince or pear
stock.

=Belle Picarde.= =1.= _Rev. Hort._ 156, Pl. 1888.

Originated in the village of Charmes, Aisne, Fr., in the middle of
the last century. Fruit large to very large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform,
orange-red and speckled especially on the sunny side; flesh white,
melting, very sugary; juice rather abundant, sweet and of a pleasant
flavor; good for dessert but specially recommended for cooking; being
large and attractive in appearance is well adapted for the market; Dec.
to June.

=Belle Rouennaise.= =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:210, fig. 1867. =2.=
_Jour. Hort._ N. S. =19=:328. 1870.

Raised from seed by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr. It gave its first fruit in
1856. Fruit medium, long-pyriform, bossed around calyx, sides unequal;
color greenish-yellow, dotted with russet, veined with fawn around the
stem and often covered with russet markings; flesh semi-fine, white,
juicy, melting, gritty at the core, refreshing, sweet, acid, possessing
a delicious flavor; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Belle de Stresa.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 58. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=4=:213. 1879.

A wild seedling found at Stresa, on Lake Maggiore, Italy. Fruit nearly
medium, ovate, rather short and thick, or pyriform, olive-green,
washed with dark brownish-red on the side next the sun; flesh buttery,
melting, juicy, saccharine, and with a delicate and refreshing perfume;
handsome and of first quality; late Aug.

=Belle Sucree.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 83. 1876.

_Schoene Zuckerbirne._ =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 280. 1889.

Published in Germany previous to 1876; origin unknown. Fruit large,
variable in form; of a beautiful lemon-yellow, almost entirely washed
with red; flesh semi-melting, very saccharine; Sept. and Oct.

=Belle de Thouars.= =1.= _Gard. Chron._ 979. 1860. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =1=:212, 213, fig. 1867.

Probably originated at Thouars, Fr. About 1839 the Horticultural
Society of Angers received a pear called _Coulon de Saint-Marc_
which was propagated under that name, but was proved to be identical
with Belle de Thouars. It was subsequently propagated and sold by a
nurseryman at Jersey, and acquired the name of _Belle de Jersey_. Fruit
medium to large, long-obtuse-pyriform at both ends, somewhat bossed at
summit; skin at first brownish-olive changing to a ferruginous brown as
the fruit approaches maturity, somewhat rough, with russet dots; flesh
white, firm, or half-breaking, with little juice and an acidulated,
sugary flavor; good only for kitchen use; Nov. and Dec.

=Belle Williams. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 110. 1862. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 669. 1869.

Of foreign origin, possibly English. Tree vigorous, very erect, hardy;
young wood olive, slightly yellow, glossy. Fruit medium to large,
oblong-pyriform, with a groove or sunken line from stem to calyx,
yellowish, with marblings and tracings of russet; stem long, curved,
set in a slight depression by a lip; calyx partially closed; flesh
whitish, not juicy or rich; good for cooking; Dec. to Mar.

=Bellissime d'Automne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:214. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 496. 1884.

First mentioned by Merlet under the name of _Belle-et-Bonne_ in 1675.
It lost its original name and became known by that of Bellissime
d'Automne. Fruit variable in size but more medium than small;
long-acute-pyriform, occasionally slightly obtuse; skin smooth and
shining, greenish-yellow, dotted with fawn on the shaded side and
extensively washed with red-brown or fine, deep crimson on the side
exposed to the sun, with stripes of the same color around the stalk;
flesh white, fine, semi-melting; juice plentiful, sweet, with an
aromatic flavor; second as a dessert fruit, but useful for culinary
purposes; Oct.

=Bellissime d'Hiver. 1.= Duhamel _Trait Arb. Fr._ =2=:234. 1768. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 496. 1884.

An old French pear described by Duhamel du Monceau in 1768. By
some, Merlet is believed to refer to it in 1690 when writing of the
_Bellissime d'Hiver de Bur_, but this latter is regarded by Leroy as
synonymous with Belle Angevine. Fruit very large, larger than the
Catillac, globular, turbinate, mammillate; skin smooth, thick, green
changing to dark yellow, washed on the side of the sun with a beautiful
tint of bright carmine, strewed all over with large brown-russet dots;
flesh white, fine grained, crisp, tender, juicy, sweet, musky; one of
the very best culinary pears; all the winter till May.

=Belmont. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:171, fig. 470. 1880. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 496. 1884.

An English cooking pear raised about the year 1840 by T. A. Knight,
Downton Castle, Eng. Fruit medium, globular-oval, even and regularly
shaped; skin rather rough to the touch, covered with a coating
of somewhat rough russet except on the shaded side where it is
greenish-yellow, and marked with patches and dots of dark-brown russet;
on the side next the sun it shows a coppery-red glow; flesh yellowish,
rather coarse, sugary, vinous, finely flavored like Swan Egg; almost
first; Oct. and Nov.

=Beman. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =26=:14. 1903. =2.= _Ibid._ =28=:219. 1905.

Originated at Newcastle, Ontario, Can., by E. C. Beman. Tree
productive. Fruit large, juicy and delicious; Oct. and Nov.

=Benadine. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:109. 1856.

Raised from seed at Oberlausitz, Ger. Published in 1821. Fruit medium,
pyriform, medium ventriculous, yellow, sprinkled all over with spots of
yellow-ochre; flesh white, buttery, melting, juicy, delicate and full
of aroma; first for dessert; Sept.

=Benoist Nouveau. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 367. 1859. =2.= Ragan _Nom.
Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:34. 1908.

Distributed by Ellwanger & Barry of Rochester, N. Y., about 1850 as a
new foreign variety. Fruit medium, globular-obovate, greenish-yellow
with brown cheek, dull russet marblings and indistinct brown specks;
flesh breaking, juicy, rather astringent; requires careful ripening;
Feb. to April.

=Benoit Caroli. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

Introduced by Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel., as a new variety in 1895.
Fruit medium yellow, finely dotted, washed with reddish-brown on the
cheek exposed to the sun; flesh white, greenish toward the upper part,
buttery, almost melting, saccharine and pleasantly perfumed; Dec.

=Bensell. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:34. 1908.

Originated by a Mr. Bensell, Philadelphia. Fruit large, globular,
yellow; flesh buttery, sweet, juicy, acidulous; late.

=Benvie. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:130. 1843. =2.= Hogg. _Fruit Man._ 497.
1884.

A dessert pear adapted to the climate of Scotland where in some
districts it produces immense crops of excellent fruit. Fruit small,
obovate, yellow-green, sometimes tinged with dull, dingy red on the
side next the sun, almost entirely covered with thin, delicate gray
russet and thickly strewed with russety dots; flesh yellowish, buttery,
juicy, perfumed; good; Aug. and Sept.

=Bequesne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:220. 1867. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
497. 1884.

The origin of this ancient pear is unknown, though Henri Heissen, a
German author, describing it in 1690 called it the _Bequesne of Anjou_.
Fruit medium to rather large and handsome, long-obtuse-pyriform; skin
of a fine bright golden-yellow on the shaded side, encrimsoned on the
side next the sun, strewed all over with russet dots which give it a
rough feel; flesh white, dry, semi-breaking, sweet, slightly perfumed,
gritty round the core; an excellent cooking pear; Oct. to Jan.

=Bergamot de Chantilly. 1.= Brookshaw _Pomona_ =2=:Pl. XLVIII. 1817.
=2.= Brookshaw _Hort. Reposit._ =1=:63, Pl. 31. 1823.

A variety known in Covent Garden Market, London, in 1823. The fruit
was classed as superior and fetched 9 pence apiece. Size medium,
roundish-obtuse-pyriform, yellow with some blush on the side next the
sun; flesh buttery, of excellent flavor; Sept., not a keeping pear.

=Bergamot Louvain. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =21=:185. 1855.

Fruit medium, globular, yellow, with russet specks; on the sunny side
the specks are red, some blotches of russet; flesh white, tender,
rather dry, with a pleasant flavor; Oct.

=Bergamot Seckel. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 671. 1869.

Raised by William Pitmaston, Eng. Fruit medium or below in size;
roundish, regular; color reddish-brown, dotted with russet; flesh
white, juicy, sugary, having all the spicy flavor of the Seckel.

=Bergamot Winter. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 131, Pl. 67. 1729.

Included in Langley's list of the best kinds of pears in England in
1729. Fruit medium, globular-obtuse; Sept.

=Bergamote Arsene Sannier. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 174. 1889. =2.=
Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 343. 1908.

Probably of French origin. Fruit medium or rather large,
globular-oblate, or onion-shaped, water-green clearing on maturity
to Indian-yellow, clouded with ochre; flesh fine, melting, juicy,
saccharine, slightly acidulous, with a characteristic aroma; first;
Jan. to Mar.

=Bergamote d'Automne Panachee. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:225, fig.
1867.

_Bergamotte Suisse._ =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 505. 1884.

A variegated form of the French Bergamotte d'Automne. Merlet, who
described it in 1675 in his _Abrege des bons fruits_, named it
_Bergamote Suisse_, indicating thereby the country of its origin.
Fruit medium, roundish and flattened, somewhat inclining to turbinate,
regular, and having the summit always a little mammillate, color
olive-yellow, occasionally slightly tinged with dull red, spotted all
over with large, fawn dots, and beautifully striped longitudinally
with large bands of brownish-green passing into bright green on the
side shaded from the sun; flesh white, melting and buttery, sugary,
acidulous; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Bergamote Balicq. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 174. 1889.

_Bergamotte Ballicq._ =2.= _Guide Prat._ 85, 223. 1895.

Belgian. Fruit medium; flesh white, fine, semi-melting, juicy,
saccharine; first; Dec. and Jan.

=Bergamote Boussiere. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:227, fig. 1867.

Raised by Van Mons and fruited for the first time in 1844. Fruit above
medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, regular, greenish-yellow, dotted
and veined with fawn and clouded with reddish-brown around the stem;
flesh whitish, half-fine, melting, very gritty around the core; juice
abundant, vinous, sugary and slightly aromatic; second; Oct. to Dec.

=Bergamote Hamdens. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 131, Pl. 65, fig. 3. 1729.

Fruit medium, oblate; Aug. and Sept.

=Bergamote de Hollande Panachee. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:245. 1867.

_Amoselle panachee._ =2.= _Le Bon Jard._ 363. 1882.

Of interest on account of the curious variegation of its fruit and
wood. The fruit differs from that of the Bergamotte d'Holland in the
variegated green brown of its skin; flesh deficient in juice and
wanting in delicacy and leaves an unpleasant taste behind; second for
cooking; Dec. to April.

=Bergamote Philippot. 1.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 370. 1908.

Described by Baltet as, "A beautiful fruit, grey and bronzed; good for
stewing."

=Bergamote Rose. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:256, fig. 1867.

This curious variety was raised by A. Bivort from seed beds in the
garden of the Society Van Mons and first bore fruit in 1848. It is
endowed with so pronounced a scent of rose that the producer hoped from
it and another variety called Parfum de Rose it might be possible to
create a new class of pears. Fruit small, oblate, bronze, strewed with
grayish-white dots, some brownish stains, scaly; flesh white stained
with carmine, scented, rather coarse, breaking, seldom gritty; juice
sufficient, saccharine, having an odor and flavor similar to that of
roses; third; Jan. and Feb.

=Bergamotte d'Anvers. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 85. 1895.

Introduced by Daras de Naghin of Antwerp (Anvers), Bel. Fruit medium
or rather large, true Bergamot shape, green changing to yellow at
maturity; flesh white; fine, buttery, sweet and well perfumed; Dec.

=Bergamotte d'Automne. 1.= Duhamel. _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:165, Pl. XXI.
1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:223, fig. 1867.

_Rote Bergamotte._ =3.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 271. 1889.

Authorities fail to agree on the origin of this pear. Benedictus
Curtius, a Florentine author writing in 1536, thought it had birth at
Bergamo in Lombardy. But in 1644, Jean Bodaeus, a Dutch physician, in
his translation of the _Historia Plantarum_ of Theophrastus, states
that the Bergamote came from Asia, whence the Romans had imported
it to Italy and that it was known to them as the _Pirum Regium_ or
pear of Kings. If it originated in Asia, the probability is that its
birth-place was Pergamum, a village of Asia Minor between the AEgean and
Marmora seas. This view was accepted in the eighteenth century by such
authorities as Lacour, Henri Manger and Menage, and later by Leroy.
Fruit medium; variable but usually globular-oblate, greenish-yellow,
dotted and striped with russet, flesh whitish, fine, melting, generally
gritty, sweet, savory; first; Oct. to Jan.

=Bergamotte Bouvant. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

Listed as a new variety in 1895. Fruit medium; flesh fine, melting,
juicy, well sweetened and pleasantly perfumed; Apr. and May.

=Bergamotte Bufo. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:228, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 498. 1884.

_Kroeten Bergamotte._ =3.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 244. 1889.

Le Lectier says this pear was cultivated at Orleans in 1628 under the
name of _Crapant_ or Toad on account of the rough character of its
skin. It was also known in Germany in 1690 under this latter name and
as _Oignon rosat_ by reason of its shape and the perfume of its juice.
In 1846 in France, because of the supposed inelegance of the word
"crapant," its name was changed to Bufo, the Latin name of a toad.
Fruit above medium, globular-oblate, even and regular like a true
Bergamot; skin rough, dark yellow, dotted and marbled with fawn and
usually also bearing some large brown stains; flesh white, melting,
fine; juice sufficient, vinous, acidulous, sugary, savory, recalling
the scent of the rose; excellent dessert pear; late Oct.

=Bergamotte Bugi. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 131, Pl. 46. 1729. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =5=:9, fig. 293. 1880.

_Bergamote du Bugey._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:229, fig. 1867.

This is a pear of ancient and uncertain origin. It has a large number
of synonyms. Claude Saint-Etienne, writing in 1660, and La Quintinye,
in 1690, two of the best describers of this pear, each called it
by the name Bugi. Its synonym, _Pera Spina_, attributed to Merlet,
appears to indicate an Italian origin to it. Fruit medium and sometimes
larger, globular-turbinate, generally very regular, clear olive-green,
covered with large, fawn dots intermingled with brownish patches;
flesh yellowish-white, semi-melting, semi-fine, seldom gritty; juice
sufficient, sprightly, saccharine but occasionally acid, with some
perfume; second for dessert, first for cooking; Feb. to Apr.

=Bergamotte de Coloma. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 499. 1884.

Fruit below medium, globular-obovate; skin greenish-yellow, becoming
bright yellow when it ripens, and with a pale tinge of red on the side
next the sun, the whole surface covered with large, pale, brown-russet
dots, with patches of russet around the calyx and stalk; flesh
yellowish-white, fairly juicy, rather gritty, with a brisk but not rich
flavor; quality inferior; late Oct.

=Bergamotte de la Cour. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:76. 1856.

Belgian, 1828. Fruit fairly large, globular-flattened, uneven in form,
light green turning to light lemon-yellow, often rather blushed with
brownish-red on the sunny side, without any scent; flesh melting,
delicate, very juicy; very good for the table, second for kitchen.

=Bergamotte de Darmstadt. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 76, 236. 1876. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:25, fig. 205. 1879.

Germany. Probably it obtained its name from having been raised in the
suburbs of the city of Darmstadt. Fruit rather small or nearly medium,
globular or globular-cylindrical, and equally obtuse at both ends,
yellow-green all over; flesh buttery, juicy, with a Bergamot scent;
first; Nov.

=Bergamotte de Donauer. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:119, fig. 252. 1879.

This pear was found in a garden in the suburbs of Coburg,
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha, Ger. Fruit medium or large, globular-obtuse,
sometimes a little conical, and often somewhat irregular in outline,
very light green, dotted with fine points and with some brown-yellow
spread around the summit and the calyx; flesh white, half-fine, buttery
or half-buttery, juicy, sweet, a little vinous; quality only second;
Sept.

=Bergamotte Double. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 83, 236. 1876.

Fruit medium, nearly round, greenish-yellow; flesh semi-melting, juicy;
first; Sept. and Oct.

=Bergamotte Dussart. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:39, fig. 1857. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 670. 1869.

Obtained at Jodoigne, Bel., by Dussart, a gardener; published in 1829.
Fruit medium, obovate-pyriform, yellow-ochre, with gray dots and traces
of russet; flesh white, melting, juicy, vinous, sugary, acidulous and
aromatic; first; Dec. to mid-Jan.

=Bergamotte Esperen. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:75, fig. 1857.

_Bergamotte d'Esperen._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 670. 1869.

Raised from seed about 1830 by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel. Of his many
pears this was the most valuable. It is a most delicious late pear
and a good successor to Winter Nelis. Fruit medium, frequently above,
round, flat at base, mammillate at summit, and often bossed near stalk;
skin rough to the touch, dull greenish-yellow, dotted with russet,
streaked with russet around the stalk and often marked with blackish
stains; flesh yellowish, fine-grained, quite melting, very juicy and
sugary, with a pleasant aroma; mid-Feb. to April.

=Bergamotte Esperen Souvenir de Plantieres. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 83. 1895.

Produced by Simon-Louis Bros., nurserymen, Metz, Lorraine. The foliage
of this variety is margined with yellow and does not scorch from the
sun. The tree is not vigorous.

=Bergamotte d'Ete. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:161. 1768. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:237. 1867.

_Summer Franc Real._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 344, fig. 141. 1845.

Bergamotte d'Ete is of ancient and unknown origin. Le Lectier wrote of
it in 1628 as cultivated under the name of _Milan de la Beuveriere_.
Fruit medium, globular-turbinate or globular, bossed, narrowed towards
the top which is usually mammillate, pale green slightly yellowish on
the shaded side and tinted with tender rose color on the cheek exposed
to the sun, and dotted all over with fawn; flesh whitish, semi-fine,
melting, rarely very gritty; juice abundant, rather tart, saccharine,
with a very savory flavor; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Bergamotte d'ete de Lubeck. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 83, 237. 1876. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =5=:97, fig. 337. 1880.

This variety is very much grown in the environs of Lubeck, Ger. Fruit
medium, nearly round, color at first of a water-green, nearly covered
with a russet of gray-brown; when ripening the russet brightens and
some dots of whitish-gray become visible; flesh yellowish-white, fine,
compact, buttery, rather gritty near the core, sugary and juicy; first;
Aug. and Sept.

=Bergamotte Fertile. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 83, 237. 1876.

A Van Mons seedling; Belgium, 1828. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate,
symmetrical, uniform light lemon-yellow all over, russeted; skin
scentless; flesh granular, melting, sweet, aromatic; second for
dessert, first for kitchen and market; late Sept.

=Bergamotte la Gantoise 1.= _Guide Prat._ 85. 1895.

Raised from seed of the Bergamotte Esperen, which it surpasses in size
and quality, by Dervaes Bros., Wetteren, Bel. Fruit large, generally
round; color green sprinkled with brown dots, passing into yellow on
ripening; flesh white, very melting, juicy, slightly perfumed; first;
Feb. and Mar.

=Bergamotte Heimbourg. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =21=:189. 1855. =2.= Mas _Le
Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 159, fig. 176. 1866-73.

A seedling of Van Mons. Reported for the first time in 1847. Fruit
medium, globular-conic; skin rough to the touch, olive-yellow, dotted,
veined and stained with russet and slightly washed with pale red on the
cheek exposed to the sun; flesh whitish, fine, melting, rather gritty
at center; juice sufficient, acidulous, sugary, delicately perfumed;
first; Oct.

=Bergamotte Herault. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 85. 1895. =2.= _Cat. Cong. Pom.
France_ 151, fig. 1906.

Obtained from seed in 1860 by M. A. Herault, Angers, Fr. First fruited
in 1870. Fruit large, although sometimes only medium in size, irregular
roundish-obconic and angular in outline; stem short to medium, thick
and fleshy, usually obliquely inserted in cavity; calyx small, open or
semi-closed; skin rather glossy, pale yellow, dotted with red; flesh
whitish, slightly gritty at the center, fine-grained, melting, juicy,
sweet, with delicate aroma; very good; Dec. and Jan.

=Bergamotte Hertrich. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 61, 237. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =5=:7, fig. 292. 1880. =3.= _Jour. Hort._ 3rd Ser. =2=:43, fig.
9. 1881.

Raised from seed of Fortunee by Herr Hertrich, a merchant at Colmar,
Ger. It fruited first in 1853 and was placed in commerce in 1858. Fruit
below medium, Bergamot-shaped, inclining to roundish-turbinate or
obovate, even in outline, furrowed at stalk, grass-green ground seen
through much ash-gray russet, with some brownish tinge on the side next
the sun; flesh yellowish, with a greenish tinge under the skin, fine,
melting, rich flavor, juicy and aromatic; delicious and a good keeper.

=Bergamotte-d'Hiver de Furstenzell. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 84, 237. 1876.

Probably of German origin. Fruit large, conic-obtuse, yellow, lightly
washed with red; flesh very juicy; Oct. to Dec.

=Bergamotte d'Hollande. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:170. 1768.
=2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 430. 1845.

Origin ancient and uncertain, but as the first name by which it was
known was _Bergamote d'Alencon_, pomologists have deemed it to be
French. Fruit medium and often larger, globular-flattened; olive-green
turning as it ripens to clear yellow, dotted and streaked with russet,
washed with brown on the side of the sun; flesh white, rather gritty,
coarse-grained, semi-breaking, pleasantly flavored; second for the
table but good for cooking; March to June.

=Bergamotte Jars. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:93, fig. 45. 1866-73.

Raised by M. Nerard, near Lyons, Fr. Fruit small or nearly medium,
oblate, shaped very much like an apple, much depressed at base and
summit, pale yellow; flesh buttery, white, fine, melting, rich in
sugar, and well perfumed and vinous; altogether first class; Nov.

=Bergamotte de Jodoigne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:246, fig. 1867.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 502. 1884.

Raised from seed by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., in 1853. Fruit below
medium or small, Bergamot-shaped, slightly mammillate at the summit,
flat at base, yellow, sprinkled all over with russet dots, the yellow
passing to orange on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish-white,
fine, melting, rather gritty at center, juicy, sweet, and with an
agreeable perfume; its greatest merit is its long keeping; Mar. to May.

=Bergamotte Klinkhardt. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:149, fig. 459. 1880.

Raised by Van Mons and entered in his catalog for 1823. Fruit small
or medium, globular-ovoid, sometimes ovoid-pyriform, usually a little
irregular in outline; skin slightly thin and tender, dull green with
some indistinct dots, traces of russet irregularly disposed, but more
condensed about the base and summit; flesh white, rather fine, buttery,
melting, with abundant sugary and perfumed juice; first class except
that it ripens too quickly; early Oct.

=Bergamotte Laffay. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:157, fig. 175. 1878.

Origin uncertain, though it is not unlikely that it was raised by
M. Laffay, a nurseryman at Paris. Fruit small or nearly medium,
globular-ovate-obtuse, green, sprinkled with very numerous small,
dark-green spots; flesh white, tinged with green, fine, melting, a
little gritty at the center, full of juice, saccharine, acidulous,
wanting in perfume; second, but keeps well; all winter.

=Bergamotte Leseble. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:246, fig. 1867. =2.=
Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:47, fig. 120. 1878.

A chance seedling found in a vineyard by Narcisse Leseble, President
of the Horticultural Society of Tours, Fr., in 1843. Fruit medium,
globular-turbinate, swelled, obtuse, bossed at summit, golden-yellow,
dotted with fawn, showing some russet markings and lightly washed with
pale rose on the side turned to the sun; flesh whitish, rather coarse,
melting, slightly gritty around the core; juice extremely abundant,
sugary, agreeably perfumed leaving an after-flavor of anis; first; Oct.

=Bergamotte Liabaud. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1895.

Obtained by M. Liabaud. On trial with Simon-Louis Bros. of Metz,
Lorraine, in 1895. Fruit above medium, globular-flattened,
yellow-green, washed with gray-fawn on the side exposed to the sun;
flesh white, fine, melting, saccharine, vinous; Nov. and Dec.

=Bergamotte Mico. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 502. 1884.

Fruit above medium, globular, rather like a small Easter Beurre,
greenish-yellow, covered with freckles and dots of cinnamon-colored
russet; flesh coarse-grained, gritty, wanting in flavor; inferior; late
Nov.

=Bergamotte de Millepieds. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:249, fig. 1867.
=2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:107, fig. 150. 1878.

Raised by M. Goubault, near Angers, Fr. First reported in 1852. Fruit
medium, globular-ovate or sometimes globular-pyriform, olive-green,
sprinkled with brownish dots and streaked with fawn around the calyx
and stem, changing to pale yellow, with a glow on the side next the
sun; flesh white, tender, buttery, melting, richly flavored; first;
Sept. in Fr.; Nov. in America.

=Bergamotte Nicolle. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:149, fig. 555. 1881.

Raised from seeds of Flemish Beauty in 1849 by M. Nicolle, a member of
the Society of Horticulture of Rouen. Fruit medium, globular, attaining
its greatest circumference around the middle, depressed at each pole,
bright green sprinkled with distinct red dots, some russet patches;
flesh white, slightly yellowish, fine, very melting; juice abundant,
saccharine, perfumed; first; Oct.

=Bergamotte Oeuf de Cygne. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:55, fig. 508. 1881.

Fruit medium or rather large, globular, more or less depressed at both
base and summit, regular in outline, largest circumference around the
middle, bright green, sprinkled with gray or greenish-gray dots; flesh
white, tinted and veined with yellow, fine, melting, rather gritty
about the core, with abundant, sweet juice, delicately perfumed; first;
Oct. and Nov.

=Bergamotte d'Oisan. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =13=:189. 1857.

Published in England in 1857 in the _London Illustrated News_, and
described as a large pear weighing between two and three pounds, found
in Algeria, and exhibited in London.

=Bergamotte de Parthenay. 1.= _Pom. France._ =4=:No. 146, Pl. 146.
1867. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:5, fig. 483. 1881.

A chance seedling found in a wood on the outskirts of Parthenay, a town
in the Department of Deuz-Sevres, Fr. Fruit large, globular-turbinate,
obtuse, often irregular in outline, greatest circumference around the
middle, dull green, sprinkled with large, fawn dots, regular and evenly
spaced, changing to greenish-yellow and more golden on the side next
the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, semi-melting; juice fairly abundant,
saccharine and without perfume, often astringent; first for cooking.

=Bergamotte Picquot. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 671. 1869. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =3=:131, fig. 162. 1878.

A French pear of uncertain origin. Fruit medium, globular-conic, very
clear green changing to yellow, sprinkled with numerous indistinct dots
of grayish-brown; flesh white, fine, buttery, melting, juicy, sugary;
good, first if its season were more prolonged; Oct.

=Bergamotte Ploskui. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 61. 1880.

A variety grown on the Northern plains of the steppes of Russia where
the summer is fully as dry and hot as that of Iowa and the winter far
more severe. On trial at the College Farm, Ames, Iowa, in 1880. It
seems to unite well with the apple when root- or top-grafted.

=Bergamotte Poiteau. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:21, fig. 107. 1878.

_Poiteau_ (_des Francais_) =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:538, fig. 1869.

This variety came from a seed bed made by M. Poiteau, Fr., and was
first reported in 1851. Fruit medium, globular-obtuse, irregular in
outline, golden yellow, sown with very numerous and extremely fine gray
and brown dots, generally washed with dull red on the side next the
sun; flesh very white, fine, melting, watery; juice very saccharine,
slightly acid and musky, agreeable; first; Oct.

=Bergamotte Pomme. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 84. 1876.

Fruit rather large, globular-oblate, dull yellow; flesh very juicy,
vinous; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Bergamotte du Quercy. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:113, fig. 57. 1872.

Mas obtained grafts of this pear about 1847 from the Duke of Arenberg;
he had seen a quotation from Van Mons catalog of 1823 in which it was
described. Fruit medium or nearly medium, nearly globular, rather
obtuse at the two ends, regular in outline, attaining its greatest
thickness at the middle; skin slightly thickened, very pale green,
sown with very small, brown dots scattered irregularly; flesh quite
white, fine, firm yet melting, streaming with sweet juice, more or less
perfumed according to the season; end of Sept.

=Bergamotte Reinette. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:254, fig. 1867. =2.=
Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:93, fig. 143. 1878.

Raised by M. Boisbunel, nurseryman at Rouen, Fr., who introduced it in
1857. Fruit small, Bergamot-shaped; skin at first bright green, marked
with large, russet patches but changing to yellow as it ripens; flesh
half-tender, with abundant sweet juice which has a brisk acidity, like
the Reinette apple; quality hardly first-rate and variable, but to be
recommended for its early and long season; late Aug.

=Bergamotte de Rouen. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 84. 1876.

Fruit large; recommended as being of good quality by the Society of
Horticulture of Rouen; April to June. The tree is vigorous and fertile.

=Bergamotte Rouge. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:162, Pl. XIX, fig.
6. 1768. =2.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 334. 1831.

This pear is of ancient and unknown origin. It was mentioned by Le
Lectier in 1628, Merlet in 1675, and Duhamel in 1768, but without
history. Fruit rather large, globular, acute-pyriform, irregular,
mammillate at calyx, greenish-yellow, washed with brownish-red on the
side next the sun, and marked with stripes of the same color, the
whole covered with fine, delicate, cinnamon-colored russet, sprinkled
with large, gray dots; flesh white, coarse, melting, gritty; juice
sufficient, with a slight musky perfume, sugary; first for both table
and kitchen; Sept.

=Bergamotte Rouge de Mayer. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:189, fig. 287. 1879.

Sent out by M. Jahn of Meiningen; it has a strong resemblance to the
Bergamotte Rouge of Duhamel. Fruit medium, sometimes pyriform-ovoid,
and sometimes turbinate-ovoid, bright green, sprinkled with numerous
very small dots of blackish-gray; on ripening the ground-green passes
into dull yellow, sometimes colored with intense blood-red on the side
next the sun; flesh whitish, coarse, half-melting, with not much juice,
sugary, little perfume; of beautiful appearance, and recommended for
household use; Aug.-Sept.

=Bergamotte Sageret. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 671. 1869. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =5=:129, fig. 353. 1880.

M. Sageret obtained this Bergamotte from seed; he first reported it
in 1830. Fruit medium, nearly spherical, symmetrical in outline;
skin rather fine and thin, water-green, sprinkled with very many and
prominent, large dots becoming when ripe more yellow and the cheek next
the sun golden; flesh white, fine, buttery, rather gritty near the
core; juice sufficient, not very saccharine, deficient in perfume; a
good second-rate dessert pear; Oct. to Jan.

=Bergamotte Sanguine. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:65, fig. 225. 1879.

Entered in catalog of M. Jahn, 1864. Fruit medium or nearly medium,
globular-turbinate, regular in contour, greatest circumference
around middle, slightly pointed at base, obtuse at summit; color
dull water-green, generally covered with a thick coating of a dark
reddish-violet which on ripening assumes a more vivid tone on the side
next the sun; flesh white, speckled with red, coarse, semi-melting,
gritty at the core, not much juice; only second; interesting for
amateurs on account of its remarkable color of violet red so dark as to
be almost black; Sept.

=Bergamotte Sannier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 53. 1895.

Produced by M. Arsene Sannier, Rouen, Fr. It is said to have resisted
the severe freeze in France in the winter of 1879-80. Fruit medium in
size, globular-conic; color green; flesh semi-fine, melting, juicy and
of delicious flavor; first; end of winter and spring.

=Bergamotte Silvange. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 65, fig. 31.
1866-73.

_Silvange._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:664, fig. 1869.

Bergamotte Silvange was found in the woods of the Metz district,
Lorraine, about the middle of the eighteenth century. The fruit is very
variable in form and quality so that writers have been led to speak
of three sorts of pears called Silvange--the yellow, the long, and
the green. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate or obovate or of Bergamot
shape; skin rough, bright green on the shaded side, darker where
exposed to the sun, sprinkled with large, gray dots and stained with
dark patches; flesh tinged with greenish-white near the center and
yellowish-green near the skin, tender and melting, full of perfumed
juice, saccharine, acidulous and possessed of an exquisite flavor;
first; Oct. and Nov.

=Bergamotte de Souchait. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:99, fig. 434. 1880.

Of uncertain origin, though Mas suggests that it may have been raised
in Germany. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, pale green, strewn with
large, brown dots and stained with some patches of russet; on ripening
the basic green becomes lemon-yellow and warm gold, the side next the
sun being washed with vermilion on which are some grayish dots; flesh
yellowish, half-tender, half-breaking, dry, sugary and highly perfumed
with musk; second or third; July and first of Aug.

=Bergamotte de Soulers. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:168, Pl.
XLIV, fig. 1. 1768. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 504. 1884.

_Bonne de Soulers._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:487, fig. 1867.

This pear is an old French dessert fruit the first mention of which was
by Merlet in 1675 who described it as a species of winter Bergamotte
of good flavor and long keeping. Fruit medium, long-obovate, almost
oval; skin smooth, shining, pale greenish-yellow, covered with dots of
fawn and faintly tinged with brick-red on the side next the sun; flesh
white, tender, melting, free from granulations, juicy, saccharine,
slightly acidulous, with a characteristic and pleasant flavor; in
France, of first quality and considered superior to Easter Beurre; in
England only second, being too tender for the climate; Jan. to Mar. or
Apr.

=Bergamotte de Stryker. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 69, fig. 33.
1866-73. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:261, fig. 1867.

This variety is generally attributed to M. Parmentier, Enghien, Bel.
Fruit small, globular, slightly flattened at the base and mammillate at
the summit, yellow-ochre, finely dotted with bright gray and stained
with russet patches; flesh yellowish, tender, semi-melting and very
full of juice which is watery, sweet and pleasantly aromatic; first in
France, second in England; end of Sept. and Oct.

=Bergamotte Suisse Rond. 1.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:86, 134, Pl. 1771.

This pear resembles the ordinary Autumn Bergamot except in color which
is green at first, becoming yellow as it attains maturity, streaked
with yellow and red. Sept. and Oct.

=Bergamotte Tardive Collette. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 176. 1889. =2.=
_Guide Prat._ 86. 1895.

Raised from a seed of Doyenne d'Alencon previous to 1870 and judged by
the Horticultural Society of Rouen, Fr., to be of good quality; Apr. to
end of June.

=Bergamotte Thuerlinckx. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:149, fig. 171. 1878.

This pear was distributed by the Society Van Mons in whose bulletins
it was published in the years 1857-58-60 and 1862, though without
any statement as to its origin. Fruit medium or nearly medium,
globular-turbinate, obtuse, of largest circumference at center, very
pale green, sprinkled with numerous very small points of fawn; on
ripening the basic green changes to very pale yellow, whitish and
usually a little golden on the sunny side, without any trace of red;
flesh quite white, half-fine, half-melting, without grit at the core,
very juicy, sugary and perfumed; good; Oct.

=Bergamotte de Tournai. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 84, 238. 1876.

_Beurre Vert de Tournai._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:438, fig. 1867.

Obtained by M. Dupont, at Tournai, Bel., from pips of Glou Morceau
in 1830. Fruit large, globular-ovate, bossed at summit, olive-green
passing into pale green on the shady side, covered with gray-russet
dots; flesh greenish-white, semi-fine, melting, juicy, sugary, sweet,
without any pronounced aroma; second quality; Oct. and beginning of
Nov., often extending to Dec.

=Bergamotte de Tournay. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:35, fig. 402. 1880.

Obtained from seed by M. du Mortier, president of the Horticultural
Society of Tournay, Fr., and approved by the Society in 1857. Fruit
rather small, ovoid, short and swelled, obtuse at the summit, bright
green, and sprinkled with dots of a very rich green; flesh yellowish,
tender, buttery, melting, rather granular near the core; juice
abundant, richly sugared and perfumed; first; beginning of Sept.

=Bergamotte Volltragende. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 242. 1881.

German. Fruit turbinate-obtuse, typical Bergamot, smooth skin,
yellowish-green turning to golden-yellow, without russet; flesh
whitish, soft and melting, often half-melting, agreeable and sweet and
of Bergamot flavor; good for the table and very good for the kitchen;
mid-Sept.

=Bergbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 60, fig. 1913.

A perry pear growing in the mountains of Switzerland and the Austrian
Tyrol. Fruit small to medium, turbinate-obtuse, greenish-yellow, much
sprinkled with russet speckles and dots; flesh yellowish-white, almost
fine; first half of Oct.

=Bergen. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 453. 1857. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=1=:143, fig. 72. 1872.

A chance seedling found at New Utrecht (now part of Brooklyn), L. I.
Fruit large, elongated-obtuse-pyriform, sides often not symmetrical,
angular; skin smooth, waxen, lemon-yellow flushed with crimson and fawn
where exposed to the sun and thickly sprinkled with brown and crimson
dots; flesh whitish, veined with yellow, buttery, melting, juicy, with
a sweet, aromatic flavor, delicately perfumed; good to very good; end
of Sept.

=Berlaimont. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 132. 1825.

Belgium; a Van Mons seedling; 1825. Fruit large, ventriculous-conic,
bossed, yellow-green, with dull blush, with numerous green-brown dots;
flesh buttery, juicy, mild and tender; first for table and household
use; mid-Sept.

=Bernard. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 511. 1863. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=1=:262, fig. 1867.

A French pear, probably originated in the middle of the last century,
for it was growing at Lyons in 1855. Fruit below to medium, globular,
mammillate and deeply depressed at both base and crown, golden-yellow,
dotted and veined with fawn, slightly tinged with pale rose where
exposed to the sun; flesh white, fine, melting; juice abundant, sugary,
tart, very delicate and savory; first; Nov. to Feb.

=Berriays. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:263, fig. 1867. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 692. 1869.

M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr., raised this variety from seed in 1861. Fruit
medium, sometimes larger, oblong, ventriculous, obtuse, bossed; color
pale lemon-yellow, thickly sprinkled with greenish-russet dots; flesh
very white, melting, juicy, rather gritty around the core, refreshing,
sweet, acidulous, with a delicate aroma; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Bertrand Guinoisseau. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 84. 1876.

Bertrand Guinoisseau was obtained by M. Flon, Angers, Fr., in 1868, and
was first exhibited in the United States by Colonel M. P. Wilder. Fruit
rather large, globular-oblate; skin smooth, yellow; flesh fine, very
melting and excessively juicy; first; end of Nov.

=Berzelius. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 132. 1825. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:187. 1856.

Attributed to Van Mons. Fruit below medium, short-conic, bossed and
uneven, lemon-yellow, densely spotted and partly covered with russet,
thick skinned; flesh yellowish-white, firm, coarse grained, sweet,
rather musky; third for the table, good for culinary and market
purposes; early summer.

=Besi de Caen. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:264, fig. 1867.

The word Besi or Bezy is of Breton origin and signifies a wild pear.
Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse, often distorted and generally more
swelled on one side than the other, green, strewn with russet dots and
touched with fawn around the stem; flesh white, semi-fine, perfumed,
juicy, melting, rather gritty around the center; first; beginning of
Mar. to end of Apr.

=Besi de Caffoy. 1.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =3.= 1807.

A wilding discovered in the forest of Caffoy, Britanny, Fr. Fruit
small, oblong, yellowish, spotted with red; flesh melting; juice very
rich; Dec. and Jan. The fruits are produced in large clusters at the
extremity of the shoots.

=Besi-Careme. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 84, 238. 1876.

On trial with Simon-Louis Bros. of Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit large
to very large; flesh melting; first; Mar. to May.

=Besi Dubost. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:29, fig. 13. 1866-73. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:268, fig. 1867.

Obtained from a seed of Echasserie by M. Pariset, Curciat-Dongalon, Fr.
It first bore fruit in 1845. Fruit medium, turbinate, very obtuse and
swelled, generally a little bossed, golden-yellow, dotted and striped
with russet; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, juicy, gritty around the
core; second; Jan. to Mar.

=Besi Esperen. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:91, fig. 44. 1866-73. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:271, fig. 1867.

Obtained by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., about 1838. Fruit medium
to large; form varies from long turbinate-obtuse-pyriform to
obovate-pyriform, with contorted outline, greenish-yellow, dotted all
over with bright russet and occasionally washed with a deep tinge of
red; flesh white, buttery, melting, juicy, sugary, perfumed; first, but
does not keep long; Nov. and Dec.

=Besi Goubault. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:272, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 506. 1884.

Raised by M. Goubault near Angers, Fr., and submitted to the notice of
the Horticultural Society of Maine-et-Loire in 1846. Fruit large or
sometimes medium, globular, bossed, flattened at the base, mammillate
at the summit, with sides unequal, greenish-yellow, dotted and streaked
with russet; flesh very white, very fine, melting, containing some
small grits around the center; juice extremely abundant, saccharine,
perfumed and having a delicate and agreeable flavor; first; Sept. to
Nov.

=Besi de Grieser de Boehmenkirsch. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:93, fig. 335.
1880.

Said to have been obtained in the Swabian Alps, S. W. Ger. Fruit nearly
medium, ovoid-pyriform, obtuse, bright green, sprinkled with very small
and numerous gray dots; flesh white; fine, buttery; juice sufficient,
sugary, and delicately perfumed; good; Aug.

=Besi d'Hery. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:139. 1768. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 506. 1884.

_Kuemmelbirne._ =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:7. 1856.

A wilding discovered in the forest of Hery or Heric in Brittany in the
sixteenth century. The Bretons presented a basket of this fruit to King
Henry IV on his visit to Brittany in 1598. Fruit medium, globular; skin
thin, very smooth, bright green at first, changing when it ripens to
pale yellow, with blush of red on the side next the sun, strewed with
very minute points; flesh white, fine, semi-melting, generally gritty;
juice sufficient, sweet, with somewhat of a Muscat perfume; first-rate
cooking pear; Oct. to Jan. A good bearer in rich soil.

=Besi Liboutton. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 278. 1858. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =1=:277, fig. 1867.

Origin uncertain, but it was cultivated in the garden of the
Horticultural Society of Angers, Fr., in 1844. Fruit medium, globular,
regular in form, resembling an apple, deeply depressed at either pole,
green turning slightly yellow at maturity, sprinkled with large dots
and some fawn-colored stains; flesh white, fine, semi-melting, gritty;
juice sufficient, sugary, vinous, rather pleasantly perfumed; second;
mid-Aug. to mid-Sept.

=Besi de Mai. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:278, fig. 1867.

Raised by J. de Jonghe, Brussels, from a seed bed made in 1845.
Fruit large, obovate, rather uneven and irregular in its outline,
bossed, greenish, streaked and dotted with brown fawn; flesh fine,
white, melting, rather gritty; juice sufficient, sugary, acid, richly
flavored; first; Apr. and May.

=Besi de Moncondroiceu. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:65, fig. 321. 1880.

According to Oberdieck, this variety was brought to him from the
Chateau of Herrenhausen near Hanover. Fruit small, globular-ovoid,
or irregularly round, often higher on one side than on the other,
pale green, sown with points of gray-fawn; flesh whitish, semi-fine,
melting, a little granular about the core, juicy, sugary, not much
perfume; quality good but unstable, depending much on the season; Oct.

=Besi de Montigny. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:207, Pl. XLIV,
fig. 6. 1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:279, fig. 1867. =3.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 701. 1869.

The origin of this pear is ancient and uncertain. The monks of the
Chartreuse at Paris, however, propagated and described it in 1752 and
Duhamel du Monceau again wrote of it in 1768. Fruit medium, obovate but
variable, one type being pyriform, ventriculous; color greenish-yellow,
smooth, shining, sprinkled with exceedingly fine dots of fawn and
russeted around both stem and calyx; flesh white, tender, buttery,
semi-melting, gritty around the core; juice abundant, saccharine,
acidulous, having a pleasant, musky flavor; first; end of Sept.
occasionally to Nov.

=Besi de la Motte. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:206, Pl. XLIV,
fig. 5. 1768. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 507. 1884.

First reported by La Quintinye, the creator of the fruit gardens of
Louis XIV of France, as having been found by him at the end of October,
1685. Tree hardy, vigorous, a prolific bearer. Fruit above medium to
large, globular, more swelled generally on one side than on the other,
greenish-yellow or bright green, sprinkled with large russet dots;
flesh whitish, fine, melting, buttery, slightly gritty; juice very
abundant and full of sugar, savory and delicate; first; Sept. and Oct.
and sometimes later.

=Besi de Naghin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1895.

On trial with Simon-Louis of Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. Fruit above
medium, apple-shaped; in character it is an improvement on the
Chaumontel but its flesh is less firm, finer and more piquant; its
perfume is similar, and it has less bitterness than is often found in
the older fruit; Jan.

=Besi de la Pierre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:283, fig. 1867.

A gain of A. de la Farge, Salers, Fr., from a bed of mixed seeds made
in 1847. Fruit medium and often less, ovate, regular in form, slightly
swelled and bossed, lemon-yellow, partly covered with dots, marblings,
and stains of fawn especially around the eye and the stem; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, melting; juice extremely abundant, saccharine,
vinous, very delicate; first; all Oct. to mid-Nov.

=Besi de Quessoy. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:285, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 508. 1884.

_Bezy de Caissoy._ =3.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:178, Pl. XXIX.
1768.

Merlet stated in 1675 that this variety was said to have been found
originally in the forest of Quessoy near Saint-Brieuc. It was known
locally as the _Rousette_ or the _Petit Boeure d'Hiver_ and was
propagated at the beginning of the seventeenth century. Fruit borne
in clusters, small, globular or ovate; skin rough, yellowish-green,
much russeted; flesh white, delicate, melting, gritty around the core,
aromatic and savory; second; ripens in succession from Nov. or Dec.
till Feb.

=Besi de Saint-Waast. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:286, 287, fig. 1867.

_Bezi Vaet._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 702. 1869.

Van Mons was of the opinion that the Besi de Saint-Waast originated at
the Benedictine Abbey of Saint-Vaast, Fr. Fruit above medium, obovate,
obtuse, narrowing toward the stalk but variable; skin thick, yellow,
dotted with fawn, extensively washed with red-brown on the side exposed
to the sun; flesh rather white, fine, semi-breaking, very juicy,
rather gritty at the center, saccharine, acid, with a pleasant aroma
suggestive of the Chaumontel; a first-class dessert pear in Europe but
hardly more than a good second-rate fruit in this country; Nov. to Jan.

=Besi Sans Pareil. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 78, 240. 1876.

_Besi Incomparable._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:275, fig. 1867.

_Besi Sanspareil._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 702. 1869.

Bonnefonds mentioned this pear in 1651 under the names of _San-Pair_ or
_Nonpareille_, as also did Saint-Etienne in 1660 and Olivier de Serres
in 1608. Introduced to this country about the year 1850. Fruit medium,
spherical or globular-oval, generally rather symmetrical, lemon-yellow,
slightly greenish, dotted and mottled with fawn, blushed with
brownish-red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine,
rather melting, very juicy, vinous, saccharine, sourish, having an
extremely agreeable aroma; first; Oct. to Feb.

=Besi Tardif. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:288, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =7=:57, fig. 509. 1881.

Raised in 1845 by M. Goubault, Angers, Fr., this variety was described
in 1846, and in 1847 was declared by the Horticultural Society of
Maine-et-Loire to be worthy of cultivation. Fruit medium or below,
globular, bossed, greenish-yellow, dotted, and russeted; flesh white,
fine, melting, slightly gritty around the core; juice abundant, sugary,
astringent; third or sometimes second; Nov. to Feb.

=Besi de Van Mons. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:53, fig. 315. 1880.

A Belgian variety, cataloged in 1864 by M. Jahn. Whether it was
obtained by Van Mons or merely dedicated to him is unknown. Fruit
small, globular-conic, more or less short, regular in outline, bright
green, sown with numerous small, gray-green spots; flesh white, rather
granular, buttery, a little gritty at the core, with abundant, sweet
juice, acid, distinct perfume; good; Nov.

=Besi des Veterans. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:127, fig. 62. 1866-73. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:289, fig. 1867.

_Veterans._ =3.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 716. 1897.

Raised from seed by Van Mons about 1830. Fruit large, turbinate, clear
yellow, very much dotted with grayish-brown specks of different sizes;
flesh white, semi-melting, fine, buttery, with sufficient sweet juice,
slightly acid; second for dessert, but first for stewing; ripens in
Oct. and lasts occasionally even till Apr. The tree is a prolific
bearer.

=Besi de Vindre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:291, fig. 1867.

Was cultivated in the garden of the Horticultural Society of Angers in
1838. Fruit small, globular, rather more swelled on one side than on
the other, greenish-yellow, dotted with russet and streaked with russet
about the calyx, and marked with brownish-fawn about the stem; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, semi-melting and containing some grits around the
core; juice sweet, not acid, rather savory; second; Oct.

=Besi de Wutzum. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:119, fig. 540. 1881.

Of uncertain origin. Fruit rather small, globular, regular in contour,
largest circumference around center, forming short point at stem, pale
green, sown with many fawn dots; on ripening the green changes to pale
yellow and the sun-exposed side becomes golden and washed with red;
flesh white, tinted with yellow, semi-fine, melting, rather gritty
about the center, juicy, sugary; second; Oct.

=Bessemianka. 1.= _Mont. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 53, fig. 1881-2. =2.= _Ia.
Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 83. 1882. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 40. 1909.

A Russian variety recommended for cultivation by the American
Pomological Society. It grows in Europe from the Gulf to the Volga as
far north as Moscow and Kazan and is the most widely-known and most
largely-grown pear in central Russia. J. L. Budd says, "This is beyond
all doubt a true hybrid with a wild pear of Russia as the parent tree.
The name means _seedless_, and it is rare, indeed, that more than the
rudiment of a seed can be found." Tree upright; leaves large, dark,
thick, very slightly crenate, almost entire, stands aridity well. Fruit
large, round-obovate, greenish-yellow, with some russety-brown; flesh
gritty at the core, juicy, with few or no seeds, mild, pleasant; early
Oct.

=Best Favorite. 1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 178, 186. 1896. =2.= J. V.
Cotta _Cat._ 12, fig. 1898.

From Winnebago County, Ill. Fruit medium, bronze-yellow, melting,
juicy; good; ripening in Sept.

=Bettina. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:124, 1856.

A seedling of Van Mons, first published in 1851. Fruit medium, conic or
ventriculous-turbinate, acute, symmetrical in contour, green changing
to lemon-yellow, dotted and flecked with russet, often covered with
russet; flesh yellowish-white, very fine, excellent; first for dessert;
Oct.

=Betzelsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:194. 1856.

A perry pear grown in Austria and Germany. Fruit rather large,
globular, diminishing acutely to the stalk, grass-green, sprinkled with
dark gray spots; flesh greenish-white, dense, juicy; very good for
household use and perry; suitable for long-distance transport; Jan. to
Apr.

=Betzy. 1.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 404. 1908.

A small, French fruit, good for market and household use, for cooking,
preserving, or the making of wine.

=Beurre Adam. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:292, fig. 1867.

A rather poor French dessert pear known for 250 years. Fruit below
medium, oblong-obtuse-pyriform, dark greenish-yellow, fawn, dotted
with russeted, and washed with carmine on the cheek next the sun;
flesh yellowish, veined with pale green, melting, sweet, fairly juicy,
acidulous and aromatic; second, apt to rot at the core when ripe; Aug.
to Oct.

=Beurre Ad. Papeleu. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 178. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 86. 1895.

Raised from seed of Glou Morceau, and placed on the market by Dervaes
Brothers, Wetteren, Bel., in 1888. Fruit long, bright green; flesh
white, sugary, very melting; Mar.

=Beurre d'Adenaw. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 84. 1876.

Found in the garden of the Convent of Schwarzenbruck. Fruit large,
rather uneven, yellow; flesh buttery and pleasantly perfumed; good;
through the winter.

=Beurre Alexandre Lucas. 1.= _Le Bon Jard._ 358. 1882. =2.= _Jour.
Hort._ =18=:216. 1889.

The parent tree was a wilding found in 1836 in a wood of the Department
of Loir-et-Cher, Fr., and in foliage and growth much resembles Doyenne
Boussock. Fruit large to very large, handsome, pyriform, clear green,
dotted with maroon or chestnut-colored spots; flesh fine, melting,
perfumed, juicy, in flavor superior perhaps to Doyenne Boussock; first;
Nov. to Jan.

=Beurre Allard. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:293, fig. 1867.

From the Horticultural Society of Maine-et-Loire whose Committee
named it in 1852. Fruit below to medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, dotted and mottled with russet; flesh whitish, fine,
soft, melting, not gritty, reddish under the skin, with very sugary
juice, perfumed; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Amande. 1.= Lucas _Tafelbirnen_ 117. 1894. =2.= _Guide Prat._
61, 228. 1895.

Raised by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Fruit medium to large, variable in
form, globular, narrowing toward the upper part and somewhat distorted
near the stem, which is placed at right angles to the long axis of
the fruit, bossed; skin fine, shining, greenish-yellow changing to a
translucent canary-yellow; flesh white, very fine, altogether melting,
and of a sweet, delicious and pronounced flavor of almond; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre d'Amanlis. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:294, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 509. 1884.

Pomologists differ as to the origin of this pear. Probably it takes
its name from Amanlis, a village near Rennes, Fr. Fruit large,
obtuse-pyriform, rather uneven in contour, bright green changing to
yellowish-green, lightly washed with red-brown on the cheek exposed to
the sun, dotted and marbled with fawn-russet; flesh greenish-white,
fine, melting, tender, rich, very juicy, sugary, some acidity,
agreeably perfumed; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Beurre Ananas. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 510. 1884.

Fruit small, pyriform, regular in outline, yellow, with red blush
on side next the sun, and streaks of crimson; flesh yellowish,
semi-buttery, melting, very juicy and sweet, with a strong odor of
musk; inferior; end of Oct.

=Beurre d'Angleterre. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:197. 1768. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:297, fig. 1867.

_Angleterre._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 481. 1884.

The first description of this pear was given by Le Lectier, Orleans, in
1628. The probability is that it was imported to France by Le Lectier
early in the seventeenth century from England. It is grown extensively
around Paris for the supply of the markets where it is in very
general demand in September. Fruit medium, acute-pyriform, bright
green-yellow, dotted very regularly with small, russet spots; flesh
white, buttery, melting, very juicy, sugary and richly flavored; good
dessert pear; Sept.

=Beurre Antoine. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:180, fig. 572. 1881. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:299, fig. 1867.

Raised at Lyons, Fr., by M. Nerard, nurseryman, in 1822 from
a bed of seeds of White Doyenne. Fruit about medium size,
oblong-obovate-pyriform; color yellowish-green; flesh granulated, very
melting, rich in sugar; early Sept.

=Beurre Antoinette. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =7=:61, fig. 1859. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:300, fig. 1867.

A gain of Alexandre Bivort at Geest-Saint-Remy, Bel., in 1846. Fruit
medium, sometimes larger, oblong-obtuse-pyriform; golden-yellow, dotted
and mottled with brown, stained with fawn around the stem and often
colored on the side next the sun; flesh greenish-white, semi-fine,
semi-melting, gritty around the core; juice abundant, acid, sugary,
aromatic; first; Oct.

=Beurre Aqualine. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:116. 1856.

A seedling of Van Mons published in 1833. Fruit medium,
long-obtuse-oval, light green turning to yellow-green, dotted with
whitish-gray; flesh semi-fine, white, extremely juicy; first class for
all purposes; end of Dec.

=Beurre de l'Assomption. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:303, figs. 1867.
=2.= _Pom. France_ =4=: No. 166, Pl. 166. 1867.

M. Ruillie de Beauchamp, Goupillere, Nantes, Fr., obtained cions of
a pear raised by an amateur. These grafts gave fruit in 1863. J. J.
Thomas wrote briefly of it in the _American Fruit Culturist_ in 1885.
Fruit very large, pyramidal-obtuse, but rather variable, undulating and
bossed, lemon-yellow, dotted and streaked with russet; flesh white,
semi-fine, melting, juicy, slightly gritty around the core; juice
abundant, saccharine, acidulous, vinous and delicately perfumed; first
in France, rather disappointing in England; Aug.

=Beurre Audusson. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:305, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed by Anne-Pierre Audusson, Angers, Fr., in 1833 or
1834. Fruit below medium, pyriform, slightly obtuse, even in contour,
greenish, sprinkled with large dots of brown and blushed on the side
next the sun; flesh semi-fine, whitish, rather melting, gritty at the
center; juice sufficient, saccharine, having little flavor or perfume;
third; end of Aug.

=Beurre des Augustins. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1895.

Originally described in the _Pomone tournaisienne_ which is suggestive
that the neighborhood of Tournai, Bel., was the place of its birth.
Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse; flesh buttery, very juicy; first; Nov.
and Dec.

=Beurre Auneniere. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 277. 1859. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =1=:308, fig. 1867.

Generally attributed to Van Mons. Fruit below medium and often small,
conic-obtuse-pyriform, lemon-yellow, finely dotted with brown-russet,
washed with bright rose on the side of the sun; flesh white, semi-fine,
gritty at center; juice sufficient, sugary, agreeable; second; Oct. and
Nov.

=Beurre d'Automne de Donauer. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:173, fig. 567.
1881.

Liegel said he had received this variety as having come from seed beds
of Van Mons. Fruit medium, conic, regular in contour, bright green;
flesh white, tinted with yellow, melting, abounding in rich, sugary
water, vinous and pleasantly perfumed; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre d'Avoine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:309, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =5=:183, fig. 380. 1880.

M. Tuerlinckx, Mechlin, Bel., raised this variety. The date of its
first fruiting is not known with certainty but it was probably about
1849. Fruit medium to rather large, oblong-cylindrical, irregular,
flattened at base; color greenish-yellow, dotted with minute brown
points; flesh white, coarse, generally gritty, very juicy, sugary;
second as a dessert fruit but first for stewing.

=Beurre d'Avril. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 66. 1911.

Raised from seed by Ernest Baltet and shown before the Pomological
Society of France at Lyons in March, 1909; it received great praise.
Fruit medium to large, globular-obtuse-pyriform, green changing to
yellow on ripening; flesh color of fresh butter, fine and melting,
sugary, perfumed, vinous; good; Mar. to May.

=Beurre Bachelier. 1.= _Pom. France_ =2=:No. 49, Pl. 49. 1864. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 673. 1869.

This splendid pear was obtained by Louis-Francois Bachelier, commune
of Cappellebourg, Canton of Bourbourg, Fr., in 1845. Fruit large,
oblong-turbinate, very obtuse and swelled, mammillate at summit,
greenish-yellow, with brown dots, russeted and streaked with fawn
around the stalk; flesh white, fine, melting; juice very abundant,
sweet, acid, vinous, delicate and aromatic; first; Oct. to Dec.

=Beurre Backhouse. 1.= _Garden_ =52=:309. 1898. =2.= _Ibid._ =76=:42,
54. 1912.

Raised by James Backhouse, York, Eng., about 1862. Fruit large, juicy
and richly flavored; though larger it much resembles Beurre d'Amanlis;
Sept. and Oct.

=Beurre Bailly. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:311, fig. 1867. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 673. 1869.

Raised from a seed bed of pips of a Doyenne made about 1836 by
M. Bailly, a nurseryman near Lille, Fr. The parent tree first
fruited in 1848. Fruit large, long, assuming generally that of the
Calebasse, bossed, irregular; color golden-yellow, sown all over with
greenish-gray dots and streaked with fawn around the calyx; flesh
exceedingly white and fine, semi-melting, juicy, somewhat gritty around
the core; juice abundant, sugary, lacking much perfume but delicate;
first; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Baltet Pere. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 109. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=7=:47, fig. 504. 1881. =3.= _Garden_ =52=:356, 397. 1897.

_Baltet Senior._ =4.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 171. 1889.

Obtained by Baltet Brothers, Troyes, Fr., about 1865. Fruit large,
turbinate, yellowish-green; flesh very fine, melting, juicy and richly
flavored; first, "there are few pears of better quality." (_Gard._
=52=:356.) Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Baud. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:1, fig. 193. 1879. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 512. 1884.

Attributed to Van Mons. Fruit medium to small, obovate, lemon-yellow,
thickly mottled with cinnamon-colored russet; flesh whitish, sometimes
veined with yellow, fine, buttery, melting; juice abundant and sugary,
agreeable but not a remarkable flavor; hardly first-rate; Oct.

=Beurre Beauchamp. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 456. 1857. =2.= Mas _Le
Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 113, fig. 55. 1866-73.

Attributed by Van Mons in his catalog of 1823 to M. Beauchamp. Fruit
medium to large; globular, bossed, pale yellow, dotted with fawn,
strongly carmined on the side next the sun; flesh fine, white,
excessively melting; juice sugary, perfumed, having a buttery flavor,
delicate and agreeable; first; Nov.

=Beurre Beaulieu. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 673. 1869.

Fruit globular-pyriform, greenish-yellow, very much russeted; flesh
whitish, rather coarse, buttery, melting, vinous; good; Oct.

=Beurre Beek. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:69, fig. 515. 1881.

Whether this variety originated in the outskirts of Beek, a town of the
Rhine, or whether it came from the neighborhood of the town of Beek in
the Pays-Bas is uncertain. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, obtuse, bright
green, sown with numerous strongly marked gray-green dots, russeted
at summit and base; flesh white, melting; juice abundant and sugary;
third-rate for the table but quite useful for the kitchen; Sept.

=Beurre des Beguines. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:314, fig. 1867. =2.=
Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:133, fig. 163. 1878.

A posthumous gain of Van Mons at Louvain. Its first fruit was gathered
in 1844. Fruit below medium size; oblate, more enlarged on one side
than the other; skin entirely covered with a crust of cinnamon-brown
russet; flesh greenish-white, rather coarse, very juicy and sweet,
richly flavored, with perfume of the Seckel; quite a good pear; Oct.

=Beurre Bennert. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:19, fig. 1857. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:315, fig. 1867.

Obtained from the seed beds of Van Mons at Louvain subsequent to
his death in 1842. It first bore fruit in 1846. Fruit medium,
globular-obtuse-pyriform, sides uneven; color golden-yellow, striped,
veined and stained with fawn, dotted with fawn around the stem and
washed with reddish-brown on the side next the sun; flesh white, fine,
melting containing gritty concretions around the core; juice abundant,
acid, vinous, with delicate aroma; first, Dec. to Feb.

=Beurre Benoist. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 360. 1859. =2.= Mas _Le Verger_
=3=:Pt. 1, 35, fig. 16. 1866-73. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 674. 1869.

Found on a farm at Brissac, Fr., and propagated by Auguste
Benoist about the middle of the last century. Fruit large,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform; skin pale yellow-green strewed with dots and
patches of pale brown-russet, the fundamental yellow-green passing, on
ripening to bright yellow and the side well exposed to the sun often
being tinted with orange-red; flesh white, fine-grained, melting,
acidulous and very juicy, perfumed with a distinct Seckel aroma; first;
Sept.

=Beurre Berckmans. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:316, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 674. 1869.

Gained by Alexandre Bivort, Louvain, Bel. Fruit medium or above, long,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform, yellow-ochre, generally covered with streaks
and markings of fawn; flesh whitish, fine, very melting, seldom gritty;
juice excessive, perfumed; refreshing and delicate; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre de Biseau. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =22=:311, fig. 1872.

Raised by A. de Biseau d'Hauteville, Binche, Bel., and sent by him
in 1871 to the Royal Horticultural Society of London where the Fruit
Committee awarded it a first class certificate. Fruit above middle
size, oblong, unshapely and undulating in its outline; skin entirely
covered with a thick coat of smooth, dark cinnamon-brown russet; flesh
yellowish, tender, buttery and sweet with a rich flavor and excellent
bouquet; first; Apr. and May.

=Beurre Blanc Dore. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:93, fig. 431. 1880.

The first description of this pear was given in 1839 by Dittrich; its
origin is uncertain. Fruit medium, globular-conic, pale water-green,
dotted with gray-brown, the green becoming at maturity a beautiful,
warm, golden-yellow with the side next the sun washed with bright
vermilion-red; flesh yellowish-white, semi-buttery, sugary and
perfumed; good; Sept.

=Beurre Blanc de Nantes. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:317, fig. 1867.
=2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:31, fig. 409. 1880.

According to Prevost, writing of this pear in 1845, it probably
came from Brittany or Anjou. Fruit below medium, turbinate-ovate or
turbinate-spherical, yellowish-green, dotted with gray, mottled with
fawn, and occasionally slightly colored with tender rose on the side
next the sun; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, gritty, semi-melting;
juice rather deficient, saccharine, but wanting in flavor and generally
acid; third; Aug. and Sept.

=Beurre Boisbunel. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:318, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 514. 1884.

Raised at Rouen, Fr., from a bed of mixed seeds in 1835 by L. M.
Boisbunel; first fruited in 1846. Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse
or obovate, greenish-yellow, some russet; flesh yellowish, tender,
melting, and gritty; juice plentiful, sweet, little perfume, refreshing
but generally rather harsh; second and often third; Sept.

=Beurre Bollwiller. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:319, figs. 1867. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 514. 1884.

Raised by Baumann Brothers, Bollweiler, near Colmar, Alsace. Propagated
in 1842. Fruit medium to large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, golden-yellow,
dotted with gray and brown and washed with tender rose on the side
exposed to the sun; flesh very white, tender and melting; juice
abundant, sugary, fresh, exceedingly savory; first; Mar. to end of May.

=Beurre de Bordeaux. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:463. 1855.

Recommended in 1855 by Thomas Rivers, a well-known English authority,
as a very productive standard; fruit of medium size and first quality;
Oct.

=Beurre Bourbon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:322. 1867.

Raised by M. Parigot, a magistrate at Poitiers, Fr.; it came from a bed
sown with various seeds in 1845. Fruit of first quality; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre de Breme. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1895.

Published in Germany. Fruit small or medium, globular-turbinate,
greenish-yellow; flesh fine, melting, juicy; first; Nov.

=Beurre Bretonneau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:322, fig. 1867. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 515. 1884.

Raised by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel. Fruit large,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow much covered with
brownish-russet and washed with carmine on the side next the sun;
flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine, semi-melting, juicy, acid, sweet,
vinous, slightly perfumed; quality variable according to locality, but
generally second rather than first; March to May.

=Beurre de Brigne. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:93, fig. 47. 1872.

_Poire des Nonnes._ =2.= _Horticulturist_ =7=:514. 1852. =3.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:463, fig. 1869.

A wilding found in the commune of Brigne, Maine-et-Loire, Fr. It was
introduced in 1832. Fruit below medium or medium, globular-oblate,
bossed round the summit, pale yellow shaded with tender green,
sprinkled with large, gray-russet dots and some brownish stains; flesh
whitish, very fine, melting; juice exceedingly abundant, saccharine,
acidulous, having a musky perfume, delicious; first; Sept.

=Beurre Bronze. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 57, fig. 27. 1866-73.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:324, figs. 1867.

Raised by Van Mons at Louvain and published by him in 1823 under the
number 328. It was received in Germany soon after and named Beurre
Bronze. Fruit medium to small, ovate, greenish-bronze, marbled with
bright green on the shady side and entirely bronzed and dotted with
russet on the side exposed to the sun; flesh firm, juicy, sugary and
aromatic; first; end of Oct.

=Beurre de Brou. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:1, fig. 481. 1881.

A seedling of Van Mons grown about 1825. Fruit small or medium,
turbinate-obtuse, very pale green, strewn with numerous minute points
of gray-green; on ripening, the side next the sun becomes golden and
the rest of the skin yellow; flesh white, melting, with abundant juice,
sugary, agreeable; a fruit of good quality and ships well; end of Sept.

=Beurre Brougham. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:325, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 538. 1884.

Raised from seed in 1831 or 1832 at Downton Castle, Hereford, Eng.,
by Thomas Andrew Knight. Fruit medium, globular-obovate, inclining to
oval, yellowish-green, covered with large, brown-russet specks; flesh
yellowish-white, tender and juicy, gritty at center; juice sweet,
vinous, perfumed; second and often first; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Bruneau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:326, fig. 1867. =2.= _Ann.
Pom. Belge_ =5=:11, fig. 1857.

_Bergamotte Crassane d'Hiver._ =3.= Mas _Le Verger._ =1=:19, fig. 8.
1866-73.

Raised at la Bourdiniere, in the commune of Chateau Thibaut, Fr., first
reported about 1830. Fruit above medium, globular-turbinate, very
obtuse and swelled, deeply depressed at each end, yellow-orange, dotted
with gray and red-brown; flesh yellowish-white, semi-melting, rather
gritty; juice abundant, acidulous, sugary, vinous, slightly perfumed,
often sour; second; Nov. to Feb.

=Beurre de Bruxelles. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:327, fig. 1867.

Originated in Brabant, Bel., and first reported by Louis Noisette,
Paris, Fr., in 1813. Fruit above medium, very long, bossed, rather
obtuse and always swelled round the calyx; skin rough to the touch,
greenish-yellow, dotted with bright brown and washed with rose on
the side of the sun; flesh very white, fine, semi-melting, generally
gritty around the core; juice abundant, sugary, acidulous, more or less
perfumed, refreshing and very agreeable; first; beginning of Sept.

=Beurre Burnicq. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_. =3=:Pt. 1, 101, fig. 49. 1866-73.

From a seed bed of Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., first published in
1846. Fruit above medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform; skin rough from a
thick covering of russet, strewed with gray specks but showing some of
the yellow of the ground color, often of a rather somber red color on
the sunny side; flesh slightly greenish, very fine, melting, sugary,
juicy, perfumed; quality in France first; end of Sept.

=Beurre du Bus. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1876.

Fruit medium, turbinate, yellow, stained with fawn; flesh buttery,
melting, aromatic; first; Dec. and Jan.

=Beurre Bymont. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 363. 1859.

Of foreign origin; described by Elliott as "new" in 1859. Fruit above
medium, obovate-truncate, russety; flesh juicy, sweet, perfumed; said
to be very good to best; Oct. to Dec.

=Beurre de Caen. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 515. 1884.

Fruit large, pyriform, narrow, long, yellow, heavily covered with
brown-russet; flesh coarse; inferior; Feb.

=Beurre Capiaumont. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:330, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 682. 1869.

A handsome Flemish pear raised from seed by M. Capiaumont, Mons,
Bel., in 1787. Fruit medium, long-obtuse-pyriform, clear yellow, with
cinnamon-red cheek and strewed with specks and markings of fawn; flesh
white, with greenish filaments, fine-grained, buttery, melting; juice
abundant, sweet, aromatic; first quality; good for dessert and also for
the kitchen; Oct.

=Beurre Caty. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ 1:331, fig. 1867.

Obtained about 1858 by a Doctor Helin, Ronquieres, Bel. Fruit under
medium, globular-obtuse-pyriform, mammillate at summit and one side
generally more bulged than the other, dull yellow, dotted and veined
with bright brown; flesh fine, melting, a little gritty at center;
juice plentiful, sourish, sweet, savory; first; Jan. to Mar.

=Beurre Caune. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1895.

Fruit rather large, water-green, touched with dull carmine; flesh
melting, juicy, sugary, acidulated, recalling the agreeable perfume and
acidity of the Beurre Gris; first; Sept.

=Beurre du Cercle Pratique de Rouen. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:332,
fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 516. 1884.

From a seed bed made by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr., in 1845. Fruit rather
below medium size, pyramidal but much longer on one side than on the
other; skin rough to the touch, lemon-colored, much covered with
bronze-russet and strewed with gray dots; flesh greenish, fine, juicy,
melting, very gritty, sweetish acid and of a very delicate flavor;
first; end of Sept.

=Beurre du Champ Corbin. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:59, fig. 414. 1880.

Obtained by Jacques Jalais from a bed of mixed seeds made in 1846.
Fruit medium, globular-ovoid, water-green, sown with large, round dots;
flesh yellowish, semi-fine, buttery, semi-melting, with abundant juice,
sugary and having a rather agreeable perfume.

=Beurre Charron. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:334, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 516. 1884.

Raised from seed at Angers, Fr.; fruited in 1838 by M. Charron. Fruit
medium or below, globular, greenish-yellow, dotted with russet; flesh
tender, juicy, watery, melting; juice very abundant, sweet, vinous,
refreshing, deliciously perfumed; first; Oct.

=Beurre Chatenay. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:334, fig. 1867.

A French pear raised in the commune of Doue-la-Fontaine,
Maine-et-Loire, by Pierre Chatenay in 1846. Fruit small, ovate, bossed
and contorted, yellowish-green, washed with bright red on the side
exposed to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, juicy, sugary,
highly perfumed; first; Nov.

=Beurre Chaudy. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1895.

Fruit very large, pyriform, bossed, bright green changing to pale
yellow at maturity; flesh fine, melting, very juicy, perfumed; Oct. to
Dec.

=Beurre Christ. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:143, fig. 168. 1878.

Described in the Van Mons Catalog under the number 139; dedicated to
the German pomologist Christ. Fruit medium, obovate, rather bossed in
its outline, bright green, numerous small dots of gray-brown; quality
good; flesh fine, buttery; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Citron. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 676. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =1=:133, fig. 67, 1872.

From a Van Mons' seed bed. Fruit small or medium, ovate, somewhat
globular, lemon-yellow; flesh white, fine, breaking; juice sufficient,
wanting in sugar, acidulous, without appreciable perfume; not of
first quality but of some value on account of its prolonged period of
maturity; Jan. to end of winter.

=Beurre Clotaire. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:337, fig. 1867.

The wilding, parent-tree of this variety was found in 1854 by M.
Clot, Angers, Fr. Fruit medium, obovate-pyriform, obtuse, generally
narrowed toward the summit, yellow-ochre color, much dotted with
greenish-russet; flesh whitish, fine, watery, melting, gritty round
center; second; Sept.

=Beurre de Coit. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:243, fig. 120. 1866-73. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 722. 1869.

Originated with Colonel Coit, near Cleveland, Ohio. Fruit medium,
obtuse-pyriform, dull green, sprinkled with numerous large brown
points; flesh semi-fine, whitish, veined with yellow, buttery, melting,
rich in sugary water, vinous and perfumed; good; Sept.

=Beurre Colmar. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =1=:67, fig. 1853. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 517. 1884.

_Beurre d'Enghien._ =3.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:23, fig. 492. 1881.

Raised in Belgium by Van Mons before 1823. Fruit large, ovate, bossed,
irregular, obtuse at both ends, smooth, yellow, dotted with brown and
fawn, with a tinge of orange-red on the side next the sun; flesh white,
crisp, melting, juicy, some grit around the core; juice abundant,
sugary, slightly perfumed; a dessert pear of first quality; mid-Oct. to
Dec.

=Beurre Coloma. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:339, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 517. 1884.

Obtained by Count Coloma, probably at Mechlin, Bel. Fruit large,
oblong-obovate, obtuse, much reduced at both extremities; skin thin and
tender, at first a lively green changing to golden-yellow on ripening,
much russeted; flesh white, fine, dense; juicy, semi-melting, gritty at
center, sugary and vinous flavor; second; end of Sept.

=Beurre du Comte Marcolini. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:115.
1856.

Upper Italy, 1839. Fruit medium, long, medium ventriculous, shining
pale green changing to whitish-green; flesh acidulous, sweet, and
aromatic; second; end of Oct.

=Beurre de Conitz. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:103, fig. 52. 1872.

A German variety at one time grown a good deal in the neighborhood of
Danzig, where it was known by the name _Fondante de Conitz_. Fruit
medium to large, conic-pyriform, lemon-yellow, washed with lively red;
flesh white, fine, very melting, very sugary, pleasantly scented; good;
middle of Aug.

=Beurre Copretz. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 517. 1884.

Fruit below medium, oval, regular in outline; skin smooth,
greenish-yellow, having large patches and dots of russet; flesh
greenish-white, coarse-grained, juicy and sugary, having but little
flavor; inferior; Nov.

=Beurre Dalbret. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:343, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 678. 1869.

This variety was obtained by Van Mons prior to 1832. Fruit medium or
above, elongated-pyriform, rather indented and irregular, golden or
greenish-yellow, dotted all over, mottled and spotted with bright red;
flesh white, fine, juicy, melting, perfumed; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Beurre Daras. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 85. 1876.

Distributed by M. du Mortier, Tournai, Bel., who said that its fruit
was very large, always of first quality; Dec. and Jan.

=Beurre Daviss. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:460. 1855.

Fruit medium, obovate; good; Jan. and Feb.; somewhat resembling the
Passe Colmar, but keeps better.

=Beurre Defays. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:344, figs. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 518. 1884.

Raised by Francois Defays near Angers, Fr.; fruited first in 1839
or 1840. Fruit large, pyramidal-obtuse, pale golden yellow, with
large, brown dots, and an orange tinge on side next the sun; flesh
yellowish-white, delicate, melting, juicy, sugary, vinous; first; end
of Nov. to Feb.

=Beurre Degalait. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 85. 1876.

Probably produced in the Tournai district, Bel., fruit medium,
turbinate, greenish-yellow, very juicy; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Delannoy 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 71, fig. 34. 1866-73.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:346, fig. 1867.

Obtained by Alexandre Delannoy, nurseryman, near Tournai, Bel. It was
first made known in 1848. Fruit medium or large, turbinate-obtuse,
bossed, one side generally more enlarged than the other,
greenish-yellow, finely dotted with russet; flesh whitish, fine, juicy,
melting, a little gritty around the core, sugary, acid, with a really
exquisite savor; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Delbecq. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 58, 232. 1895.

Fruit medium, conic-pyriform, lemon-yellow; flesh very fine, melting,
sweet; first; Oct.

=Beurre Delicat. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:17, fig. 105. 1878.

Thought by Mas to have been raised by M. de Jonghe, Brussels. Fruit
small, rather long-turbinate, even in contour, bright, clear green,
covered with extremely small and numerous fawn dots; flesh white, fine,
melting, with abundant, sweet juice, perfumed.

=Beurre Derouineau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:348, fig. 1867. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 518. 1884.

Raised from seed in 1840 by a gardener named Derouineau near
Angers, Fr. Fruit small, obovate; skin rough to the touch, bronze,
but brightening somewhat on the shady side and turning to yellow;
flesh white, delicate, melting, juicy, sweet and aromatic; hardly
first-class; Nov.

=Beurre Dilly. 1.= _Pom. France_ =4=: No. 171, Pl. 171. 1867. =2.=
_Guide Prat._ 159, 244. 1876.

Obtained about 1848 by M. V. Dilly near Tournai, Bel. Fruit rather
large, pyriform-globular, obtuse; skin thick, rather rough and
wrinkled, green changing to yellow, washed with dull red; flesh
greenish, very fine, melting; juicy, sugary, perfumed; very good; Sept.
and Oct.

=Beurre Docteur Pariset. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:177, fig. 569. 1881.

Produced from a chance seedling in 1856 and cultivated by M. Pariset,
Ain, Fr. Fruit large, conic-obtuse-globular or nearly globular,
water-green, sprinkled with numerous very large, brown dots; flesh
fine, buttery, melting; juice abundant and perfumed; somewhat like
Beurre Diel which it surpasses in quality; Nov.

=Beurre Doux. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:352, fig. 1867.

Cultivated in France in the middle of the last century; its origin is
unknown. Fruit medium to large, globular-turbinate, bossed, rough,
yellowish-green, dotted all over with gray specks, extensively tinged
with vermilion on the side next the sun; flesh white, melting, gritty
at center, juice sufficient and very sweet, vinous, sourish; third;
Sept.

=Beurre van Driessche. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:434, fig. 1867.

Obtained from seed in 1858 by M. van Driessche, a horticulturist at
Ledeberg, near Ghent, Bel. Fruit rather large, oblong-obtuse, dull
yellow; flesh semi-melting, sugary and of a delicate savor, vinous and
acid juice; first; Feb. to May.

=Beurre Driessen. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =21=:146. 1855.

_Driessen's Pomeranzenbirne._ =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:157.
1856.

A seedling of Van Mons, 1834. Fruit large, roundish, yellow, with a
strong, reddish blush; flesh whitish-yellow, semi-melting, rather sour
and sweet; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Beurre Dubuisson. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =20=:789. 1896. =2.=
_Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 177, fig. 1906.

Obtained about 1832 by Isidore Dubuisson, a gardener near Tournai,
Bel. Fruit rather large, oblong, obtuse at base, flat at summit,
greenish-yellow on shaded side, often washed with red on the side
exposed to the sun, marked all over with russet spots and veinings;
flesh white, fine-grained, melting, buttery, juicy, sweet, acid,
perfumed; very good; Dec. to Feb.

=Beurre Duhaume. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 519. 1884.

Fruit turbinate, evenly shaped; skin yellow but almost entirely covered
with brown-russet, some red and orange on side exposed to the sun;
flesh firm, breaking, very juicy, sweet, rich, vinous; first; Dec. to
Feb.

=Beurre Dumont. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:353, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 519. 1884.

Obtained from a seed-bed by Joseph Dumont, Esquelmes, Bel. It first
bore fruit in 1833. Fruit rather large, globular-oval, greenish-yellow,
speckled with brownish-russet on the shaded side and entirely washed
with reddish-brown on the side of the sun; flesh juicy, melting, and
richly flavored and aromatic; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre Dumortier. 1.= _Pom. France_ =3=:No. 100, Pl. 100. 1865. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:354, figs. 1867.

Attributed to Van Mons, about 1818. Fruit above medium, turbinate, more
or less elongated, obtuse, bossed, yellowish-green, dotted and mottled
with russet, and often tinged with pale rose on the side of the sun;
flesh whitish, melting or semi-melting according to climate; juice very
abundant, acidulous, sugary, with a delicious, perfumed flavor; first;
Sept. to Dec.

=Beurre Dupont. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 519. 1884.

Fruit small, pyriform-curved, sides unequal, rich golden-yellow,
speckled with patches of cinnamon russet; flesh tender, melting, juicy
and sweet, without perfume and only a sweet-water flavor; second; end
of Oct.

=Beurre Duquesne. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 520. 1884.

Fruit medium, obovate, yellowish-green changing to yellow, tinged with
red next the sun, covered with heavy, brown dots; flesh white, tender,
melting, sugary, rich; a good dessert pear; Oct.

=Beurre Durand. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:355; fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:93, fig. 239. 1879.

Came from a seed bed made by M. Goubault near Angers, Fr., and
was reported in 1854. Fruit above medium, obtuse-pyriform, long,
golden-yellow, dotted and mottled with fawn; flesh very white, fine,
melting, full of sugary, vinous juice, and having a pleasant flavor;
first; Sept. and Oct.

=Beurre Duval. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:356, figs. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 520.1884.

This variety was found among a collection of seedlings raised by
M. Duval, Hainaut, Bel., some time before 1823. Fruit medium to
large; short-pyramidal, bossed, greenish-yellow, covered with large,
greenish-gray freckles and large, dark brown patches, often washed with
red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh yellowish, melting and juicy,
sugary and aromatic; first; Sept. to Nov.

=Beurre d'Ellezelles. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 109. 1876.

A Belgian pear sent out before 1876. Fruit flesh very fine, juicy,
sweet, perfumed, musky; an exquisite pear; Oct.; tree never blighted.

=Beurre Epine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:359, fig. 1867.

M. Bivort was the first to describe this pear which he did in
1850; it was disseminated from Belgium. Fruit above medium,
long-obtuse-pyriform, even in contour; skin rough, lemon-yellow,
mottled with fawn, heavily washed with brown-russet on the side next
the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine, melting, gritty around the core;
juice abundant, vinous and saccharine, with a delicate, acid flavor;
second; Nov.

=Beurre d'Esperen. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:460. 1855.

Fruit large; good; tree hardy, healthy and succeeds well on quince
stock; Jan.

=Beurre d'Esquelmes. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 77. 1895.

Raised by Joseph Dumont at Esquelmes near Toumai, Bel. Fruit rather
large, globular-obovate or Doyenne-shaped, yellowish-green, washed with
fawn; flesh fine, melting; good; Nov.

=Beurre Eugene Furst. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1876.

Fruit large; flesh melting; of first quality; Oct.

=Beurre Fauve de Printemps. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:135, fig. 356. 1880.

Raised by Van Mons. Fruit medium or nearly medium, sometimes
turbinate-conic, sometimes conic-ovate, water-green, speckled with
numerous brown points, changes to bright lemon-yellow on ripening;
flesh yellowish-white, buttery, sweet, generally musky; good; end of
spring.

=Beurre Favre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:360, fig. 1867.

Raised by Francois Maisonneuve, Nantes, Fr.; it was first reported
in 1845. Fruit below medium, long-pyriform, obtuse, often mishapen,
one side always longer than the other, yellow-ochre; flesh whitish,
semi-melting, sweet, acid, juicy; second, sometimes third; beginning of
Oct.

=Beurre Fenzl. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:169, fig. 181. 1878.

First recorded by Denis Henrard, a horticulturist at Liege, Bel.
Fruit medium, turbinate-globular, or turbinate-pyriform, irregular
in contour, pale and dull green, speckled with dots of gray-green
or green, on ripening becomes lemon-yellow or gold and washed with
vermilion on the side of the sun; flesh white, melting, sweet,
refreshing; first-class; Nov.

=Beurre de Fevrier. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =7=:93, fig. 1859. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:361, fig. 1867.

A seedling raised by M. Boisbunel at Rouen, Fr., in 1845. Fruit medium
to large, oval-pyriform, enlarged toward its summit, green passing into
yellow-green on ripening, finely dotted with gray; flesh very fine,
greenish-white, very melting, buttery; juice abundant, sugary-acid, a
little musky, very agreeable; first; mid-Jan. to early Mar.

=Beurre Fideline. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:362, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed in 1861 by Robert and Moreau, horticulturists at
Angers, Fr. Fruit below medium, ovate, green, much dotted with russet;
flesh yellowish, melting; juice abundant, sugary and refreshing and
delicately perfumed; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre Flon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:363, fig. 1867. =2.= _Gard.
Chron._ N. S. =23=:308, 446, fig. 57. 1885.

Obtained at Angers by M. Flon; fruited for the first time in 1852.
Fruit rather large, turbinate, very obtuse, bossed, usually having
one side larger than the other; skin harsh to the touch, thick,
lemon-yellow, entirely covered with red-gray spots, largely marbled and
spotted on the side exposed to the sun; flesh white, rather delicate,
tender, slightly gritty; juice abundant, sweet, aromatic, endowed with
an agreeable and delicate acid flavor; first; mid-Sept, to mid-Oct.

=Beurre Fouqueray. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ N. S. =24=:622. 1885. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 87. 1895.

Obtained by M. Fouqueray, and introduced before 1885. Fruit very large,
oblong, obtuse-pyriform, olive-green, speckled with brown spots; flesh
white, tender, melting, sweet and perfumed; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Gambier. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:119, fig. 58. 1866-73.

Obtained by M. Gambier, Rhode Sainte-Genese, Bel.; cataloged first
in 1862. Fruit medium to rather large, obovate-pyriform, bright
lemon-yellow, washed with red; flesh white, slightly veined with
yellow, fine, buttery, melting; juice abundant, sweet, perfumed; below
first; Jan. and Feb.

=Beurre Gaujard. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 72, 244. 1876.

Fruit medium, oblong-globular, yellow, covered with fawn russet; flesh
fine, semi-melting, a distinctive and very pronounced perfume; Sept.
and early Oct.

=Beurre Van Geert. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 75, 249. 1876.

Obtained by Jean Van Geert, Senior, horticulturist at Ghent, Bel. Fruit
large, oblong-obovate, lively yellow, washed with vermilion; flesh very
juicy, acidulous; a good fruit of brilliant coloring; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Gendron. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:365, figs. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 688. 1869.

Raised in the nurseries of M. Gendron at Chateaugontier, Fr.; gave
its first fruit in 1849. Fruit large, variable, oblong-turbinate or
nearly globular, but always irregular, bossed, obtuse and contorted,
yellowish, speckled with brown, mottled with fawn around the calyx and
stalk, lightly tinged with vermilion on the cheek exposed to the sun;
flesh white, coarse, firm, breaking, granular round the pips; juice
sufficient, acidulous, sugary; second; Jan. to Mar.

=Beurre de Germiny. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1895.

First mentioned in _Pomone tournaisienne_. Fruit medium, oblong, dull
yellow; flesh fine, buttery, sugary, very juicy, vinous; first; Oct.
and Nov.

=Beurre de Ghelin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:367, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 520. 1884.

Raised by M. Fontaine de Ghelin, Mons, Bel., in 1858. Fruit large,
globular-ovate irregular in form and bossed, pale yellow, much covered
with fawn-russet; especially on the sun-exposed side; flesh yellowish,
melting; juice most abundant, with a rich and delicious perfume; first;
Oct. to Dec.

=Beurre Gilles. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1876.

On trial at the Experiment Farm, Agassiz, B. C., in 1900. Fruit large,
pyramidal, brilliant yellow; flesh very fine, very juicy, sugary,
aromatic; good; Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre Goubault. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:370, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 521. 1884.

Obtained from seed in 1842 by M. Goubault, a nurseryman near Angers,
Fr. Fruit medium, globular, inclining to turbinate, green even when
ripe, uniformly sprinkled with grayish dots; flesh white, semi-fine,
melting; juice very abundant, sugary, aromatic; first-class; Sept.

=Beurre Graue Herbst. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 256. 1881.

Fruit variable in form, long and globular, sometimes long and pyriform,
light green turning to golden-green; flesh whitish, soft, melting,
sugary with muscatel flavor; a very good dessert and good cooking pear;
Oct.

=Beurre Gretry. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1895.

Distributed by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit medium,
brown-russet; of good quality; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Gris. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:196, Pl. 38. 1768.
=2.= _Pom. France_ =2=:No. 68, Pl. 68. 1864. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=1=:371, fig. 1867

_Brown Beurre_. =4.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 538. 1884.

A very old French pear mentioned by Olivier de Serres, 1651; C. Mallet,
1652; Claude St. Etienne, 1670; and Merlet, 1690. It was mentioned by
Rea in 1655 as being cultivated in England under the name of _Boeure de
Roy_. Fruit large, oblong-obovate; color of skin varies very much, but
usually yellowish-green, nearly covered with thin brown or olive-russet
and tinged with reddish-brown on the side next the sun; flesh
greenish-white under the skin, yellowish at center, melting, tender,
buttery, with a rich, musky and subacid flavor.

=Beurre-Gris d'Enghien. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 109, 245. 1876.

A Belgian variety raised previous to 1870. A handsome and good fruit,
the flesh having a delicious flavor; Mar.

=Beurre de Grumkon.= =1.= _Rev. Hort._ 133. 1894.

Fruit large to very large, very irregular, obtuse-pyriform, bossed,
tolerably convex; skin smooth, green, washed with light brown; flesh
whitish, melting, juicy; first; Nov.

=Beurre Grumkower. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 257. 1881.

Of Belgian origin; described early in the nineteenth century. Fruit
medium, pyriform, light green turning to greenish-yellow; flesh
whitish, granular, with a somewhat cinnamon flavor; very good; Nov.

=Beurre Hamecher. 1.= Leroy Dict. _Pom._ =1=:376, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 521. 1884.

This was one of the last seedlings raised by Van Mons and ripened its
first fruits in October, 1847. Fruit medium to large, globular-ovate,
bossed at the stem and depressed at the summit, rather irregular, one
side being much longer than the other, greenish-yellow, mottled with
russet; flesh white, fine, melting, juicy, sugary, acid, slightly
perfumed; second, at times, third; early Sept.

=Beurre d'Hardenpont d'Automne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:377, fig.
1867. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 683. 1869. =3.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=5=:95, fig. 336. 1880.

This pear has often been confused with Glou Morceau but erroneously;
both were raised by Van Mons, but they differ in form and other
characteristics. This variety was obtained from seed by Van Mons
about 1802. Fruit medium to large, long-pyriform-obtuse, pale yellow,
covered with large, bronze dots and patches of russet; flesh yellowish,
fine, melting, generally gritty; juice abundant, sugary, vinous, very
aromatic; first; end of Sept.

=Beurre Hennau. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:3, fig. 482. 1881.

Probably Belgian. Fruit medium, ovate-pyriform; bright green, speckled
with light brown dots; flesh whitish, fine, melting, very juicy, sweet
and rather vinous; good; Oct.

=Beurre Henri Courcelle. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =4=:602. 1888.
=2.= _Guide Prat._ 52. 1895.

Raised by Arsene Sannier, Rouen, Fr., from seed of Bergamotte Esperen
which it resembles in form. Fruit medium to small, oblong-pyriform,
grayish-green; flesh very fine and of a distinctive and exquisite
flavor; first; winter and spring; very fruitful.

=Beurre Hillereau. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1895.

Fruit large, pale yellow, ensanguined on the side exposed to the sun;
flesh medium fine, very melting; first; Dec.

=Beurre d'Hiver. 1.= Noisette _Man. Comp. Jard._ =2=:534. 1860.

Introduced to France by Louis Noisette from Brabant, Netherlands, in
1806. Fruit green, does not change on ripening; flesh melting, sugary,
perfumed; good; Jan.

=Beurre d'hiver de Dittrich. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1895.

Fruit rather large, conic, yellowish-green; flesh buttery, perfumed;
first; Dec. and Jan.

=Beurre d'Hiver de Kestner. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 522. 1884.

Fruit medium, obovate, with a very long, straight stalk obliquely
inserted, greenish, covered with pale russet; flesh yellowish, coarse,
not juicy and rather disagreeable than otherwise; handsome but
worthless; mid-Dec.

=Beurre de Hochheim. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1876.

Of German origin. Fruit medium, pyriform, clear green; flesh buttery,
of a flavor recalling that of the Beurre Gris; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre Hudellet. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:95, fig. 240. 1879.

Origin uncertain, but probably it was raised from seed by Van Mons.
Fruit medium, turbinate-conic, regular in form, water-green, speckled
with very dark green spots; flesh whitish, rather fine, buttery,
sufficiently juicy and sugary, vinous and agreeable; medium; Sept.

=Beurre Jalais. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:380, fig. 1867. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 692. 1869.

Raised from seed by Jacques Jalais, Nantes, Fr.; it was made known
in 1848, and the Horticultural Society of Nantes awarded it a silver
medal in 1861. Fruit large, globular-obovate-pyriform; skin oily,
golden-yellow, finely dotted, striped and veined with brown-russet,
reddened on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, fine, melting,
generally gritty round the core, with vinous, sweet, savory, perfumed
juice; first; Sept. to mid-Oct.

=Beurre Jean Van Geert. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:381, fig. 1867. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 522. 1884.

Raised from seed by Jean Van Geert, a nurseryman at Port de Bruxelles,
Bel., and placed on sale in 1864. Fruit large, pyriform, curving toward
the stalk, bright yellow, dotted and marbled and striped with fawn,
washed with vermilion on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine,
melting, juicy, granular around the core; first, but of rather variable
character; Nov.

=Beurre Kennes. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:383, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 522. 1884.

From seed sown by Van Mons; yielded its first fruit in 1845. Fruit
below medium, globular, obtuse-pyriform, yellow-ochre, dotted with
gray specks, brick-red on the side next the sun; flesh yellow, coarse,
semi-melting, juicy, sweet, and highly perfumed; first; Oct.

=Beurre Kenrick. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:64. 1842. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 692. 1869.

A seedling from Van Mons, named in honor of William Kenrick, the
American pomologist. Fruit large and handsome, sometimes smaller,
turbinate, greenish-yellow, with indistinct russet spots; flesh
buttery, juicy, sweet; good, but variable; Sept.

=Beurre Knight. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:385, figs. 1867.

Obtained from seed by Van Mons and sent to the London Horticultural
Society in 1817 bearing the name of "Knight" in honor of T. A. Knight,
who was at that time President of the Society. Fruit medium or above;
form varying from globular-ovate to globular-turbinate, always deeply
depressed at the lower end and usually swelled near the stalk,
yellow-green, dotted all over with fawn and extensively colored with
dark carmine on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, rather coarse,
melting; juice abundant, saccharine, refreshing, possessing a delicious
perfume; first; Oct.

=Beurre Knox. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:387, figs. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 523. 1884.

Raised by Van Mons before 1819. Fruit large; form varies from true
turbinate to globular-turbinate, bossed and contorted, smooth, shining
pale green in shade, tinged with red on the side next the sun; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, melting, juicy, of agreeable flavor; second for
eating, first for the kitchen.

=Beurre de Koninck. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 97, fig. 145.
1866-73. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:388, fig. 1867.

Obtained by Van Mons and dedicated to Laurent-Guillaume de Koninck.
Fruit small to nearly medium, globular-turbinate, or turbinate-obtuse,
somewhat bossed, olive-yellow, dotted and mottled with russet and on
the side of the sun entirely covered with a clear brown wash; flesh
greenish-white, semi-fine, melting, watery, generally gritty; juice
abundant, saccharine, vinous, and only slightly perfumed; Oct.

=Beurre Kossuth. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =18=:295, fig. 21. 1852. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:389, fig. 1867.

Received by Andre Leroy about 1849 among numerous varieties sent him
by many persons for trial. Fruit large, variable in form but always
turbinate, swelled at central circumference, surface very uneven,
rough; skin thin, dull yellowish-green, traced and freckled with gray
or bronze, dotted with specks of the same color; flesh whitish, very
fine, melting, buttery, sugary; juice abundant, slightly acidulated; an
excellent fruit of first quality; mid-Sept.

=Beurre de Lade. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 133. 1894.

Included about 1893 by M. Lucas, director of the Pomological Institute
of Reutlingen, Ger., in his list of 100 best pears. Season Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre Lagasse. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 71. 1895.

A French variety which resisted the great frost of 1879-80. Fruit
medium, oval-pyriform, yellowish-green: flesh fine, melting, juicy;
good; late Sept.

=Beurre Lamoyeau. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 523. 1884.

Fruit large, long-pyriform, golden-yellow, speckled with russet,
crimsoned on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish, fine-grained,
rather firm, sweet, with a watery juice; inferior; Oct.

=Beurre Langelier. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 523. 1884.

Raised by Rene Langelier, Jersey, British Channel Islands, about 1840.
Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, pale greenish-yellow, crimson blush on
the side next the sun, covered with russet dots; flesh tender, buttery
and melting, with rich and vinous flavor; excellent; Dec. and Jan.

=Beurre de Lederbogen. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:51, fig. 218. 1879.

The parent tree of this variety was found about 1829 in the garden of
M. Lederbogen near Magdeburg, Prussia. Fruit nearly medium, globular,
conic, regular in form, clear bright green, speckled with numerous
and regularly spaced, very fine, brown dots; flesh white, semi-fine,
melting, with abundant, rich, sugary juice, delicately scented.

=Beurre Lefevre. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 799. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 524. 1884.

This variety was distributed by M. Lefevre of Mortefontaine near Paris
in 1846. Fruit large, obovate and sometimes oval, greenish-yellow on
the shaded side and much covered with russet, but brownish-orange on
the side next the sun, with some streaks of red; flesh white, rather
gritty at the core, melting, juicy, rich, aromatic and delicious, soon
decays at the core; middle and end of Oct.

=Beurre de Lenzen. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86, 247. 1876.

Fruit large, turbinate, meadow-green; flesh fine, melting, juicy;
first; Oct.; tree vigorous.

=Beurre Liebart. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:342, figs. 1869. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:107, fig. 246. 1879.

Beurre Liebart was raised from seed by Van Mons before 1817 and was
dedicated to an amateur pomologist. Fruit large, globular-ovate but
rather variable in form, clear yellow, dotted uniformly and streaked
with brown-russet, extensively carmined on the side next the sun; flesh
whitish, coarse, hard and breaking, rather gritty at the center; juice
sufficient, with little sugar and generally acid and without perfume;
second or third; end of Sept.

=Beurre de Lindauer. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 86. 1895.

Fruit large or very large, long-ovate, greenish passing into yellow;
flesh melting, very fine, sugary, agreeable perfume; Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre Loisel. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:391, fig. 1867.

Obtained by M. Loisel, Fauquemont, Province of Limburg, Holland, and
was distributed in France in 1853. Fruit under medium, conic-obtuse,
always bossed, dark olive-yellow, dotted with fawn around the stem,
streaked with pale red around the calyx, and washed with rose on the
sun-exposed side; flesh white, melting, the juice being abundant, acid,
sweet, vinous and very delicate; first; beginning of Oct.

=Beurre de Longree. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 79. 1895.

A Belgian variety. Fruit small, globular, yellow-russeted; flesh
melting, very sugary; of good quality; Jan. and Feb.

=Beurre de Lucon. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =7=:71, fig. 1859.

_Beurre Gris d'Hiver Nouveau._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:374, fig.
1867.

Pomologists are agreed that this pear originated about 1830 at Lucon,
Vendee, Fr. Fruit above medium to rather large, globular, irregular,
bossed, and always more extended on one side than on the other; skin
thick and wrinkled, grayish-green, and reddened on the sunny side and
stained with large patches of fawn; flesh yellowish, fine, melting,
gritty especially around the core; juice extremely abundant, sugary,
vinous, aromatic; first; Nov. to Jan.

=Beurre Luizet. 1.= Hogg _Fruit. Man._ 524. 1884.

Fruit large, pyriform, pale yellow, speckled with russet dots; flesh
tender, buttery, melting, sweet, with watery juice; inferior; Oct.

=Beurre de Mans. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 524. 1884.

Cultivated in England prior to 1863. Fruit small, roundish-ovate;
green, changing to yellow, streaked and crimsoned on side next the sun;
flesh yellow, crisp, very juicy, with a rich sweetness; excellent; end
of August.

=Beurre Mauxion. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =23=:259. 1857. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 693. 1869.

A seedling found in a garden at Orbigny, Indre-et-Loire, Fr. Fruit
medium, ovate, inclining to pyriform, clear yellowish-green, with
reddish spots in the shade, clear yellow in the sun, marbled and
spotted with red, washed at maturity on fruits well exposed with golden
red-brown on the side of the sun; flesh white, melting; juice very
abundant, with a savory perfume, and rich in sugar; first; Sept.

=Beurre Menand. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:393, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 525. 1884.

Raised by Leroy, Angers, Fr., and fruited first in 1863. Fruit medium,
globular-obovate, pale lemon-yellow, strewed with brown dots; flesh
tender, white, melting; juice sufficient, buttery, sweet; first; Oct.

=Beurre Millet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:394, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 525. 1884.

Raised by Leroy, Angers, Fr., in 1847. Fruit below medium, obovate,
dark grass-green, much covered with russet; flesh whitish, tender;
juice plentiful but watery; first; Oct.

=Beurre Moire. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 83, fig. 40. 1866-73.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:395, figs. 1867.

A wilding found at Saint-Aubin-de-Luigne, near Angers, Fr., about 1836.
Fruit medium or above, turbinate-pyriform, slightly obtuse, bossed
and slightly contorted, greenish-yellow, covered in part with pale
markings of russet and dots of brown-russet; flesh whitish, semi-fine,
semi-melting, watery, granular at the center; juice excessive in
amount, sweet, sugary, aromatic and having a very delicate savor;
first; Nov.

=Beurre Mondelle. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 143, fig. 70. 1866-73.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:396, fig. 1867.

M. Bavay, Vilvorde, Bel., propagated this variety about 1850; origin
unknown. Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse, ventriculous, regular in form,
greenish-yellow, dotted with fawn and nearly covered with marblings
of russet; flesh white, semi-fine, compact, melting, granular at the
core; juice very abundant, very saccharine, savory, possessing a highly
agreeable, musky perfume; first; all Sept.

=Beurre de Mons. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 684. 1869.

Foreign; of small value as it rots at the core. Fruit small,
globular-obovate, yellowish, with a shade of brownish-red in the sun,
many green and gray dots; flesh whitish, coarse, juicy, astringent;
poor; Aug.

=Beurre de Montgeron. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:75, fig. 36. 1866-73.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:397, fig. 1867.

In 1830 M. Guyot found this pear in the commune of Saint-Leger,
Department of Cher, Fr. Fruit medium and below, obovate-obtuse or
globular-turbinate, smooth to touch, shining, golden-yellow, dotted
with fawn, vermilioned extensively on the side next the sun; flesh
fine, semi-melting, rather gritty around the core; juice sufficient,
saccharine, vinous, with little perfume; second, but first rarely, when
the juice is highly perfumed; end of Aug.

=Beurre Morisot. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:7, fig. 4. 1872.

A hardy French pear of unknown origin, but published in M. de Bavay's
Catalog, 1855-56. Fruit large, globular-conic, bright yellow all over;
flesh white, semi-melting; juice abundant, sweet, slightly acid, of
refreshing savor; good; toward end of winter and spring.

=Beurre de Mortefontaine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:399, fig. 1867.

_Beurre Beaumont._ =2.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:89. 1851.

Obtained from seed about 1804 by M. Lefevre, a Frenchman. It is quite
probable that this is identical with Beurre Lefevre, although slight
differences appear in the descriptions. Fruit large, often very large,
globular-turbinate or spherical, generally irregular; skin rough,
bronze, sprinkled with large, scaly dots of gray, and with brick-red
stains on the cheek next the sun; flesh greenish-white, coarse,
semi-breaking, doughy, very gritty around the core; juice deficient,
acidulous, vinous; third for dessert, second for kitchen; end of Aug.
and early Sept.

=Beurre de Mortillet. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 45. 1895.

Of unknown origin but obtained shortly before 1895, probably in France.
Fruit large or very large, turbinate-pyriform, tender green, dotted
with russet, generally blushed on the side next the sun; flesh white,
very fine-grained, buttery, melting, juicy; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Beurre Motte. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:401, fig. 1867.

Raised about 1853 at Roubaix in the Department of the Nord, Fr. Fruit
medium, oblong-pyriform, having always one side longer than the other,
bronze, dotted with russet, washed with grayish-green on the side
not exposed to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, semi-melting, juicy,
sugary, with a very agreeable, buttery flavor; second; Nov.

=Beurre des Mouchouses. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:9, fig. 3. 1866-73.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:402, fig. 1867.

This pear was procured from seed by M. Rongieras near Perigueux,
Dordogne, Fr. The tree ripened its fruit for the first time in 1841.
Fruit above medium, globular-turbinate, very obtuse and much swelled,
dark olive-yellow, stained with russet around the stem and dotted with
the same color, tinted with brownish-red on the cheek next the sun;
flesh whitish, a little coarse, melting, watery, rarely very gritty;
juice abundant, saccharine, vinous and with a savory aroma; second; Aug.

=Beurre de Naghin. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 142. 1889. =2.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd
Ser. =42=:444, fig. 182. 1907.

Obtained about 1840 by M. Norbert Daras de Naghin, Tournai, Bel. Fruit
above medium, globular-obtuse-pyriform, yellowish-green, more or less
covered with minute, blackish spots; flesh white, melting, agreeable
flavor, aromatic, juicy, free from grit.

=Beurre de Nantes. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:17, fig. 1854. =2.= Mas
_Le Verger_ =2=:47, fig. 22. 1866-73. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:403,
fig. 1867.

M. Francois Maisonneuve, Nantes, Fr., found this wilding and first
published it in 1845. Fruit medium and often larger, oblong, very
obtuse, generally bossed and a little contorted; very variable in
both size and form; color tender green or yellowish-green, dotted and
slightly mottled with fawn and sometimes colored with dull red on the
side next the sun; flesh white, fine, melting, free from grit; juice
sufficient, sugary, acidulous, without any pronounced perfume; second;
early Sept.

=Beurre de Nesselrode. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 108, 247. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =3=:191, fig. 192. 1878.

Originated in the Crimea. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, bright green
dotted with bright brown specks; flesh white, fine-grained, buttery,
melting, abundant, with sugary juice, a subtle perfume, and distinct
flavor; good; Oct.

=Beurre Obozinski. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1876. =2.= _Ibid._ 77. 1895.

Beurre Obozinski was listed by Messrs. Simon-Louis in 1876 as a
"recent" gain of M. Gregoire of Jodoigne, Brabant, Bel. Fruit medium,
truncate-turbinate; flesh greenish-white, semi-fine, deficient in juice
and sugar, perfumed; fairly good; Nov.

=Beurre Oudinot. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:516. 1853. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =1=:406. 1867.

Published by Leroy in 1849. Fruit above medium, turbinate-obtuse,
swelled, irregular and bossed, rough to the touch, dull grayish-yellow,
dotted with clear brown, slightly blushed on the side exposed to
the sun; flesh white, very fine and melting, free from grit; juice
abundant, sugary, vinous, of an exquisite flavor; first; Sept.

=Beurre de Paimpol. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:407, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 695. 1869.

Beurre de Paimpol was a wilding found in the commune of Plowbazlance,
Cotes-du-Nord, Fr., in 1825. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform,
ventriculous, regular in contour; skin rough, thick, grass-green,
sprinkled with numerous gray-russet dots especially around the stem;
flesh white, semi-fine, breaking, granular around the center, juicy,
saccharine, vinous, with an agreeable flavor; second; Sept.

=Beurre de Palandt. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1876.

A German variety. Fruit medium, pyriform, yellow, covered with
cinnamon-russet; flesh fine, melting; first; Nov.

=Beurre Pauline. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1895.

The variety is supposed to have originated in the neighborhood of
Tournai, Bel. Fruit medium, pyramidal, bright yellow; flesh fine,
buttery, very juicy; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Pauline Delzent. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:51, fig. 314. 1880.

Raised by M. Lefevre-Boitelle at Amiens, Fr., about 1850. Fruit large,
conic-ovate, sombre green and speckled with many large, gray-brown
points; flesh whitish, slightly tinted with green under the skin,
buttery, melting, rather granular at the core, sweet, juicy, vinous;
good; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Payen. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:408, fig. 1869.

Raised by Adrien Papeleu at Wetteren near Ghent, Bel., who disseminated
it in 1846. Fruit medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, grayish-russet,
covered with strongly marked, whitish specks; flesh yellowish-white,
semi-fine, melting; juice sweet and musky.

=Beurre Perran. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =19=:209, fig. 28. 1896.
=2.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =32=:91, fig. 14. 1896.

This variety was imported into England by the Worcester Nurseries about
1866, but was not much heard of until 1896 when it was exhibited before
the Royal Horticultural Society and was awarded a certificate of merit.
Fruit large, globular-obtuse, irregular surface, pale yellow but nearly
covered with russet spots and blotches; in season immediately after
Christmas and keeps till end of Feb.; for such a season the flavor is
rich and good, flesh very melting.

=Beurre Philippe Delfosse. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:409, fig. 1867.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 518. 1884.

From a bed of seeds made in 1832 by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit
above medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, golden yellow, dotted, striped
and marbled with fawn; flesh buttery, whitish, very melting, slightly
gritty at core; juice very abundant, acidulous, sugary, delicately
perfumed; first; Nov. to Jan.

=Beurre Pointille de Roux. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:410, fig. 1867.
=2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ 7:107, fig. 534. 1881.

Alexandre Bivort described this pear in 1851 and said that it had been
raised by Van Mons. Fruit medium, long-turbinate-obtuse, meadow-green,
mottled and dotted with russet; flesh greenish-white, semi-fine,
semi-melting, gritty around the core; juice sufficient, saccharine,
having little perfume; second; Oct.

=Beurre de Popuelles. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1895.

A Belgian variety. Fruit medium, green, russeted; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre Preble. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:60. 1842. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 695. 1869.

A native variety raised from seed by Elijah Cooke, Raymond, Me. Fruit
large, oblong-obovate, greenish-yellow, mottled with russet and green
spots; flesh white, buttery and melting, with a rich, high flavor;
good; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Precoce. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:413, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 526. 1884.

Raised by M. Goubault, a nurseryman at Mille-pieds, near Angers, Fr.,
in 1850. Fruit medium, obovate, obtuse at stalk, yellowish-green,
specked with russet, slightly reddened on the side exposed to the
sun; flesh white, delicate, melting; juice abundant, sugary, vinous,
sometimes disagreeably astringent; moderate; Aug.

=Beurre Pringalle. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 60. 1895.

Obtained by M. Celestin Pringalle, nurseryman near Tournai, Bel. Fruit
medium, oval-oblong, gray; flesh very fine, buttery, melting, sweet and
aromatic; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre de Quenast. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:15, fig. 1854. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:414, fig. 1867.

Appears to have originated at the village of Quenast, Brabant, Bel.,
but the date and circumstances of its origin are unknown. Fruit medium,
turbinate, slightly obtuse, bossed, bright yellow-green, sprinkled with
large dots of russet and some patches of darker russet; flesh whitish,
semi-fine, semi-melting, juicy, gritty around the core, saccharine,
acidulous, of good flavor; second; late Sept.

=Beurre de Ramegnies. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1876.

Fruit rather large, obovate-pyriform, yellowish-green, stained with
fawn and washed with red; flesh buttery, very juicy; first; Oct.

=Beurre de Rance. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:45. 1855. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 526. 1884.

_Bon-Chretien de Rance_. =3.= _Pom. France_ =3=:No. 107, Pl. 107. 1865.

Obtained from seed by Abbe Hardenpont at Mons, Bel.; the first fruiting
of the parent tree was in 1762. Fruit medium to large; oblong-ovate,
rounded at the stalk, usually ventriculous and bossed; skin very
rough, dark green, bronzed, dotted and mottled with gray; flesh
greenish-white, semi-fine, sometimes coarse, semi-melting, very juicy,
always a little astringent but aromatic and vinous; first; Feb. to May.

=Beurre Reine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:417. 1867.

A Belgian variety cultivated in the Royal fruit orchards of
Vilvorde-lez-Bruxelles in 1850. Fruit very large, especially on
espalier and pyramid; obovate, often approaching the form of the Beurre
Diel; second; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Richelieu. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 696. 1869.

Fruit large; obtuse-pyriform-truncate; skin greenish, inclining to
yellow, sprinkled with dots; flesh buttery, juicy, melting, with a
fine, sweet, aromatic flavor, sometimes astringent; good to very good;
Dec.

=Beurre Roland. 1.= _Gard Chron._ 3rd Ser. =1=:385. 1887.

Raised by M. Roland and described as a new seedling in 1887. Fruit
medium, pyriform, regular, olive, much russeted; flesh melting, sugary,
fragrant; Mar.

=Beurre Romain. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 364. 1845. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:420, figs. 1867.

Of uncertain origin; described by Diel in 1802. Fruit medium or below,
variable in form from obovate-pyriform to oblong-obtuse-pyriform,
greenish-yellow tinged with russet-red next the sun and covered with
numerous dark gray spots; flesh whitish, semi-fine, melting, almost
free from grit, juicy, acidulous, saccharine, with a slight and
pleasant taste of anis; variable in quality; Sept. and Oct.

=Beurre Rome Gaujard. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 65. 1895.

Of Belgian origin. Fruit rather large, pyriform, green covered with
brown-russet, changing to yellowish-green on ripening; flesh white,
rather firm, melting, perfumed; Jan. and Feb.

=Beurre Rose. 1.= Noisette _Man. Comp. Jard._ =2=:528. 1860.

Fruit medium, obovate, yellow washed with rose; flesh white,
semi-melting, sweet; end of Oct.

=Beurre Rouge d'Automne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:421, fig. 1867.

Raised about 1780 by the Chartreuse monks at Paris. Fruit medium and
often below, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, yellow-ochre, dotted and stained
with fawn around the calyx and washed with brownish-red on the side
next the sun; flesh white, semi-fine or coarse, melting, rarely very
juicy, granular at center, sugary, vinous, little perfume; quality
variable.

=Beurre Royal de Turin. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ N. S. =21=:779. 1884.

Originated in Italy. Fruit large, globular, irregular, yellow, dotted
with green; flesh melting, white, sugary, pleasantly acidulous.

=Beurre de Saint-Amand. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:3, fig. 1856. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:423, fig. 1867.

Obtained from seed by M. Gregoire, near Fleurus, Bel., in 1853.
Fruit medium, globular-ovoid, very obtuse, bright green passing to
golden-yellow and stained with orange-red on the sunny side when ripe;
flesh yellowish-white, fine, melting, juicy, some grit around the
seeds; juice vinous, sweet, aromatic; first; Oct.

=Beurre de Saint Arnaud. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =26=:219. 1860. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 685. 1869.

A Belgian variety, originated 1853; probably identical with Beurre
de Saint-Amand. Fruit small or medium; globular-acute-pyriform,
golden-yellow, marked with orange-red at maturity, striped with
brownish-red in the sun; flesh white, fine, buttery; juice abundant,
sugary, perfumed; first; Nov.

=Beurre Saint-Aubert. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1895.

Probably Belgian. Fruit medium, oval, lemon-yellow, speckled with fawn;
flesh very melting, sugary and perfumed; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Saint-Francois. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1895.

Fruit rather large, oval-oblong, sombre yellow; flesh very melting,
sugary, delicious, Nov.

=Beurre Saint-Marc. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:425, fig. 1867.

A French pear of uncertain origin. Fruit medium, roundish-ovate,
greenish-yellow; washed with rose; flesh dense, very juicy, of
exquisite flavor, sweet and acid; first; Dec. to Feb. Tree vigorous.

=Beurre Samoyeau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:428, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:129, fig. 257. 1879.

A seedling of Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr.; fruited in 1863. Fruit below
medium, turbinate, slightly obtuse, one side always more swelled than
the other; skin greenish-yellow, sprinkled with large, russet spots and
some stains of fawn, partly scaly; flesh white, fine, melting, rather
granular above and below the core; juice fair in amount, saccharine,
with a delicate perfume and highly agreeable, buttery flavor; first;
Nov. and Dec.

=Beurre Scheidweiller. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 528. 1884.

A seedling of Van Mons, named by him after M. Scheidweiller, Professor
of Botany at Ghent, Bel. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, bright
pea-green, strewed with minute, russet dots; flesh yellowish-white,
coarse, sweet, very juicy; an agreeable pear, of moderate merit; end of
Oct. and early Nov.

=Beurre Seutin. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:180. 1856. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 697. 1869.

Attributed to Van Mons and first published in 1847. Fruit medium,
pyriform, inclining to oval, irregular or angular, light green turning
yellowish at maturity, sprinkled with dots and speckles of russet,
sometimes shaded with dull crimson; flesh coarse, not very juicy,
semi-melting; third for dessert, first for cooking; Dec. and Jan.

=Beurre de Silly. 1.= Guide _Prat._ 87. 1895.

Fruit rather large; first; Sept. and Oct. Tree fertile.

=Beurre Six. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:429, fig. 1867. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 697. 1869.

Raised from seed about 1845 by a gardener named Six at Courtrai in
Belgium. Fruit large, pyriform, smooth, pea-green changing to yellow;
flesh greenish-white, fine, melting, firm, buttery, very juicy; first;
Oct. to Dec.

=Beurre Soulange. 1.= _Horticulturist_ N. S. =4=:81, fig. 1854.

Imported from Brussels to this country before the middle of the last
century. Fruit medium to large, acute-pyriform, pale, clear yellow at
maturity with some traces of russet; flesh melting and very juicy, with
a rich and sugary flavor and a particularly pleasant aroma; very good;
Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Spence. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 697. 1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 529. 1884.

This name has been given to several varieties. The true Beurre Spence
was raised by Van Mons who described it as follows: "Fruit shape and
size of Brown Beurre. Skin green, handsomely streaked and marked with
reddish-brown and reddish-purple. Flesh tender, juicy, sugary, and
perfumed; Sept."

=Beurre Stappaerts. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:125, fig. 61. 1866-73.

A seedling of Van Mons. Fruit small to medium, nearly spherical or
conic-spherical; skin thick and firm, pale green sprinkled with large,
brownish dots regularly spaced, turning to dull, pale yellow and rather
golden where exposed to the sun; flesh yellowish-white, semi-breaking;
juice moderate in amount, very saccharine, highly perfumed, agreeable;
second; Jan. and Feb.

=Beurre Steins. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:175, fig. 376. 1880.

Cataloged by M. Jahn in 1864. Fruit medium, turbinate, regular in
form, green, usually entirely or nearly covered with a fine coating of
russet of a yellowish-brown, sown with very small and numerous gray
dots; flesh whitish, fine, semi-buttery; juice sufficient, sweet and
agreeable; Oct.

=Beurre Sterckmans. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:51, fig. 1856. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 529. 1884.

_Doyenne Sterckmans_. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:89, fig. 1869.

Obtained by M. Sterckmans at Louvain, Bel., before 1820. Fruit medium,
oblong-obovate-pyriform, delicate greenish-yellow, largely washed with
crimson on side next the sun, some traces of russet; flesh white, with
a greenish tinge, semi-melting, buttery, rich, sugary, vinous, fine
aroma; first; Jan. and Feb.

=Beurre de Stuttgardt. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:430, fig. 1867.

Obtained from seed at Stuttgart, Wuerttemberg, Ger., in 1863. Fruit
medium, long-ovoid, obtuse, yellow-ochre, sown with points of
gray-russet and some brownish patches, generally colored with pale rose
on the side exposed to the sun; flesh yellowish-white, fine, melting,
juicy, sugary, vinous, possessing an extremely delicate flavor; first;
Sept.

=Beurre Sucre. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:109, fig. 247. 1879.

Considered to be a seedling of Van Mons. Fruit small, ovate-pyriform,
pale green, speckled with brown dots, large and prominent; flesh
greenish-yellow, melting, rather gritty at the core; juice rich in
sugar, having the consistency of a syrup, from which the fruit received
its name; good; Oct.

=Beurre Thoury. 1.= Hooper _W. Fr. Book_ 132. 1857.

Said to have been exhibited before the Cincinnati Horticultural
Society, 1855, by F. R. Elliott, of Cleveland. Tree handsome, vigorous.
Fruit medium to above, round, obtusely turbinate, buttery, juicy; good;
Aug. and Sept.

=Beurre Triguer. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =18=:150. 1852.

"A small, roundish formed pear, of a yellow color, dotted with
red spots, that has a short stem, and is sweet and juicy, of a
half-breaking texture."

=Beurre de Ulm. 1.= Lucas _Tafelbirnen_ 103. 1894.

A German pear published in the middle of the nineteenth century. Fruit
medium, roundish, sometimes rather oval, yellowish-green, on ripening
bright yellow; flesh yellowish-white, soft, melting, very agreeable;
end of Oct.

=Beurre Vanille. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 62. 1895.

Disseminated by M. Proche, a pomologist at Slonpno, Bohemia. Fruit
medium, pyriform, russet, with yellow and red on the sunny side; flesh
fine, melting, very sugary and juicy; first; autumn.

=Beurre Varenne de Fenille. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:53, fig. 33.
1866-73.

Obtained by M. Pariset, Curciat-Dongalon, Fr. Fruit rather large,
globular but irregular, pale green; flesh fine, very melting, buttery,
abundant, with sweet juice and well perfumed, first; Dec. and Jan.

=Beurre Vauban. 1.= _Cat. Con. Pom. France_ 195, fig. 1906.

Obtained by M. A. Varet in 1867. Fruit rather large to large,
pyriform-obtuse, very irregular, mammillate at crown, bossed at base,
bright green, russeted; flesh whitish, fine, melting, very juicy,
sugary, with an agreeable perfume; very good; Jan. and Feb.

=Beurre Vert d'Ete. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:435, figs. 1867.

A Prussian variety the exact place of origin of which is obscure.
Fruit medium and often below medium, obovate-pyriform, contorted near
the stem which is set obliquely to the axis of the fruit; skin rough,
bright green in the shade, yellow-green in the sun, entirely covered
with large, gray, round dots and some patches of russet; flesh whitish,
coarse, semi-melting, with little juice, which is very sweet and musky;
third class; end of Aug.

=Beurre Vert Tardif. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:93, fig. 53. 1866-73. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:437, fig. 1867.

A variety well known in Belgium and Germany in the seventeenth century.
Fruit medium, pyriform, very regular, generally obtuse, pale green,
dotted and striped with fawn; flesh white, buttery, semi-melting; juice
sufficient, vinous, little perfume; second; Dec. and Jan.

=Beurre Wamberchies. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ =19=:706. 1883. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 88. 1895.

Fruit rather large, roundish-obovate, dotted, deep green passing
into yellow on ripening; flesh melting, with abundant, sugary juice,
completely devoid of pips and grit; excellent; May and June.

=Beurre de Wetteren. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:439, fig. 1867. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 530. 1884.

Originated in Louis Berckman's garden at Heyst-op-den-Berg, Bel., and
is supposed to have been one of the seedlings raised by Major Esperen,
some of whose trees Berckmans obtained after the former's death. It
was disseminated about 1848. Fruit rather large, globular-pyriform,
lemon-yellow and shining, covered with large, russet spots, washed with
dull red next the sun; flesh yellowish, coarse-grained, buttery, well
sweetened and flavored, juicy; very good; Dec. and Jan.

=Beurre Winter. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:460. 1855.

Raised by Rivers of Sawbridgeworth, Eng., from seed of the Easter
Beurre; must not be mistaken for either the _Black Achan_ or
_Chaumontel_ for each of which the name _Beurre Winter_ is synonymous.
Fruit large; flesh very rich flavor and vinous; excellent; Feb. and Mar.

=Beurre Witzhumb. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 190. 1832. =2.= _Ibid._ 158.
1841.

Possibly one of Van Mons' seedlings. Fruit oval, knobby, three and
a half inches in diameter; skin rough, green, brownish-red or dark
brown next the sun; flesh greenish-white, semi-transparent, melting,
perfumed; Dec.

=Beurre Woronson. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:234. 1854. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
Rpt._ 158. 1860.

This pear, which has been known as _Beurre Woronson_, _Beurre
Woronzow_, _Beurre Woronzon_, and _Woronson_, is credited to M. De
Hartwiss of either France or Belgium. Tree very productive. Fruit
medium, obovate, attractive, juicy; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Beurre Zotman. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:69, fig. 323. 1880.

Cataloged by this name by the Society of Van Mons, though M. Jahn
cataloged it in 1864 under the name _Franz-Madame von Duves_. Fruit
small or rather small, like Calebasse in form, bright green, sprinkled
with dots of greenish-gray, the green passing at maturity to bright
lemon-yellow and washed on the side next the sun with a beautiful
tender rose; flesh white, rather delicate, juicy, sweet; second, but
its very fine appearance should merit it a place; July.

=Beyer Martinsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:28. 1856.

Raised in Saxony in 1816. Fruit medium, light green changing to
lemon-yellow, with reddish blush, scaly; flesh very juicy; good;
beginning of Aug.

=Beymont. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 895. 1860. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
474, fig. 1857.

May be identical with _Beurre Bymont_. Fruit about medium,
oblate, even, and handsomely shaped; golden-yellow next the sun,
greenish-yellow in the shade, russeted around the stalk; flesh tender,
not very juicy; an inferior fruit; Nov.

=Bezi Blanc. 1.= Cole _Am. Fr. Book_ 154. 1849. =2.= Elliott _Fr. Book_
391. 1854.

Of foreign origin. Fruit large, oblong-pyriform, yellowish; quality
very similar to Bartlett, though hardly so good, but it is two weeks
earlier; Aug.

=Bezi de Naples. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 355. 1854.

Origin unknown, presumably European and Italian. Fruit medium,
ovate-obovate, light yellowish-green, with blotches and stripes of
darker hue, some russet patches and dots; flesh fine, buttery, juicy,
sweet; first; end of Sept.

=Bied-Charreton. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 88. 1895.

A French variety distributed from Nantes before 1895. Fruit medium to
large, coppery-colored; flesh semi-fine, melting, juicy, and has a
delicate aroma; Oct.

=Bierbaumer Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 76. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium, obtuse-turbinate; skin fine,
greenish-yellow, covered with small dots and specklings, slightly
blushed; flesh yellow-white, firm, juicy; early half of Oct.

=Big Productive. 1.= Burbank _Cat._ 2. 1921.

Said to be a large fall pear, a cross between Bartlett and Le Conte.

=Bijou. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 69. 1895.

A French variety obtained by M. de Mortillet. Fruit small or medium,
long, pale yellow, tinged with red; flesh melting, juicy, very
refreshing; first half of Sept.

=Bill Campbell. 1.= Van Lindley _Cat._ 22. 1892.

Said to have been originated in Alabama by a colored man of the same
name from seed of Duchesse d'Angouleme. Claimed to resemble its parent
very much but to be larger and better in quality.

=Binsce. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

Described by Parkinson, 1629, as a good winter pear, of russet color,
and a small fruit but a good keeper.

=Birne von Turschud. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:157. 1856.

A Levantine variety introduced into Germany in 1833. Fruit medium,
smooth, yellow, without any redness or russet; flesh savorless,
granular, breaking; Oct.

=Bishop Thumb. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
Rpt._ 237. 1854. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:441, figs. 1867. =4.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 702. 1869.

A long, oddly-shaped English pear of variable color and quality, rated
as an excellent dessert pear by some; placed on the list of rejected
fruits by the American Pomological Society. Tree hardy, very abundant
bearer. Fruit rather large, oblong, narrow, pyriform, undulating; color
dark yellowish-green, covered with numerous large, russety dots and
having a russet-red cheek; calyx small, open; stalk attached with no
depression; flesh greenish-yellow, melting, juicy, vinous; good to very
good; Oct.

=Bivort Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:55. 1856.

A Belgian seedling, 1851. Fruit large, obovate, smooth, green changing
to yellow, with bright red cheek; flesh melting, vinous, sweet and
agreeable; good; beginning of Sept.

=Black Hawk. 1.= =Mag. Hort.= =1=:437. 1845.

Exhibited before and reported on at various times by the Massachusetts
and New Haven Horticultural Societies as a baking variety. Probably a
seedling of Governor Edwards.

=Black Huffcap. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 531. 1884.

A well-known perry pear cultivated in Herefordshire and Worcestershire,
Eng. Fruit quite small, pyriform or oblong-ovate, olive-green on the
shaded side and covered with dull rusty red on the sun-exposed side;
flesh yellowish-green, firm and very gritty.

=Black Sorrel. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

Described by Parkinson in 1629 as "a reasonable great long peare, of a
darke red colour on the outside."

=Black Worcester. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 429. 1845. =2.= _Ibid._
702. 1869. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 531. 1884. =4.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy
Fruits_ 160. 1920.

_Worster_. =5.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

=Black Pear of Worcester.= =6.= Langley _Pomona_ 133, Pl. LXXI, fig. 2.
1729.

_Livre._ =7.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:235. 1768. =8.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:346. 1869.

_Iron Pear._ =9.= Cole _Am. Fr. Book_ 174. 1849.

The Romans cultivated a _Pound Pear_ during the first century of the
Christian era. In 1652 Claude Mollet describes a _Pound Pear_. Several
subsequent writers describe the same pear as _Livre_, _De Livre_, or
_Poire de Livre_. In Worcester, Eng., in the sixteenth century a pear
known as _Black Worcester_, _Black Pear of Worcester_, or Parkinson's
_Warden_ came under general cultivation as a "Warden" or baking pear
of which it forms the type. These two pears appear to be identical.
Mas makes _Black Worcester_ a synonym of _De Livre_, Hogg states that
they very much resemble each other, the authors of _Guide Pratique de
l'Amateur de Fruits_ list them as synonymous, and Bunyard says that he
believes that they are almost certainly identical. _Black Worcester_
is retained as the name of the variety because it is now most commonly
used. Tree vigorous, hardy, bears well as a standard; young shoots dark
yellow-olive, diverging; branches inclining downward with the weight
of the fruit. Fruit large, obovate; skin thick, green, rough, nearly
covered with dark russet, occasionally with a dull tinge next the sun;
calyx small, nearly closed, set in a wide and rather deep basin; stem
about an inch long, very stout, woody, inserted without depression;
flesh pale yellow, hard, crisp, coarse, flavorless, rather gritty; a
good cooking pear; Nov. to Feb.

=Blackeney Red. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 531. 1884.

A second-rate perry pear much used in Herefordshire, Eng. Fruit medium,
obovate, greenish-yellow, more or less deep red on the side next the
sun; flesh firm, crisp, juicy and mildly acid.

=Blanquet Anastere. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:443, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 703. 1869.

Raised by M. Goubault, a nurseryman at Angers, Fr., in 1840. Fruit
small, pyriform but rather variable, form oblong to turbinate-ovoid,
but always rather more swelled on one side than on the other;
color pale green in the shade, dotted with gray but passing to
greenish-yellow on the sun-exposed side which is also generally colored
with vermilion; flesh white, half-fine, granular and breaking, juicy,
sugary, with a delicate and characteristic aroma; second; July.

=Blanquet Long. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:217, fig. 107. 1866-73.

Obtained in the garden of the Horticultural Society of Angers,
Maine-et-Loire, Fr. Fruit small, long-ovate, bright green passing at
maturity to pale yellow, washed with blood-red on the side next the
sun; flesh white, fine, almost buttery, with abundant, sweet juice,
refreshing and perfumed; good; early July.

=Blanquet a Longue Queue. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:131. 1768.
=2.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:233, fig. 15. 1866-73.

Of very ancient and unknown origin, mentioned by various French
authors of the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Fruit small,
ovate-pyriform, bossed and corrugated at summit, smooth, pale yellow,
slightly streaked with tender rose on the sun-touched cheek; flesh
white, semi-fine, melting, seldom gritty, juicy, acidulous, sweet, with
a slightly musky and delicate perfume; second; end of July and Aug.

=Blanquet Precoce. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:446, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =7=:19, fig. 490. 1881.

This is an ancient and probably German variety. Fruit small,
long-pyriform, very pale green changing to canary-yellow; flesh white,
semi-melting, granular; juice moderate in amount, sweet, acid, musky;
second; early July.

=Blanquet de Saintonge. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:447, fig. 1867.

Its name indicates that it was raised in the Basse Saintonge, Fr. Fruit
small, oblong-obovate; bright lemon-yellow, dotted with grayish-white;
flesh white, semi-fine, rather melting; juice sufficient, sweet,
generally vinous, with some aroma; second; end of Aug.

=Blanquette de Toulouse 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:229, fig. 113. 1866-73.

Origin unknown, through its name suggests Toulouse, Fr. Fruit small,
short-pyriform, bright green passing on ripening to pale yellow,
carmined on the side next the sun, with numerous gray dots; flesh
white, granular, semi-melting, with abundant sweet juice; a fruit of
good quality for the season; middle of July.

=Bleeker Meadow. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 355, fig. 149. 1845. =2.=
_Mag. Hort._ =14=:339, fig. 33. 1848.

Found in a meadow by Aaron Feaster, Bucks County, Pa., about 1783.
Fruit small or medium, globular, very regular; skin smooth, bright
clear yellow, sprinkled with crimson dots on the side next the sun;
flesh very white, firm, with a musky and spicy taste, but mostly
remains crisp and hard; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Blessed. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:59. 1908.

Described by Dr. Mease in _Domestic Encyclopedia_, 1804. Fruit small;
very good; medium early.

=Blickling. 1.= Bunyard _Cat._ 39. 1913.

Named from Blickling Hall, Norfolk, Eng., and supposed to have been
introduced by monks from Belgium. Fruit greenish and russety; flesh
melting, of rich flavor; excellent; Dec. and Jan.

=Block. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:59. 1908.

Originated by A. Block, Santa Clara, Calif., before 1908. Fruit medium,
globular-ovate; green-yellow, russeted; flesh melting; season medium.

=Blodget. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =2=:216. 1832.

Raised from seed by David Blodget, Camden, Me., about 1800. Fruit
medium, pyriform; flesh melting, juicy, with a pleasant, vinous flavor;
Sept.

=Blumenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:154. 1856.

A seedling of Van Mons, Bel., 1825. Fruit small,
roundish-turbinate-obtuse, lemon-yellow, washed with red on the sunny
side; flesh half-melting; good; end of Aug.

=Blutbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:193. 1856. =2.= Loeschnig
_Mostbirnen_ 218, fig. 1913.

Published in Germany in 1795 and regarded as a perry pear in Austria.
It is known as the _Flesh-pear_ in Upper and Lower Austria and also as
the _Sanguinol_ in the former. Fruit small, globular-pyriform, obtuse,
greenish-yellow, strongly blushed on the sun-exposed side; flesh
yellowish-white, flushed with red especially on the side next the sun,
rather coarse, subacid, little aroma; third; Oct.

=Bocksbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:34. 1856.

Originated in Saxony 1833. Fruit small, turbinate, light yellow and
blushed slightly on the side of the sun; flesh aromatic; good; Aug.

=Boediker Dechantsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:95. 1856.

A seedling of Van Mons, Belgium, 1852. Fruit medium, turbinate, green
turning to greenish-yellow, speckled uniformly with russet spots; flesh
yellowish-white, very soft and delicate; very good; Oct. and Nov.

=Bogenaekerin. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:195. 1856.

Originated in Wuerttemberg, 1823. Fruit medium, oblique, sides unequal,
grass-green changing to light yellow, russeted; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Boehmische fruehe Jakobsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:47.
1856.

Originated in Bohemia, 1852. Fruit small, yellowish-green, streaked
with russet; flesh yellowish, vinous; good; end of July for two weeks.

=Boieldien. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

A cross between Crassane and Louise-bonne Sannier. Fruit medium to
large; flesh very fine and perfumed; Oct. and Nov.

=Bolarmud. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:116. 1856.

An oriental variety introduced in 1833. Fruit fairly large,
ventriculous-turbinate, of a uniform light green, blushed with red;
tolerably sweet; Dec.

=Bollweiler Butterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:70. 1856.

A seedling raised by Bollweiler in Alsace, 1851. Fruit medium,
short-turbinate, green changing to greenish-yellow, somewhat blushed,
thick-scaled; flesh melting, sweet; Apr.

=Bologna. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:59. 1908.

Originated by Van Mons. Fruit medium, yellow; good; late.

=Bon-Chretien d'Auch= (Calvel). =1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 533. 1884.

Although bearing the same name this pear is quite distinct from
the _Bon-Chretien d'Auch_ which is regarded as synonymous with the
_Bon-Chretien d'Hiver_, since the pear here discussed ripens in July
and August. Fruit large to very large, like Calebasse in form, one
side sometimes more swollen than the other, green becoming yellow on
approaching maturity, bright vermilion on side exposed to the sun;
flesh breaking; juice rich and sugary; good; July.

=Bon-Chretien d'Automne. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 131. 1729. =2.= Knoop
_Fructologie_ =1=:82, Tab. II, fig. 1771.

Listed by Langley as ready to be gathered Aug. 20. Knoop stated in 1771
that it had the same qualities as the Bon Chretien d'ete but that it
ripens a little later. Fruit large; flesh soft and friable, but juicy,
pleasant and aromatic.

=Bon-Chretien Bonnamour. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 76. 1898. =2.= _Cat. Cong.
Pom. France_ 196, fig. 1906.

Raised in 1895 by M. Guillot, Rhone, Fr., and placed on the market
in 1898. Fruit large to very large, of typical Bartlett form, rather
contracted at the lower end and obliquely hollowed around the stalk,
smooth, shining, and covered with fawn-russet and often tinted on the
side next the sun; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sweet, perfumed; first
class.

=Bon-Chretien d'Espagne. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:216, Pl. 46.
1768. =2.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:131, fig. 64. 1866-73.

_Spanish Warden._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 648. 1884.

The origin of _Bon-Chretien d'Espagne_ or _Spanish Warden_ is ancient
and uncertain. Merlet described it in 1675, and so did La Quintinye,
in 1692. It was well known; for Messrs. Simon-Louis of Metz, Lorraine,
gave it some forty synonyms in their 1895 catalog. Fruit large,
pyriform, very ventriculous in its lower half where it is more or
less bossed, the upper part narrows to an obtuse end; skin thick,
greenish-yellow changing to yellow, dotted and marked with fawn-russet,
and highly colored with vivid red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh
white, coarse, breaking, juicy, with a pleasant, brisk flavor and musky
aroma; third for the table, first for the kitchen; Nov., Jan. and even
Mar.

=Bon-Chretien d'ete. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:217, Pl. XLVII,
fig. 4. 1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:457, fig. 1867.

Origin ancient and unknown but was cultivated in French gardens about
the end of the sixteenth century, being mentioned by Olivier de Serres
in 1600, and by Le Lectier of Orleans in 1628. It has been cultivated
all over Europe for over three centuries and has consequently acquired
a number of synonyms. Fruit large, pyriform, irregular in form, yellow,
with orange blush on side next the sun, and strewed with green specks;
flesh yellowish, crisp, coarse-grained, very juicy and of a rich, sweet
and pleasant flavor; second; early Sept.

=Bon-Chretien Fondant. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 704. 1869. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =7=:113, fig. 537. 1881.

_Bon-Chretien de Bruxelles._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:453, fig. 1867.

An ancient Flemish pear which must not be confounded with Epine d'Ete
although _Bugiarda_ has been used as a synonym for both. Fruit large,
oblong-pyriform, green, sprinkled with small dots of deep green, the
fundamental green changing to lemon-yellow on maturity; flesh whitish,
very melting and juicy, sweet, delicately perfumed; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Bon-Chretien Frederic Baudry. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 88. 1895.

Fruit medium or large; flesh fine, sweet, perfumed; first; Feb. and
Mar.

=Bon-Chretien d'Hiver. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:212, Pl. XLV.
1768. =2.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:23 _bis_, fig. 18. 1866-73.

_Bon-Chretien d'Auch._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 533. 1884.

A volume might be filled with a record of the endeavors to determine
the origin of this pear. As to its great antiquity all are agreed. It
is established that it was imported into France from Italy in 1495 by
Charles VIII on his conquest of the kingdom of Naples, but whether it
was the _Crustuminum_ of the Romans or whether it received its name at
the beginning of Christianity remains uncertain. One explanation of
the name was that Francois de Paul, the founder of a monkish order,
being called to the court of Louis XI for the recovery of his health,
was styled by that monarch "le bon Chretien," and that he brought with
him from Calabria some of this fruit which henceforth acquired the
name it bears. That suggestion, however, is evidently erroneous as
Saint Francois de Paul's visit to the King at Tours took place in 1483
whereas this pear was introduced to France in 1495. It is thought not
improbable that the name is derived from the Greek panchresta, meaning
"all good," of which the Latin _Crustuminum_ of the Romans may also be
a derivation. Fruit large and sometimes very large, variable in form,
irregularly pyriform or obovate-turbinate, rather rough to the touch,
dull greenish-yellow, some brown next the sun, and strewed with small,
russet dots; flesh whitish, crisp, juicy, sweet, aromatic and vinous; a
dessert pear of merit, first class for cooking; Dec. to Mar.

=Bon-Chretien d'Hiver Panache. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:467, fig.
1867.

_Striped Bon Chretien._ =2.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 184. 1833.

A variegated form of Bon Chretien d'Hiver propagated by Louis Noisette
at Brunoy, Seine-et-Oise, Fr., in 1802. It differs only from its type
in the coloring of its skin which is bright green, finely dotted and
stained with brownish-red and covered with large, yellow streaks
extending from the stalk to the calyx, and in its flesh being more
melting.

=Bon-Chretien Mathieu Joseph Lamarche. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:99,
fig. 1855.

Said to have been raised about the middle of the eighteenth century in
a Belgian monastic garden. Fruit large, irregular-pyriform, rough to
the touch, bright green, striped with russet and sprinkled with black
dots, becoming rich golden-yellow on maturity; flesh white, buttery,
melting; juice very abundant, with a delicate savor of the peach and
the aroma of the raspberry; first; end of Oct.

=Bon-Chretien Prevost. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 88. 1895.

Fruit large; flesh semi-melting, juicy and has a very pleasant perfume;
first; Dec. to Feb.

=Bon-Chretien du Rhin d'Automne. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:139, fig. 166.
1878.

Diel stated that he received this variety from the neighborhood of
Dietz in the Duchy of Nassau without any account of its origin. Fruit
large, ovate-pyriform, bossed and irregular, sides unequal, bright
green, dotted with gray points, passing to bright lemon-yellow on
ripening, with some red coloring on the fruits more exposed; flesh
white, rather fine, semi-buttery, firm, with sufficient sweet juice
which is vinous, acidulous and perfumed.

=Bon-Chretien Ricchiero. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 139, fig. 166.
1866-73.

Obtained by M. de Mortillet, Meylan, Fr.; first published in 1865.
Fruit medium to large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, pale green, sown with
brown spots; flesh greenish-white, fine, melting, a little gritty at
the core; juice abundant, sugary, vinous, highly scented; first; Oct.

=Bon-Chretien Vermont. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 88. 1895.

A cross between Rousselet de Reims and la Belle Angevine obtained by M.
Sannier. Fruit large; form that of Belle Angevine; flesh fine, juicy,
scented and sweet; Oct.

=Bon-Chretien de Vernois. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:469, fig. 1867.

Obtained by M. Henrard, nurseryman at Liege, Fr., about 1840. Fruit
large, varying in form between ovate and turbinate-obtuse, bossed,
greenish-yellow, touched with olive-russet and dotted with bright
brown specks; flesh whitish, semi-fine, semi-melting, rather gritty
at center; juice abundant, sweet, astringent and slightly aromatic;
second; Nov. to Jan.

=Bon Gustave. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 69. 1848. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=1=:471, fig. 1867.

From a seed bed of Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., but it did not
bear fruit till 1847. Fruit rather large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform,
mammillate, bright green, marbled with russet; flesh greenish-yellow,
buttery, sweet, perfumed; first; beginning of winter.

=Bon Parent. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:472, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas Pom.
Gen. =3=:117, fig. 155. 1878.

Raised by Simon Bouvier of Jodoigne, Bel., in 1820. Fruit medium,
regular pyriform, bossed at summit, smooth, lemon-yellow, dotted with
gray-russet, washed with reddish-brown on the side next the sun; flesh
white, fine, semi-melting, juicy, vinous, aromatic; hardly first; Oct.

=Bon-Roi-Rene. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:473, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed by Leroy and bore fruit first in 1864. Fruit medium to
large, ovate, irregular, bossed, lively green, sprinkled all over with
dark gray dots and vermilioned on the side exposed to the sun; flesh
yellowish-white, fine and dense, watery, excessively melting, and a
little gritty; juice abundant, sweet, vinous, with a delicious perfumed
taste; first; Oct.

=Bon Vicaire. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 88. 1895.

The fruit of this variety resembles that of the Vicar of Winkfield
and the tree, of moderate vigor, is similar to that of the Duchesse
d'Angouleme. Fruit large or very large, long and like Calebasse in
form, yellow, vermilioned on the sunny side; flesh very fine, melting;
Sept.

=Bonne d'Anjou. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:474, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed by Leroy in 1864 at Angers, Fr. Fruit medium and
sometimes large, ovate, irregular and much bossed, bright yellow,
speckled all over with dark gray spots and washed with vermilion on the
side next the sun; flesh yellowish-white, fine and dense, exceedingly
melting, a little gritty; juice abundant, sugary, vinous, refreshing,
deliciously perfumed; first; Oct.

=Bonne-Antonine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:475, fig. 1867.

There is a great similarity between this variety and Beurre Flon.
The origin is obscure. The Society of Van Mons distributed it
before 1876 without description. Fruit large and often enormous,
long-conic, obtuse, slightly bossed and generally somewhat contorted
at the summit, dull golden-yellow, mottled and dotted with russet;
flesh yellowish-white, fine, dense, very melting, almost free from
granulations; juice abundant, refreshing, sugary, with an exceedingly
pleasant after flavor of anis; first; mid-Oct.

=Bonne de Beugny. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 280. 1911.

A chance seedling, found at Sainte-Catherine-de-Fier-Bois, Fr., by M.
Chivert in 1875. Fruit large to very large, globular-obtuse-pyriform,
yellow, washed with russet especially round the stalk; flesh melting,
juicy, sweet, and agreeably perfumed; first; Oct. to Jan.

=Bonne Carmelite. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 88. 1876.

Distributed from Tournai, Bel. Fruit semi-melting; like Calebasse in
form; Mar. and Apr.

=Bonne de la Chapelle. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:231, fig. 114. 1866-73.

A wilding found by Jacques Jalais, Nantes, Fr., in 1845. It was
described in this country by Downing in 1869. Fruit medium, turbinate,
short and swelled, rather irregular in contour, green, sprinkled with
dots of a deeper shade of green, some russet blush on the exposed side;
flesh a little greenish, fine, buttery, melting, with abundant sweet
juice, first; end of Aug.

=Bonne Charlotte. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:477, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 705. 1869.

Obtained from seed in the garden of the Society of Van Mons at
Geest-Saint-Remy, Jodoigne, Bel., in 1849. Fruit medium, variable in
form, but usually simply pyriform, bossed, pale yellow, with green
dots, lightly washed with purple on the side exposed to the sun; flesh
white, rather fine, more buttery than melting, sugary; juice sufficient
and slightly musky; good; Aug. and Sept.

=Bonne d'Ezee. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:73, fig. 1857. =2.= _Pom.
France_ =1=:No. 34. Pl. 34. 1863.

_Brockworth Park._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 535. 1884.

A wilding found at Ezee in the Touraine, Fr., by Dupuy about 1788.
Fruit large, often medium, long-ovate-obtuse; skin rather thick, oily,
lemon-yellow or golden, dotted and stained with bright russet; flesh
white, very fine and melting; juice excessively abundant, sugary,
acidulous, having an exquisite aroma; first; all Sept.

=Bonne de Jalais. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:480, fig. 1867.

Obtained from seed in 1857 at Nantes, Fr., by Jacques Jalais. Fruit
small, globular-ovate, bossed, one side always more enlarged than the
other; skin rough, pale yellow, dotted with clear brown and stained
with russet markings; flesh whitish, semi-fine, melting, sometimes a
little dry, slightly gritty at center; juice sufficient, very sugary
and having an agreeable flavor; second; latter half of Sept.

=Bonne-Jeanne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:481, fig. 1867.

Origin unknown, but in the middle of the nineteenth century it was
extensively cultivated in the environs of Paris. Fruit medium to
small, pyriform-obtuse, depressed at crown and stem, yellow-ochre,
dotted and mottled with fawn and washed on the exposed side with
brick-red or brilliant-violet-red; flesh greenish-white, semi-fine, and
semi-melting, rather dry, very sweet and with a not unpleasant taste of
fennel; third, middle of Aug.

=Bonne Sophia. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 706, fig. 1869.

Fruit medium, obovate-acute-pyriform, pale greenish-yellow, with a red
cheek, a few patches and nettings of russet and numerous small, brown
dots; flesh white, fine, melting, sweet and slightly perfumed; very
good; Oct.

=Bonne Therese. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:488, fig. 295. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 797. 1869.

Probably originated by Nelis, Mechlin, Bel., previous to the year 1834.
Fruit medium, regular, roundish-oval, greenish-yellow, marbled with
dull red at the stalk; stalk short, straight; calyx small, open; flesh
white, juicy, highly aromatic, sweet, melting; first; Oct.

=Bonne des Zoes. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:463. 1855.

Described as a recent introduction in England in 1855. Fruit medium;
first; Sept.; tree productive, making a good standard.

=Bonners. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 51. 1869. =2.= _Ibid._ 119. 1873.

Originated in Hancock County, Ga., and was known in 1869 in Washington
County, of that state, as the _Pope_ pear. Fruit has a peculiar almond
flavor; very good; Sept.

=Bonneserre de Saint-Denis. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:490, figs. 1867.

An exquisite pear raised from seed by Leroy, Angers, Fr., in 1863.
Fruit medium or above, globular-obtuse-pyriform, regular in outline;
a second type of the variety is rather contorted and bossed; color
greenish-yellow, dotted, striped and stained with russet; flesh white,
fine, melting, granular about the core; juice plentiful, sweet, acid,
and endowed with a delicious perfume; first; Dec. and Jan.

=Bonnet Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:55. 1856.

A Belgian variety attributed to Van Mons. Fruit medium to small, long
and convex, beautiful yellow, flushed with red on the side of the sun;
flesh melting and sweet; first; Sept.

=Boutoc. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 69. 1895.

A very ancient variety cultivated in the Gironde, Fr., and often called
_Poire d'Ange._ Fruit medium, obtuse, short, lemon-yellow, stained with
gray and red; flesh fine, melting; good; end of Aug.

=Bordine Musk. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 131. 1729.

Considered one of the best pears in England in the early part of the
eighteenth century. Fruit small, globular, musky; end of June for very
short season.

=Bouchamp. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:64. 1908.

A chance seedling in the garden of M. Penneton. Fruit medium,
globular-obtuse-pyriform, green, yellow-russeted; flesh delicate,
juicy, buttery, melting, sweet, vinous, perfumed; season medium.

=Boucquia. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:134, fig. 3. 1843. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 355. 1845.

A Flemish variety originated by Van Mons who sent cions of it to
Manning in 1836. It bore fruit for the first time in the Pomological
Garden, Salem, Mass., in 1841. Fruit large, oval, largest in the
middle, tapering towards each end, pale yellow, tinged with pale red on
the side next the sun, covered with blackish specks and some patches of
russet; flesh yellowish-white, tender, melting, sweet, rich, somewhat
astringent at times, perfumed; Oct. and Nov.

=Bourdon de Roi. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 536. 1884.

Fruit small, globular, yellowish-green, changing to clear yellow,
with some dark red blush next the sun; flesh white, very tender,
semi-melting, of a refreshing, sweet, vinous and musky flavor; first;
Nov.

=Bouvier d'Automne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:491, fig. 1867.

A seedling of Van Mons, said to have been tasted by Bivort for the
first time in 1845. Fruit below medium, ovate-obtuse-pyriform,
golden-yellow, speckled with large dots of bright brown, mottled
with fawn and generally bronzed on the side next the sun; flesh
yellowish-white, semi-fine and semi-melting; juice abundant, sugary,
acidulous, and having a delicate aroma; second; Oct.

=Bouvier Bourgmestre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:492, fig. 1867. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 537. 1884.

Raised from a seed bed made in 1824 by Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit
large, obtuse-pyriform, bright yellow, covered with small, gray dots,
washed with fawn at each end; flesh very white and fine, melting,
juicy, gritty around the core, vinous and sugary; second; Oct. and Nov.

=Bouviers Herbstbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:65. 1856.

Originated by Van Mons, 1847. Fruit medium, oval, obtuse, green turning
to yellow, marbled with dark brown and speckled; flesh semi-buttery,
aromatic, sweet; first; latter half of Oct.

=Bowdoin. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =3=:48. 1837.

Raised from seed in the neighborhood of Boston, Mass., early in the
nineteenth century. Fruit large; skin thick; second; Sept.

=Bowne Winter Russet. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 272. 1858.

Originated at Flushing, Long Island, N. Y. Fruit large,
greenish-yellow; good; Jan.

=Boyken June. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 108. 1873.

Believed to have originated on the lower James River, Va. On trial and
well regarded in 1873. Fruit medium, beautifully colored; good, may be
shipped in early July, keeping qualities good, but rather deficient in
flavor.

=Braconot. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:494, fig. 1867.

From a seed bed made in 1840 or 1841 by Leclerc in his garden at
Epinal, Fr. Fruit large, oblong-obtuse, much swelled, bossed; skin
greasy, golden-yellow, speckled all over with grayish-brown, washed
with red on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish, fine, semi-melting,
gritty around the core; juice moderate in amount, sweet, acid and
deliciously perfumed; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Brandes. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:495, fig. 1867.

Raised by Van Mons, Louvain, Bel.; first reported in 1818. Fruit below
medium, long-ovate-obtuse, greenish-yellow, dotted and marbled with
russet and extensively washed with russet around the stem; flesh white,
fine, excessively melting, gritty at center; juice sufficient, sweet,
musky; first; mid-Nov. to mid-Dec.

=Braunrote Speckbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 189. 1889.

_Poire de Lard Brune._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:145, fig. 553. 1881.

A German variety cultivated in Hanover where it is also known under the
names _Poire Pendante_ and _Poire Bourree de Hambourg_. Fruit medium
or nearly large, obovate-pyriform, bright green, with very numerous
dots of darker green but usually no trace of russet. On ripening, the
fundamental green becomes bright yellow, brightened with reddish-brown
on the side next the sun; early Sept.

=Braunrothe Fruehlingsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:4. 1856.

Of Belgian origin. 1832. Fruit medium, entirely covered with
brown-russet; good; winter to March first.

=Braunrothe Sommerrusselet. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:42. 1856.

_Rousselet d'ete Brun Rouge._ =2.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:53, fig. 25.
1866-73.

Probably of ancient German origin. Published at Nassau, 1804. Fruit
small, obtuse-conic, regular in outline, summit flat, smooth, pale
green changing to bright greenish-yellow and extensively washed on the
side next the sun with dull brownish-red on which are yellow-gray dots
so prominent as to be rough to the touch; flesh yellow-white, rather
breaking, melting, gritty around the core, sweet, refreshing, having
the perfume characteristic of the Rousselet; first; Aug.

=Brederode. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:37. 1856.

Seeding of Van Mons, 1817. Fruit medium, long-turbinate, light
greenish-yellow changing to light lemon-yellow, slightly russeted;
flesh granular, softish, very sweet; end of Sept. and early Oct.

=Bremer Butterbirne. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 247. 1881.

Raised from seed by Herr Neuburg in Bremen, Ger. Fruit large,
turbinate, green, turning to yellow-green and yellow on ripening; flesh
yellowish-white, fine, melting, finely granular, musky; Dec.

=Brewer. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 708. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=5=:1, fig. 289. 1880.

Origin uncertain, but probably American. Fruit medium,
obovate-pyriform; skin thin, tender, bright green dotted with very
small, brown specks; flesh white, translucent, melting; juice sweet,
very abundant, delicately and agreeably perfumed; good; Oct.

=Brewster. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 46. 1866.

A seedling fruited by Dr. S. A. Shurtleff of Brookline, Mass., in 1865.
Fruit medium, yellow, melting and juicy; Nov.

=Brialmont. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:498, fig. 1867.

Origin uncertain, but it was described in the catalog of the Society
of Van Mons. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, mammillate at summit,
yellowish-green, covered with dots and patches of gray russet; flesh
very white, dense, fine, semi-melting, some grit about the core; juice
abundant, sweet and perfumed; second; Oct.

=Brielsche Pomeranzenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:22. 1856.

_Orange de Briel._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:47, fig. 408. 1880.

Attributed to Holland about 1812 by Dochnahl. Fruit small or nearly
small, globular-turbinate, sides uneven (Dochnahl), even contour (Mas),
green passing at maturity to bright lemon-yellow, washed on the side
next the sun with a beautiful vermilion, covered with numerous minute
dots of fawn which change to yellow on the sunny side; flesh whitish,
rather fine, semi-buttery, gritty, not very juicy, saccharine; first.

=Briffaut. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 367. 1863.

Fruit medium, pyriform, smooth, shaded side green, other red; flesh
greenish-white, fine, melting, sweet, perfumed; it is one of the most
beautiful fruits of the summer, brilliant in coloring, but it decays
rapidly; Aug.

=Brindamour. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:501, fig. 1867.

Originated in the Department of the Vienne, Fr., at the beginning of
the nineteenth century. Fruit medium, obtuse-turbinate, rough to the
touch, bronzed, dotted with fawn, some bright green around the stem,
and marbled with the same color on the cheek exposed to the sun;
flesh whitish, fine, soft, melting; juice extremely abundant, sweet,
acidulous and very pleasantly perfumed; first; Nov. to the end of Jan.

=Bringewood. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:124. 1843. =2.= _Ibid._ =13=:153.
1847.

A foreign variety, probably English. Fruit medium, pyriform,
yellowish-brown, almost covered with russet; flesh yellowish-white,
somewhat gritty around the core, otherwise buttery, rich; first; end of
Oct. to beginning of Dec.

=British Queen. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =3=:546. 1862. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 537. 1884.

Raised by Thomas Ingram from seed of Marie Louise at Frogmore, Eng.,
and first distributed in 1863. Fruit large, obovate-pyriform, bossed,
golden, much covered with cinnamon-colored russet, encrimsoned on side
next the sun; flesh yellowish-white, fine-grained, buttery, melting,
rich, sugary, having the flavor of the Marie Louise; first; Oct.

=Broncirte Winterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:70. 1856.

Raised by Van Mons at Louvain, 1853. Fruit medium to small,
obtuse-ventriculous, entirely covered with russet but somewhat blushed
on the side next the sun; flesh very sweet; first; Jan. and Feb.

=Bronx. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 710. 1869.

Raised by James R. Swain, Bronxville, N. Y., about 1850. Fruit medium,
obovate-pyriform, greenish-yellow, netted and stained with russet;
flesh whitish, juicy, melting, sweet, slightly perfumed flavor; very
good; first half of Sept.

=Bronzee Boisselot. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 88. 1895.

Fruit medium; flesh very melting, and of excellent flavor, sugary;
first; Oct.

=Bronzee d'Enghien. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:171, fig. 374. 1880.

Disseminated by the Society of Van Mons. Fruit medium, long-pyriform,
well swelled around the center, golden-yellow, dotted and stained with
light bronze; flesh fine, semi-melting, juicy, acidulous; Nov. to Jan.

=Brookline. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1866.

A seedling pear fruited by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., in 1862.
Fruit above medium, turbinate, brown-russet; flesh sweet, juicy and
buttery, with high flavor; very fine; Oct.

=Broom Park. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 209, fig. 1845. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
538. 1884.

Raised by Thomas Andrew Knight at Downton Castle, Herefordshire, Eng.;
it first bore fruit in 1831. Fruit small, globular-obovate; skin green
and rough, largely covered with brown-russet; on the side next the sun
it is tinged with dull red; flesh yellowish, melting, juicy, rich, with
something of a melon flavor combined with pineapple. This singular
commixture of flavors is its principal characteristic; an excellent
dessert pear; Jan.

=Brough Bergamot. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 538. 1884.

A variety which succeeds well in the North of England. Fruit
small, globular-turbinate tapering into the stalk; skin rough,
yellowish-green, very much covered with brown-russet; flesh
yellowish-white, rather coarse-grained, saccharine, very juicy, with a
rich and highly perfumed flavor; first; Dec.

=Brugmans. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =4=:395, 1838. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:100. 1856.

A seedling of Van Mons, 1821. In September, 1838, it was exhibited
among "ninety varieties" by Manning, before the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society. Fruit medium, conic, light green changing to
light yellow at maturity, sometimes rather blushed; flesh aromatic and
sweet; mid-Nov. for three weeks.

=Brumbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:9. 1856.

Originated in Odenwald, Ger., 1847. Fruit medium, turbinate, light
yellow turning to lemon-yellow, striped with bright red; good; Sept.
and beginning of Oct.

=Brune Mineme. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 88. 1876.

Fruit rather large; first quality for cooking; Nov. and Dec; of
doubtful merit. Tree vigorous and fertile, well suited for exposed
situations.

=Brunet. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:9, fig. 485. 1881.

Found growing wild at Houga, Department of Gers, Fr., about 1826. Fruit
medium, globular, very bright green, dotted with numerous small, gray
specks; at maturity the basic green passes to pale yellow, a little
warmer on the side next the sun; flesh white, fine, melting; juice
plentiful, sweet and agreeably musky; fair; end of Aug.

=Bruesseler Herbstbergamotte. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:76.
1856.

Raised by Van Mons in 1825. Fruit medium, obovate-turbinate,
yellowish-green changing on maturity to lemon-yellow all over; flesh
granular, soft, vinous and strongly musky; good; Nov.

=Brute Bonne. 1.= Miller _Gard. Kal._ 206. 1734.

_Franzosische Zapfenbirne._ =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:139,
1856.

Fruit medium, thin-skinned, grass-green all over, flushed red on the
side next the sun; flesh somewhat musky, sweet, acidulous; good; end of
Oct.

=Bryan Edwards. 1.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =16=:395. 1826.

A seedling found growing early in the nineteenth century in
the neighborhood of Southampton, Eng., by Bryan Edwards. Fruit
globular-turbinate, pale green changing at maturity to pale yellow;
flesh melting, rich, sweet, pleasantly perfumed; of considerable
excellence; beginning of Nov.

=Buchanan. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 114. 1869.

Submitted for examination to the Fruit Committee of the American
Pomological Society in January, 1869, by Isaac Buchanan of New York.
Fruit medium, obovate-acute-pyriform, dull yellow, with considerable
russet; flesh a little coarse-grained, melting, juicy, gritty next the
core, moderately sweet, and of good flavor.

=Buffalo. 1.= Hooper _W. Fr. Book_ 151. 1857.

Of foreign origin; "an early and abundant bearer; flesh a little
coarse, but buttery, juicy, sugary and sprightly."

=Bunte Mannabirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:106. 1856.

A variegated form of the French _Colmar d'Hiver_ or _Colmar_. Fruit
greenish-yellow, with reddish-brown stripes; in other respects similar
to its type.

=Buntebirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:106. 1856.

Originated in Hanover, Ger., 1852. Fruit medium to small,
greenish-yellow turning to bright, light yellow; flesh fine, flushed,
sweet; good; mid-Sept. and Oct.

=Burchardt Butterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:114. 1856.

Considered by Dochnahl to be a seedling raised in 1833. Fruit medium,
rather variable, globular-ovate, uniformly bright lemon-yellow,
sprinkled with fine russet; flesh rather yellowish, semi-melting,
aromatic, sweet; first; all Oct.

=Buree Winter. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 131. 1729.

Fruit medium, globular-obtuse-pyriform, somewhat depressed at both
stalk and calyx, speckled all over; may be gathered early in September
and in season Feb. to Apr.; first class.

=Burgoyne. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:68. 1908.

Fruit large, oblong-pyriform, greenish-yellow, blushed with russet;
flesh melting, juicy, sweet; good; season medium.

=Burkett. 1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 144. 1880. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
Rpt._ 236. 1911.

Reported to the Illinois Horticultural Society in 1880 by C. S. Capps
of Mt. Pulaski who described it as a "miserable apology" for a pear,
though exempt from blight. It was mentioned in a communication to the
American Pomological Society in 1911 by Charles G. Patten, Charles
City, Iowa, as a variety which originating in Illinois had resisted
blight for a period of forty-five years in South Iowa. It has been
suggested that this and _Sudduth_ may be the same.

=Burlingame. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =15=:344. 1849. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 711. 1869.

Raised from seeds of pears planted in 1790. In 1830 Dr. S. P. Hildreth,
Marietta, Ohio, sent a description of the pear to the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society which named it after Mrs. Burlingame of
Marietta who had originally saved the seeds. Fruit below medium,
globular-oblate, pale yellow, blushed with red on the sun-exposed side
and covered with small, russet specks; flesh white, coarse, melting and
juicy, rich, sugary, perfumed; Aug. and Sept.

=Burnett. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 139. 1841. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 712. 1869.

Raised by Joel Burnett, Southborough, Mass., in the early half of
the nineteenth century. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, pale yellow,
with much iron-russet and flushed on side next the sun; flesh
greenish-white, rather coarse-grained but rich, musky, juicy, sweet;
excellent; Oct. and Nov.

=Butt Pear. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 539. 1884.

A pear grown in England especially around Ledbury, Herefordshire, for
the production of perry. Fruit small, globular-obovate, lemon-color,
strewed with minute, russety dots; flesh yellowish, coarse-grained,
granular, acidulous.

=Butterartige Bergamotte. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:79. 1856.

No. 33 in the Van Mons collection, 1834. Fruit small, long-globular,
dark yellow, much covered with red-russet; flesh yellowish-white,
semi-melting, sweet, firm, aromatic, suitable for espalier; beginning
of Nov.

=Buettner Sachsische Ritterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:23.
1856.

_Poire de Chevalier de Buttner._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:145, fig.
265. 1879.

According to Diel this variety originated in the environs of Halle,
Prussia. _Fruit_ medium or nearly medium, globular-turbinate
or globular-ovate, often irregular in contour, a lively green
sprinkled with dots of gray-green changing to brilliant lemon-yellow
at maturity, well-exposed fruits being extensively washed with
brownish-red; flesh white, tinted yellow under the skin, a little
coarse, semi-breaking, fairly juicy, more or less perfumed according to
the season; quality inconstant; Aug.

=Cabot. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =2=:214. 1832. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=10=:298, 299, fig. 1844. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 712. 1869.

Raised from seed of Beurre Gris planted in 1821 or 1822 by J. S.
Cabot, Salem, Mass. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, slightly irregular;
skin rough, bronze-yellow, almost covered with cinnamon-russet, some
marbling of red on the side next the sun; flesh greenish-white,
breaking, juicy, with a rich, subacid flavor; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Cadeau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:507, fig. 1867.

Mainly cultivated in the neighborhood of Angers, Fr., where it probably
originated. Fruit small, globular-ovate, one side always more swelled
than the other; skin thick, greenish-yellow or pale yellow, dotted and
striped with gray-brown; flesh yellowish, coarse, semi-melting, very
granular, wanting in juice, sugary, not much flavor; third; end of July.

=Cadet de Vaux. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 132. 1825. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 712. 1869. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:508, fig. 1869.

It is claimed that Van Mons originated this variety. Tree very
productive, an early and heavy bearer. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform,
ochre-yellow, dotted with brown and shaded with fawn and pale red in
the sun; stem short, large, curved; calyx large; flesh yellowish-white,
fine, breaking, sweet, juicy, perfumed; good; Dec. to Mar.

=Caen de France. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:102. 1853. =2.= _Ibid._
=21=:188. 1855. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 52. 1869.

Synonymous with No. 51 of Van Mons. It was introduced into this country
in 1834 by R. Manning, Salem, Mass. Fruit large, pyriform; skin thick,
yellow, overspread with russet; flesh yellowish-white, semi-melting,
juicy, sweet, vinous, with a little astringency, slightly aromatic;
"one of the very best of the late varieties, keeps without trouble, and
may be put in barrels to ripen, and can be depended on from Jan. to
Mar."

=Caesar. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:98. 1832.

Extensively cultivated in the French Department of Lorraine in the
early part of the nineteenth century. Fruit large, obovate-pyriform,
smooth, pale yellow in the shade, deeper next the sun and sometimes
slightly tinged with red, sprinkled with minute specks; flesh very
white, breaking, of a rich and rather musky flavor; on maturing becomes
soft rapidly; Dec.

=Caillot Rosat= (English). =1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 540. 1884. =2.=
Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 191. 1889.

This is not the _Caillot Rosat_ of the French which in England is
known as the _Summer Rose_. Fruit above medium, pyriform, smooth,
greenish-yellow, with a brownish-red cheek and streaks of brighter red
on the side next the sun; flesh tender, very juicy, sweet, perfumed;
good; Aug.

=Caillot Rosat= (French). =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:509, fig. 1867.
=2.= _Guide Prat._ 72, 254. 1876.

_Summer Rose._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 652. 1884.

An ancient French pear of unknown origin. Writing of it in 1586
Jacques Dalechamp thought it identical with the pear _Nard_, of the
Greeks. This, however, has not been substantiated; but the pear was in
early times spread generally through France under a variety of local
names. One Jehan de Meung, a poet born near Orleans in 1280, wrote
of it, as also did Gilles Menage in 1694 who said it was "a kind of
pears so called because of their hardness, their whiteness and their
taste of rose." It is probable that it takes its name _Cailleau_,
_Calliot_, _Caillou_, _Caillorosar_, _Caillot_, from the _caillou_,
a pebble, because of the grit with which it is filled. Fruit medium,
globular-oblate, yellowish, with stains of fawn-russet, washed with
tender rose on the side of the sun and streaked with the same color
around the stem; flesh white, scented, a little coarse, semi-melting,
always gritty around the core; juice sufficient, sugary, acid, musky;
second; Sept.

=Calbasbirn. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 497. 1817.

_Graue Flaschenbirne._ =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:140. 1856.

Originated in Holland in 1758. Fruit large, gourd-shaped, irregular,
bossed, yellow, with grayish-russet, becoming golden and washed with
red; flesh yellowish-white, soft, granular, somewhat woody, musky,
sweet; good; Nov. and Dec.

=Calebasse. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:512, fig. 1867. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 712. 1869.

Termed by Downing "a very grotesque looking Belgian fruit." Leroy
considered it to have been raised in Brabant, Holland, early in the
eighteenth century by Herman Knoop, a Dutch horticulturist. Fruit
medium, long gourd-shaped, crooked and undulating in outline; skin
rough, dull yellow, with thin, gray russet on the shaded side becoming
cinnamon- and orange-russet next the sun; flesh yellowish-white,
semi-fine, semi-melting, crisp, juicy and sweet; second; Sept. and Oct.

=Calebasse d'Anvers. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

Sent out by M. Daras de Naghin of Antwerp, Bel., and recommended in
1895 by Simon-Louis Brothers, Metz, Lorraine, as combining all the
qualities requisite to render it a fruit suitable for commerce. Fruit
large, long, more or less contracted at its center, canary-yellow,
dotted with brown specks and stained with fawn at the summit; flesh
rather fine, free from granulations, juicy, sugary and savory; good;
Oct. and Nov.

=Calebasse de Bavay. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:35, fig. 24. 1866-73. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:514, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed at Mechlin, Bel., and distributed in 1849 by M.
Tuerlinckx. Fruit rather large, long-pyriform, contracted at summit,
concave on one side, the lower end being bent; color yellowish-green;
flesh white, very fine; juice abundant, sweet, acid, having a delicate
perfume; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Calebasse Boisbunel. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 41. 1871. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 65. 1895.

Obtained by M. Boisbunel of Rouen, France. Fruit large, like Calebasse
in form, greenish-yellow, washed with red; flesh fine, yellowish-white,
melting, very sweet; first quality; Feb. and Mar.

=Calebasse Bosc. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:515, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 540. 1884.

=3.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 162. 1920.

A chance seedling found in 1819 by Van Mons in the garden of M. Swates
at Linkebeeke near Brussels, Bel. Fruit medium to large, long-conical;
skin rough to the touch and entirely covered with brown-russet,
sprinkled with darker russet dots; flesh yellowish, semi-fine, melting,
juicy, sweet and agreeably flavored; second; Oct.

=Calebasse Delvigne. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 141, fig. 69.
1866-73. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:517, fig. 1867.

Mas thinks Calebasse Delvigne was raised in Belgium and Leroy considers
it to have originated in France. Fruit medium, pyriform, yellow,
strewed with cinnamon-colored russet and richly colored with red on
the sun-exposed side; flesh yellowish-white, rather coarse-grained,
melting, juicy, sweet and fine flavor, strong musky aroma; second to
first; Oct.

=Calebasse d'Ete. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:518, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 540. 1884.

A seedling obtained by Major Esperen of Mechlin, Bel. Fruit above
medium and sometimes larger, long-pyramidal, obtuse, a little contorted
at base, greenish-yellow, covered with brown-russet and with numerous
russet spots; flesh white, semi-melting, rather gritty at center,
sugary, slightly acid and having a delicate perfume; a good early pear;
Sept.

=Calebasse Fondante. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 140. 1841.

Described by Kenrick in 1841 as a new variety by Van Mons. Fruit
very much lengthened, bossed, uniformly red; flesh melting, sugary,
agreeable; Oct.

=Calebasse d'Hiver. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 69. 1848. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
_6_:161, fig. 465. 1880.

Obtained by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., and described in 1848 as a
new fruit. Fruit large, turbinate or ovate-pyriform and long, dark
green, sprinkled with brown dots, the dark green becoming at maturity
pale yellow and golden on the side of the sun; flesh semi-melting,
white; juice abundant, sweet, and without any appreciable perfume; good
for the purposes of the kitchen.

=Calebasse Kickx. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 89, 254. 1876. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 541. 1884.

This is No. 590 in the Van Mons catalog and was a seedling first
described in 1823. Fruit below medium, obovate, rather uneven in
outline, light greenish-yellow turning to lemon-yellow, with some
patches of very thin, pale, cinnamon-colored russet; flesh whitish,
coarse-grained, semi-melting, sweet, with an agreeable perfume;
inferior, becoming pasty in the middle of October; early Oct.

=Calebasse Leroy. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:519, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:175, fig. 280. 1879.

Raised by Van Mons about 1830 and published for the first time in the
_Catalogue Systematique_ of Diel in 1833. Fruit medium, conic-pyriform,
somewhat contracted around the middle, bright green, stained with
russet patches and sown with some gray dots and generally blushed with
pale red on the side of the sun; first; Sept.

=Calebasse Oberdieck. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 285. 1881. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:520, fig. 1867.

A seedling raised by Leroy at Angers, France; it first fruited in 1863.
Fruit large, very long, like Calebasse in form, more or less obtuse,
bossed; color orange-yellow, very finely dotted with brown, marked
with some fawn and blackish patches; flesh white, extremely fine,
semi-melting, juicy, fresh, sugary, aromatic; first; Oct.

=Calebasse d'Octobre. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 41. 1871. =2.=
_Horticulturist_ =27=:102. 1872.

Received by the Massachusetts Horticultural Society from M.
Alexandre Bivort of Belgium and tested November, 1871. Fruit medium,
acute-pyriform, long; skin smooth, pale yellow, traced with russet,
with a fine ruddy tint on one side; flesh yellowish-white, melting,
juicy and buttery, fine-grained; flavor vinous, rich, aromatic,
sprightly, with a slight astringency.

=Calebasse Rose. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:123, fig. 542. 1881.

Of uncertain origin. Fruit medium or rather large; obovate-pyriform,
usually rather irregular or bossed in its outline, bright green, sown
with dots of darker green; on ripening the fundamental green changes
to a pale lemon-yellow, sometimes washed with rose; flesh whitish,
buttery, melting, sufficient sweet juice, acidulous; good; Oct.

=Calebasse Tougard. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:95, fig. 1855. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:521, fig. 1867.

_Tougard_. =3.= _Gard. Chron._ 415. 1863.

A posthumous seedling of Van Mons, first fruited in 1847. Fruit
medium, pyriform, yellowish, covered with spots and patches of rough
brown-russet; flesh has a pink tinge, half-melting, juicy, sugary and
has a pleasant flavor; Oct. and Nov.

=Calebasse Verte. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:522, fig. 1867.

Attributed to Van Mons, date unknown, as also whether from Brussels or
Louvain. Fruit medium to large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, bossed, bright
green, sprinkled with russet dots, veined with grayish-brown around
the calyx and stem; flesh greenish-white, fine, melting; juice sweet,
abundant, acid, agreeable; first; Oct.

=Calhoun. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 5. 1843. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=11=:252. 1845.

Raised by Governor Edwards, New Haven, Conn., and submitted by him
to the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1843. Fruit medium,
globular, obliquely oblate, yellowish, shaded with dull crimson,
russetted; flesh white, coarse, granular, buttery, melting, pleasant;
good; Oct.

=Caliorosa. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =18=:151. 1852.

Described among new varieties of fruits. Fruit large, pyriform,
greenish-yellow, with brown specks; not juicy, indifferent.

=Calixte Mignot. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 88. 1895.

Fruit large, pyriform, greenish, dotted with russet, passing to yellow
at maturity; flesh very fine, melting, buttery, juicy; first; Oct. and
Nov.

=Calvillebirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:72. 1856.

Originated by Van Mons, 1825. Fruit medium, obovate-conic, light green
changing to lemon-yellow, washed with red on the sun-exposed side;
flesh fine, granular, sweet, juicy, melting, vinous and musky; good;
Feb. and Mar.

=Calvin. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:71. 1908.

Originated by Calvin Throop in Washington, U. S. A. Fruit medium,
ovate-pyriform yellow, blushed and striped; flesh buttery, juicy,
melting; good; medium.

=Camak. 1.= _Gard. Mon._ =2=:320. 1860. =2.= _Guide Prat._ 70. 1895.

Originated with J. Camak, Athens, Ga., and first reported in 1860.
Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, yellowish-green, slightly washed with
carmine; flesh fine, juicy, sugary; good; Sept.

=Cambaceres. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:523, fig. 1867.

Distributed by Charles Baltet, Troyes, Fr., about 1861, without any
specification of origin. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, one side
generally more swelled than the other, golden yellow, dotted and
marbled with russet; flesh whitish, semi-fine, melting; juice very
abundant and very sweet, refreshingly acidulous, with a delicate aroma;
first; Oct.

=Camerling. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:524, fig. 1867. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 108. 1876.

A seedling of Van Mons which first bore fruit in 1842. Fruit
medium, oblong-obtuse-pyriform, bossed and somewhat swelled; skin
thick, wrinkled, yellow-ochre, dotted with russet, much washed with
gray-bronze and clouded with brown-red on the side next the sun; flesh
whitish, often doughy; juice sweet, agreeable; more frequently third
than second class; Oct.

=Camille de Rohan. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 542. 1884.

Fruit medium, pyriform, green changing to yellow-green on ripening,
with numerous russety dots; flesh white, with a pinkish tinge,
fine-grained, melting, vinous and of good flavor; Dec. and Jan.

=Canandaigua. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =16=:36, 153. 1850. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 714. 1869.

Judge Atwater of Canandaigua, New York, brought cions of this pear from
Connecticut in 1806. It was exhibited at the Pomological Congress in
New York in 1849 under the name _Catherine_ but there being already one
or more pears known by that name it was deemed well to change its name
to avoid confusion. Fruit medium, irregular, elongated-acute-pyriform,
lemon-yellow, sometimes red on the sunny side; flesh white, fine,
melting and buttery, sugary, high flavor; handsome and excellent; Sept.

=Canning. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ 460. 1855.

Fruit large, resembling Easter Beurre but the habit of the tree is more
robust and hardy; Jan. and Feb.

=Canourgues. 1.= Mas. _Le Verger_ =2=:77, fig. 37. 1866-73. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:526, fig. 1867.

A wilding found about the beginning of the nineteenth century by M.
Lauzeral, Monestier, Fr. Fruit small, long-ovate, often more curved on
one side than on the other, smooth and shining, bright yellow, sown
with small dots of grayish-brown, colored with pale rose on the side
of the sun; flesh white, fine, melting; juice very abundant, vinous,
sugary, refreshing and aromatic; first; July.

=Cantelope. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =4=:231, 466. 1838. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 714. 1869.

Raised by Governor Edwards of New Haven and presented to the
Horticultural Society of New Haven in September, 1838, when it was
reported to be worthy of cultivation. Fruit below medium, globular,
pale yellow, sometimes blushed in the sun; flesh whitish, coarse,
breaking, wanting in juice; good for cooking; Oct.

=Canton. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:72. 1908.

Originated in 1883 in Madison County, Miss. Fruit medium, ovate, green
to yellow, blushed; flesh breaking, juicy, sprightly; very good; season
medium.

=Capsheaf. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =3=:52. 1837. =2.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_
=7=:77, fig. 1859.

Introduced by S. H. Smith, an amateur horticulturist of Rhode
Island where it was already much cultivated in 1837. Fruit medium,
oblong-obovate-pyriform, deep yellow, with patches and traces of
cinnamon-russet; flesh white, juicy, melting, not highly flavored but
very sweet and agreeable; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Capucine Van Mons. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:528, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =5=:145, fig. 361. 1880.

Obtained by Simon Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel., a friend of Van Mons,
to whom he dedicated the variety in 1828. Fruit above medium,
oval-pyriform, bright green, dotted all over with fawn and slightly
bronzed on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish or greenish, fine,
semi-melting, crisp, rich, sugary; juice very abundant, vinous, having
a delicate aroma; good to very good; Oct. to Dec.

=Carasi. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 80. 1876. =2.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 373. 1908.

This is a perry pear, widely distributed in Europe under variations
of the same name. On the farms of Brie, France, it is known as the
_Carisi_, the fruit being medium size or rather large, the juice
perfumed, without color, rich in tannin. In the neighborhood of Metz,
Lorraine, it is called Carasi and in the district of Auge, France,
_Carisy_. Bunyard and Thomas in their joint work, "The Fruit Garden,"
mention _Carisie-Gros_ and _Carisie-Petit_ as varieties for perry
making, and they are probably two variations of the same pear, as too
are the _Carisi rouge_ and _Carisi blanc_ of France. The Carasi, or
_Rote Carisi_, of Austria is a beautiful fruit, large to very large,
irregular in outline, pyriform, swelled at middle, somewhat truncated;
skin tough, green, turning to lemon-yellow, richly blushed on the
sunny side, dotted with red; flesh whitish, rather coarse, very juicy,
subacid, aromatic; Oct.

=Cardinal Georges d'Ambroise. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

Raised from Beurre Clairgeau crossed with Beurre Henri Courcelle. Fruit
medium, curved, pyriform, the form of Beurre Clairgeau; flesh very
fine, juicy, sugary; delicious; Nov. and Dec.

=Carleton. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 46. 1866.

This is one of the forty-five seedlings fruited by S. A. Shurtleff,
Brookline, Mass., between the years 1862 and 1866. Fruit large,
obovate, light green; flesh melting, juicy, slightly acid; good bearer,
markets well; Oct.

=Carmel. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 134. 1920.

Originated with N. W. Crawford, East Carmel, O., and introduced by
him about 1850. Tree hardy, productive; fruit russet; flesh juicy,
excellent; ripens early.

=Carminbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:50. 1856.

Locality of origin Nassau, western Germany, 1812. Fruit medium,
obovate, sides unequal; pronounced lemon-yellow, carmined on the side
of the sun; good; Aug.

=Caroline Hogg. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 543. 1884. =2.= Nicholson _Dict.
Gard._ =3=:51. 1900.

A seedling from John Mannington, Uckfield, Sussex, Eng., which first
fruited in 1870. Fruit below medium, Bergamot-shaped, even and regular;
skin covered with a thick, rather deep brown-russet, reddish on side
exposed to the sun; flesh very tender, melting, rich, vinous, with
plenty of finely perfumed juice; first quality, reminiscent in shape
and flavor of Winter Nelis; Dec.

=Carriere. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 1046. 1866. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=1=:529, fig. 1867.

In 1866 the original tree was still existing at Poncet, Fr., being then
about 200 years old. Fruit small, pyriform, golden-yellow, dotted with
brown-gray on the shaded side and bright yellow on the side of the sun,
washed with brilliant red; flesh yellowish-white, breaking, rather dry,
sweet, acidulous, agreeable, without perfume; second; July and Aug.

=Cartheurserbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:9. 1856.

French, 1845. Fruit very large, ovate-pyriform, bossed, green, changing
to yellow, lightly blushed in the sun; flesh soft; winter.

=Casimir. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:185, fig. 577. 1881.

A seedling from Beurre de Lucon, raised in 1859 by M. Pariset,
Curciat-Dongalon, Fr. Fruit medium, ovate-pyriform; skin thin, tender,
bright green, sprinkled with numerous round, brown dots; on ripening
the green becomes lemon-yellow, lightly washed with red-brown on the
exposed side; flesh a little yellow, fine, melting, gritty around the
core, juice sugary, abundant, vinous, acidulous and perfumed; good; Nov.

=Cassante du Comice. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ =20=:30, fig. 1871.

Raised from seed by the Horticultural Society of Angers, Fr.,
and distributed by Leroy of that city about 1870. Fruit medium,
globular-oblate or Bergamot-shaped, dull yellow, much covered with
rough, brown-russet which leaves large patches of the ground color
apparent; flesh yellowish, coarse-grained, crisp, very juicy, with a
rich, sweet, sugary flavor; first; Sept.

=Cassante de Mars. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:75, fig. 44. 1866-73. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:530, fig. 1867.

A little-known seedling raised by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., about
1840. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate, orange-yellow, dotted, stained
and marbled with fawn, bronzed on the side exposed to the sun; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, breaking, gritty about the core; juice abundant,
vinous, sugary, rather aromatic, richly flavored; second; winter and
spring.

=Cassel. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 134. 1920.

Probably a cross between Duchesse d'Angouleme and Kieffer. Introduced
by Cassel Nursery, Cleveland, O., about 1914. Tree strong, upright,
productive. Fruit large, resembling Duchesse d'Angouleme in shape, rich
lemon-yellow; flesh yellowish, white, fine-grained, rich, juicy, sweet;
Oct. to Dec.

=Cassolette. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:160, Pl. XVIII. 1768.
=2.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =3=: 1807. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:531.
1867.

An ancient pear deriving its name from an imagined resemblance to a
perfuming-pot. Numerous synonyms have been locally given to it. Fruit
small, globular, pyriform, whitish-green, sprinkled evenly all over
with small dots; flesh white, semi-fine, breaking, very tender; juice
sufficient, sugary, slightly musky; second; Aug. and Sept.

=Cassolette (Knoop). 1.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:104, 135, Pl. 5. 1771.

This is not the same variety as the _Cassolette_ described by Leroy.
Fruit medium, long-obtuse-pyriform; skin rather rough, brown or grayish
on the fundamental green, on ripening becomes a little yellow; flesh
soft, melting, with a very pleasant flavor; Aug. and Sept.

=Castelline. 1.= _Pom. France_ =4=:151, Pl. 151. 1867. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:532, fig. 1867. =3.= _Guide Prat._ 49. 1895.

A Belgian variety obtained in 1835 by Florimond Castelain near Tournai,
Bel. Fruit medium, turbinate-pyriform, yellowish-green, much covered
with russet and speckled with fawn-russet, colored with dull red on the
side of the sun; flesh yellowish, semi-fine, melting; juice sugary,
acidulous and agreeably perfumed; first; Nov.

=Catherine Gardette. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 715. 1869. =2.= Thomas
_Am. Fruit Cult._ 697. 1897.

From W. D. Brinckle, Philadelphia, in 1857. Fruit medium,
globular-obovate, yellow, freely dotted with red spots on the
sun-exposed side; flesh yellowish, coarse, buttery, sweet; good; Sept.

=Catherine Lambre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:534, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 716. 1869.

One of the last seedlings raised by Van Mons in his nursery at Louvain.
Fruit large, oblong-obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, covered with
russet dots on the shaded side and blushed with tender rose on the
sunny side; flesh whitish, semi-fine, juicy, melting, sweet, seldom
gritty, having an exquisite savor recalling the perfume of the rose;
very good; Oct. and Nov.

=Catherine Royal. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 131, Pl. LXII, fig. 5. 1729.

_King Catherine._ =2.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

Catherine Royal is mentioned by Langley as one of "the best kinds
of Pears in England," and is without doubt the _King Catherine
Pear_ described earlier by Parkinson. Fruit medium in size,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform; July and Aug.

=Catillac. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:233, Pl. LVIII, fig. 4.
1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:535, fig. 1867. =3.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 716. 1869. =4.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 162. 1920.

_Grand Monarque._ =5.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:125, 136, fig. 1771.

This old French baking pear with over sixty synonyms is supposed to
have been found near Cadillac in the Gironde. Bonnefond in 1665 in the
_Jardinier Francois_ first described it under this name. The great size
of the Catillac has often caused it to be confused with the _Pound_
pear, and the latter's name has been applied as a synonym for the
Catillac, but the two are distinct. Tree stout, vigorous, spreading,
productive; leaf large, round, downy, serrate. Fruit very large,
broadly turbinate, dull green to yellow, with brownish-red blush; stem
stout, an inch long, in a small cavity; calyx open, in a moderately
deep, ribbed basin; flesh hard, rough; one of the best of stewing
pears, cooking a deep red; Nov. to Mar.

=Catinka. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:537, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 545. 1884.

Raised by Major Esperen from seed at Mechlin, Bel., about 1845.
Fruit medium, obovate, lemon-yellow, thickly covered with
large cinnamon-colored freckles and tracings of russet; flesh
yellowish-white, juicy, sugary, with a rich, full flavor perfumed with
rose; good; late autumn.

=Cavaignac. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:96. 1856.

Raised by Van Mons, 1852. Fruit medium; skin rough, green changing to
yellowish-green, blushed with red on the sun-exposed side; devoid of
scent and flavor; Sept.

=Cavelier de la Salle. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

Raised from seed of Olivier de Serres fertilized with Vice-President
Delbee; described in 1895 as a new variety. Fruit medium, having the
appearance of Olivier de Serres; flesh extra fine, juicy, sugary,
delicious, agreeably perfumed; Dec. Tree rather vigorous and very
fertile, forming beautiful pyramids.

=Cedarmere. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =18=:279, fig. 1863. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 716. 1869.

Raised from seed by William C. Bryant, the poet, at his country seat at
Roslyn, N. Y., about 1860. Fruit small, globular-obovate, sides unequal,
pale greenish-yellow, with small russet dots and nettings; flesh white,
juicy, melting, sweet, fine-grained, aromatic; very good; Aug.

=Cels Butterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:113. 1856.

A Van Mons seedling, 1804. Fruit medium, long, obtuse, golden-yellow,
washed with reddish-brown; Sept.

=Century. 1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 77. 1883.

Dr. J. Stayman, Leavenworth, Kan., before the Missouri Horticultural
Society in 1883 stated that the Century pear had stood over a hundred
years at its home in Pennsylvania, had borne well and at that
time showed no blight or disease. He also said it appeared to be
blight-proof at Carthage, Mo.

=Cerise Brune. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 89. 1895.

Fruit medium, regular in form, greenish, passing into yellow at
maturity, speckled with brown dots; flesh white, rather astringent,
with a savor at once sour and sweet; July and Aug.

=Cerise Double. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 89. 1895.

Fruit medium, pyriform, slightly swollen about the middle, pale green
changing to yellow on ripening, lightly dotted with brown; flesh white,
breaking, with a slightly astringent flavor; Aug.

=Cerruttis Durstloesche. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 194. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 81. 1895.

Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse; yellow; flesh breaking, very juicy,
scented; good for cooking; Sept.

=Certeau. 1.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 404. 1908.

Baltet remarks of this pear that with it, in common with Catillac and
certain other varieties, the flesh becomes red when cooked. Baltet also
points out that pears with a gray skin are generally good for kitchen
use.

=Certeau d'Automne. 1.= _Pom. France_ =3=:No. 111, Pl. 111. 1865. =2.=
_Guide Prat._ 66. 1895.

Described in 1661 by Bonnefond, in 1690 by Merlet and by La Quintinye
in 1730, but its place and time of origin are unknown. Fruit small
to medium, growing in clusters, long-pyriform, yellow, washed with
brilliant orange-red and dotted with gray; flesh white, not fine,
breaking, juicy, sugary, having a perfume of the Rousselet; good for
kitchen use; Oct. to Dec.

=Certeau d'Ete. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:539, fig. 1867.

In the sixteenth century this variety was also called the pear of
_Champagne_, coming as it did, according to Charles Estienne, from that
district in 1540. Its name may be referred to the Latin word _certo_
signifying constant or certain. Fruit above medium, long, variable,
sometimes rather like Calebasse in form but more usually obtuse-conic,
bright yellow though a little greenish, dotted all over with gray-brown
and widely carmined on the side opposed to the sun; flesh whitish,
semi-fine and melting; juice sufficient; saccharine, seldom much
perfumed but with a delicate flavor; second; Aug.

=Certeau d'Hiver. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:540, fig. 1867. =2.=
Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:248. 1768.

Certeau d'Hiver, like Certeau d'Ete, originated, Charles Estienne,
writing in 1540, tells us, in the environs of Vitry-le-Francais,
in the French champagne country. Fruit medium and sometimes less,
long-turbinate, swelled and contracted at summit, sometimes gourd-like
in form, bright yellowish-green, dotted with fawn, washed with
brown-red on side touched by the sun; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine,
semi-breaking, gritty and somewhat astringent; juice abundant, sugary,
perfumed; third; Dec. to Apr. or May.

=Cesile. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 140. 1841.

Tree hardy, productive; fruit large, globular, flattened at the apex,
red-russeted; flesh buttery; very good; Oct.

=Chaigneau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:542, fig. 1867. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 57. 1895.

From a seed bed made in 1848 by Jacques Jalais, a nurseryman at
Nantes, Fr., first published in 1858. Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse,
yellowish-green, dotted with brownish-gray; flesh white, melting; juice
acidulous, sugary, refreshing, aromatic; first; Oct.

=Chair-a-Dame. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:156, Pl. XVI. 1768.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:543, fig. 1867.

Le Lectier possessed in his garden at Orleans at the beginning of the
seventeenth century two strains of the Chair-a-Dame. One he called
_Chere-a-Dame tres-hastine_, and the other _Chere-a-Dame_. The first
is very early in its ripening and the second much later. Fruit medium
or less, oblong-pyriform, bossed, fairly regular; skin thin, bright
yellow-green, very finely dotted with gray-russet and extensively
carmined on the side next the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, breaking or
semi-melting, watery, gritty at center; juice abundant, saccharine,
vinous, rarely very aromatic, sometimes slightly acid; second; Aug. and
Sept.

=Chamness. 1.= Clingman _Cat._ 8. 1921.

Originated with a Mr. Chamness of Timpson, Tex., possibly as a cross
between Kieffer and Bartlett, and was introduced in 1913. Fruit medium,
smooth, yellow; flesh melting, juicy, tender, sweet; ripens last of
August.

=Champ Riche d'Italie. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:232. 1768.
=2.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 124. 1841. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:544,
fig. 1867. =4.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 545. 1884.

Probably of Italian origin. Diel of Stuttgart devoted many pages of
his _Kernobstsorten_ to it in 1805 at which time he had received it
from the neighborhood of Paris, though it had already been known for
a long while at Berlin. Fruit above medium and often large, pyriform,
always rather swelled below the central circumference, contracted at
the summit which is often nearly acute, greenish on the shady side,
yellow-ochre on the face exposed to the sun, dotted all over with brown
specks; flesh whitish, semi-melting or breaking, rather fine, free from
grit, juicy, sweet and perfumed; first rate for cooking and compotes
but third for dessert.

=Champagner Bratbirne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 89, 256. 1876. =2.= Loeschnig
_Mostbirnen_ 8, fig. 1913.

Much valued in Germany for making champagne and perry. It was grown in
Baden, Wuerttemberg, and Hesse in 1797. Fruit small, globular-turbinate,
even in outline, light green turning yellow without any blush, speckled
with brown-russet and finely dotted; flesh white, coarse, nearly
breaking; first for perry; autumn.

=Chancelier de Hollande. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:31, fig. 496. 1881.

A seedling of Van Mons. Fruit medium to large, obovate-pyriform; skin
rather thick and firm, becoming a little greasy, bright green speckled
with green-gray dots; on ripening the original green becomes yellow
and washed with red on the exposed side; flesh whitish, a little green
under the skin, rather coarse, gritty at the center, semi-melting;
juice plentiful, rich in sugar, acidulous, slightly perfumed,
agreeable; third; Nov.

=Chancellor. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:65. 1853. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 717. 1869.

Said to have originated in Germantown, Pa., on the grounds of a Mr.
Chancellor. At the Second Session of the American Pomological Congress
in 1853 it was placed on the list of pears that promised well. Fruit
rather large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, sometimes
blushed on the exposed side, dotted; flesh white, juicy, buttery,
melting, sugary, perfumed; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Chantry. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:125. 1843.

Published in the London Horticultural Society's Catalogue of Fruits,
1842. Fruit medium size, globular, brown and russet; buttery; second;
Dec. and Jan.

=Chaploux. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:169, fig. 83. 1866-73. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:547. 1867.

Distributed from nurseries at Vilvorde-lez-Bruxelles, Bel., in 1859.
Fruit small, globular-turbinate, acute, the stem being perpendicular
to and continuous with the fruit; color dark green, touched with brown
russet; flesh yellowish-white, veined with green, fine, buttery, very
sugary; first quality for cider and for drying; Dec. and Jan.

=Chapman. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =14=:84. 1848. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
717. 1890.

Originated in Philadelphia or its vicinity. Shown at the exhibition of
the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society held at Philadelphia, September,
1847. Fruit medium, obovate-pyriform, yellow, with brown and green
dots; flesh white, semi-melting, astringent; Sept.

=Chaptal. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:547. 1867.

Raised in Paris by Michel-Christophe Hervy, about 1800. Fruit very
large, oblong, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, yellow-ochre, dotted with
greenish-brown, marbled with fawn, washed with dark red on the side
facing the sun; flesh white, semi-fine and semi-melting, gritty at the
center; juice sufficient, sugary, acidulous; second.

=Charles Bivort. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:549, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =6=:151, fig. 460. 1880.

A seedling of Van Mons fruited prior to 1842. Fruit medium,
globular-ovate-obtuse; bright green changing to orange-yellow
at maturity, marbled and dotted with bright brown, and clouded
with olive-russet on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, coarse,
semi-breaking, gritty at core; juice rather wanting, sugary, vinous;
second; Oct.

=Charles Cognee. 1.= Bunyard-Thomas _Fr. Gard._ 367. 1904. =2.= Baltet
_Cult. Fr._ 345, fig. 247. 1908.

Raised at Troyes, Fr. Fruit large or rather large, obtuse-pyriform;
skin pinkish-yellow, lightly dotted with brown; flesh slightly
granulous, sweet, perfumed, juicy, with a very agreeable flavor; first;
Feb. and longer.

=Charles Ernest. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 292. 1889. =2.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._
328, fig. 224. 1908. =3.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 163. 1920.

Obtained by Charles and Ernest Baltet, nurserymen of Troyes, Fr., and
placed in commerce in 1879. Fruit large, shortened pyriform, obtuse,
golden-yellow, encrimsoned on the side next the sun, dotted with gray
on the bright side and with green on the shaded; flesh white, fine,
melting, very juicy, sugary, rich, perfumed; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Charles Frederickx. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:1, fig. 1854. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:550, fig. 1. 1867.

In 1840 or 1841 this pear was raised in the Van Mons nursery at
Louvain, Bel. Fruit medium, globular-ovate-pyriform, slightly obtuse
and bossed, golden-yellow, dotted and veined with fawn, shaded and
mottled with red in the sun; flesh white, buttery, sweet, melting,
juice sufficient, sugary, very savory and musky; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Charles de Guelin. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =35=:79. 1904.

Described in the _Bulletins d'Arboriculture_, January, 1904. Fruit
large, turbinate, smoky-brown; flesh yellowish-white, melting, perfumed
and juicy; good; Jan. and Feb.

=Charles Smet. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 480. 1857. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =1=:551, fig. 1867.

A seedling of Van Mons. Fruit large, globular, greenish-yellow, fine,
dark green spots, stained with blackish-brown around the stalk; flesh
white, coarse, breaking, gritty around the core; juice abundant,
saccharine, with not much flavor; second; Jan. to Mar.

=Charles van Hooghten. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =17=:472. 1851. =2.=
_Horticulturist_ =8=:30, fig. 1853.

Fruit large, even, roundish-oval, yellow, netted and patched with
russet and with many russet dots; stem slender, fleshy at insertion;
calyx open; basin shallow; flesh white, coarse-grained, gritty, not
very juicy, sweet, rich, with a musky perfume; good; Oct.

=Charles Van Mons. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =16=:295. 1850. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
Rpt._ 238. 1854. =3.= Hogg _Fr. Man._ 546. 1884.

Belgian, about 1847. At the second session of the Congress of Fruit
Growers in 1850 this pear was placed on the rejected list, as also it
was again by the American Pomological Society in 1854. Fruit large,
oblong-obovate-obtuse, smooth, bright green, strewed with some minute
dots; flesh yellowish, rather coarse-grained, with a cold acidity and
not much flavor; of small merit; Oct. and Nov.

=Charli Basiner. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 546. 1884. =2.= _Guide Prat._
89. 1895.

A production of J. de Jonghe of Brussels, Bel., about 1857. Fruit
medium, obovate, pale green, dotted and clouded with brown-russet
changing as it ripens to yellowish-green; flesh white, juicy and
sugary; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Charlotte de Brouwer. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:33. 1855. =2.= Mas _Le
Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 107, fig. 52. 1866-73.

One of Major Esperen's seedlings raised at Mechlin, Bel., and reported
on in 1835. Fruit medium and above, globular-ovate, yellow ground
of skin almost entirely covered with a coating of light brown-russet
except on the shaded side; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine,
semi-melting; juice sufficient, sugary, vinous, acid and very
astringent; second; Oct. and Nov.

=Charlotte de Roucourt. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 194. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 89. 1895.

Distributed by Daras de Naghin of Antwerp, Bel., about 1880. Fruit
medium, obovate or obtuse-pyriform; flesh melting, very juicy, sugary,
perfumed; Mar. and Apr.

=Charnock. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 547. 1884. =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._
194. 1889.

A Scotch dessert pear. Fruit small, pyriform, greenish-yellow in the
shade and dark, dull red on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish,
semi-buttery, juicy, sweet, aromatic; Sept.

=Chat Brule. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2:=247. 1768. =2.= Miller
_Gard. Dict._ =3=: 1807. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:555, fig. 1867.

Duhamel du Monceau writing in 1768 mentions two varieties bearing the
name _Chat Brule_ or _Burnt Cat_. Of these the second is the _Chat
Brule_ described under that name by Leroy, ripening in November and
the first is the Dutch variety _Kamper Venus_, ripening late in the
winter. Each of these has been known also as _Kamper Venus_. Fruit
medium, globular-pyriform, smooth, shining, pale yellow where shaded,
and washed with red where exposed to the sun; flesh very white, rather
coarse, breaking; juice rather wanting, rarely very sweet, generally
without perfume; good only for cooking; Nov. and Dec.

=Chattanooga. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

Originated at Brookline, Mass., by S. A. Shurtleff; fruited first in
1863. Fruit medium to large, truncate, dark green; flesh fine, melting,
juicy, sweet, perfumed; good; Oct.

=Chaudfontaine. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:59, fig. 510. 1881. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 81. 1895.

Disseminated by M. Galopin, a nurseryman at Liege, Bel., in 1865. Fruit
large or rather large, pyriform, a little swelled, water-green almost
entirely covered with cinnamon-colored russet, changing to pale yellow
on maturity and the russet to golden on the side to the sun; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, semi-breaking, full of juice, sweet and musky; good
for household use; Oct.

=Chaumontel. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 718. 1869. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 163. 1920.

_Besi de Chaumontel_. =3.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:199, Pl. XL.
1768. =4.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:266, fig. 1867.

Merlet writing in his _L'Abrege des bon fruits_ of 1675 said that the
Chaumontel pear originated from a wilding growing at Chaumontel, Fr.
In 1765 Duhamel du Monceau saw the parent tree, at that time more than
a century old, bearing a fine crop. Fruit large; form variable, but
always long, obtuse, bossed, pyriform, yellow or yellowish-green in
the shade, dotted with numerous brownish-red spots and brownish-red or
deep rich red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine,
melting, buttery, rich and sugary; juice abundant, vinous, highly
perfumed; a high class dessert pear.

=Chaumontel Gras. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 468, fig. 1888.

In 1845 seed of the Chaumontel was sown from which was obtained in 1859
fruit whose seed was in turn sown. A seedling grown from this latter
seed bore fruit, which was reported about 1875 as follows: Fruit large
or very large, obtuse-pyriform, swelled, bossed, bright yellow, very
much covered with fine dots and gray marblings and on the sun-touched
side often tinted with carmine or brick-red more or less intense;
flesh white or yellowish, semi-fine, crisp, very melting, juicy, rich,
sugary, perfumed; spring.

=Chaumontel Swan Egg. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =5=:304. 1839.

Raised by John Williams, Pitmaston, Eng., from seed of Chaumontel
impregnated with the pollen of Swan Egg. Fruit medium, obovate, russet;
flesh rich and sugary; Oct.

=Chaumontelle d'Ete. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 1207. 1873. =2.= _Guide Prat._
90. 1876.

Presumably a French pear, having been received in England from Orleans
in the autumn of 1871. Fruit large or very large; flesh semi-melting or
juicy, sugary and of a distinct perfumed flavor.

=Chelmsford. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =6=:18. 1840. =2.= _Ibid._ =7=:169. 1841.
=3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 719. 1869.

Originated on the farm of Zaccheus Wright, Chelmsford, Mass.,
early in the nineteenth century. It has been known also under the
names _Tyngsboro_ and _Mogul Summer_. Fruit of the largest size,
globular-obtuse-pyriform, yellow, red cheek; flesh coarse, sweet; good
for cooking; Sept.

=Cher a Dames= (Knoop). =1.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:105, 135, Pl. V.
1771.

This pear although illustrated by Knoop under the name _Chair a Dame_
is not identical with the variety described under that name in this
work or by Leroy. Fruit medium, somewhat oblong, diminishing toward
the stalk and becoming acute, globular in lower half, flattened around
the calyx which is not deeply sunken; when ripe the skin is uniformly
yellow and blushed on the side of the sun with a beautiful red; flesh
soft, rather gritty, succulent and of a very agreeable flavor; Aug. and
Sept.

=Cherroise. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:557, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =6=:169, fig. 469. 1880.

This wilding was found in a wood in the Commune of Cherre,
Maine-et-Loire, Fr., and was first propagated about 1848. Fruit medium,
ovate-obtuse, mammillate; skin rough to the touch, yellow-ochre, with
patches of fawn-colored russet, washed when ripe with a blush of
vermilion red on the side of the sun; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine,
breaking; juice sufficient, sugary, rather savory; second; Jan. and Feb.

=Chesill. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

Mentioned by John Parkinson in 1629 as a "delicate mellow pear, even
melting as it were in the mouth of the eater, although greenish on the
outside."

=Chilton. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1866.

A seedling raised and fruited by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., and
exhibited to the Fruit Committee of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society in 1866. Fruit medium, turbinate, brown-russet; flesh sweet,
juicy and buttery, with high flavor; described by the promoter as very
fine; Oct.

=China. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 1095. 1867.

Of Chinese origin. Reported in 1867 to be full of promise in
Queenstown, Australia, and to have been growing in the neighboring
British Colony of New South Wales for many years. Fruit large, many
weighing 16 or 17 ounces; shape variable, breadth being sometimes as
great as the length, warm yellow ground dotted all over with russet;
flesh crisp, juicy, sweet, the skin having something of a musky
pineapple flavor; a handsome, fragrant fruit; first for cooking; a good
keeper; summer.

=Chio. 1.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =3=: 1807.

Commonly called, according to Miller, the _Little Bastard Musk Pear_
to distinguish it from the _Little Musk Pear_. Fruit small, roundish,
yellow when ripe, with a few streaks of red on the side next the sun;
juice musky; good; July.

=Choak-pear. 1.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =3=: 1807.

The fruit of this pear is so acrid that it produces a choking
sensation. Its flesh is red and it is rarely cultivated.

=Choisnard. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:559, fig. 1867. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 80. 1895.

Found growing wild in the environs of Ormes-Sur-Vienne, Fr., about
1810. Fruit above to medium, pyramidal-obtuse, rather wrinkled, dark
yellow, dotted with fawn, large gray marblings which pass to dark brown
on the exposed side; flesh yellowish, semi-melting, semi-fine, gritty
at core; juice sufficient, sugary, tartish, savory, with a delicate,
musky flavor; first; Jan. to Mar.

=Cholwell. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:451. 1847.

An English variety first described by the London Horticultural
Society in 1847. Fruit medium, curved pyramidal; skin smooth, thin,
yellowish-green in the shade and partly tinged and obscurely streaked
with dull red next the sun where it is also speckled with pale dots;
flesh yellowish-white, melting, buttery, very sugary and rich, musky;
Oct.

=Christmas. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book._ 371. 1859.

Originated in Cincinnati, O., and described as "new" in 1859. Fruit
medium, ovate-rounded, rough, bronzed, russety; flesh a little gritty,
juicy, sweet; very good; Dec. and Jan.

=Christmas Beurre. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 158. 1874.

A seedling of the White Doyenne shown in the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society's rooms in 1874. Fruit full medium size,
ovate-pyriform, dull green, with thin russet towards the stem and
sometimes sprinkled with red next the sun; flesh rather gritty at core,
juicy and rich; very good to best; Dec.

=Church. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =23=:112, fig. 5. 1857. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 19. 1869.

_Vanilla._ =3.= Watson _Am. Home Gard._ 376, fig. 235. 1860.

Reported by Downing to have originated on land belonging to Trinity
Church at New Rochelle, N. Y., hence its name; but Dr. Brinckle, in the
second reference, says that it was believed to be a seedling raised
by an old Huguenot settler, and that the original tree still existed
on the premises of L. P. Miller, and was presumed to be nearly 100
years old. In 1859 Dr. Brinckle and Prince and Ferris expressed the
opinion that it was identical with _Platt's Bergamot_ and Mr. Colt
thought the _Clark_ pear of Hartford was also the same. Fruit medium,
globular-oblate, irregular, green becoming yellow at maturity, with
minute dots; flesh fine, very buttery, melting, with a very rich, sweet
and highly perfumed flavor; first; Sept.

=Chypre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:561, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 571. 1884.

Duhamel in 1768, Poiteau in 1848 and Dr. Hogg in 1884 make this pear
synonymous with _Early Rousselet_. Leroy regards it as a separate
variety. It is an ancient pear of uncertain origin. It was described
by Merlet in 1675 and was cultivated even earlier by Le Lectier
in his garden at Orleans. Probably it originated at the beginning
of the seventeenth century, but whether it took its name from the
Island of Cyprus or the cypress tree seems uncertain. Fruit small,
globular-turbinate, bright grayish-green, stained with brownish-red on
the side of the sun; flesh dense, rather coarse, semi-breaking; juice
abundant, vinous, sugary, with a perfume recalling cinnamon; first as
an early pear; July and Aug.

=Cincincis. 1.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 12. 1874-5. =2.= _Cornell Sta.
Bul._ =332=:451, 479, figs. 149, 154. 1913.

This oriental pear, possibly of French origin, was received from
New York by S. F. Smith, Marietta, O., in 1854. It is the parent of
numerous seedlings fruited by Mr. Smith. Fruit medium to small, oval,
fairly regular, light greenish-russet, with numerous brown dots; skin
slightly rough; flesh yellowish-white, juicy, breaking, crisp; devoid
of flavor, poor; Oct.

=Cincincis Seedling. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:479. 1913.

Introduced by William Parry and very closely resembles, if it is not
identical with, Cincincis. Fruit medium to large, oblong, largest at
stem end, tapering to blossom end, smooth, creamy-yellow; flesh tender,
crisp, juicy, lacking quality.

=Cincinnatus. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:479. 1913.

An oriental seedling produced by S. F. Smith from seed of Cincincis.
Folette Smith, son of the originator, says, "The tree is vigorous,
hardy, productive; fruit resembles Cincincis in color and shape but is
quite distinct in quality; juicy, subacid, rich; flesh gritty."

=Cinquantieme Anniversaire. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 89. 1895.

Raised by M. Gregoire of Jodoigne, Bel., who considered it one of his
best gains. Fruit small to large; Nov.

=Cire. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:563, fig. 1867. =2.= _Guide Prat._
108. 1876.

_Wachsbirne._ =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:187. 1856.

One of Major Esperen's gains at Mechlin, Bel., about 1840. Fruit large,
long-conic, obtuse, much swelled around the calyx; skin waxy yellow,
bright, rather thick, slightly tinged with rose on the side of the sun
and some small stains of dark maroon; flesh whitish, semi-fine and
semi-melting, extremely granular about the center; juice sufficient but
wanting in perfume and in sweetness; third; Feb.

=Cite Gomand. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 74. 1895.

A gain of M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Brabant. Fruit medium,
turbinate-ovate, yellow with dots; flesh melting, juicy; good; Oct.

=Citrina. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1866. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 720. 1869.

One of S. A. Shurtleff's seedlings. First fruited in 1862. Fruit
medium, short-pyriform, bright yellow, lumpy and nodular; flesh nearly
white, coarse, gritty at core, of a pleasant, peculiar flavor; Sept.

=Citron. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =4=:231. 1838. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
720. 1869.

A seedling of the late Governor Edwards. Fruit small,
globular-turbinate, greenish, shaded with dull crimson; flesh greenish,
rather coarse, juicy, melting, sugary, vinous, musky; good; Aug. and
Sept.

=Citron d'Hyver. 1.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =3=: 1807.

Fruit medium to large, "in shape and color very like an orange or
citron;" flesh hard and dry, gritty; good baking pear; Dec. to Mar.

=Citron de Saint Paul. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:566. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:29, fig. 207. 1879.

From a seed bed of M. de la Farge in the Commune of Salers, Cantal,
Fr. It was first published in 1856. Fruit below medium, ovate, obtuse
and bossed, golden-yellow, dotted all over with bright green; flesh
whitish, fine, melting, juicy, rather gritty; juice very abundant,
sugary, sweet and deliciously perfumed; first; Sept.

=Citron de Sierentz. 1.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:103, 135, Pl. V. 1771.
=2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:101, fig. 435. 1880.

The Horticultural Society of Angers received some grafts of this
variety in 1836 with the information that it originated in the small
village of Sierentz, near Mulhausen, Alsace. Knoop, however, describing
it in 1771 under the name of _Citron de Sirene_ gives it various
Flemish synonyms. Fruit small to medium, turbinate or globular-ovate
and slightly pyriform, bright yellow or greenish-yellow, dotted with
russet and some brownish-fawn markings passing often to olive-brown
and slightly vermilion on the side of the sun; flesh white, coarse,
breaking, juicy, sugary, acid, savory; second; July and Aug.

=Citronnee. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:568, fig. 1867. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 71, 245. 1895.

This is practically identical with the pear found by Diel and described
by him in 1806 under the name _Rothbackige Citronatbirne_. Fruit below
medium, globular, bossed at summit, lemon-yellow, dotted with russet
and washed on the sun-exposed side with delicate rose; flesh white,
fine, dense, very melting, gritty about the core; juice very abundant,
sugary, slightly acid, aromatic, savory, leaving a slight flavor of
musk; first; Sept.

=Clap. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 720. 1869.

Originated by Captain William Clap of Massachusetts. Fruit below
medium, acute-pyriform, yellowish-green, with brownish blush in the
sun; flesh whitish, buttery, juicy, aromatic; Aug.

=Clara. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:58. 1842. =2.= _Ibid._ =16=:295. 1850.
=3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 720. 1869.

A Van Mons seedling placed on the list of "Rejected Fruits" at the
second session of the Congress of Fruit Growers at New York in 1850.
Fruit medium, long, light green, with some russet spots and patches;
flesh white, juicy, good, rather too acid; Oct.

=Clara Durieux. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:149, fig. 75. 1872. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 108. 1876.

A seedling of Von Mons. Fruit medium, globular, bright green, with dots
of darker green, becoming golden-yellow on maturity, washed with red on
the sun-kissed side; flesh whitish, rather fine, melting, juicy, sweet,
vinous, perfumed; Oct.

=Claretenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:195. 1856.

Northern Germany, first reported in 1773. Fruit large,
roundish-turbinate, often unequal sides, bossed, yellow, somewhat
blushed; flesh granular, sweet and astringent; good; Sept.

=Clark. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:518. 1853. =2.= _Ibid._ =24=:126. 1858.

Origin uncertain; cultivated in Hartford, Conn. The pear "bears a
good deal of resemblance in form, texture, flavor and seed to the
_Autumn Bergamot_ of Col. Carr." Fruit above medium, short-pyriform or
turbinate, as broad as it is high; flesh rather coarse, very tender,
melting, juicy, with a refreshing and agreeable flavor; desirable; Oct.

=Clarksville. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 134. 1920.

Original tree about 90 years old. Introduced by Sunny Slope Nursery,
Hannibal, Mo.

=Claude Blanchet. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 54. 1895. =2.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._
405. 1908.

A gain of Claude Blanchet, Vienne, Fr., and listed in the _Journal de
la Societe Nationale et Centrale d'Horticulture de France_ in 1883.
Fruit small or medium; ovate-obtuse and rather swelled, green washed
with yellow; flesh whitish, semi-fine, juicy, sugary and acidulous;
good; Aug.

=Claude Mollet. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 90. 1876.

Fruit large, oval-shortened; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Clay. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 5. 1843. =2.= _Mag. Hort._ =11=:437.
1845. =3.= Downing. _Fr. Trees Am._ 721. 1869.

One of Governor Edwards' seedlings, exhibited before the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society in 1843. Fruit medium, roundish-oblate, sometimes
pyriform, waxen-yellow, blushed with crimson and sprinkled with brown
or crimson dots; flesh whitish, rather coarse, granular, juicy, sweet;
good; Oct.

=Clemence de Lavours. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:71, fig. 42. 1866-73.

A wilding found in the Commune of Lavours, Department Ain, Fr. Fruit
medium, pyriform, lemon-yellow; flesh melting, perfumed; first; winter.

=Clemence van Rumbeck. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 62. 1895.

Presumably Dutch. Fruit medium or large, nearly round, maroon-russet on
yellow; flesh yellowish, fine, melting; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Clement Bivort. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:569, fig. 1867.

Obtained by Alexandre Bivort, director of the nurseries of the Society
Van Mons at Geest-Saint-Remy, in the gardens of the Company, and
first placed on the market in 1858. Fruit medium, globular-oblate,
orange-yellow, sprinkled with some gray dots, clouded with fawn
especially on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, melting, juicy,
sugary, acidulous and sourish, with a strong, agreeable perfume of
anis; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Clementine. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:136. 1856. =2.= _Gard.
Chron._ 1038, fig. 1859.

Seedling of Van Mons, 1833. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform,
golden-yellow, with dots of reddish-brown, slightly reddened on side
next the sun; flesh white, moderately fine-grained, melting; juice
abundant and perfumed; good; Sept.

=Clinton. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:60. 1842. =2.= _Ibid._ =17=:263. 1851.

Seedling of Van Mons. Fruit large, light yellow; flesh soft, buttery
and good but not high flavored; Nov.

=Cloche de Wittenberg. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 90. 1876.

Fruit large, turbinate-obovate, dark lemon-yellow, lightly washed with
red; flesh breaking; for kitchen use; Oct. and Nov.

=Coit Beurre. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =19=:110, figs. 1, 2. 1864. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 722, fig. 1869.

Raised by Colonel Coit, near Cleveland, O. Fruit medium, obovate
inclining to pyriform, yellow, deeply covered with russet, covered with
dots which become crimson on exposed side, cheek often crimson; flesh
buttery, juicy, spicy, melting, rich, vinous; very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Cole. 1.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:239. 1903.

Originated at Detroit, Kan., and variously known as _Cole's Seedless_,
_Cole's Pear_, _Cole's Coreless_ and _Cole's Seedless and Coreless_.
Fruit medium, globular approaching acute-pyriform; color lemon-yellow,
thickly sprinkled with minute russet dots; stem medium long, stout,
inserted in a very small cavity; calyx small, open, in a small, shallow
basin; flesh white, a little granular, moderately juicy, sweet,
pleasant aroma; good. Often sold as "seedless" but frequently shows
seeds.

=Cole Winter. 1.= _U. S. D. A. Pom. Rpt._ 37. 1895.

Received from Horticultural Gardens, Victoria, Australia, by T.
J. Garden, Gardenia, Va. Fruit medium, short, pyriform, having a
well-defined suture-like groove running from stem to calyx; color
yellow, russeted; stem medium, in a small cavity; calyx large, open;
flesh white, tender, melting, juicy, sprightly; very good; autumn.

=Collins. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =17=:255, fig. 261. 1851. =2.= _Ibid._
=18=:149. 1852.

Raised from seed of the White Doyenne on the farm of a Mr. Collins in
Watertown, Mass., and introduced in 1848. Fruit large, obovate, rather
flattened, when ripe greenish-yellow, with a fine blush in the sun and
speckled with russet dots; flesh white, fine, brisk, melting, juicy,
vinous, sweet; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Colmar. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:222, Pl. L. 1768. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:572, fig. 1867.

A highly esteemed pear of ancient and probably Belgian origin. Merlet
mentions it in 1690 and La Quintinye in 1730. Fruit above medium,
obtuse-pyriform, smooth, pale green changing to yellow-ochre on
ripening and sometimes washed with pale red on the side exposed to the
sun; flesh yellowish-white, fine, semi-melting, watery, tender, with a
rich, sugary flavor; juice very abundant, acidulous, and deliciously
perfumed; first; Nov. to Mar.

=Colmar d'Alost 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:574, fig. 1867.

Raised from a seed bed made in 1840 by M. Hellinckx, a nurseryman at
Alost, Bel. Fruit large, oblong, very obtuse, enlarged on one side,
bright green in the shade, yellowish-green on the side exposed to the
sun, dotted with brown specks and covered with patches of fawn; flesh
white, fine, semi-melting, juicy, gritty at the center, sweet, vinous,
acidulous, savory: first; Oct. and Nov.

=Colmar d'Arenberg. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:3, fig. 1855. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:575, fig. 1867.

Attributed to Van Mons and thought to have originated in 1821. Fruit
very large; form rather variable, obovate, uneven and bossed in
outline, yellow-ochre on the shaded side and russeted on the exposed
face; flesh yellowish-white, semi-melting, juicy, sweet, slightly
aromatic; a handsome but coarse pear; Oct.

=Colmar Artoisenet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:577, fig. 1867.

Found by Simon Bouvier in the garden of M. Artoisenet at Jodoigne,
Bel. Fruit medium to above, turbinate-obtuse, greenish-yellow, dotted
and marbled with gray-russet on the shady side and entirely stained
with fawn on the cheek exposed to the sun; flesh whitish, fine,
semi-melting; juice rather wanting, little sugar, delicate; second; Nov.

=Colmar d'Automne Nouveau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:578, fig. 1867.
=2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:45, fig. 503. 1881.

Originated in the garden of the Horticultural Society of Angers; first
reported in 1851. Fruit above medium, conic-obtuse but sometimes
almost cylindrical, russet-gray, lightly and uniformly clouded with
orange-yellow; flesh white, fine, melting; juice abundant, sugary and
strongly aromatic, occasionally a little acid; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Colmar Bretagne. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 549. 1884.

Growing in the gardens of the Caledonian Horticultural Society in
Edinburgh, Scot., before 1884. Fruit medium pyramidal, swollen on one
side; skin smooth, deep, clear yellow, tinged with green on the shaded
side and bright vermilion on the side of the sun, covered all over with
small, russety dots; flesh sweet, crisp, juicy and agreeably flavored;
dessert fruit; Oct.

=Colmar Charni. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:43, fig. 1857. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:579, fig. 1867. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 549. 1884.

In 1854 this ancient pear was introduced into the gardens of the
Society of Van Mons at Geest-Saint-Remy, Bel. Fruit medium, oval, dull
yellow, dotted, veined and stained with fawn, with a vermilion blush
on the side of the sun; flesh white, very fine, semi-melting, juicy,
sweet, vinous, having a delicious aroma; first; Jan. to Mar.

=Colmar Daras. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 90. 1876. =2.= _Ibid._ 50. 1895.

Obtained by Daras de Naghin of Antwerp, Bel. Fruit large, long and
pyramidal, brilliant lemon-yellow, mottled with fawn; flesh very
melting and juicy, very sugary; first; winter.

=Colmar Delahaut. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:21, fig. 1857. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =1=:581, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium,
curved-pyriform, rather variable, greenish-yellow in the shade,
brownish-yellow on the side of the sun, dots and patches of pale
brown-russet; flesh whitish, semi-fine and semi-melting, wanting in
juice, sugary, vinous, aromatic; second; Jan.

=Colmar Demeester. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:582, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 550. 1884.

A seedling raised by Van Mons. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, somewhat
obovate, even and regular in outline, greenish-yellow, rather heavily
dotted and with some small patches of brown-russet; flesh yellowish,
coarse, semi-melting; juice abundant, sugary, acidulous, with an
agreeable if often a rather cloying flavor; a second class dessert
pear; Sept. and Oct.

=Colmar Dewez. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 192. 1832. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=5=:395. 1839.

Originated near Brussels, Bel., about 1825, and in 1839 was shown by R.
Manning at the Massachusetts Horticultural Society. Flesh white, tender
and very melting; juice abundant, mild, with an agreeable aroma.

=Colmar Epine. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 99, fig. 146. 1866-73.
=2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 725. 1869.

_Beurre Epine._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:359, fig. 1867.

Origin uncertain, possibly one of Van Mons' seedlings, distributed by
M. Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit above medium, long-obtuse-pyriform,
ventriculated in its lower part, symmetrical, pale green changing at
maturity to lemon-yellow, mottled with fawn-russet and strongly washed
with brownish-russet on the side opposed to the sun; flesh whitish,
semi-fine, melting, gritty around the core; juice abundant, vinous and
saccharine, with an acidulous flavor; second; Nov.

=Colmar d'Ete. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 875, 913. 1860. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =1=:583, fig. 1867.

Attributed to Van Mons about 1825. Fruit small, obovate or
globular-obovate, smooth, shining, greenish-yellow becoming quite
yellow when ripe, sprinkled with brown dots, having in some seasons
and places a cheek red and almost transparent; flesh yellowish, very
melting; juice excessively abundant, of honey sweetness, rich flavor,
acidulous, pleasantly aromatic; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Colmar Flotow. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:65, fig. 417. 1880. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 79, 246. 1895.

Named by Oberdieck, who received it unnamed from Van Mons. Fruit
medium, globular-conic, green, with numerous very small, brown dots
changing to dull lemon-yellow on maturity; flesh whitish, semi-fine,
buttery; juice plentiful, sweet and delicately perfumed; good; winter.

=Colmar-Hirondelles. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:151, fig. 76. 1872.

A product of the Van Mons seed beds, catalogued in 1823. Fruit medium,
pyriform and somewhat swelled around the middle, green, speckled with
brown dots, changing to bright lemon-yellow on ripening, the exposed
side being blushed with a beautiful red; flesh yellow, semi-fine,
semi-melting; juice abundant, sugary, vinous and slightly perfumed;
second.

=Colmar de Jonghe. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 724. 1869. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 72. 1895.

J. de Jonghe of Belgium originated this variety and said of it, "Tree
hardy, robust, vigorous and productive, rather upright; young wood
nut brown, with a few gray specks." Fruit medium, pyriform, bright
yellowish-green, washed with brown; flesh yellowish, very fine,
semi-melting, juicy, perfumed; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Colmar de Mars. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:586, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:139, fig. 262. 1879.

Grown from seed by M. Nerad, Jr., nurseryman at Lyons, Fr., in 1853.
Fruit medium, globular-ovate, golden-yellow, dotted, veined and
slightly rayed with russet; flesh yellowish, fine, firm though melting,
scented; juice abundant, refreshing, sugary, savory and having a slight
taste of musk; first; May.

=Colmar du Mortier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 89. 1895.

Fruit medium, ovate, bright lemon-yellow; flesh salmon, very fine, very
melting, very sugary; first; Feb.

=Colmar Navez. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:586, fig. 1867. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 551. 1884.

Raised from seed by M. Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel. The first fruits were
yielded in 1837. Fruit large, globular-obovate, yellowish-green,
slightly dotted with gray, clouded with brown-russet, and often washed
with brick-red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh white, rather
fine, semi-melting; juice sufficient, sugary, acidulous, savory, having
an aroma suggestive of musk and anis; first; Oct.

=Colmar Neill. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 821. 1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 551. 1884.

From a seed bed made by Van Mons in 1815. Fruit very large, obovate,
smooth, glossy, pale yellow, sprinkled all over with russety dots and
stained with some markings of cinnamon-colored russet; flesh white,
buttery, sweet, juicy, vinous and of a musky flavor; good to very good;
Oct.

=Colmar Sirand. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:178, fig. 570. 1881. =2.=
_Guide Prat._ 63. 1895.

From a seed bed of Winter Nelis made in 1856 by M. Pariset,
Curciat-Dongalon, Department Ain, Fr. Fruit medium, globular-pyriform;
skin thin and tender, pale green, with brown dots, yellow when ripe;
flesh slightly yellow, fine, melting, having a decided scent of musk
and rose; first; Dec.

=Colmar Van Mons. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 192. 1832. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 551. 1884.

_Colmar des Invalides._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:584, fig. 1867.
=4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 725. 1890.

Raised at Enghien, Bel., in 1808 by M. Duquesne, a friend of Van Mons.
Fruit medium, globular-turbinate, irregular; skin thick, dark green
changing to yellow-green and washed with red on the side of the sun;
flesh yellowish, buttery and melting, gritty about the core; juice
watery; a cooking pear; Nov. to Jan.

=Colmart. 1.= Coxe _Cult. Fr. Trees_ 200. 1817. =2.= Ragan _Nom. Pear,
B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:83. 1908.

An old variety resembling Bon-Chretien d'Hiver. Fruit large,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform; stalk planted in a deep hollow, bossed; skin
smooth, green, dotted with brown spots, inclines to yellow on maturity;
flesh yellowish, very fine, buttery and melting; juice very sweet and
sprightly; Jan. to Apr.

=Coloma Carmeliterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr Obstkunde_ =2=:12. 1856.
=2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 197. 1889.

One of Count Coloma's Belgian seedlings, 1828. Fruit medium, conic,
covered all over with dark brown-russet, with a dark blush when ripe;
good for transportation; Dec.

=Colorado Seedless. 1.= Stark Bros. _Cat._ 30. 1913.

Originated near Paonia, Col. Tree vigorous, healthy, hardy,
productive; fruit large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform; skin smooth, dull
greenish-yellow, with green and russet dots and a distinct reddish
blush; core small; seeds few, usually abortive; flesh yellowish-white,
rather fine-grained, tender, melting, juicy, aromatic; good; Oct.

=Coloree de Juillet. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:43, fig. 20. 1866-73. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:589, fig. 1867.

Obtained by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr., about 1857. Fruit medium,
ovate, regular; skin oily, bright yellow, dotted with gray and dark
red, vermilion on the side next the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine and
semi-breaking; juice never abundant, sweetish, wanting in sugar and
perfume; second; July.

=Columbia. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 725. 1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 552. 1884.

The original tree grew on the farm of a Mr. Casser, Westchester
County, N. Y. Fruit large, oblong-obovate, smooth, fine, pale green
or golden-yellow when ripe, with sometimes a soft orange tinge on its
cheek and dotted with small, gray dots; flesh white, buttery, melting,
sweet, perfumed; hardly good; Nov. to Jan.

=Commandant Belaieff. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 463. 1906.

Placed on the market as a new pear by M. Bruant, Poitiers, Fr., in
1906. Fruit large, wrinkled and reddened all over; flesh rather fine,
juicy, very sugary, strongly scented; first; end of Dec.

=Commissaire Delmotte. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:15, fig. 1857. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:591, fig. 1867.

Gained by Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel.; ripened first in 1852 or
'53. Fruit medium and above, globular-turbinate-obtuse, slightly
bossed; skin wrinkled, lemon-yellow, dotted and veined with fawn,
shaded with gray-russet and with numerous very small, blackish-gray
stains; flesh yellowish, coarse, semi-melting, gritty at core; juice
abundant, sugary, acid, with a delicate scent; second; Nov. to Jan.

=Commodore. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:60. 1842. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
570. 1857.

Van Mons seedling No. 1218. Fruit medium, very regular, obovate, round
and full at the crown, yellow, with patches of red and russet; flesh
buttery, melting, rich, sweet and good; Oct. and Nov.

=Compotbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:164. 1856. =2.=
Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 198. 1889.

Of French origin, attributed to 1675. Fruit medium, pyriform, pale
yellow, entirely covered with fine, cinnamon-colored russet, becoming a
dark golden green on ripening; good; Feb.

=Compote d'Ete. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:107, fig. 342. 1880.

Mas states he received this variety in France from T. Rivers,
Sawbridgeworth, Eng. Fruit large, ovate, bright green, speckled with
brown dots, turning to pale yellow on ripening; flesh white, rather
fine, semi-buttery; juice scarcely sufficient but sugary, a little
acid, slightly perfumed.

=Comprette. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =2=:174. 1847. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 726. 1869. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 552. 1884.

A Flemish seedling. It was exhibited by M. P. Wilder, President of
the Massachusetts Horticultural Society at the Society's meeting in
1844. Fruit small, obtuse-pyriform, smooth, greenish-yellow, becoming
lemon-yellow, strewed with patches and dots of russet; flesh white,
buttery, melting, juicy, sweet; not of high merit; Nov.

=Comstock. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 393. 1859. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 727. 1869.

An American variety which originated in Dutchess County, N. Y. Fruit
medium, obovate, smooth and glossy, bright yellow, with crimson cheek;
flesh white, crisp and when well ripened has a sweet and sprightly
flavor; a coarse, cooking pear; Nov. to Jan.

=Comte Canal de Malabaila. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:139, fig. 358. 1880.

Origin uncertain, but probably German. Fruit rather large,
globular-ovate or nearly conic, bright green, with brown dots, changing
to lemon-yellow and rather golden on the side of the sun; flesh white,
fine, buttery, sufficient sweet juice, agreeable; first; through the
winter.

=Comte de Chambord. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876. =2.= _Cat. Cong. Pom.
France_ 215, fig. 1906.

Found at Nantes, Fr., towards the end of the nineteenth century. Fruit
medium, turbinate-obtuse, enlarged at the summit, narrowed at base,
yellow; flesh white, very fine, very melting and juicy, sugary and
perfumed; very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Comte d'Egmont. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 552. 1884.

Fruit small, obovate or turbinate, lemon-yellow, entirely covered with
dots of a fine reddish-brown russet, which in some parts are so dense
as to form an irregular patch particularly around the calyx; flesh
yellow, melting, rather gritty, very rich, sugary, delicious; first;
Nov.

=Comte de Flandres. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:592, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 727. 1869. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 552. 1884.

A seedling of Van Mons though it did not bear fruit till 1843. Fruit
very large, obtuse-pyriform, mammillate at each end, rough to the
touch, yellowish-green, heavily covered with cinnamon-colored russet;
flesh yellowish-white, fine, extremely melting, juicy, perfumed,
sugary, quite devoid of seeds; of the highest merit; Oct. to Dec.

=Comte de Lambertye. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 542. 1894. =2.= _Guide Prat._ 89.
1895.

From seed of the Beurre Superfin sown by M. Tourasse; exhibited at
Paris and Lyons in 1894, and obtained from the Pomological Congress of
Lyons a first class certificate. Fruit globular-turbinate, blonde or
light colored, dusted over with golden russet; flesh fine, melting,
juicy, sprightly; Sept. and Oct.

=Comte Lelieur. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 47. 1895. =2.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._
305, fig. 189. 1908.

Gained by Ernest Baltet, nurseryman at Troyes, Fr., in 1865. Fruit
rather large, globular-oval, yellow, dotted with fawn and washed with
carmine; flesh fine, very juicy, sugary, with a delicious aroma; first;
Sept. and Oct.

=Comte de Meladore. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 40. 1871.

One of a collection of forty-two new varieties of pears exhibited by
Marshall P. Wilder at the Exhibition of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society in 1871. Fruit medium, pyriform, yellow, with reddened cheek;
flesh white, fine-grained, tolerably juicy.

=Comte de Morny. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 40. 1871.

Exhibited by Marshall P. Wilder among a collection of 42 new varieties
of pears at the Exhibition of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society
in 1871. Fruit medium, short-acute-pyriform, yellowish, with a red
cheek a little obscured with russet; flesh yellowish-white, juicy,
sweet and high flavored.

=Comte de Paris. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 727. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 553. 1884.

A Van Mons seedling. Fruit medium, oblong-obovate-obtuse,
yellowish-green thickly dotted all over with large, gray-russet dots
and patches, with an orange blush next the sun; flesh yellowish, juicy,
brisk, sweet, aromatic; good; Oct. to Dec.

=Comtesse d'Alost. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:594, fig. 1867.

Origin uncertain, but it was being cultivated in France in 1840 and
in Germany in 1854. Fruit medium, long-conic, rough to the touch,
russeted, finely dotted with gray and partially covered with large,
longitudinal stains; flesh yellowish-white, close-grained, very
melting; juice very abundant, sugary, acidulous and having a very
aromatic savor; first; Nov.

=Comtesse de Chambord. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =7=:13, fig. 1857. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:596, fig. 1867.

From seeds of Winter Nelis sown in 1847 by President Parigot, Poitiers,
Depart. Vienne, Fr., and fruited for the first time in 1855. Fruit
medium and above, obovate-obtuse-pyriform; skin rough, wrinkled, very
bright green, sprinkled with dots of greenish-gray, brilliant yellow
on the side touched by the sun, and sometimes washed with bright red;
flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine, very melting, buttery, gritty at
core; juice most abundant, sugary, refreshing, vinous and delicately
aromatic; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Comtesse Clara Frijs. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1876. =2.= Mathieu _Nom.
Pom._ 198. 1889.

Danish. Fruit medium to large, pale yellow, dotted; flesh white,
melting, juicy, sugary, perfumed; good; Aug.

=Comtesse de Grailly. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:165, fig. 83. 1872.

Introduced by Eugene des Nouhes, near Pouzanges, Vendee, Fr., in 1867.
Fruit medium, globular-conic, flattened at the two poles, very bright
green changing to a beautiful lemon-yellow on ripening, golden on the
side of the sun, sprinkled with numerous fawn dots; flesh white, fine,
melting, rather granular at the core, with abundant sweet juice and a
delicate perfume; Oct. and Nov.

=Comtesse de Paris. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 242, fig. 89. 1898. =2.= _Cat.
Cong. Pom. France_ 218, fig. 1906.

Obtained by W. Fourcine, Dreux, Fr., about 1893. Fruit medium,
long-pyriform, bent toward stem, greenish-yellow, tinted with fawn
around the stem and calyx and dots of russet over the rest of the skin;
flesh white, semi-fine, melting, extremely juicy, very sugary, mild
flavor; good; Dec.

=Condorcet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:597, fig. 1867.

Of unknown origin; named after the Marquis of Condorcet. Fruit
below medium or small, turbinate, acute and undulating at base, but
sometimes somewhat obtuse and mammillate, always mammillate at crown,
bright yellow, dotted, streaked and patched with russet; flesh white,
semi-fine, melting, slightly gritty at core; juice enough, sugary,
aromatic, rather savory; second; Sept.

=Conference. 1.= Nicholson _Dict. Gard._ =3=:51. 1900. =2.= _Garden_
=62=:367, fig. 1902. =3.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 166. 1920.

Named after the National (British) Pear Conference of 1885. Originated
by Rivers, the English pomologist, and introduced in 1894. It is
now grown in enormous quantities in England for market purposes and
is said to be one of the most regular cropping varieties. Tree a
moderate grower, very productive. Fruit medium to above, slightly
long-gourd-shaped, even, smooth, shining green, dotted with russet;
stem long, woody; calyx open in a shallow basin; flesh pale yellow,
slight pinkish tinge, melting, very juicy, sweet, good; Oct. and Nov.

=Congres de Gand. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 73. 1895.

A Belgian variety distributed by Daras de Naghin of Antwerp. Fruit
medium, pyriform, fawn color; flesh white, melting; good; Oct.

=Congres Pomologique. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:598, fig. 1867. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees. Am._ 728. 1869.

Raised by Boisbunel, Rouen, 1854. Fruit above medium, turbinate,
globular and bossed; skin rough, olive-yellow, slightly dotted with
brown, more or less clouded with pale red on the cheek next the sun;
flesh yellowish-white, fine, melting, juicy, sugary, acidulous, having
a pleasant flavor of musk; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Conkleton. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:85. 1908.

Raised in Texas from seed of Le Conte. Cataloged as "new" in 1902.

=Conklin. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 728. 1869.

Originated in Westchester County, N. Y. Fruit medium large,
oblate-obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow sprinkled with green and brown
dots, russeted; flesh yellowish, coarse, half melting, sweet, juicy;
good; Sept.

=Connecticut. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 272. 1858.

Raised in Connecticut. Fruit medium, oblate, yellowish-green; quality
poor.

=Conseiller de Hollande. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 554. 1884.

Fruit large, pyramidal, golden-yellow, much covered with rather rough,
cinnamon-colored russet, with a warm orange glow on the sun-exposed
side, with some streaks of crimson, and some green specks and large
dots on the shaded side; flesh firm and crisp, yellowish, not melting,
deficient in juice, sweet and with a musky aroma; handsome but third
rate; Oct.

=Conseiller Ranwez. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:599, fig. 1867. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 554. 1884.

Raised by Van Mons; it fruited in 1841. Fruit large, pyramidal, bright
green, covered with fawn dots, becoming yellow within a day or two
of its ripening; flesh fine-grained, half-buttery, tender; juice
plentiful, sugary, vinous and delicately perfumed; good but variable;
Oct. and Nov.

=Constant Claes. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 108, 260. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=7=:91, fig. 526. 1881.

A Belgian variety distributed in 1863 by de Jonghe. Fruit medium or
rather large, conic-pyriform; skin thin and slender, pale green, washed
on ripening with light orange-red; flesh white, fine, melting; juice
abundant, sweet, vinous and pleasantly scented; first; Sept.

=Cooke. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 484. 1857. =2.= Elliott _Fr. Book_
372. 1859.

Place of origin, King George County, Va. Introduced by H. R. Roby,
Fredericksburg, Va. Fruit rather large, irregularly pyramidal,
pale-yellow; flesh juicy, buttery, melting, sweet, rich, vinous;
mid-season.

=Copia. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:455. 1855. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 571. 1857. =3.= _Ibid._ 729. 1869.

Originated about the middle of last century at Philadelphia. Fruit
large, yellow, with specks of russet, broad-turbinate; flesh sugary,
rather coarse, somewhat resembling the Beurre Diel in flavor; good;
Sept. and Oct.

=Cornelie Daras. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 89. 1895.

Distributed by Daras de Naghin of Antwerp, Bel. Fruit medium, globular,
lemon-yellow; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sugary and well perfumed;
Nov. and Dec.

=Cornemuse. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 335. 1862. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=1=:602, fig. 1867.

This is one of the most ancient French pears and was cultivated in
1628 at Orleans, Le Lectier tells, under the name _Chair de Fille_
but a little later under that of Cornemuse, it being described by
Claude Saint-Etienne in 1670. Fruit below medium, long, somewhat
gourd-shaped, narrow and undulating towards the stem, golden-yellow,
shining, speckled with gray dots on the shaded side and with dull
yellow on side exposed, and also extensively washed with carmine on the
same side; flesh yellowish-white, fine, semi-melting; juice abundant,
acidulous, sugary and aromatic; first; July.

=Cornewell. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 59. 1858. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=26=:64. 1860.

A variety of unknown origin which about 1830-5 was disseminated by the
"Vermont grafters" who travelled the country setting grafts for those
who desired. Fruit medium, globular, greenish-yellow, much russeted,
and with many dark and purple specks; flesh yellowish-white, tender,
melting, juicy, vinous, spicy and rather astringent; good; Sept.

=Coter. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:149. 1846. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
729. 1869.

One of Van Mons' seedlings. Fruit medium, varying from obtuse to
acute-pyriform, light green or yellowish with russet dots and patches;
flesh whitish, tender, juicy, vinous; good; Oct. to Dec.

=Coule-Soif de Cerutti. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:15, fig. 296. 1880.

Origin unknown but was named after a druggist named Cerutti of Camburg,
Saxe-Meiningen, Ger., who propagated it in the environs of that
village. Fruit medium, turbinate, very bright green, speckled with
dots of bright brown, changing to yellow on ripening; flesh whitish, a
little transparent, coarse, semi-melting; juice very plentiful, sugary,
refreshing; good; Sept.

=Courte-queue d'Automne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:603, fig. 1867.
=2.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1876.

Raised by Leroy in his nurseries at Angers, it bore its first fruit in
1863. Fruit medium, globular, irregular, one side usually less swelled
than the other, bright green, dotted with brown, much stained with
russet and blushed with tender rose on the exposed side; flesh white,
very fine, semi-melting; juice abundant, sugary, having a delicate
scent and a most agreeable tartish flavor; first; Oct.

=Courte-queue d'Hiver. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 260. 1876. =2.= _Ibid._
66. 1895.

Obtained by Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr. Fruit large, gray; flesh fine, very
melting, sugary and perfumed, slightly musky; Mar. to May.

=Cousin Blanc. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:133, fig. 355. 1880.

Of Flemish origin. Cataloged by M. Jahn, 1864. Fruit medium,
globular-conic, very pale green, sprinkled with very fine points of
fawn; flesh white, slightly tinted with yellow, semi-fine and melting,
fairly full of richly saccharine juice having a fresh and pleasant
flavor of almond.

=Couteau. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

Mentioned by John Parkinson in 1629 in a list of pears grown in England
at that time as a pear that is "neither good one way nor other."

=Craig. 1.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 177, fig. 1885-86.

_Early Butter of Indiana._ =2.= Hooper _W. Fr. Book_ 154. 1857.

One of several seedling pear trees brought from Vincennes, Ind., by
John Wright and planted at Vevay, Ind., in 1804. Fruit very small,
globular-acute-pyriform, pale lemon-yellow, with faint indication of
blush and many minute, russet dots; flesh white, juicy, rather firm,
pleasant; fair, becomes mealy when fully ripe; June.

=Craig Favourite. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 554. 1884. =2.= Mathieu _Nom.
Pom._ 199. 1889.

A valuable autumn dessert pear in Scotland; raised in the neighborhood
of Perth, for which climate it is admirably adapted. Fruit medium,
obovate-turbinate, yellowish-green in the shade, almost entirely
covered with thin russet which is again covered with dots and patches
of coarser russet and next the sun dull red, streaked with livelier
red, mottled with orange and thickly strewed with large, gray-russety
dots; flesh white, semi-buttery, juicy, sugary, perfumed; dessert; Sept.

=Crassane. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:166, Pl. XXII. 1768. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 728. 1869.

_Bergamotte Crassane._ =3.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:61, fig. 1854. =4.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:231, fig. 1867.

An ancient pear of obscure origin. In the middle of the seventeenth
century it was introduced for cultivation in France by La Quintinye,
gardener to King Louis XIV. It appears to have derived its name from
the Latin word _crassus_ which signifies thick. Some authorities
have suggested it was named after the celebrated Roman Consul Marcus
Lucinius Crassus who, with Julius Caesar and Pompey, formed the first
triumvirate, and who died 53 B.C. The balance of authority is in
favor of its having had a French origin. By Belgian and some French
and German writers it is known as the _Bergamotte Crassane_. Fruit
medium and above, globular, bossed, flattened at extremities, bright
greenish-yellow, veined and dotted with fawn; flesh buttery, melting,
tender, of a rich sugary flavor and perfume; a dessert pear of formerly
high reputation but rather superseded; Oct. to Dec.

=Crassane Libotton. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:13, fig. 7. 1872.

According to the catalog of Van Mons this is a gain of a M. Libotton
and is probably Belgian. Fruit small, almost a globe, depressed at both
poles; skin thick, intense green, dotted with black spots, sometimes
blushed on ripening; flesh white, semi-fine and melting, sweet, vinous,
agreeably perfumed; suitable for large orchards; Sept. and Oct.

=Crassane du Mortier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 77. 1895.

Obtained by B. C. Mortier in France. Fruit rather large, turbinate,
yellow marked with green; flesh very melting and juicy; first; Nov.

=Crawford. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 335. 1845. =2.= _Ibid._ 729.
1869. =3.= Bunyard-Thomas _Fr. Gard._ 139. 1908.

_Chalk._ =4.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 163. 1920.

This tree, probably of Scotch origin, grows to a large size in the
orchards of Kent, Eng., and is often planted on the windy sides of
plantations as a protection to other trees. Tree stout, remarkably
productive. Fruit below medium, obovate, pale green, with faintest
red blush; stem stout, medium short, fleshy; calyx open, in a shallow
basin; flesh nearly white, mealy, sweet, juicy; flavor nil; Aug.

=Crede Kegelfoermige Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:48.
1856.

A German variety cultivated in Hesse and Franconia in 1828. Fruit
medium, conic, covered with cinnamon-russet, somewhat blushed; flesh
granular, sweet, with an agreeable cinnamon flavor; good; Sept.

=Crede Sommerrusselet. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:47. 1856.

Reported from Upper Hesse, Ger., in 1833. Fruit small, pyriform, light
yellow, blushed with light red; flesh soft, aromatic; very fruitful,
excellent; Sept.

=Crisco. 1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._ 288. 1893.

A seedling of Seckel raised in North Carolina by Robert Crisco. Fruit
roundish, below medium in size, greenish-yellow, nearly covered with
russet; dots numerous; calyx small, closed, in a moderately deep basin;
stem medium, stout, fleshy at base; cavity small; flesh greenish-white,
fine, juicy, mild subacid, almost sweet; good to very good.

=[vC]rnivka. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 10, fig. 1913.

A Russian wild pear. Fruit small, globular, rather acute toward stalk,
yellowish-green, with some brown-russet; flesh white, agreeable; a good
wild pear; Sept.

=Crocker. 1.= _U. S. D. A. Yearbook_, 497, Pl. LX. 1905.

Originated in an orchard planted by gold miners near Loomis, Cal.,
about 1850 and known locally as _Crocker Bartlett_. Fruit medium,
oblong-obovate-pyriform, somewhat angular, golden-yellow, netted and
russeted; stem medium to long, slender, obliquely inserted; calyx
small, closed, in a deep, abrupt basin; flesh yellowish, buttery,
juicy, mild subacid to sweet; very good; Jan. to Mar.

=Croft Castle. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:60. 1842. =2.= _Ibid._ =13=:154.
1847. =3.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 121, fig. 157. 1866-73.

Raised by T. A. Knight, former President of the London Horticultural
Society. Fruit medium, globular at the stalk end, greenish-yellow,
covered with large, brown dots and russet markings; flesh whitish,
a little gritty but melting, juicy, rich, sugary, and perfumed; an
excellent dessert pear; Oct.

=Cross. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =7=:132, fig. 8. 1841. =2.= _Ibid._ =20=:138.
1854.

Originated with a Mr. Cross, Newburyport, Mass. Fruit medium,
globular-ovate, smooth, deep yellow, red on the sunny side,
covered with russet dots, patches of russet around the eye; flesh
yellowish-white, tender, juicy, of a rich, spicy flavor; a handsome and
excellent fruit; Dec.

=Crouch. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 730. 1869.

Originated at Colchester, Conn. Fruit below medium, globular, inclining
to oblate, pale yellow, netted and patched with russet, many russet
dots; flesh whitish, juicy, melting, sweet, pleasant; good; Sept.

=Crow. 1.= John S. Kerr _Cal._ 11. 1898.

Described by John S. Kerr, Sherman, Tex., as new in his catalog of
1898. Fruit said to be like Bartlett in shape and color; finest flavor;
Sept.

=Cullem. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:165, fig. 275. 1879.

From Van Mons. Fruit medium, pyriform-ovate, tender, green, dotted with
fine specks of brown-fawn passing to pale whitish-yellow on ripening,
with the cheek exposed to the sun blushed with red and golden hues;
flesh yellowish-white, rather transparent, firm and yet melting;
abundant juice with flavor recalling that of the old White Doyenne;
good in quality, but a poor bearer; Oct. and Nov.

=Cumberland. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 168. 1832. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=26=:508. 1860. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:608, figs. 1867. =4.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 730. 1869.

Alexandre Bivort and M. de Jonghe declared that this variety was one of
Van Mons' seedlings while Downing, Kenrick and Manning affirmed it to
be a native of Cumberland, R. I. The conflicting opinion is explained
by the fact that the _Cumberland_ of the first parties is really
_Henkel_. Fruit large, obovate-pyriform, pale yellow on the shaded side
and greenish-yellow on the side of the sun, dotted with gray-russet and
having some russet patches; flesh white, semi-fine, dense, melting,
very juicy, sugary, acidulous, rather pleasantly flavored, slightly
perfumed; second; Sept.

=Cure d'Oleghem. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:613, fig. 1867. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:171, fig. 278. 1879.

Probably of Belgian origin, having been described by Bivort in 1852
and placed in the General List of fruits cultivated in the garden of
the Society of Van Mons in 1857. Fruit small, globular, bossed, larger
on one side than on the other, greenish-yellow, dotted all over with
russet and extensively washed with the same around the stem; flesh
white, fine, melting, gritty at center; juice scanty, little sugar, no
perfume, very acid; third; Oct.

=Cushing. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:144. 1832. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 730. 1869.

A native pear which originated on the farm of Col. Washington Cushing,
Hingham, Mass. It was introduced to notice at the first annual show of
the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1829. Fruit medium, somewhat
variable according to cultivation and soil, obovate-obtuse, light
greenish-yellow, sometimes blushed with dull red on the sunny side
and sprinkled all over with russety dots; flesh fine, white, melting,
juicy, agreeably sprightly, rich; very good, among the best autumn
pears; Sept.

=Czernowes. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:17, fig. 489. 1881.

Of unknown origin. Fruit medium, turbinate-obovate or pyriform-obovate,
often bossed; when ripe is a brilliant lemon-yellow, with some dots
except on the side of the sun which is tinged with light orange-red;
flesh white, fine, buttery, melting, with abundant sugary juice,
slightly musky, agreeable; first; Sept.

=D'Amboise. 1.= Decaisne & Naudin _Man. Amat. Jard._ =4=:464.

Fruit medium, oblate or turbinate, greenish-yellow, washed with very
bright red, marked with brown around the stem; flesh very white, sweet,
without scent.

=D'Arad. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:187, fig. 382. 1880.

A Hungarian variety; probably originated in the County of Arad in the
west of Transylvania. Fruit medium, an almost perfect ellipsoid; skin
rather thick, water-green, often nearly covered with brown-russet;
flesh yellowish, semi-fine, buttery, melting, full of richly saccharine
juice, vinous and perfumed; good; Sept.

=D'Auch. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 397. 1831. =2.= Decaisne &
Naudin _Man. Amat. Jard._ =4=:473.

This pear greatly resembles _Colmar_ in almost every respect and has
often been confused with it. It is, however, more full next the stalk
and arrives at maturity somewhat later and its flesh has a higher
flavor. D'Auch was introduced into England before 1817 by the Duke of
Northumberland. Fruit very large, long, bossed, irregular, obtuse; skin
a lively yellow washed with orange-red; flesh breaking, sweet; not high
in quality.

=D'Oeuf. 1.= Duhamel _Trait Arb. Fr._ =2=:157. 1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:470, fig. 1869. =3.= _Guide Prat._ 55, 256. 1895.

A Swiss pear largely grown in the neighborhood of Basle. The
botanist Valerius Cordus described it in 1561. Fruit small, oval,
greenish-yellow, strewed with gray-russet dots, more or less
tinged with red on the side of the sun; flesh white and semi-fine,
semi-breaking or melting, rich, sugary, musky; juice abundant; second;
Aug.

=Daimyo. 1.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 129. 1888. =2.= _Guide Prat._
105. 1895.

A Japanese variety. Fruit medium, roundish-pyriform, clear yellow with
minute pale or brownish dots; stem long, curved, slender, set in a
slight depression; calyx open, in a shallow basin; flesh white, coarse,
crisp; poor; Oct. and Nov.

=Dallas. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =11=:252. 1845. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
730. 1869.

In 1843 this, one of Governor Edwards' seedlings raised at New Haven,
Conn., was exhibited to the Massachusetts Horticultural Society. Fruit
medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, dull yellow, thickly interlaced
with cinnamon-russet sprinkled with crimson and russet dots; flesh
yellowish-white, fine, melting, buttery, juicy, aromatic; good; Oct. to
Dec.

=Dame. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:1, fig. 1869. =2.= Mathieu _Nom.
Pom._ 200. 1869.

For two and a half centuries this variety has been known in the
Department of Maine-et-Loire under the name of Dame, though in
one district it bore the name of _des Buhards_. Fruit medium,
globular-ovate, mammillate around calyx; skin rough, grass-green,
dotted with fawn at each end and sprinkled with gray specks; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, tender, semi-melting, gritty; juice sufficient,
sweet, acidulous, rather well flavored; third; Sept.

=Dame-verte. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:3, fig. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =1=:139, fig. 70. 1872.

Attributed to Van Mons about the beginning of the nineteenth century.
Fruit above medium, obtuse-conic, skin thick, yellowish-olive,
sprinkled with green dots changing to bright yellow and on the side
of the sun occasionally touched with crimson; flesh yellowish-white,
rather coarse, semi-melting, rather gritty at the center, with plenty
of sweet juice, acid but rather savory; second; Aug.

=Darimont. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 369. 1831. =2.= Prince _Pom.
Man._ =2=:200. 1832.

A Flemish pear new in the early part of the nineteenth century.
Fruit medium, oblong, tapering somewhat toward the stalk,
yellowish-gray-russet, sprinkled with numerous scabrous specks; flesh
white, gritty, melting, with a saccharine, slightly musky and somewhat
astringent juice; Sept. and Oct.

=Darlington. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 731. 1869.

An American variety; origin unknown. Fruit large,
oblate-obtuse-pyriform, pale yellow, some crimson at times on the side
of the sun, nettings and patches of russet and russet dots; flesh
whitish, coarse, sweet; moderate quality; rots at core; Sept.

=Dathis. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:4, fig. 1869.

Origin not clear, but it was cultivated in France before the middle
of the last century. Fruit large, turbinate and very swelled, one
side being often more so than the other, bright yellow passing to
grayish-yellow on the cheek touched by the sun, dotted with green;
flesh whitish, semi-fine, half-breaking, gritty at center; juice
deficient, sugary; second; Oct.

=David. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1876.

Fruit rather coarse, of handsome pyramidal form, yellowish-green washed
with purple; flesh breaking; first quality for cooking purposes; Apr.
and May.

=David d'Angers. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1876. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:6, fig. 1869.

Raised from seed by Andre Leroy in 1865. Fruit medium to large,
turbinate-obtuse, rather pentagonal, mammillate at calyx, bright
yellow, finely dotted with fawn; flesh white, fine, melting, juicy,
sugary, acidulous, savory, pleasantly perfumed; first; Feb. to Apr.

=Davis. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =23=:107 1857. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
731. 1869.

A seedless native pear found about 1837 by a Mr. Davis, six miles from
Philadelphia, on the Westchester Road. Fruit small; variable in form,
sometimes globular, usually obtuse-pyriform, yellowish, much russeted;
flesh buttery, aromatic, melting, sweet, rather coarse, somewhat
vinous; good; Oct.

=De Cerciaux. 1.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 373. 1908.

A variety good for perry and for drying. The juice is amber-colored,
perfumed and of an agreeable flavor; Oct. and Nov.

=De Chasseur. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:89, fig. 141. 1878.

A seedling of Van Mons which produced fruit in 1842. Fruit medium,
pyriform-ovate, slightly obtuse; skin rather thick and tough, pale
green, sprinkled with gray-brown dots, becoming at maturity bright
yellow, a good deal shaded with brown-russet; flesh white, slightly
tinged with green, semi-fine, melting; juice plentiful, sweet,
pleasantly perfumed; good; Sept. and Oct.

=De Croixmare. 1.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 372. 1908.

A good perry pear cultivated in France. Fruit small, very good,
especially for the manufacture of alcohol; has little tannin. The juice
is colorless; Sept. and Oct.

=De Duvergnies. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 463. 1863. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:119, fig. 1869.

_Koestliche Van Mons_. =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:124. 1856.

Originated by Van Mons; fruited in 1821. Downing describes this pear
under the name _Delices Van Mons_ and gives as a synonym _Delices
de Mons_, but since these names are also synonyms of _Viconte de
Spoelberg_, a very different variety, the name originally given by
Van Mons is to be preferred. Fruit medium and often larger, obtuse,
long-ovate, regular and bold in contour; surface uneven, slightly
constricted near the top, and slightly mammillate; skin thin, rough to
the touch, lemon-yellow, dotted all over with greenish-gray, generally
vermilioned on the cheek exposed to the sun; flesh yellowish-white,
fine or semi-fine, melting, granular around the core; juice abundant,
saccharine, vinous, sourish, with a peculiar and delicious aroma;
first; Oct.

=De Fer. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:152, fig. 1869.

According to Leroy this pear is at least four centuries old and
originated in Germany, where Cordus described it about 1544 under
the name of _Pear of Os_. Fruit above medium and often large;
form variable, at times prolonged like Calebasse, more generally
turbinate-ovate or turbinate-globular; stem obliquely planted; skin
slightly wrinkled, bright yellowish-green, more or less vermilioned on
the side next the sun, covered with large, gray dots and some streaks
of brown-russet; flesh very white, semi-fine, hard and breaking,
lacking in juice, sweetish, deficient in perfume; third; Jan. to Mar.
or Apr.

=De Fosse. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:191, fig. 1869.

A very ancient French variety mentioned by Le Lectier in his catalog
of 1628. Fruit below medium and often small, globular-turbinate, clear
yellow dotted and netted with russet; flesh white, semi-fine, firm,
semi-breaking, scented; juice abundant, sugary, acidulous; very musky;
second or third; Aug. and Sept.

=De Lamartine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:325, fig. 1869.

_Lamartine._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 797. 1869.

Raised by Bivort, director of the nurseries of the Society of Van
Mons and first reported in 1850. Fruit small, globular or turbinate,
flattened, often irregular and bossed, olive-green, dotted and very
much covered with russet; flesh white, coarse, melting, generally
gritty around the core; juice sufficient, sweet, musky and delicate;
second, or third when the flesh is excessively gritty; Nov.

=De Louvain. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:363, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 734. 1869.

Raised by Von Mons in 1827 and published in 1834. Fruit above medium,
obtuse-turbinate, clear grass-green or dull yellow, much covered with
fine dots of gray-russet and stains of russet; flesh whitish, semi-fine
and semi-melting; juice abundant, saccharine, vinous, with a delicate
flavor and perfume of musk; second; Sept.

=De Pretre. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:190. 1768. =2.= _Mag.
Hort._ =9=:131. 1843. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:550, fig. 1869.

A very old French pear just mentioned by the pomologist Le Lectier
of Orleans and for a long while known under the names of _Caillout_,
_Caillolet_ and _Caillot d'Hiver_. Le Lectier cultivated it in 1600
and cataloged it in 1628. In 1858 Decaisne coupled with it the ancient
name of _Carmelite_. Fruit below medium, spherical but sometimes a
little elongated and narrowed toward the upper part; skin rather thick,
clear brown-russet dotted all over on the side exposed to the sun with
whitish points, but with ash-gray points on the other side; flesh
white, semi-fine, breaking, gritty at center; juice moderate in amount,
saccharine, acidulous, more or less musky; second or third for dessert,
first for compotes; Jan. to Mar.

=De Rachinquin. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 170. 1832.

Produced by M. Noisette. Fruit round, compressed, rough, brown; flesh
melting buttery, sugary, highly flavored; Nov. and Dec.

=Delcange. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1876.

Fruit large; flesh melting; first quality; Sept.

=Delices de la Cacaudiere. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:9, fig. 1869.

Gained by Count Eugene des Nouhes in 1846 near Pouzauges, Vendee, Fr.
Fruit above medium, long-conic, slightly obtuse, mammillate at crown
and irregular in contour, bright yellow, dotted with gray and greenish
specks, colored with carmine on the cheek next the sun; flesh very
white and fine, melting; juice abundant, acidulous, sugary, aromatic,
rather savory; second; July and Aug.

=Delices de Charles. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:10, fig. 1869. =2.=
_Guide Prat._ 74, 262. 1876.

_Wredow._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 886. 1869.

Raised in 1826 by Simon Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium,
turbinate-pyriform but inconstant in contour, dark lemon-yellow, dotted
with russet; flesh white, fine, very melting, buttery, sweet, juicy,
vinous and with a delicious tartness; good to very good; Oct. to Dec.

=Delices de Chaumont. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 72. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=7=:133, fig. 547. 1881.

Fruit rather large, conic-ovate, olive spotted with gray; flesh white,
buttery, melting, wanting in juice, very sweet; second, cooking.

=Delices Everard. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 558. 1884.

Raised by Gabriel Everard, Tournay, Fr., in 1840. It was sent to
England in 1865 and received a first-class certificate from the Royal
Horticultural Society in 1875. Fruit small, globular-turbinate, smooth,
shining, bright yellow, much speckled and marked with russet; flesh
salmon tint, tender, buttery, melting, very juicy, sweet, delicious
flavor and fine perfume; Oct. to Feb.

=Delices de Froyennes. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 558. 1884.

Raised by Isidore Degaud, Froyennes, Tournay, Fr. Fruit medium, oval,
yellow covered with fawn-colored russet; flesh tender, melting, very
juicy, sugary and perfumed, vinous; Oct. and Nov.

=Delices d'Hardenpont. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 99. 1825. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 558. 1884.

Raised by Abbe Hardenpont, Mons, Bel., in 1759. There has been
much confusion between this and _Delices d'Hardenpont d'Angers_
and the _Archiduc Charles_ and _Charles of Austria_. Fruit large,
oblong-obovate-obtuse; skin smooth, bright green changing to yellow,
with pale brown-russet dots; flesh white, tender, buttery, melting,
rich, sweet, perfumed; good; Nov.

=Delices d'Hiver. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:61, fig. 415. 1880. =2.=
_Gard. Chron._ N. S. =26=:210. 1886.

Distributed by M. Dauvesse, Orleans, Fr., early in the latter
half of the nineteenth century. Fruit large; form variable from
elongate-pyriform to globular-pyriform with short stalk set obliquely;
skin thick, green, heavily dotted; flesh moderately fine, full of
sugary juice, acid and delicately perfumed; Dec. to Jan.

=Delices de Huy. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 56, 251. 1895.

Fruit large, conic-pyriform, yellowish-green; flesh greenish-yellow,
juicy, pleasantly perfumed; first; Sept.

=Delices de Jodoigne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:15, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 559. 1884.

Obtained by Simon Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel., in 1826. Fruit medium,
pyriform, irregular, slightly obtuse and larger on one side of the axis
than the other, grass-green on the shaded side and reddish-gray on
the exposed face, covered with numerous very fine dots of fawn; flesh
white, firm, breaking, sweet, juicy, refreshing and aromatic; first;
Oct.

=Delices de Ligaudieres. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 60. 1895.

Fruit medium, of the style of White Doyenne, but the stem thicker and
shorter; flesh fine, melting; first; Oct.

=Delices de Lovenjoul. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:65, fig. 1858. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 734. 1869.

_Jules Bivort._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:15, fig. 1869.

A seedling of Van Mons in whose catalog of 1828 it is No. 521.
Fruit medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow washed with
orange-red, speckled all over with russet dots; color variable; flesh
yellowish-white, fine, melting, semi-buttery; juice abundant, sugary,
with an acid flavor and delicious perfume, rich; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Delices de la Meuse. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 279. 1858. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:16, fig. 1869.

Laurent de Bavay, Director of the Royal Nurseries of Vilvorde,
near Brussels, sent this pear out in 1850. Fruit medium and above,
ovate, irregular, bossed, more enlarged on one side than the other,
greenish-yellow, very finely speckled with green and brown dots; flesh
dirty white, coarse, breaking, gritty at center; juice variable in
amount, moderately sweet, acid, musky; second; Feb.

=Delices de Naghin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 90. 1895.

Fruit rather large, turbinate, yellow, washed with fawn; flesh very
juicy, very sweet; an exquisite pear; Nov.

=Delices de Saint-Medard. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 70. 1895.

Sent out from Belgium. Fruit medium or rather large, shining yellow
touched with russet; flesh fine, melting, sweet; good quality; Sept.

=Delices de Tirlemont. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 90. 1895.

First placed in commerce by H. Millet, nurseryman at Tirlemont, Bel.
Fruit medium or large; flesh melting; first; Jan. to Mar.

=Delicieuse de Grammont. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 92. 1876.

Raised by M. de la Croix d'Ogimont, Tournai, Bel. Fruit medium,
long-pyriform, delicate yellowish-green; flesh white, very juicy;
first; end of Aug.

=Delicieuse de Swijan. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 90. 1895.

Distributed by Baron de Trauttenberg, Prague, Bohemia. Tree very
fertile and suitable for cold and mountainous climates. Fruit medium,
globular, yellowish-green, dotted; flesh yellowish-white, fine,
melting, sugary; very good; Nov. and Dec.

=Delisse. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 72. 1895.

Fruit medium, oblong, of even contour, much covered with fawn-russet;
flesh fine, melting, very juicy; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Delpierre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:17, fig. 1869. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 70, 252. 1895.

A wilding found in the Canton of Jodoigne, Brabant, Bel. Fruit large,
ovate-obtuse-pyriform, wrinkled, thick, olive-green clouded with dark
yellow; flesh greenish-white, coarse, semi-melting; juice acid, rather
sweet, vinous, abundant; second; Sept.

=Delporte Bourgmestre. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 90. 1895.

Fruit rather large, yellowish; first; Mar. and Apr.

=Democrat. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =25=:69. 1859. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
734. 1869.

A seedling originated in Pennsylvania and introduced as new in 1859.
Fruit medium or below, globular-obovate, greenish-yellow with nettings
and patches of russet and dotted with russet and brown spots; flesh
semi-melting, juicy, sweet, pleasant good; Sept.

=Demorest. 1.= _Wash. Nurs. Cat._ 5. 1921.

Reported as "luscious, larger, later and a better keeper than Bartlett."

=Dempsey. 1.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 155. 1914.

A Canadian pear produced from a seed of Bartlett fertilized with
Duchesse d'Angouleme. fruit large, oblong-obovate-pyriform, smooth,
yellowish-green with brownish-red cheek in sun; flesh white,
fine-grained, tender, almost melting, with sweet, delicious flavor;
Oct. and Nov.

=Denis Dauvesse. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876.

Fruit medium to large, long-pyriform; flesh fine, melting, pleasantly
perfumed; Sept.

=Des Chartreux. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:171, fig. 84. 1866-73.

Origin uncertain. Fruit small or nearly medium,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform, light green, speckled with dots of a very deep
green, washed with light red on the sunny side; flesh slightly yellow,
fine, more firm than breaking; juice sugary, acidulous, slightly
perfumed; second; Aug.

=Des Deux Soeurs. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 463. 1863.

The original tree was found in the garden of the Misses Knopp of
Mechlin, Bel. Fruit medium, oblong, lemon-yellow; flesh melting, juicy,
sugary, slightly astringent but wanting in perfume and flavor; grown
both in Belgium and France; not first class.

=Desire Cornelis. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:18, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 560. 1884.

The parent tree was from seed sown by Van Mons; first bore fruit in
1847. Fruit large, oblong-oval, obtuse; skin very fine, pale yellow
and often orange-yellow, dotted and netted with greenish-gray; flesh
very tender, buttery, melting; juice plentiful, sugary, deliciously
perfumed; first; Sept.

=Dessauer Weissbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:35. 1856.

North German, 1804. Fruit medium, smooth, pale greenish-yellow changing
to citron yellow, sometimes rather lightly blushed; flesh fine,
somewhat soft, sweet, aromatic; good; Aug.

=Deutsche Augustbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 202. 1889.

_D'Aout Allemande._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:65, fig. 513. 1881.

A German variety much cultivated in Saxony. Fruit small, ovate; skin
rather thick, dull green, sprinkled with small and numerous gray dots,
becomes yellow on ripening and somewhat blushed in the sun; flesh green
and veined with green, semi-fine, buttery; juice sufficient, sugary,
vinous, acid, pleasant; good; Aug.

=Deutsche Glasbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:69. 1856.

German, 1811. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate, bent toward stalk,
uniformly light yellow, blushed with russety-red on the side of the
sun; flesh sweet; good; Sept.

=Deutsche Kuemmelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:157. 1856.

German, 1802. Fruit small, globular, dirty yellow, washed with russet;
flesh very tender, sweet, strongly aromatic and perfumed; good; Sept.

=Deutsche Muskateller. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 106. 1825. =2.=
Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 202. 1889.

_Muscat Allemand d'Hiver._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:439, fig. 1869.

_German Muscat._ =4.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 772. 1869.

An old pear of uncertain origin. La Quintinye mentioned it without
description in 1690, but in 1768 Duhamel du Monceau gave a careful
description to distinguish between it and _Royale d'Hiver_ which it
somewhat resembles. Fruit medium or above, obovate-obtuse-pyriform,
pale yellow, speckled with numerous large, gray dots; flesh yellowish,
semi-fine, semi-melting, juicy, granular, sweet, slightly astringent;
second; Mar. to May.

=Deux Tetes. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:244. 1768. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:23, fig. 1869.

_Zwibotzenbirne._ =3.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 162. 1825. =4.= Mathieu
_Nom. Pom._ 303. 1889.

One of the most ancient pears cultivated in France. Charles Estienne
described it in 1530 in his Seminarium, under the name _Pyra Bicipitia_
or _Poire a Deux-Testes_. It takes its name from its large and oval
calyx being placed on two prominences. Fruit small to medium, globular,
somewhat turbinate, pale yellowish-green in the shade, blushed on the
side next the sun; flesh white, coarse, breaking, juicy, slightly
perfumed, but often having an unpleasant acidity; an indifferent
dessert fruit; Aug.

=Devergnies. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:57, fig. 1858. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:24, fig. 1869.

Obtained from seed in 1817 in Hainaut by M. Devergnies of Mons. Fruit
medium, turbinate-obtuse, much corrugated at summit, olive-green,
nearly covered with gray-russet and slightly clouded with orange-red on
the side next the sun; flesh yellowish-white, fine, melting, buttery;
juice abundant, acidulous, sugary, aromatic; second; Nov. and Dec.

=Dewey. 1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 55. 1898. =2.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._
=332=:480, fig. 160. 1913.

An oriental pear, in form resembling Kieffer. Fruit medium, conical to
globular-oval, rusty green with faint blush; skin rough; flesh white,
juicy, coarse, gritty, fibrous; quality poor; Oct.

=Dhommee. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:25, fig. 1869.

A seedling raised by the Horticultural Society of Angers, Fr.; it first
bore fruit in 1858. Fruit medium and often larger, long-ovate, bossed,
one side always larger than the other, bright green, finely dotted and
much mottled with russet; flesh white, firm, fine, melting, slightly
gritty; juice abundant, sugary, acidulous, devoid of perfume; second;
Oct. to Dec.

=Dickerman. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 376. 1859. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 736. 1869.

_Dikeman._ =3.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 700. 1897.

Obtained by S. D. Pardee, New Haven, Conn. Fruit medium,
globular-oblate, often irregular in outline, yellowish, bright cinnamon
on the sunny side, covered with minute dots; flesh white, fine,
melting, sugary, perfumed; first; Sept.

=Diego. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

Described by John Parkinson in 1629 as a small pear growing in
clusters, excellent, and musky in flavor.

=Dienstbotenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:200. 1856.

Dutch, 1807. Fruit medium, pyriform, light greenish-yellow turning
to bright yellow, with only an indistinct red blush, if any; flesh
granular, aromatic and sweet; good; Oct.

=Dieudonne Anthoine. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:85, fig. 1857. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:26, fig. 1869.

Obtained by Dieudonne Anthoine at Ecaussines-d'Enghien, Bel., and bore
fruit at Brussels in 1850. Fruit medium and above, globular, slightly
turbinate, bossed, flattened at both ends, greenish-yellow, dotted with
brown, mottled with russet, becoming at maturity a brilliant yellow,
washed with vermilion on the side of the sun; flesh very white and very
fine, breaking; juice sufficient, sweet, often astringent and only
slightly perfumed; second; Oct.

=Diller. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 36. 1852. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 736. 1869.

This pear was approved at the American Pomological Congress in 1852,
where it was reported to have been imported from Germany by the Diller
family many years previously, but considered by others to be a native
of Pennsylvania. Fruit below medium, globular-ovate, cinnamon-russet;
flesh somewhat granular, whitish, buttery, melting; juicy with a fine
aromatic flavor; good to very good; Aug. and Sept.

=Diman. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., submitted this among other seedlings
to the Fruit Committee of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society
in 1866. Fruit 2-1/2 in. in diameter, russet, with red cheek; flesh
breaking, melting, very sweet and juicy; ripens soundly; all Oct. This
pear has improved, year by year, in size and character; first-rate.

=Directeur Alphand. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ N. S. =17=:538. 1882. =2.=
_Guide Prat._ 54. 1895.

Sent out in 1880 by Messrs. Croux and Son, Chatenay, Seine, Fr. Fruit
very large, oblong-pyriform, yellowish-green passing into golden-green,
dotted and splashed with red; flesh white, semi-fine, generally gritty
toward the center, sugary; very good for ornament and stewing; Feb. and
Mar.

=Directeur Hardy. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 542. 1894. =2.= _Ibid._ 500, fig.
153. 1894.

From the seed beds of M. Tourasse and promoted by M. Baltet of Troyes,
Fr. It was submitted to the Tasting Committee of the Pomological
Society of France in 1894 and declared to be very good. Fruit large or
medium, turbinate, elongated, obtuse, slightly bent, golden-yellow,
washed with red on the exposed side; flesh white, fine, melting, very
juicy, sugary, vinous, slightly perfumed; Sept.

=Directeur Tisserand. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 7. 1900.

Obtained by M. A. Sannier, Rouen, from Beurre d'Hardenpont fertilized
with Doyenne du Comice; introduced in 1900. Fruit medium or rather
large, ovate-turbinate; skin fine, shining, colored in the sun; flesh
white, melting, juicy, sugary, having a peculiar flavor; good; Dec. and
Jan.

=Directeur Varenne. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 6. 1897.

A cross between Easter Beurre and Bergamote Esperen, introduced by
M. Arsene Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Fruit large to very large, approaching
Easter Beurre in form and color; stem short; flesh very fine, juicy,
with a slight aroma.

=Dirkjes Peer. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:25, fig. 13. 1872. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 92. 1876.

Dutch. Fruit medium, globular-conic, lemon-yellow streaked with
brownish-red; flesh whitish, semi-breaking, agreeably acid and sugary;
second; good for household use; Aug.

=Dix. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:142. 1831. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 737, fig. 1869.

Originated in the garden of Madame Dix, Boston, Mass.; it bore first
in 1826. Fruit large, oblong or long-pyriform; skin rough, green, the
exposed fruit becoming deep yellow when ripe, marked with distinct
russet dots and sprinkled with russet around the stalk; flesh melting,
rich, juicy, of a fine flavor and by some thought to be superior to the
St. Germain; very good to best; Oct. and Nov.

=Dixie. 1.= Griffing Bros. _Cat._ 19, fig. 1915.

Originated in southern Georgia as a chance seedling, possibly a cross
between Le Conte and the Sand Pear; and was introduced in 1914 by
Griffing Brothers of Florida. Fruit medium to above, roundish, slightly
oblong, light green, sweet, sprightly; Aug.

=Doat. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:29, fig. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=4=:19, fig. 202. 1879.

The parent tree was noticed by M. Doat in his garden near Fleurance,
Gers, Fr. Fruit large, like Calebasse in form; skin rough to the touch,
bright yellow dotted with fawn; flesh yellowish-white or greenish,
semi-melting, gritty around the core; juice abundant, vinous, sugary,
rather aromatic; second; Sept.

=Docteur Andry. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:31, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 561. 1884.

Raised in the nurseries of M. Boisbunel, Jr., at Rouen, Fr., in 1849.
Fruit medium, globular, Bergamot-shaped, bright yellow all over, with
dots of russet around the stalk, and sprinkled with small brown specks;
flesh very white, fine, melting, somewhat gritty at center, juicy,
sugary, with a delicate taste of musk; first; Nov.

=Docteur Benit. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:31, fig. 1869.

Raised from seed by Van Mons in 1840. Fruit below medium, globular,
larger on one side than the other, wrinkled, bronzed all over, dotted
with bright grayish-green; flesh whitish, dense, semi-melting, veined
with greenish-yellow; juice sufficient, rather sugary, vinous, slightly
aromatic; third; Dec. and Jan.

=Docteur Bourgeois. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 62. 1895.

Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Fruit medium, apple-shaped,
lemon-yellow; flesh fine, somewhat granular at center, juicy, with
agreeable perfume.

=Docteur Bouvier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:33, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 738. 1869.

An excellent French pear suitable for a mild climate. Fruit medium,
globular-obovate-pyriform, greenish, more yellow at maturity,
sprinkled, shaded and dotted with russet, sometimes with slight crimson
and fawn on exposed cheek; flesh rather coarse, melting, juicy, vinous,
having but little perfume; good to very good; Dec. to Mar.

=Docteur Capron. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:34, fig. 1869. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 62, 255. 1895.

Obtained by Van Mons in 1842. Fruit medium or rather large, ovate,
lemon-yellow; flesh melting, yellow, buttery, sugary, juicy, of good
flavor and scented with almond; first; Nov.

=Docteur Chaineau. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1895.

Fruit rather large; flesh melting; first; Oct.

=Docteur Delatosse. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1895.

Fruit exquisite; Oct. and Nov. Resisted the severe frost of 1879-80.

=Docteur Gromier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876.

First published in 1873. Fruit medium; flesh very fine, buttery,
melting, juicy, with an aroma of mingled rose and musk; first; Oct.

=Docteur Joubert. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 561. 1893.

Baltet Brothers, Troyes, Fr., introduced this pear in 1893. Fruit
rather large, pyriform, clear green passing to pale yellow, dotted with
fawn, rosy on the side of the sun; flesh melting; juice abundant, with
a sugary taste and having a pleasant perfume; autumn.

=Docteur Koch. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:36, fig. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =4=:7, fig. 196. 1879.

Raised from seed by Andre Leroy in 1864. Fruit above medium, ovate,
bossed, irregular, lemon-yellow, finely dotted and reticulated with
russet, lightly washed with reddish-brown on the side exposed to the
sun; flesh whitish, fine, firm, melting, rather gritty about the core,
full of sugary juice, acid and pleasantly perfumed; first; Sept.

=Docteur Lentier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:37, fig. 1869. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 74, 256. 1895.

From seed sown in 1847 by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Brabant. Fruit medium,
ovate, somewhat elongated, smooth, greenish or lemon-yellow, splashed
and dotted with cinnamon-russet; flesh whitish, fine-grained, tender,
buttery, melting, juicy, exceedingly rich, sweet and perfumed; first,
of the highest merit; Oct.

=Docteur Lindley. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 40. 1871. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 108. 1876.

Shown at the annual exhibition of the Massachusetts Horticultural
Society in 1871. Fruit above medium, broadly turbinate, yellow, tinged
with red and slightly traced with russet; flesh white, buttery, sweet,
highly flavored; very good; Nov.

=Docteur Meniere. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:38, fig. 1869.

Raised from seed by Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr.; fruited first in 1864.
Fruit large, cylindrical, slightly ovate; skin wrinkled, bright yellow,
dotted with greenish-gray and partly covered with russet markings;
flesh whitish, fine, melting, very juicy, sugary, slightly acid,
agreeably-perfumed flavor; Sept.

=Docteur Nelis. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:87, fig. 1856. =2.= Mas _Le
Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 129, fig. 161. 1866-73.

Obtained by M. Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel.; first published in
1847. Fruit above medium or small, turbinate-obtuse, generally much
more curved on one side than the other, clear dark lemon-yellow,
thinly dotted with russet; flesh yellowish, fine-grained, very tender,
melting, juicy and sweet, rather aromatic; second; Sept.

=Docteur P. Bruzon. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 463. 1906.

Placed on the market as a new variety in 1906 by M. Bruant, Poitiers,
Fr. Fruit very large, greenish-yellow, dotted and mottled with russet;
flesh white, semi-fine but very juicy, very melting, sugary, pleasantly
perfumed; good; Sept.

=Docteur Pariset. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876.

Fruit large, nearly cylindrical, golden lemon-yellow; flesh buttery,
melting, juicy, sugary and perfumed; first; Nov.

=Docteur Pigeaux. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:40, fig. 1869. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 92. 1876.

From a seed bed of Major Esperen of Mechlin, Bel., placed on the market
in 1864. Fruit above medium and often rather large, globular-ovate,
yellow tinged with rose; flesh fine, melting; good; Oct. to Dec.

=Docteur Trousseau. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:89, fig. 1857. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 738. 1869.

One of the last of the seedlings of Van Mons; fruited in 1848. Fruit
large, pyriform-obtuse, yellowish-green, dotted with bright fawn and
stained with brown-russet around the stem; flesh white, buttery,
melting, very juicy and aromatic; first; Nov.

=Doctor Bachmann. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 190. 1867.

Produced at the Pomaria nurseries, South Carolina, from seed and
reported to the American Pomological Society in 1867. Fruit medium,
globular, green with dull red cheek; flesh juicy, vinous and refreshing.

=Doctor Engelbrecht. 1.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =11=:No. 70, Pl. 70. 1882.

German. Fruit rather large, pyriform-elongated, nearly smooth, shining,
green, clouded with greenish-yellow; flesh yellowish-white, fine,
softish, melting, sweet, vinous, with an agreeable cinnamon flavor.

=Doctor Hogg Bergamot. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 562. 1884.

Raised by T. Rivers, Sawbridgeworth, Eng., from seed of Gansel
Late Bergamot; received a first-class certificate from the Royal
Horticultural Society in 1878. Fruit produced in great clusters, small,
size of Seckel, obovate, even in outline, grass-green, with a dull
brownish cheek, changing to deep yellow and bright red cheek with an
orange glow; flesh melting, remarkably sweet like honey, with a brisk
acidulous flavor and perfume of lemon; one of the richest flavored
pears; Sept.

=Doctor Hoskins. 1.= _Rural N. Y._ =44=:201, 203, figs. 120, 121. 1885.

According to correspondence with J. T. Macomber of Adams, Vt., this
variety is a seedling of Flemish Beauty. It is said to be medium to
above in size, roundish-obtuse, pyriform, pale yellow, red on the sunny
side and "very good" in quality.

=Doctor Howe. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 2nd App. 146. 1876.

Originated in garden of Dr. John T. Howe, Birmingham, Conn., about
1890. Fruit medium, globular, inclining to pyriform, somewhat obtuse,
greenish changing to light yellow, netted and patched with russet dots;
flesh whitish, semi-fine, juicy, melting, sweet, rich, slightly-vinous
flavor; promising in 1890; Oct.

=Doctor Turner. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 210. 1862. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 740. 1869.

A pear of Connecticut origin. Tree of good growth, moderately
spreading, rather an early and regular although not an over-abundant
bearer; young wood a dark olive-brown. Fruit large, oblong-pyriform,
with blunt neck; skin pale yellow, sometimes with a slight blush and
thickly sprinkled with green and brown dots, a few traces of russet;
stalk long, curved, set in a slight depression by a ring or lip; calyx
closed; basin rather small; flesh white, juicy, half melting, slightly
vinous, somewhat astringent; good; Aug.

=Dodge. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:480, fig. 161. 1913.

A hybrid-oriental variety. Fruit medium, ovate-pyriform, narrowing
rapidly to the stem, greenish-yellow, profusely dotted; skin thin but
tough, russeted near stem; flesh white, juicy, melting, tender, free
from grit; fair; Oct.

=Doktorsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:61. 1856.

German, from the Rhine country, 1833. Fruit large, pyriform, smooth,
light-yellow without russet, slightly blushed on side next the sun;
flesh agreeable, sweet; good; Oct.

=Donatienne Bureau. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1895.

On trial in 1895 at Simon Louis's grounds at Metz, Lorraine. Fruit
large, ovate-long, bright yellow stained with brown; flesh fine; first.

=Dones. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 92. 1876.

Fruit small; flesh melting, juicy; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Donville. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:42, fig. 1869. =2.= Mathieu _Nom.
Pom._ 204. 1889.

An old French pear mentioned first by Merlet in 1675. Fruit medium to
large, pyriform-obtuse, bright yellow when ripe, washed with dark red
on the side of the sun; flesh-yellowish, semi-fine or coarse, breaking;
juice deficient, sweet, no perfume; first for kitchen use; Jan. to Apr.

=Doppelttragende gelbe Muskatellerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:11. 1856.

Originated in Thuringia, Ger., 1803. Fruit medium, conic, symmetrical,
light greenish-yellow; flesh breaking, soft, mild, tender, aromatic;
good; Aug.

=Doerell Herbst Muskateller. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:96.
1856. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:1, fig. 385. 1880.

Fruit nearly medium, ovate-pyriform, pale yellow sprinkled with very
small, very numerous and regularly-spaced fawn dots usually free
from any trace of russet; at maturity the yellow passes into clear
lemon-yellow and on well-exposed fruits is washed with vermilion; flesh
white, rather fine, breaking, dense, not juicy but sugary and perfumed;
good for culinary purposes; winter.

=Dorothee Nouvelle. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 92. 1876.

Belgian; highly recommended. Fruit of first quality; Oct. Tree very
fertile.

=Dorothee Royale Nouvelle. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:39, fig. 500. 1881.

Fruit small, pyriform, green changing to pale yellow, some russet
markings and speckled with grayish dots; flesh whitish, melting, juicy,
sugary, delicious; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Dorr. 1.= Cole _Am. Fr. Book_ 154. 1849. =2.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 421.
1859.

Originated in New Hampshire. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, pale yellow,
blushed with red; flesh rather coarse, deficient in juice, sweet,
pleasant; cooking or eating; Aug.

=Dorschbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 148, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small, obtuse-turbinate, somewhat
globular, green changing to yellow when ripe, dotted with yellow-brown
and marked with cinnamon-russet, blushed on the sun-exposed side; flesh
tough, light yellow, very astringent, subacid and very juicy; Oct.

=Dosoris. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =22=:88. 1867. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._
100. 1869.

Found in a field at Glen Cove, L. I, about 1866. Fruit full medium,
obtuse-pyriform, when ripe a beautiful yellow with two-thirds bright
scarlet; flesh sweet, juicy, agreeable, though deficient in flavor;
beginning of Aug.; good but not first quality.

=Double d'Automne. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 49. 1831. =2.= _Mag.
Hort._ =9=:131. 1843.

Fruit medium, Bergamot-shaped, entirely cinnamon-russet, through
which a little green appears, with numerous small, gray specks; flesh
white, breaking, rather gritty but mellow; juice saccharine. New in
1831 and considered promising but in 1843 was discarded by the London
Horticultural Society.

=Double-Fleur. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:177. 1768. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:123, fig. 254. 1879.

_Double Blossom._ =3.= Langley _Pomona_ 132. 1729. =4.= Lindley _Guide
Orch. Gard._ 412, 1831.

Of ancient and unknown origin. Mentioned by Nicholas de Bonnefonds in
1651 in his first edition of the _Jardinier Francais_, by Merlet in
1675 and Claude Saint-Etienne in 1660. Worth growing for ornament, its
large, double flowers, with from twelve to fifteen petals, being very
handsome. Fruit above medium, globular or globular-turbinate, generally
enlarged on one side more than on the other, green but yellow when
ripe, dark red or pale purple on the side of the sun; flesh greenish,
semi-fine, quite crisp, juicy, sweet, rather sugary; excellent culinary
pear; Feb. to May.

=Double de Guerre. 1.= _Garden_ =56=:426. 1899. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 167. 1920.

Introduced into England from Mechlin, Bel., about 1835. Tree hardy,
productive. Fruit medium to above, pyriform, tapering to the stem,
yellow-brown speckled with russet; stem short, stout, generally
obliquely inserted; calyx open in a shallow basin; flesh yellow, firm,
slightly acid; Dec. to Feb.

=Double-Plouvier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:47, fig. 1869.

Origin and age uncertain. Fruit above medium, long-ovate, more or less
bossed, greenish, dotted all over with gray-russet; flesh whitish,
semi-fine, semi-melting, scented; juice moderate but sugary; first for
the kitchen; Jan. to Mar.

=Double Rousselet. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:21, fig. 1858. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:48, fig. 1869.

Raised by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., about 1845. Fruit medium,
globular-turbinate, regular in contour; skin fine, tender, green but
almost entirely covered with cinnamon-colored russet; when ripe the
russet becomes more golden and warmer in tint on the side next the sun;
flesh white, very fine, melting, with abundant sugary juice, vinous,
very agreeable; first; Oct.

=Dow. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 92. 1858. =2.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 377.
1859. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 741. 1869.

Raised by Dr. Eli Ives, New Haven, Conn., in the middle of the
nineteenth century. Fruit above medium, obovate, acutely pyriform,
sometimes turbinate; skin rough, yellowish-green, with russet patches
and dots; flesh white, buttery, juicy, melting, vinous flavored
sometimes slightly astringent; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Dowler. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =4=:193. 1838.

Exhibited before the London Horticultural Society in 1838, under the
name of _Dowler's seedling_. A small winter pear, described as one of
the best and a good keeper.

=Downton. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:455. 1855. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:50, fig. 1869.

Raised by T. A. Knight, Downton Castle, Eng., about 1840. Fruit medium
or above, oval, somewhat irregular, greenish-yellow changing to
lemon-yellow, a good deal russeted particularly on the side next the
sun where it is completely covered and assumes a reddish-brown tinge;
flesh whitish, not quite melting but tender, fine, free from grit,
agreeably acidulous, sweet and juicy, with some taste of orange; first;
Nov. and Dec.

=Doyen Dillen. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:27, fig. 1853. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:51, fig. 1869.

From seed sown by Van Mons at Louvain in 1827. Fruit medium to large,
pyriform-conic, yellow, much covered with dots and patches of russet;
flesh white, buttery, melting, free from grit; juice rather abundant,
sweet, rich and pleasantly perfumed; first; Nov.

=Doyenne Bizet. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1895.

Tree moderately vigorous, very fertile. Fruit large; good; Mar. to
June.

=Doyenne Blanc Long. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 27, fig. 12.
1866-73. =2.= _Guide Prat._ 74. 1895.

Origin unknown. Fruit medium, growing often in bunches, pyriform; skin
thin, fine, bright green changing to brilliant yellow, golden on the
side next the sun, with some bright red shading; flesh white, fine,
melting, musky; first; Oct.

=Doyenne Boisnard. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1895.

Fruit rather large; first; Dec.

=Doyenne Boisselot. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 205. 1889. =2.= _Garden_
=50=:405. 1896.

A little-known pear, large in size, some of the fruit weighing a pound,
Bergamot in form, maturing about Christmas.

=Doyenne de Bordeaux. 1.= _Pom. Fr._ =4=:No. 150, Pl. 150. 1865. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:57, fig. 1869.

Origin unknown but cultivated in the environs of Bordeaux about 1820.
Fruit large, globular, flattened at each end; skin thick, wrinkled and
oily, golden-yellow sown with large dots of greenish-russet and marbled
with the same, some orange-red on side next the sun; flesh very white,
coarse, breaking, gritty at center; juice sufficient, sweet; third for
dessert, first for compotes; Oct. to Dec.

=Doyenne Bouyron. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1895.

Distributed from Bordeaux, Fr. Fruit of the size, form and color of the
Doyenne Gris; flesh fine, juicy, somewhat acid; Aug.

=Doyenne du Cercle. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 742. 1869. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:59, fig. 1869.

A seedling obtained by M. Boisbunel, a nurseryman at Rouen, Fr.;
first published in 1857. Fruit medium, turbinate-globular, varying
to irregular-ovate, pale yellow covered with very fine gray dots and
stained with fawn, often encrimsoned on the side next the sun; flesh
whitish, very melting, scented; juice abundant, sweet, highly vinous,
with a delicate, tartish flavor; first; Nov.

=Doyenne a Cinq Pans. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =25=:132. 1899.

A cross effected in 1879 between Duchesse de Bordeaux and Easter Beurre
by M. Herault. Fruit medium, rather globular, smooth, yellow, spotted
and flecked with fawn; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sweet, with an aroma
of Pelargoniums; Oct. and Nov.

=Doyenne Defays. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 73, fig. 35. 1866-73.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:62. 1869.

_Doyenne d'Effay._ =3.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:461. 1855.

Obtained by M. Francois-Andre Defays in the field of Saint Martin, near
Angers, Fr. Fruit about medium, globular-obovate or Doyenne-shaped,
bossed at the stalk end and generally larger and longer on one side,
yellow, much covered with cinnamon-russet on the side next the sun;
flesh tender, buttery, melting, very juicy, rich, sugary, vinous, with
musky aroma; one of the best; Dec.

=Doyenne Downing. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:63, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 566. 1884.

A wilding found in a garden near Angers, Fr., by Francois Desportes,
the noted nurseryman, in 1851; it was named after A. J. Downing. Fruit
medium, globular or ovate, mammillate, one side always larger than
the other, pale yellow, dotted and marbled with russet; flesh very
white, tender, semi-melting; juice sufficient, sweet, acidulous, with a
pleasant flavor of anis; Sept.

=Doyenne Flon Aine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:65, fig. 1869. =2.=
_Rev. Hort._ 133, 1894.

Obtained from seed by M. Flon, senior, of Angers, Fr., in 1859. Fruit
large, globular, generally mammillate at summit, greenish-yellow and
yellowish-brown on the side of the sun, marbled and dotted with brown;
flesh white, fine, very melting, juicy, sugary, slightly tartish, with
a pronounced flavor of roses; first; Nov. to Feb.

=Doyenne Fradin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 93. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=6=:33, fig. 401. 1880.

Regarded as a gain of M. Parigot of Poitiers. Fruit medium, globular,
depressed at both extremities, water-green, dotted with brown, becoming
citron-yellow on ripening; flesh whitish, fine, melting, gritty at
core, full of sweet juice, vinous and richly perfumed.

=Doyenne Georges Boucher. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 496, fig. 1906. =2.= _Ibid._
197. 1907.

Came from a seed bed of Doyenne du Comice made in 1884. Fruit large and
very large, globular-turbinate, bossed at the extremities; skin rather
thick, dark yellow, sprinkled with small dots and marbled with fawn,
russeted and reddened on the sunny side; flesh yellowish-white, juicy,
sugary; very good; Feb. to Apr.

=Doyenne Goubault. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:66, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 566. 1884.

Raised by M. Goubault, Angers, Fr. Fruit above medium, obovate,
inclining to pyriform, pale yellow with russet markings and dots; flesh
melting, sugary, vinous and highly perfumed; rich and excellent; Jan.

=Doyenne de la Grifferaye. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:68, fig. 1869.
=2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:11, fig. 198. 1879.

Obtained by M. le Gris, Angers, Fr.; gave its first fruit in
1853. Fruit medium, turbinate-oblate, very obtuse and irregular,
greenish-yellow, finely dotted with russet and brown, stained with
fawn; flesh white, fine, buttery, melting, full of sweet and perfumed
juice; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Doyenne Gris. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:208, Pl. XLVII, fig.
1. 1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:69, fig. 1869.

_Doyenne Gray._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 745. 1869.

_Red Doyenne._ =4.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 635. 1884.

An ancient pear attributed to the garden of the Chartreux Monastery
at Paris about the middle of the eighteenth century. Fruit medium and
above, globular, flattened at each extremity; skin rather thin and
wrinkled, yellow-ochre, nearly covered with cinnamon-colored russet, so
that little of the true color is visible, brownish-red toward the sun;
flesh white, tender, melting, very buttery, rich and delicious; one of
the best dessert pears; Oct.

=Doyenne Guillard. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

Described as a new variety by Simon-Louis Bros., Metz, Lorraine, in
1895. Fruit rather glossy, brown, slightly dotted with green; flesh
almost fine, white, very juicy, vinous; Nov. and Dec.

=Doyenne des Haies. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:71, fig. 1869.

A wilding found on the property of M. Bardi, Bwalt, Canton of
Montastruc, Haute-Garonne, Fr., and first reported in 1855. Fruit
medium, globular or globular-turbinate, flat at base, mammillate at
summit, pale yellow, dotted and stained with fawn, blushed with tender
rose on the side toward the sun; flesh white, fine, melting, juicy,
rather gritty around the core; juice abundant, sweet, very sugary,
tasting of musk; second; Oct.

=Doyenne Hudellet. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 101, fig. 147.
1866-73.

Obtained by M. Jules Hudellet at Ceyzeriat near Bourg, Ain, Fr.; it was
first published in 1867. Fruit medium, globular-cylindrical, regular
outline, bright green sprinkled with dots of gray-brown, passing to
pale yellow, with some red on the side of the sun; flesh white, fine,
melting, full of sweet juice, slightly musky; first; Nov.

=Doyenne Jamin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:75, fig. 1869. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =5=:131, fig. 354. 1880.

Gained by Jamin & Durand, nurserymen at Bourg-la-Reine, near Paris,
in 1859 from seed. Fruit medium, turbinate-conic or turbinate-ovate,
irregular, greenish-yellow changing to yellow and washed with rose on
the sunny side, dotted with russet; flesh whitish, semi-fine, buttery,
full of sweet juice, vinous, astringent, without much perfume; second;
Jan. and Feb.

=Doyenne de Lorraine. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:17, 201. 1879.

Received by Diel, the eminent German pomologist, from a nurseryman at
Metz under the name of _Doyenne d'Austrasie_ by which it is mostly
known to German authors. Fruit medium, globular, depressed at each
pole, water-green, with gray-brown dots, bright citron-yellow when ripe
and golden on the side next the sun or sometimes washed with red; flesh
white, semi-fine, semi-buttery; juice plentiful, sweet and slightly
perfumed; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Doyenne Louis. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:79, fig. 1869.

Seedling of Van Mons, previous to 1820. Fruit small, turbinate-obtuse,
regular in form, dark yellow, strewn with numerous gray-brown dots
and carmined on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish, coarse,
semi-melting, gritty at center; juice abundant, sugary, lacking in
flavor; third; Sept. and Oct.

=Doyenne de Montjean. 1.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 243, fig. 1906.

Obtained in 1848 by M. Trottier, Montjean, Department of
Maine-et-Loire, Fr., and first published in 1858. Fruit large to very
large, ovate, nearly equally rounded at its two poles; skin thin and
rough, yellow, much russeted; flesh white, very fine, melting, very
juicy, with a slightly vinous and sweet flavor, perfumed; very good;
Jan. to Mar.

=Doyenne Nerard. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:237, fig. 117. 1866-73. =2.=
_Guide Prat._ 68. 1895.

Obtained in 1850 by M. Bonnefoy, a nurseryman at Saint-Genis-Laval,
near Lyons, Fr. Fruit small, globular-conic, yellowish-white, marbled
with bright red; flesh semi-breaking, very sugary; good; Aug.

=Doyenne Nouveau. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:461. 1855.

Fruit medium, obovate; flesh tender and juicy; excellent; Apr.

=Doyenne Perrault. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876.

Fruit medium, rather oblate, resembling Easter Bergamot with a long
stalk; flesh fine, firm, melting; first; winter.

=Doyenne Picard. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 93. 1876.

Fruit medium; flesh melting; first; Aug.

=Doyenne Rahard. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1895.

Fruit large or very large; flesh fine, melting, very sweet; Dec. to Jan.

=Doyenne de Ramegnies. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ N. S. =20=:85. 1883.

Raised by M. Norbert Bouzin of Ramegnies-Chin near Tournai, Bel. Fruit
large, turbinate and very symmetrically shaped; olive-brown, russeted;
flesh fine, buttery, vinous; Oct. and Nov.

=Doyenne Robin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:81, fig. 1869.

Raised in 1840 at Angers, Fr., by a gardener named Robin. Fruit large,
globular-ovate, yellowish, dotted and stained with bright russet; flesh
melting, juicy, sweet, vinous, aromatic; first; Oct.

=Doyenne Rose. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:82, fig. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =5=:21, fig. 299. 1880.

From a seed bed made in 1820 by Edouard Sageret, author of _Pomologie
physiologique_; it bore fruit first in 1830. Fruit above medium,
globular, irregular, yellow-ochre on the shaded side and beautiful rose
on the side of the sun; flesh very white, semi-melting, granular; juice
scarcely sufficient, little perfume or flavor; second; Oct.

=Doyenne Saint-Roch. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:83, fig. 1869.

Largely grown in the Gironde, Fr., in the middle of the nineteenth
century. Fruit above medium and sometimes larger, globular but
variable, pale yellow dotted with russet passing to bright yellow
on the side next the sun, where it is lightly washed with carmine;
flesh white, semi-fine, melting or slightly breaking, juicy, sugary,
acidulous, of delicate flavor; second; Aug. and Sept.

=Doyenne de Saumur. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:84, fig. 1869.

A French pear of uncertain origin but known in the districts of Saumur
and Lyons early in the nineteenth century. Fruit medium and below, very
variable in form, from ovate-elongated to turbinate-obtuse, bossed
and swelled, pale greenish-yellow, dotted with gray-russet especially
on the side next the sun; flesh white, very fine, melting, juicy,
perfumed, having an after-taste of musk; first; Sept.

=Doyenne Sentelet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:86, fig. 1869. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =3=:137, fig. 165. 1878.

A gain of Van Mons, 1823. Fruit about medium or below,
turbinate-ovate-obtuse, often irregular, deep rich yellow, much mottled
and speckled with cinnamon-colored russet; flesh yellowish-white,
melting, juicy, sugary, vinous; good; Oct.

=Doyenne Sieulle. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:87, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 567. 1884.

From a seed bed of Jean Sieulle, Vaux-Praslin, Fr.; it was placed on
the market in 1815. Fruit above medium to medium, often globular and
often Doyenne-shaped, deep rich yellow ground, mottled and speckled
with cinnamon-colored russet; flesh very white, fine, semi-melting;
juice sufficient, acidulous, sweet, with an agreeable almond flavor;
variable, from second to first; Nov.

=Drapiez. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:125. 1843. =2.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._
=2=:461. 1855.

Of Belgian origin. Fruit medium, obovate, pale green, very much marbled
with gray; flesh tender, sweet, acidulous, strongly perfumed; a very
excellent autumn fruit; Oct. and Nov.

=Drone. 1.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =3.= 1807. =2.= Prince _Pom. Man._
=1=:25. 1831.

Fruit middle sized, globular, light green dotted with darker shade of
same color; flesh white, breaking, full of sweet, musky juice; Aug.

=Du Breuil Pere. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:161, fig. 79. 1866-73.

Alphonse Du Breuil obtained this variety from seeds of Louise Bonne
de Jersey sown in 1840. Fruit medium, nearly a true sphere, slightly
depressed at the two poles, lemon-yellow, much russeted and at maturity
mottled with blood-red on the side next the sun; flesh white, fine,
melting, juicy; first; Sept.

=Du Mirror. 1.= Baltet _Trait. Cult. Fr._ 372. 1908.

A first-class French perry pear, grown in the Haute-Savoie, yielding
from 800 to 1000 litres of perry per tree; the beverage is clear, very
sweet, rather sparkling, and becomes stronger with age.

=Du Roeulx. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 92. 1895.

Tree hardy. Fruit medium, pyriform, short, yellow, mottled with fawn;
flesh yellowish, very melting, juicy and sugary, with an exquisite
aroma; first; Sept.

=Dubrulle. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 93, 267. 1876.

Fruit rather large, globular, yellowish-green and gray mottled with
fawn; flesh melting, very juicy, sugary, highly perfumed and of a
luscious flavor; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Duc Alfred de Croy. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:163, fig. 370. 1880. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 567. 1884.

Propagated and disseminated by M. de Jonghe, Brussels. Fruit large,
obtuse-pyriform, regular and handsome, smooth, yellowish-green, washed
with pale brown on side next the sun; flesh white, tinted with green,
not very juicy, but buttery, rich and with a fine spicy flavor and
perfume; excellent; Nov.

=Duc d'Aumale. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:91, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 568. 1884.

A product of the Van Mons nursery at Louvain where it first fruited
in 1847. Fruit small, turbinate-obtuse-pyriform; skin rough,
greenish-yellow mottled all over with cinnamon-colored russet; flesh
whitish, melting and juicy, sugary, acidulous, perfumed; first; Sept.
and Oct.

=Duc de Brabant. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:92, fig. 1869. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =7=:27, fig. 494. 1881.

Sent by Van Mons as No. 45 to Simon Bouvier in Jodoigne, Bel., in 1827.
Fruit medium, pyriform-obtuse, greenish-yellow, dotted with russet,
marbled with fawn, sometimes washed with red on the side next the
sun; flesh white, semi-fine, semi-breaking; juice sufficient, sugary,
acidulous; good; sometimes second; Oct.

=Duc de Morny. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:95, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 568. 1884.

Raised by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, and first published in 1862. Fruit
large, long-obtuse-pyriform, bossed, green, mottled and dotted with
russet; flesh whitish, tender, melting, very juicy, too acid, little
sugar or perfume; second; Nov. to Jan.

=Duc de Nemours. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:96, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 568. 1884.

Raised by Van Mons at Louvain in 1825. Fruit large and handsome,
obovate, narrowing abruptly, bright greenish or lemon-yellow,
even-dotted with russet and gray specks, sometimes reddened on cheek
next the sun; flesh white, melting, rich, sweet, sprightly, juicy,
perfumed; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Duchesse d'Angouleme Bronzee. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876.

_Duchess Bronze._ =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

A sub-variety of Duchesse d'Angouleme found in a garden of M. Weber,
Dijon, Fr., and introduced in 1873. Fruit large to very large, differs
from type by its skin being red-brown or bronze, this feature being
perfectly constant; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sugary; first; Oct. to
Dec.

=Duchesse d'Angouleme Panachee. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:102. 1869.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 569. 1884.

A variegated form of Duchesse d'Angouleme, the wood, leaves and fruit
being mottled with yellow and green. In 1848 it was attributed to M.
Audusson, who originated Duchesse d'Augouleme, but Leroy claims that it
proceeded from his nursery in 1840.

=Duchesse Anne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:102, fig. 1869.

Raised in 1861 by Jacques Jalais, Nantes, Fr. Fruit above medium,
like Calebasse in form, meadow-green, slightly yellowish, dotted with
gray; flesh greenish-white, fine, melting; juice sufficient, sweet,
acidulous, perfumed; first; Nov.

=Duchesse d'Arenberg. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:103, fig. 1869. =2.=
Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:35, fig. 498. 1881.

Although distributed from the Royal Nurseries at Vilvorde-lez-Bruxelles
without mention of origin its name suggests Belgium. Fruit medium and
often larger, turbinate-obtuse-oblate, greenish-yellow passing to
bright green on the side of the sun, dotted with gray-russet; flesh
yellowish, coarse, melting, juicy, gritty around the core; sugary,
perfumed, rather sour; second; Aug.

=Duchesse de Berry d'Ete. 1.= Leroy _Dic. Pom._ =2=:104. fig. 1869.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 569. 1884.

Raised in a seed bed in the Commune of Saint-Herblain, Department of
Loire-Inferieure, Fr., in 1827. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate,
yellow, dotted with dark gray; flesh very white, semi-fine, melting;
juice abundant, sugary, aromatic; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Duchesse de Bordeaux. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:105, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 570. 1884. =3.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 171. 1920.

_Beurre Perrault._ =4.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:133, fig. 65. 1866-73.

_Bordeaux._ =5.= Cal. Com. Hort. _Pear Grow. Cal._ =7=:No. 5, 242. 1918.

M. Secher, in the Commune of Montjean, Department of Maine-et-Loire,
Fr., bought in 1850 from M. Perrault, Montrevault, some pear trees.
Ten years passed away and then one of the trees produced the excellent
fruit here described. M. Secher invited many persons to taste it, in
particular MM. Perrault and Baptiste Desportes. Later the variety
fruited with M. Perrault and was named by him _Beurre Perrault_.
Secher affirmed he had properly given the variety the name of
Duchesse de Bordeaux. Tree large, vigorous, upright. Fruit large,
roundish-pyriform; skin thick, very tough, rough, greenish-yellow,
with mottlings and patches of russet; stem rather long, thick, set
in a moderately deep, acute cavity; calyx large, open, placed in a
moderately deep basin; flesh yellowish-white, firm, granular, juicy,
mild; good; Nov. and Dec.

=Duchesse de Brabant. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:107, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 570. 1884.

A posthumous seedling of Van Mons, which gave its first fruit in 1853.
Fruit medium, short-pyriform-obtuse; skin thin, smooth, shining,
greenish-yellow; flesh yellowish-white, buttery, melting; juice
abundant, sweet, savory; good; Oct.

=Duchesse de Brabant= (De Capeinick). =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:17, fig.
297. 1880.

This variety, obtained by M. Capeinick, received medals at Brussels and
at Tournai in 1853. Fruit medium, regular pyriform, bright green and
speckled with dots of gray-green, becoming lemon-yellow at maturity,
washed with blood-red on the side of the sun; flesh white, rather fine,
melting; juice abundant, sugary, refreshing; first; Sept.

=Duchesse de Brissac. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:108, fig. 1869.

Came from a seed bed of Auguste Benoist, Brissac, Maine-et-Loire, Fr.,
and ripened for the first time in 1861. Fruit above medium, ovate,
rather irregular, bright greenish-yellow, spotted with russet; flesh
yellowish, melting, juicy, sugary, vinous, aromatic; first; Aug. and
Sept.

=Duchesse Grousset. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 91. 1895.

Fruit large, elongated, very obtuse at base; bright yellow, speckled
with brown dots; flesh fine, very melting, rather granular at center;
Dec.

=Duchesse Helene d'Orleans. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:109, fig. 1869.

From a seed bed made at Louvain, Bel., in 1839 by Van Mons; it first
fruited in 1847. Fruit medium, ovate, always somewhat distorted, one
side being longer than the other, yellowish-green, dotted and mottled
with gray and russet, carmined on the cheek next the sun; flesh white,
melting, very juicy, acidulous, sugary, good flavor; first; Sept.

=Duchesse d'Hiver. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 749. 1869.

_Tardive de Toulouse_. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:693, fig. 1869.

M. Barthere, Sr., a nurseryman of Toulouse, Fr., found this pear in
1845 near Calmont on one of his travels through southern France. Tree
moderately vigorous, characteristically small and pyramidal. Fruit
large, roundish-pyriform, light yellow; flesh white, juicy; matures in
winter and late spring. Although not a pear of highest quality it is
worthy of notice because of its large size and long keeping.

=Duchesse Hybrid. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:481. 1913.

Form resembles Kieffer, lemon-yellow; flesh coarse; poor; Oct.

=Duchesse de Mars. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:110, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 570. 1884.

Origin uncertain; generally attributed to Belgium. Fruit medium,
obovate but variable, yellowish-green, russeted; flesh buttery, white,
melting, juicy, sweet, perfumed, well flavored; first class dessert
pear; Nov.

=Duchesse de Mouchy. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:112, fig. 1869.

From a wilding noted in 1862 by the cure of Breteuil, Oise, Fr. Fruit
large, turbinate-obtuse, bright olive-yellow, dotted with gray-russet;
flesh yellowish-white, a little coarse, semi-breaking, juicy, sugary,
vinous, slightly perfumed; second; Apr. and May.

=Duchesse Precoce. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:113, fig. 1869.

Came from a seed bed of Duchesse d'Angouleme made in 1850 by Andre

Leroy. Fruit large and often very large, ovate, golden-yellow,
sprinkled with large greenish dots, slightly carmined on the cheek
exposed to the sun; flesh very white, breaking or semi-melting, with
seeds usually absent, juicy, sweet; flavor agreeable; second; Aug.

=Duchovaya. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 22. 1887.

_Scented._ =2.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 232. 1885.

A Central-Russian pear. Fruit medium to above, obtuse-pyriform, yellow,
russeted; flesh coarse, sweet, juicy; poor; mid-season.

=Dudley. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:107. 1908.

Originated with Mr. Dudley, Boston Highlands, Mass. Fruit medium long;
very good; mid-season.

=Dumon-Dumortier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:115, fig. 1869.

From the Van Mons seed beds. Fruit medium, turbinate, yellowish-green,
dotted with russet; flesh whitish, very fine, melting, juicy, sugary,
acidulous, deliciously perfumed; first; Nov.

=Dundas. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:60. 1842. =2.= _Ibid._ =9=:132, fig.
1843. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 750. 1869.

Disseminated by Van Mons in 1834 in which year it was sent to America
to both R. Manning and W. Kenrick. This pear is known in Europe
mostly under the names of _Rousselet Jamin_, _Henri Nicaise_ and
_Heliote Dundas_ or _Heloise Dundas_. Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse,
greenish-yellow or yellow-ochre, dotted with brown and gray and washed
with beautiful carmine on the side of the sun; flesh white, with green
veins, between breaking and melting; juice insufficient; very handsome
but wanting in quality; Sept. and Oct.

=Dunmore. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:154. 1847. =2.= _Ibid._ =18=:159, fig.
1852.

One of the best seedling pears raised by Thomas Andrew Knight, Downton
Castle, Wiltshire, Eng. It first fruited in 1822 being then reported in
this country by C. M. Hovey. Fruit large, oblong-obovate; skin slightly
rough, yellowish-green, with russet patches, brownish-red tinge next
the sun; flesh yellowish, buttery, melting, rich, subacid, juicy,
sprightly, vinous, perfumed and aromatic; excellent; Sept. and Oct.

=Dupuy Charles. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:118, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 750. 1869.

Louis Berckmans, Augusta, Ga., raised this pear in 1847 from seed sent
from Ghent, Bel. Fruit medium to above, like Calebasse in form, rough
to the touch, bright green, dotted with russet; flesh greenish-white,
very fine, melting; juice abundant, sugary, acidulous; flavor delicate
and slightly musky; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Durandeau. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =26=:129. 1860. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc._ 111.
1862.

_De Tongres_. =3.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:15, fig. 1855. =4.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 489. 1857.

Originated from seed with Charles Louis Durandeau, Tongres-Notre-Dame,
a village in Hainaut, Bel., probably about 1825. Tree fairly
vigorous, pyramidal, an early and abundant bearer. Fruit medium
large, obovate-pyriform, generally irregular; skin thin, covered with
fine golden russet, blushed with carmine on the exposed cheek; flesh
yellowish-white, buttery, very juicy, vinous, sprightly, with an
exquisite aroma and of first quality; Oct. and Nov.

=Duree. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 751. 1884.

A wilding found by Isaac Hicks, Westbury, N. Y., and introduced by him
before 1869. Fruit medium, oblong-acute-pyriform, pale yellow, dotted
and patched with russet; flesh whitish, semi-melting, juicy, sweet,
slightly musky; good to very good; Oct.

=Durst-Loesche. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:155. 1856.

Thuringia, 1809. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate, greenish-yellow
turning to yellow; flesh breaking, soft, honey-sweet and aromatic;
good; Sept.

=Early Ely. 1.= _Tex. Nursery Cat._ 10. 1913.

Originated on the grounds of Silas Ely of Sherman, Tex., and was
introduced by the Texas Nursery Company about 1906. Said to be small,
yellow and good for both table and market.

=Early Green Sugar. 1.= J. Van Lindley _Cat._ 51. 1921.

Fruit large, yellow, blushed; June.

=Easter Bergamot. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 751. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 572. 1884.

_Bergamote de Paques_. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:250, fig. 1867.

An old French pear of which Merlet wrote in 1675, calling it _Bergamote
de Pasques_ or the _La Grilliere_. This variety was early known in
England according to Switzer who saw trees of it at Hampton Court
growing against a wall said to have been erected by Queen Elizabeth and
which had every appearance of having stood there since that time. Fruit
medium, globular-turbinate, narrowing toward the stalk, grayish-green,
dull, changing to pale yellow, thickly dotted with brown; flesh white,
semi-fine, gritty, breaking; juice sweet, acid, with not much perfume
or flavor; second only, on account of its extreme lateness; Mar. to May.

=Eastern Belle. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 32. 1870. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 1st App., 126, fig. 1872.

This pear originated with Henry McLaughlin, Bangor, Me. Tree hardy,
vigorous, productive; fruit of medium size, obovate-pyriform; skin
pale yellow, with nettings and patches of russet and many russet dots,
occasionally blushed with bright red; flesh whitish-yellow, coarse
at center, juicy, half-melting, sweet, rich, with a peculiar piquant
aroma; good; Sept.

=Echasserie. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:187, Pl. XXXII. 1768.
=2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 753. 1869.

_Walnut._ =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 90. 1856.

_Besi de l'Echasserie._ =4.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:269, fig. 1867.

The wilding from which this variety was derived was probably noticed
about 1660 and La Quintinye before 1690 spoke of it as having been
in French gardens for twenty years. It appears to have been a native
of Anjou, where there are three places bearing the name given to it.
Probably it had been locally cultivated under other names for a long
time previous to its official recognition. Fruit medium to small,
globular-oval but variable, always obtuse and bossed; skin rough to
the touch, lemon-yellow dotted with fawn and with some patches of
grayish-brown russet; flesh white, fine, melting, with very small grits
around the core; juice extremely abundant, acidulous, saccharine, with
an after-taste of musk, very agreeable; first; Nov. through Jan.

=Edle Sommerbirne. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 327. 1881.

Germany and Holland. Fruit small, pyriform and somewhat
long-gourd-shaped, smooth yellowish-green changing to yellow at
maturity, with reddish-brown on the side next the sun, dotted and
speckled with gray; flesh fine, semi-melting, with a sweet, agreeable,
aromatic flavor of rose; good for dessert and first for kitchen use;
Aug.

=Edward Seedling St. Germain, 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 754. 1869.
=2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:155, fig. 462. 1880.

Raised by Dr. W. D. Brinckle, Philadelphia, Pa. Fruit medium or rather
large, globular-pyriform-obtuse, a little irregular in form, with
its greatest diameter at the center; skin somewhat thick and tender,
intense green at first, sprinkled with grayish-black dots changing at
maturity to bright citron-yellow, some russet nettings and patches;
flesh whitish, semi-fine, slightly granular yet melting, full of
saccharine juice, acidulous and delicately perfumed; good; Oct. to Dec.

=Effie Holt. 1.= J. Van Lindley _Cat._ 54. 1913.

Said to have originated on the farm of L. W. Holt near Burlington,
N. C.; introduced by J. Van Lindley Nursery Company about 1907. Tree
healthy, thrifty. Fruit large, greenish-yellow; flesh light yellow,
rich, juicy; season about the same as Duchesse d'Angouleme.

=Eliot Early. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 52. 1871. =2.= _Rural N. Y._
=51=:602, figs. 242, 243. 1892.

Said to have been raised by Judge Charles Eliot of Windsor, Ontario,
Canada, from a cross between Madeleine and Doyenne d'Ete. Tree strong,
vigorous, hardy, an early and productive bearer. Fruit small, pyriform,
pale greenish-yellow, brownish-red next the sun; stem long, slender,
curved; cavity small, russeted; calyx closed or partially open; base
small; flesh whitish, half-fine, juicy, melting, sweet, slightly
perfumed; good to very good; July.

=Elisa d'Heyst. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:99, fig. 56. 1866-73. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:125, fig. 1869.

Obtained by Major Esperen of Mechlin, Bel. Fruit small but sometimes
medium, ovate, with an irregular outline, grass-green, dotted and
stained with clear fawn; flesh greenish, coarse, semi-melting, very
gritty around the core; juice sweet, abundant, sugary, slightly
perfumed, little flavor; second; Mar.

=Elizabeth (Edwards). 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ =5=. 1843. =2.= _Mag.
Hort._ =12=:441, fig. 34. 1846.

This pear was raised at New Haven, Conn., by Governor Edwards[32]
and was first exhibited in 1845. Fruit of medium size,
roundish-obtuse-pyriform, slightly angular; skin smooth, pale
lemon-yellow, profusely sprinkled with very small, pale russet dots
and a few grayish-russet patches; flesh white, somewhat coarse,
melting, very juicy, slightly subacid, with a vinous flavor; Oct.

=Elizabeth Maury. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 2nd App., 147. 1876.

A chance seedling on the ground of Reuben Maury, Charlottesville, Va.
Fruit small, oblate, slightly elevated, pale greenish-yellow, sometimes
with a shade of brown in the sun, with many greenish dots; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, tender, juicy, melting, sweet, slightly vinous; Aug.

=Ellis. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =30=:370, fig. 13. 1864. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 755, fig. 1869.

Raised from seed of Seckel in 1843 by Annie E. Ellis, New
Bedford, Mass. Tree vigorous, hardy, prolific. Fruit large,
oblong-obovate-pyriform, truncate, slightly uneven, greenish-yellow,
patched and mottled with russet, sprinkled with many russet dots; stem
rather long, rather stout, set in a small cavity; calyx large, open;
basin uneven, slight; flesh whitish, juicy, melting, sweet, slightly
vinous, aromatic; very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Ellis= (New York), =1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 756. 1869.

Downing says that there is another pear under the name of "Ellis"
grown in western New York, entirely distinct from Ellis. The fruit
is described as medium, acute-pyriform, greenish-yellow, shaded with
crimson-red in sun, with very small brown dots; flesh white, juicy,
melting, vinous, often astringent, disposed to rot at the core; good;
Aug. and Sept.

=Emerald. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 756. 1869.

Belgian. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, pale green, with pale
brownish-red next the sun and covered with russety dots; flesh white,
melting, buttery, richly flavored, subacid, vinous; good; Nov. and Dec.

=Emile d'Heyst. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:131, fig. 1869. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 173. 1920.

A seedling raised by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., which fruited in
1847. Fruit medium and often larger, ovate, rather long, irregular,
generally with sides unequal, bossed, bronzed, dotted with fine specks;
flesh greenish, fine and dense, melting, scented, free from grit; juice
very abundant, refreshing, sugary, slightly acid but very agreeably
perfumed; first; Oct.

=Enfant Nantais. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 210. 1889. =2.= _Guide Prat._
92. 1895.

Originated by M. Grousset of Nantes, Fr. Tree vigorous and productive.
Fruit large, conic, gray; flesh fine, buttery, juicy, aromatic but very
slightly tart; Oct.

=Enfant Prodigue. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 385. 1845. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:133, fig. 1869.

_Rousselet Enfant Prodigue._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 846. 1869.

_Verschwenderin._ =4.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 293. 1889.

A Van Mons seedling of about 1830. Fruit medium to large, ovate but
variable, greenish-yellow, largely obscured with cinnamon-colored
russet, more or less carmined on the side of the sun; flesh
greenish-white, dense, melting, juicy, sugary, aromatic, acidulous,
astringent; second; Sept.

=Epine d'Ete. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:138, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 758. 1869.

An old pear grown in the gardens of the Monastery of Chartreux, Paris,
and stated in the catalog of that institution, of 1736, to be identical
with the pear _Bugiarda_ of Italy. This Leroy has shown to be an
error, the _Bugiarda_ being the pear known in France as _Trompeur_.
Le Lectier appears to have grown it in 1628 in his famous gardens
at Orleans, though under the name of _Poire d'Espine_. Fruit above
medium, pyriform, more or less obtuse, bright green, finely dotted
with gray-russet and lightly colored with tender rose on the side of
the sun; flesh yellowish, fine, melting, juicy, sugary and musky; a
moderately good autumn pear; Sept.

=Epine d'Ete Rouge. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94, 270. 1876.

_Rother Sommerdorn_. =2.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 108. 1825.

French, 1805. Fruit medium, ovate, slightly bossed, light grass-green
turning to yellow-green, dark blush, dotted; flesh finely-grained;
juice somewhat deficient, aromatic; good for the table, kitchen and
market; Sept.

=Epine d'Hiver. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 132. 1729. =2.= Duhamel _Trait.
Arb. Fr._ =2=:184, Pl. XLIV, fig. 3. 1768.

_Winter Thorn._ =3.= Bradley _Gard._ 199. 1739. =4.= Lindley _Guide
Orch. Gard._ 410. 1831.

A very old French pear, reported as early as 1675. Tree healthy,
although not a strong grower, and bears well. Fruit medium to above,
roundish-obovate, smooth, green becoming yellowish and irregularly
covered with grayish-brown dots; stem rather long, fleshy at base,
inserted without depression; calyx small, open, set in a rather shallow
basin; flesh whitish, melting, tender, buttery, with a sweet and
agreeable musky flavor; a dessert pear; Nov. to Jan.

=Epine de Jernages. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1876.

Fruit medium; first; Mar.

=Epine du Mas. 1.= _Pom. France_ =1=:No. 31, Pl. 31. 1863. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:412, fig. 1869.

_Belle Epine Dumas_. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 668. 1869.

_Dumas_. =4.= _Rural N. Y._ =45=:480, figs. 292, 293. 1886.

A wilding found about 1760 by a M. Chemison in the forest of
Rochechouart near Mas, Department of Haute-Vienne, Fr. Fruit medium,
obtuse-pyriform, lively yellow or lemon-yellow, finely dotted with
brown and washed with carmine on the sun-exposed cheek; flesh white,
fine, tender, melting, sweet, gritty at center, juicy, acid, musky;
good; Nov. and Dec.

=Epine Royale. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 758. 1869.

Of French origin. Fruit medium, pyriform, yellowish, blushed with
bright red on the side next the sun; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sweet,
vinous; Oct. =Epine-Royale de Courtray. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:127,
fig. 256. 1879.

Origin not clear though mentioned in the Bulletin of the Society of Van
Mons in 1858. Fruit medium or large, pyriform-obtuse, green sprinkled
with numerous brown dots, changing to pale yellow at maturity, with
some red on the side next the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, buttery,
juicy, sugary, pleasant; handsome and good for transportation; Aug.

=Ermsinde. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:69. 1856. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:143, fig. 1869.

A chance seedling found in the garden of M. Bouvier, Jodoigne,
Bel., and reported in 1851. Fruit above medium, in form variable
from pyramidal to turbinate, lemon-yellow, dotted and marked with
brown-russet, and blushed with dark red on the exposed cheek; second;
early Oct.

=Ernestine Auzolle. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 758. 1869.

Of French origin. Fruit small, globular-pyriform, sometimes
acute-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with a shade of brown in the sun,
often netted and patched with russet; flesh rather coarse, yellowish,
moderately juicy, semi-melting, sweet; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Eseme. 1.= _Ia. Soc. Hort. Rpt._ 61. 1880.

Cultivated on the northern steppes of Russia and introduced to this
country by J. L. Budd of Iowa in 1880.

=Esperine. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:73, fig. 1856. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 759. 1869.

By Van Mons from an undated seed bed; it was first reported in 1826
and dedicated to Major Esperen, the enthusiastic and distinguished
pomologist of Mechlin. Fruit large, obtuse-ovate, yellow with greenish
tinge, much dotted with greenish-gray-russet, clouded with tender rose
on the side of the sun; flesh white, semi-melting, full of juice,
sugary, vinous, refreshing, perfumed; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Esperione. 1.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 561. 1885.

Fruit medium, obovate, slightly pyriform, yellow, juicy, melting,
perfumed; Sept.

=Essex. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 759. 1869.

Originated in the garden of W. Flack, Essex, N. Y., before 1869. Fruit
below medium, oblong-obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with many brown
and green dots, marbled with carmine in the sun; flesh whitish, juicy,
melting, granular, sweet; good; Sept.

=Esther Comte. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:39, fig. 404. 1880.

Cataloged by Dauvesse of Orleans in 1857. Fruit medium, ovate-pyriform,
bright green changing to yellow, dotted with russet; flesh whitish,
rather fine, semi-melting, juicy, sugary, delicately perfumed; good;
winter.

=Estranguillon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:146, fig. 1869.

According to Charles Estienne, 1530, this pear was at that time well
known to French gardeners. First rate for making perry. Fruit small,
ovate, yellowish, dotted with gray and slightly tinted with rose on the
cheek exposed to the sun; flesh whitish, rather coarse, breaking or
semi-melting, very juicy, without perfume; Sept.

=Esturion. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 759. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=6=:41, fig. 405. 1880.

Origin unknown. Fruit rather small, conic, pale green changing to
yellow, tinged with light red on the side of the sun; flesh yellowish,
fine, melting; juice abundant, sweet and perfumed.

=Eugene Appert. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:148, fig. 1869. =2.= _Am.
Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 130. 1881.

Raised from seed by Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr., and first gave fruit in
1862. It was introduced to this country about 1881, in which year it
was described as of "very superior quality" and one of the "best of the
kinds recently introduced." Fruit medium, globular, bossed, unequal,
grass-green, with grayish stains and large dots; flesh yellowish-white,
very fine and melting, very full of sugary, acidulous juice, having an
exquisite aroma; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Eugene Furst. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:167, fig. 468. 1880.

A gain of Van Mons. Fruit medium, globular-conic, very obtuse, green
changing to lemon-yellow, dotted with brown and more or less washed
with red-brown on the side of the sun; flesh white, fine, buttery,
melting, juicy, sugary, acidulous, with a characteristic perfume;
first; Nov. and Dec.

=Eugene Maisin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1876.

Under trial in the nurseries of Simon-Louis Bros. of Metz, Lorraine, in
1876. Fruit medium; skin rough and grayish; flesh melting; first; Dec.
and Jan.

=Eugene des Nouhes. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:148, fig. 1869. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =3=:65, fig. 129. 1878.

M. Parigot, President of the Imperial Court of Poitiers, Fr.,
obtained this variety which he dedicated in 1856. Fruit above medium,
obtuse-turbinate, dark yellow, dotted and stained with gray-russet,
slightly vermilioned on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, melting,
juicy, vinous, sweet, delicately perfumed; first; Sept.

=Eugene Thirriot. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1876.

Produced and placed on the market in 1868 by Thirriot Bros. Fruit
large, pyriform, pale greenish-yellow; flesh melting, buttery, very
juicy, sugary, perfumed; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Euratsfelder Mostbirne. 1.= _Loeschnig Mostbirnen_ 78, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium to large, globular; skin smooth,
light yellow when ripe, sprinkled with rather fine dots, and russet
speckles; flesh rather white, not very coarse, agreeably subacid, very
juicy; Oct. and Nov.

=Eureka. 1.= A. M. Augustine _Cat._ 45. 1916.

According to correspondence with A. M. Augustine, Normal, Ill., the
introducer of this pear, it was fruited in 1900 by a Mr. Dickinson
of Eureka, Ill.; a chance cross between Seckel and Kieffer and shows
characteristics of both parents. Tree reported similar to Kieffer in
leaf, habit of growth and resistance to and recovery from blight.
Fruit medium, shaped like Seckel; skin delicate, waxy, bright yellow,
slightly russeted, with a bright red cheek; flesh flavor of Seckel,
more solid, longer keeper.

=Eva Baltet. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 312, fig. 1898.

From a seed bed of Bartlett fertilized with Flemish Beauty. It was
exhibited at the International Exhibition of St. Petersburg in 1893.
Fruit very large, pyriform-truncated; skin fine, light cream passing
into yellow, dotted with brown, extensively blushed with bright
carmine; flesh white, fine, juicy, sugary and aromatic; first; Nov. but
variable.

=Excellente de Moine. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:59, fig. 318. 1880.

Distributed by Burgomaster Rossy of Schoenburg, in Moravia, Austria, in
1835. Fruit medium or rather large, globular-ovate, grass-green, dotted
with gray-green specks; flesh white, rather greenish especially just
under skin, buttery, juicy, delicately perfumed; good; latter half of
August.

=Excelsior. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 158. 1867. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 759. 1869.

A seedling of Francis Dana, Boston, Mass., raised about 1860. Fruit
medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with some russet and
many brown dots; flesh juicy, melting, sweet, pleasant; good to very
good; Sept.

=Eyewood. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:149, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 759. 1869.

Raised from seed by T. A. Knight about 1822 at Downton, Wiltshire,
Eng. Fruit medium, globular; skin very thick, greenish-yellow, tinged
with brown next the sun, much covered with pale brown-russet and large
dots; flesh yellowish, very tender and melting, juicy, sweet, with a
sprightly, vinous flavor and fine aroma; first, but sometimes has too
little perfume; Oct.

=Fall. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 102. 1875.

A natural tree planted at least as early as 1650 by Gov. Prince at
Eastham, on Cape Cod. Fruit about the size of a hen's egg, tapering
towards both ends, green, nearly covered with thin russet, of inferior
quality. In 1836 it was a flourishing, lofty tree, producing an average
of fifteen bushels of fruit.

=Fall Beurre d'Arenburg. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 119. 1875. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 3rd App. 175. 1881.

Exhibited by Asahel Foote, Williamstown, Mass., at the Boston meeting
of the American Pomological Society in 1875 as one of his seedlings.
Fruit medium, globular-oblate, inclining to obtuse-pyriform, pale
greenish-yellow, tinged with orange where well exposed, sometimes
blushed on the cheek next the sun, slightly patched and netted and
much dotted with russet; flesh whitish, rather coarse, juicy, melting,
sweet, vinous, musky; very good; Oct.

=Famenga. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 59. 1844. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 759. 1869.

A foreign variety exhibited in 1843 by R. Manning, Salem, Mass. Fruit
medium, obovate, greenish-yellow; Sept.

=Faurite. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 69. 1848.

Fruit medium, oblong-obovate, yellow, shining, tinged with red next
the sun, and having numerous reddish dots; flesh yellowish-white,
semi-melting, slightly perfumed; keeps nearly a year.

=Fauvanelle. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 146. 1911.

Considered by M. Chasset, Secretary-general of the Pomological Society
of France, to be the finest of all cooking pears. Fruit long-pyriform,
bright green, largely covered with fawn, and rayed or washed with red
on the sun-exposed cheek; flesh yellowish-white, very sugary, giving a
good red wine tone to the cooked fruit, with an agreeable aroma; very
good for kitchen use.

=Favorite Joanon. 1.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 259, fig. 1906.

Obtained in 1833 by M. Joanon, at Saint-Cyr-an-Mont-d'Or, Rhone. Fruit
medium to large, turbinate; skin smooth, bright yellow, dotted with
gray, flushed with rose at maturity; flesh white, very fine, melting,
very juicy, sweet, acidulous, perfumed; very good; Aug. and Sept.

=Favorite Morel. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876.

Obtained from a seed of Bartlett by M. Morel, a nurseryman at Lyons,
Fr., in 1874. Fruit rather large, obtuse-pyriform, suggesting in form a
long Bartlett, somewhat bossed in outline; skin a little rough, passing
from greenish-yellow to golden-yellow, mottled with fawn; flesh white,
fine, melting, compact, juicy, fresh, vinous, acidulous; first; Oct.

=Feast. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 759. 1869.

Originated with Samuel Feast, Baltimore, Md., from seed of Seckel.
Fruit medium, obovate-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with brown dots; flesh
whitish, juicy, sweet; good; Sept.

=Felix de Liem. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:151, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 759. 1869.

A posthumous variety from the seedlings of Van Mons at
Geest-Saint-Remy, 1853. Fruit below medium, turbinate, generally
obtuse, greenish-yellow, very much mottled with dirty or dusky brown,
much speckled bronze-russet on side next the sun and some traces
of crimson streaks; flesh yellowish, fine, melting, juicy, sugary,
slightly perfumed; second; early Nov.

=Felix Sahut. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 151. 1902. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._
135. 1920.

From Passe Colmar crossed with Bartlett by Arsene Sannier; new in
1902. Fruit similar in appearance to Passe Colmar; flesh fine, juicy,
melting, sugary, with a very agreeable perfume; very good; Nov. to Jan.

=Ferdinand Gaillard. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

Fruit large or very large; skin smooth, brilliant yellow all over;
flesh yellowish-white, fine, tender, very melting, juicy, very sugary;
good or very good; Nov. to Jan.

=Ferdinand de Lesseps. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:154, fig. 1869.

Raised by Andre Leroy in 1864. Fruit medium, ovate, not very regular,
bright yellow, extensively washed and marbled with brown-russet; flesh
white, very fine, melting; juice very abundant, acidulous, very sugary,
with an exquisite flavor; first; early Oct.

=Fertility. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =1=:555, fig. 100. 1880. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 174. 1920.

Raised by T. Rivers, Sawbridgeworth, Eng., in 1875, from Beurre
Goubault. Fruit medium, obovate, even and regular, entirely covered
with a bright cinnamon coat of russet, tinged with orange on the side
next the sun; flesh semi-melting or crackling, very juicy, sweet, with
a rich, highly-perfumed flavor; good; Oct.

=Figue. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:183. 1768. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 576. 1884.

The pear described under this name by Duhamel in 1768 is quite
different from the pear _Figue d'Alencon_ with which it has been
confused, the _Green fig_ of Biedenfeld or _Longue Verte_ of Leroy.
Origin uncertain. Fruit medium, long-pyriform, green and next the sun
of a dull dark red, entirely covered with numerous dots and patches
of brown-russet; flesh white, tender, buttery, melting; juice sweet,
sugary, perfumed; excellent early dessert pear; Sept.

=Figue d'Alencon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:156, fig. 1869. =2.=
_Rural N. Y._ =45=:233, figs. 150, 151. 1886.

Obtained about 1829 near Alencon, Department Orne, Fr. Fruit above
medium, sometimes large, long, very similar to the fig in form and
color; flesh greenish-white, semi-fine and melting, sugary, acidulous
and perfumed; first but requiring a favorable soil and climate; Oct.
and Nov.

=Figue de Naples. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 577. 1884.

This has been confused with _Figue d'Alencon_ but is a distinct
variety. Fruit above medium, oblong, greenish-yellow, entirely covered
with thin, delicate russet, dark reddish-brown on the side next the
sun; flesh greenish-white, buttery, melting, with a rich, sugary
flavor; excellent; Nov.

=Figueira. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 463. 1906.

A variety introduced as new in 1906 by M. Bruant, Poitiers, Fr. Fruit
of good size, having rather the form of a large fig, brilliant yellow,
colored with purple on the side of the sun, of magnificent appearance;
flesh very white, fine, melting, juicy, very sugary, with an agreeable
perfume; first, one of the best of the season; July and Aug.

=Fin Juillet. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 477, fig. 169. 1898.

Obtained by M. Herault, Angers, Fr., from Beurre Giffard crossed with
Joyau de Septembre in 1879. Fruit medium, turbinate, ovate, enlarged at
center, russeted all over; flesh fine, very melting, rather subject to
mellowness, excessively juicy, very sugary, slightly acidulous and with
a delicate, musky savor; good; Aug.

=Fin-Or d'Orleans. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:160, fig. 1869.

_Fine Gold of Summer._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 760. 1869.

An old pear mentioned by the earliest French writers. Fruit small,
turbinate, swelled, obtuse, golden-yellow, dotted with carmine on
the shaded side and bright red on the other cheek; flesh greenish,
semi-fine and melting, juicy, sugary, sourish, rather delicate; second;
Aug.

=Fin-Or de Septembre. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:156. 1768. 2.
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 577. 1884.

Under the names of _Finor_ and _Finoin_ Claude Saint-Etienne wrote
of this pear in 1670. Fruit medium, pyriform-obtuse, yellowish-green
speckled with brown-fawn dots, orange-yellow and brick-red on the side
of the sun; flesh white, tender, semi-breaking; juice moderate, sugary,
slightly acid, without pronounced perfume; third; Oct.

=Fitzwater. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 73. 1895.

Originated in New York. It resembles Lawrence. Fruit small, obtusely
pyriform, yellow partly covered with russet; flesh very fine-grained
and melting; fair; winter.

=Flemish Bon Chretien. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 761. 1869.

_Bon-Chretien de Vernois._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:469, figs. 1867.

Of Flemish origin. It was widely propagated in England in 1840. Fruit
medium, obovate, green changing to yellow; flesh yellowish-white,
crisp, sweet, perfumed; an excellent stewing pear; Nov. to Mar.

=Fleur de Neige. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:163, fig. 1869.

_Henri Van Mons._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 782. 1869.

Obtained by Van Mons between 1830 and 1835. Fruit rather large,
pyriform, narrowed toward the stalk, greenish-yellow, stained with
russet and washed with dark brick-red on the cheek next the sun and
dotted with carmine and maroon; stem long, slender; calyx open in a
small basin; flesh white, melting, abounding in sugary juice, with a
pleasant perfume; good to very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Florent Schouman. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 762. 1869. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =1=:153, fig. 77. 1872.

A posthumous gain of Van Mons propagated by the Society Van Mons. Fruit
nearly large, globular-turbinate, clear green, speckled with large,
round, gray-brown spots; flesh white, fine, melting, sugary; juice
abundant, vinous, acidulous; good; Oct.

=Florida Bartlett. 1.= _Mich. Sta. Sp. Bul._ =30=:28. 1905.

Received for trial in Michigan in 1900 from Stark Bros., Louisiana, Mo.
Fruit large, roundish-oval, tapering at both ends, yellow, with dark
brown dots; flesh greenish, firm, juicy, half-breaking, granular, mild,
almost sweet, perfumed; fair; Dec. and Jan.

=Fluke. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 174. 1909. =2.= _Ibid._ 289. 1910.

Disseminated by N. K. Fluke. Reported as hardy, blight-resistant and
better than Kieffer.

=Fondante Agreable. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =4=:83. 1854. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 94. 1876.

Belgian; described as new in 1854 by M. P. Wilder. Fruit medium,
globular-ovate, dull yellowish-green slightly russeted; flesh tender,
juicy and melting, pleasant, refreshing, with a delicate aroma; very
good; Aug.

=Fondante Albert. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 81, fig. 137. 1866-73.
=2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 762. 1869.

Obtained by Albert Boucqueau, Belgium. It was propagated in France
in 1853. Fruit medium, globular-conic, depressed at the poles, green
turning to yellow, with large dots and markings of fawn, flesh white;
semi-fine, breaking, granular about the center; juice deficient, but
delicate, vinous and aromatic; second; Sept.

=Fondante d'Angers. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:79, fig. 520. 1881.

Origin unknown, probably French. Fruit medium or rather large,
turbinate; skin fine yet a little firm, clear green, dotted with
greenish-gray, passing to yellow at maturity; flesh white, fine,
entirely melting; juice abundant and sugary, vinous, acidulous; first;
Oct.

=Fondante de Bihorel. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 547. 1888.

Fruited in France about 1866 from seed of a common French country pear.
Tree hardy. Fruit small or medium, pyriform, deep green passing to
bright yellow, speckled with gray dots, touched with carmine on the
side of the sun; flesh delicate, melting, buttery, without grit; juice
sufficient, sugary, acid, well perfumed; quality good; July.

=Fondante de Brest. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:169, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 579. 1884.

Mentioned by Claude Saint-Etienne in 1670 under the name of _Inconnue
du Chesneau_. Fruit medium or nearly medium, ovate-pyriform, more or
less swelled, smooth, shining, bright green changing to yellowish-green
on the shaded side as it ripens, and red, mottled dark blood-red next
the sun, covered with small gray dots; flesh white, rather coarse,
breaking, gritty, juicy, sugary, perfumed, rose-water flavor; second;
Oct.

=Fondante de Charleville. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 92. 1895.

Fruit large, pyriform, regular in outline, of a beautiful color; flesh
melting, buttery, of an agreeable flavor; Nov. and Dec.

=Fondante de Charneau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:170, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 579. 1884.

A wilding found by M. Legipont growing on his property at Charneau,
in the Province of Liege, Bel., at the beginning of the last century.
Fruit large, sometimes very large, pyriform but uneven in outline, pale
greenish-yellow, thickly dotted with large gray specks and sometimes
vermilioned on the side next the sun; flesh white, fine, very melting,
juicy, scented, sugary and rich; excellent; Sept. to Nov.

=Fondante de Cuerne. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:5, fig. 1854. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 175. 1920.

This variety was found by Reynaert Beernaert in the environs of
Courtrai, Bel., but the time of its first production is unknown. Fruit
large, conic-pyriform, rather irregular in outline, lemon-yellow, with
numerous ash-gray dots; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine and melting,
rather gritty about the core, very juicy, sugary, vinous, slightly
aromatic; second; Sept.

=Fondante des Emmurees. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876.

Obtained from a seed of Doyenne Boussock by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr., and
placed on the market in 1873. Fruit medium, turbinate, clear yellow,
dotted with gray; flesh yellowish, sugary, perfumed; good; Sept.

=Fondante d'Ingendal. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 763. 1869.

Belgian. Raised by M. Gambier and first published in 1856. Fruit
medium, pyriform, greenish-yellow, touched with gray and with red;
flesh fine, melting; good to very good; Sept. to Nov.

=Fondante de Ledeberg. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1895.

Belgian. Raised about 1890. Fruit pale green, dotted with brown; flesh
very melting, white and slightly perfumed; first; Mar. and Apr.

=Fondante de la Maitre-Ecole. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:175, fig.
1869. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 764. 1869.

Produced in the gardens of Robert & Moreau, growers at Angers, Fr.;
first tested in 1861. Fruit medium, oblong, golden or orange-yellow,
dotted and mottled with fawn; flesh fine, yellowish, breaking, juicy,
vinous, sugary and perfumed; second; Dec. and Jan.

=Fondante de Malines. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =14=:209. 1848. =2.= _Ann. Pom.
Belge_ =6=:9, fig. 1858.

Raised by Major Esperen at Mechlin (Malines), Bel., in 1842. Fruit
large, globular-turbinate, smooth, of a deep golden-yellow with a
crimson cheek in the sun, spotted with crimson dots; flesh white,
a little coarse, buttery, juicy, sugary, tart, good but somewhat
variable; Oct. and Nov.

=Fondante de Mars. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:177, fig. 1869.

Origin uncertain. Fruit above medium, globular, irregular, more or less
bossed; skin rough, greenish, mottled and dotted with brown; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, breaking, granular, wanting in juice and sugar;
third; Dec. and Jan.

=Fondante de Moulins-Lille. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:178, fig. 1869.

Obtained in 1858 by M. Grolez-Duriez, Rouchin-lez-Lille, Fr., from
a seed of the pear Napoleon. Fruit above medium, obtuse-pyriform,
pale greenish-yellow; flesh white, coarse, melting, juicy, sugary,
acidulous, with a delicious flavor; first; Nov.

=Fondante de Nees. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 580. 1884.

Fruit large, long-obovate, fine deep yellow, mottled and dotted
all over with pale brown-russet; flesh yellowish, buttery, lacking
sufficient juice, with a sprightly flavor; second; Oct.

=Fondante du Panisel. 1.= _Pom. France_ =3=:No. 92, Pl. 92. 1865.

_Delices d'Hardenpont d'Angers._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:13, fig.
1869.

_Delices d'Angers._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 558. 1884.

Raised about 1762 by the Abbe Hardenpont, Mons, Bel. Fruit medium to
large, globular or conic-ovate; skin rough, thick, tender, green,
almost entirely covered with marblings of olive-gray and dark green,
the basic green changing to golden-yellow, and the stains to a
russet-fawn on the side of the sun; flesh citrine, fine or semi-fine,
melting, very juicy, with a sugary flavor and a very agreeable perfume;
very good; Nov. and Dec.

=Fondante des Pres. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =9=:80, fig. 1854. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:179, 180, fig. 1869.

_Belgische Pomeranzenbirne._ =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr Obstkunde_ =2=:159.
1856.

A seedling of Van Mons, Belgium, 1850. Fruit turbinate, inclining to
pyriform, broad across the middle, yellowish-green changing to clear
lemon-yellow, sometimes tinged with red next the sun; flesh white,
melting, sweet, juicy, aromatic; very good; Oct.

=Fondante de la Roche. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:180, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 580. 1884.

Found on the property of M. Chesneau of la Haugreniere, in the Commune
of Sainte-Gemmes-sur-Loire and named by the Horticultural Society of
Maine-et-Loire. Fruit above medium, ovate, irregular, clear russet,
washed with tender rose on the exposed cheek; flesh white, fine,
melting, juicy, sugary, acidulous, aromatic, with an agreeable musky
taste; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Fondante de Rome ou Sucre Romain. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:45, fig.
402. 1880.

Origin uncertain. Fruit under medium, conic-pyriform, bright green
changing to a beautiful golden-yellow, washed on the side of the sun
with crimson-red; flesh yellowish, somewhat coarse, breaking, sweet and
juicy; second; Aug.

=Fondante de Saint-Amand. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1876.

Belgian. Fruit medium, nearly spherical, orange-yellow slightly touched
with russet; flesh fine, sugary, perfumed; first; Oct.

=Fondante-de-Septembre. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =15=:68. 1860. =2.= Mas
_Pom. Gen._ =4=:133, fig. 259. 1879.

Gained by Van Mons about 1824 or somewhat later. Fruit medium,
globular-pyriform, dull green, speckled with very fine brown dots,
changing to yellow and crimson at maturity; flesh green, transparent,
very fine and melting, semi-buttery, full of sugary juice, pleasant and
perfumed; first; Sept.

=Fondante Sickler. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:17, fig. 9. 1872. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 581. 1884.

Raised by Van Mons. Fruit small, ovate, sometimes a little pyriform;
skin rather thick and firm, clear green, speckled with dots of a darker
shade, passing when ripe to lemon-yellow and golden on the side of
the sun, without any tinge of red; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine,
semi-buttery, gritty about the core; juice sufficient, sugary and
musky; second; Sept. to Nov.

=Fondante de Thines. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:185, fig. 381. 1880.

Distributed by the Society of Van Mons. Fruit medium, long-pyriform,
very bright green changing to pale yellow, with a rosy blush; flesh
white, with a tinge of yellow, very melting, plenty of sugary juice,
with a delicate and agreeable flavor of musk; good; Oct.

=Fondante Thirriot. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 47, 266. 1895. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 175. 1920.

Obtained in 1858 by M. Thirriott, Charleville, Ardenne, Fr. Fruit
rather large, pyriform, pale greenish-yellow, dotted with gray-brown;
flesh white, semi-fine, melting, juicy, with an excellent flavor;
first; Dec.

=Fondante Van Mons. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:289, fig. 15. 1846. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 581. 1884.

Raised by Van Mons and introduced to this country by R. Manning, Salem,
Mass. Fruit medium, globular, somewhat depressed; skin thin, delicate,
smooth, removable like that of an orange when the pear is fully ripe
and having a peculiar perfume and flavor, very agreeable to some
persons; pale yellow, mottled with thin cinnamon-colored russet; flesh
yellowish-white, buttery, sweet, melting, juicy, with a musky perfume;
good; Oct. and Nov.

=Fondante de Wollmet. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 581. 1884.

Origin unknown. Fruit has some resemblance both in shape and color to
Beurre de Rance, has the same coarseness of flesh, which has a greenish
tinge under the skin, very juicy, rather crisp, with a fine brisk,
vinous flavor; excellent; Nov.

=Fontarabie. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:182, fig. 1869.

A French pear mentioned by Le Lectier of Orleans in 1628, and Merlet
in 1675. Fruit above medium, turbinate, obtuse, enlarged around
the center, bright yellow, dotted with fine points of russet and
extensively carmined on the side next the sun; flesh white, rather
coarse, breaking, gritty at core, juicy, sugary, with an after-taste of
musk; second, cooking only; Feb. to Apr.

=Foote Seckel. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 99. 1869. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 765. 1869.

Raised from seed of Seckel by Asahel Foote, Williamstown, Mass. Fruit
small, oblate, obtuse-pyriform, yellow tinged with brownish-crimson
on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, fine, juicy, melting, sugary,
slightly vinous; very good; Sept.

=Ford. 1.= _Ford Seed Co. Cat._ 52, fig. 1914.

Originated with M. P. Ellison, Naples, N. Y., and was introduced by the
Ford Seed Company about 1914. The tree is reported as healthy, a rapid
grower, and an early and productive bearer; the fruit is similar in
appearance to Bartlett and as large, practically free from seeds, with
no core to speak of, rich, sweet, juicy, ripening three weeks later
than Bartlett.

=Forme de Bergamotte Crassane. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:186, fig.
1869. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 766. 1869.

A seedling of Van Mons which gave its first fruits in 1844. Fruit above
medium, turbinate, slightly obtuse, yellowish-green, speckled with
large gray-russet dots; flesh yellowish, rather fine, melting, juicy,
sugary, vinous, aromatic; good; early Nov.

=Forme de Curtet. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:9, fig. 101. 1878.

A gain of Van Mons. Fruit small, exactly turbinate; skin fine, thin,
bright green, sprinkled with very small grayish-green dots, changes
on ripening to lemon-yellow, lightly tinged with red; flesh white,
semi-fine and breaking; juice sufficient, sweet, slightly perfumed;
second; Sept. and Oct.

=Forme de Delices. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 388. 1845. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 582. 1884.

A Flemish pear. Fruit medium, obovate, yellow, almost entirely covered
with rather rough brown-russet; flesh tender, buttery, melting, with a
rich, sweet flavor; an excellent dessert pear; Oct. and Nov.

=Fortune. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 143. 1866.

One of Dr. Shurtleff's seedlings raised at Brookline, Mass.; first
fruited in 1866. Fruit small, turbinate, golden-yellow, with russet
spots; flesh white, melting, juicy and very sweet; first; Oct.

=Fortunee. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 436. 1845.

_Bergamotte Fortunee._ =2.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:29, fig. 1857.

_Fortunee de Printemps._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:188, fig. 1869.

A Belgian wilding found near Enghien in Hainaut; disseminated about
1830. Fruit small, globular or globular-turbinate; skin rough to the
touch, deep yellow, covered with flakes and lines of brown-russet;
flesh semi-melting, juicy, sweet; a cooking pear; May and June.

=Fortunee Boisselot. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:187, fig. 1869.

Raised from a bed of seeds of Fortunee by Auguste Boisselot, Nantes,
Fr.; it gave its first fruit in 1861. Fruit large or above medium,
turbinate, very obtuse and enlarged around center; skin thick and
rough, greenish-yellow or yellow-ochre; flesh white, fine, melting,
gritty around the core, juicy, sugary, delicate, somewhat aromatic;
first; Jan. and Feb.

=Fortunee Superieure. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:190. 1869.

This was obtained by M. Flon, Angers, Fr., about 1850 from a bed of
seeds of Fortunee. In 1854 M. Flon submitted it to the Horticultural
Society of Maine-et-Loire which found its flesh "very fine, very
melting, agreeably perfumed and more free from acidity than the old
pear Fortunee," and therefore gave it the name Fortunee Superieure;
Jan. to Apr.

=Fourcroy. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:192, fig. 1869.

Raised by Van Mons about 1810. Fruit medium, ovate-pyriform; skin
thick, rather rough to the touch, yellow or yellowish-green, covered
with gray-russet dots; flesh white, very sugary, agreeably perfumed;
good and sometimes first; winter.

=Fouron. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:135, fig. 548. 1881.

French. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, dark olive-green, dotted with
grayish-white spots, large and numerous; flesh yellowish, fine,
melting, with abundant sugary juice, vinous, sprightly and musky; good;
Oct.

=Franc-Real. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:180. 1768. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:194, fig. 1869.

_Franc Real d'Hiver._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 766. 1869.

Mentioned by Charles Estienne in 1540, and other French authorities
of the seventeenth century. Fruit above medium and often larger,
globular-turbinate and bossed, golden-yellow, strewed with large russet
dots, and some brownish-red patches; flesh very white, breaking, juicy,
hardly sweet, rather acid, without perfume; first for cooking; Nov. to
Feb.

=Frances. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =11=:252. 1845.

A seedling raised by the Hon. H. W. Edwards of New Haven, Conn., and
first published in 1845. Similar to Virgouleuse, rather large, and not
so sweet.

=Franchimont. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 766. 1869.

Supposed French origin. Fruit below medium, globular-oblate, yellow
shaded with red in the sun, netted and patched with russet, many russet
dots; flesh yellowish, juicy, semi-melting, sweet, slightly aromatic;
good or very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Franchipanne. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:210, Pl. XLVII, fig.
2. 1768. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 582. 1884.

_Frangipane._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:196, fig. 1869.

This is the Franchipanne of Duhamel but not of Merlet, 1690, as Hogg
and Leroy prove. Its origin is uncertain. Fruit medium or above,
obtuse-pyriform, yellowish-green or lemon-yellow, dotted and veined
with russet, dark deep red next the sun; flesh greenish-white,
semi-fine and semi-melting, juicy, tender, buttery, perfume supposed to
resemble Frangipani, a scent invented by the Marquis of that name; a
dessert pear; Oct. and Nov.

=Francis. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

A seedling raised by Dr. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., which fruited in
1862. Fruit medium, turbinate; skin tough and rather liable to crack,
dark green; flesh fine-grained, white and delicate, with a flavor
inclining to that of White Doyenne; first; Nov.

=Francis Dana. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 80. 1877.

One of several seedling plants given by Francis Dana to Eliphalet Stone
who in 1877 showed its fruit. Fruit medium, globular-acute-pyriform,
clear lemon-yellow, with tracings of thin russet; flesh buttery, juicy,
good quality but not up to best; Sept.

=Francois Hutin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 92. 1895.

Fruit very large, long-turbinate, dark yellow; flesh fine, white,
melting, juicy, sugary, acid; Oct.

=Frangipane d'Hiver. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:105, fig. 533. 1881.

Origin unknown. Is not to be confused with Franchipanne, a smaller
ball pear. Fruit large, turbinate, much swelled at center; skin
thin, intense green, sprinkled with numerous dots of a darker shade,
changing to lemon-yellow at maturity, with some blush of brown-red or
orange-red; flesh white, breaking, not very sweet, somewhat acidulous,
with an aromatic flavor; suitable for kitchen use; all through the
winter.

=Frankenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:173. 1856.

Wuertemberg, Germany, 1830. Fruit medium, oval-obtuse, variable, bossed,
grass-green changing to golden-yellow, blushed with reddish-brown;
flesh whitish, breaking, fairly soft, very aromatic, acidulous, sweet;
good; Sept.

=Frankfurter Birne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:145. 1856.

Baden, Germany, 1847. Fruit large, variable in form, often oblique,
dirty yellow, brilliant red on the sun-touched side; flesh breaking,
coarse-grained, very sweet and juicy; good; Sept.

=Frau Louise Goethe. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =25=:132. 1899.

Raised from a seed of Bergamotte Esperen, in the Horticultural School
of Geisenheim in 1882. Fruit medium, Bergamot-shaped; skin thick,
coarse, dark green, covered with fine warts, becoming a clouded yellow
when ripe, with russety patches; flesh clouded yellow, sometimes salmon
colored, juicy, sweet, aromatic, with an aroma reminiscent of the
orange; winter.

=Frederic Leclerc. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:198, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man_. 583. 1884.

Raised in 1846 at Ghent, Bel., by Louis Berckmans. Fruit below medium,
short-pyriform-obtuse, one side always less curved than the other,
greenish-yellow, dotted, striped, veined and stained with fawn; flesh
whitish, fine, semi-melting, slightly gritty; juice sugary, rich;
second and sometimes first when its juice is abundant; Dec. and Jan.

=Frederic de Wurtemberg. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 173. 1832. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:199, fig. 1869.

_Medaille d'Or._ =3.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =1=:91, fig. 1853.

_Herbstsylvester._ =4.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =2=:No. 82, No. 82. 1883.

Van Mons raised this variety from seed of the fourth generation about
1812 and named it _Sylvester d'Hiver_ after a secretary by the name of
Sylvester. Upon the request of Frederick I, King of Wuerttemburg, the
pear was dedicated to that monarch and named Frederic de Wurtemberg.
Still further confusion arose in America when Knight of England sent to
the Hon. John Lowell of Massachusetts this fruit, by mistake, under the
name of _Capiaumont_. It was cultivated in the vicinity of Boston by
that name for some time. Tree vigorous, upright, an early and excellent
bearer; leaves roundish, broad, flat, entire. Fruit large, one-sided,
obtuse-pyriform, deep yellow, marbled and dotted with red on the
shaded side and of a most beautiful, bright crimson next the sun; stem
medium, sometimes appearing a continuation of the fruit; calyx medium,
partially open, placed even with the surface; flesh white, fine, juicy,
melting, sweet and when in perfection buttery and good; Sept.

=Frederica Bremer. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =16=:24, fig. 1. 1850. =2.= _Ann.
Pom. Belge_ =7=:81, fig. 1859.

Introduced by J. C. Hastings of Oneida Co., N. Y., in 1848 at the
exhibition of the Pomological Convention of New York. Fruit above
medium, globular-turbinate; skin very smooth, shining, dull green
reminding one of many poor pears but on ripening becomes a fine citron,
dotted with brown-russet and slightly colored with red on the side
of the sun; flesh white, fine, buttery, sweet and vinous, slightly
perfumed; one of the best; Oct.

=Fremion. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:73. 1856.

French, 1807. Bergamot type. Fruit small, globular, symmetrical, light
green changing to light lemon-yellow, faintly blushed; flesh agreeable,
buttery, gritty near the center, aromatic, sweet, acidulous; good; Oct.

=Frensdorff rothe Flaschenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:140. 1856.

Nassau, Bel., 1833. Fruit medium, smooth and shining, light yellow,
blushed; flesh very juicy, sweet, with flavor of cinnamon; good; Sept.

=Florimond Parent. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:164, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 762. 1869.

A seedling of Van Mons raised about 1846. Fruit large, long, more
or less obtuse, always contracted near the summit and much swelled
in its lower part, dark yellow clouded with pale green, dotted and
mottled with fawn and slightly washed with dark violet-red on the side
exposed to the sun, sometimes also covered with small, black and scaly
stains; flesh whitish, coarse, rather melting, gritty at center; juice
abundant, sweet, sugary, wanting in perfume; third; Sept.

=Fruehe Backhausbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:161. 1856.

Nassau, Bel., 1806. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, yellowish, light
green changing to pale yellow, often blushed; flesh granular, rather
astringent, sourish, musky, good for any situation; Aug. and Sept.

=Fruehe Schweizer Bergamotte. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:76.
1856. =2.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 241. 1881.

Holland, 1804. Fruit fairly large, variable in form, often ovate,
ventriculous-turbinate, and often pyriform, yellowish-light green
changing to lemon-yellow, sprinkled with green and yellow-gray dots,
marked with russet and often with fine yellow-gray russet on the side
exposed to the sun; flesh snow-white, buttery, melting, very juicy,
acidulous and aromatic; first; Aug.

=Fuller. 1.= _Gard. Mon._ 302. 1885. =2.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 213.
1897.

Originated in Madison, O., about 1885. Fruit similar in size, form and
season to Beurre Giffard but not quite so good. It is, however, claimed
that it is a better grower and less liable to crack; greenish-yellow;
Aug.

=Fullero. 1.= _Montreal Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 82. 1886.

Fruit rather large, greenish, with some dull red on the sunny side;
first; early summer.

=Fulton. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =2=:214. 1832. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 768, fig. 1869.

Originated on the farm of a Mr. Fulton in Brunswick, Me. Exhibited
before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1829. Fruit medium,
globular-turbinate, dark yellow, russeted; flesh, if picked and matured
in the house, buttery, melting, full of rich juice. If allowed to
remain on the tree it becomes breaking, dry and without flavor. A
peculiarity of this pear first discovered by Manning in 1840 is that
the fruits after they have attained half their size, are in good eating
condition after lying a day or two; second; Oct.

=Fusee d'Automne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:203, figs. 1869.

Origin ancient and obscure, but probably the neighborhood of Eisleben,
Saxony. Fruit often above medium and often much less, very long, conic,
bossed, golden-yellow or clear yellow, rather greenish, dotted with
russet; flesh whitish, semi-fine and semi-melting, exempt from grit;
juice rather lacking, sweet; third; Sept.

=Fusee d'Hiver. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:205, fig. 1869.

First described by Merlet in 1690. Fruit above medium and sometimes
less, long and bossed, somewhat obtuse, wrinkled, clear green, freely
dotted, mottled with gray-russet; flesh white, semi-melting; juice
abundant, rather sugary, slightly acid, without pronounced scent;
third; Feb. and Mar.

=Gabourell Seedling. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 280. 1858. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:208, fig. 1869.

Originated in early half of last century. Fruit below medium, globular,
bossed, mammillate, yellowish-green, speckled with gray dots; flesh
yellowish, coarse, breaking, gritty; juice rather lacking, sweet,
vinous, slightly perfumed; third; Nov. to Jan.

=Gakovsky. 1.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:246. 1903.

Introduced from Russia in 1879. Tree extremely hardy. Fruit medium,
pyriform, greenish-yellow, stem long; flesh dingy white, fine-grained,
buttery, juicy, mild, vinous, but not rich; good.

=Galston Muirfowl Egg. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 583. 1884.

Scotch. Fruit below medium, short-obovate, flattened at calyx,
greenish-yellow, covered with thin, pale-brown russet, mottled with red
on the side of the sun; flesh yellowish, tender, sweet and juicy, with
a peculiar aroma; excellent; Sept.

=Gans. 1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._ 390, Pl. VII. 1891.

Found by Joseph Gans in a wood near Cheviot, O., in 1871. Fruit large,
pyriform, yellow, with faint brownish cheek on sunny side; stem
slender, rather long, in a slight depression; calyx open, in a shallow
basin; flesh tender, melting, juicy; Aug.

=Gaensekopf. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:148. 1856.

North German, 1773. Fruit medium, conic, smooth and shining, green,
changing to yellow, with brownish-red blush; flesh breaking, juicy,
sweet, aromatic; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Gansel Bergamot. 1.= Brookshaw _Pomona_ =2=:Pl. L. 1817. =2.= _Pom.
Mag._ =1=:35, Pl. 1828.

_Diamant-peer._ =3.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:92, 135. 1771.

_Bergamote Gansel._ =4.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:239, fig. 1867.

Raised from seed of Autumn Bergamot by Lieutenant-General Gansel
near Colchester, Eng., in 1768. Fruit medium, globular-oblate,
greenish-yellow on the shaded side, reddish-brown on the side of
the sun, dotted and marbled with russet, sometimes washed with red;
flesh white, buttery, melting, a little gritty around the core; juice
abundant, sugary, vinous, slightly musky and acid; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Gansel Late Bergamot. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 369. 1854. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 294. 1866.

_Bergamotte Tardive de Gansel._ =3.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 125,
fig. 61. 1866-73.

Gansel Late Bergamot was raised from seed by a Mr. Williams, Pitmaston,
Eng. Fruit similar in shape and size to Gansel Bergamot, green, thickly
covered with russet dots and freckles which sometimes form patches,
yellow-green when ripe, flesh white, rather coarse and gritty, not very
juicy nor melting in England; in France and America, however, it seems
to become more juicy, melting and rich, vinous and highly perfumed;
good to very good; Nov. and Dec.

=Garnier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:209, fig. 1869.

_Besi Garnier._ =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 506. 1884.

From a seed bed made by M. Garnier, Bouvardiere, near Nantes, Fr.;
first published in 1851. Fruit large, pyriform-obtuse, skin rough,
thick, green, orange-yellow when ripe, washed with brick-red on the
side of the sun; dotted and mottled with brown-russet; flesh white,
semi-fine, breaking, rather granular, juicy, sugary; second.

=Garnons. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 161. 1841.

Fruit large, oblong, greenish-yellow, flesh buttery and excellent;
second; Jan.

=Gassenbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 150, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, symmetrical in
contour, green changing to yellow at maturity, covered with gray-brown
russet, dotted with brown-russet; flesh yellowish-white, rather coarse
texture, very juicy and subacid; Oct. to Dec.

=Gaston du Puys. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 93. 1895.

Distributed by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit medium; flesh
white, very fine, melting, sufficiently sweet and perfumed; good; Nov.

=Gaudry. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 585. 1884.

Fruit small, globular-ovate, even in outline, straw-colored, covered
with russet dots and patches; flesh white, melting, juicy, brisk,
vinous and sweet, with a pleasant rose-water flavor; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Geant. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 280. 1858. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:210, fig. 1869.

Probably of French origin. Cataloged in this country by T. W. Field
in 1858. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate; skin wrinkled, thick, dark
green speckled with gray-russet and almost entirely stained with brown;
flesh whitish, coarse, breaking, watery, very gritty around the core;
juice sugary, vinous, slightly perfumed; third.

=Gefleckte Pomeranzenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:156.
1856.

Hesse, Germany, 1833. Fruit small, globular, flattened at poles; skin
rough, yellow, often green, marbled with russet, blushed, dotted with
russet; semi-melting, granular, very aromatic; Sept.

=Gefleckte Sommerrusselet. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:42. 1856.

Nassau, Bel., 1807. Fruit small, globular, shortened, blunt,
symmetrical; skin rough, often entirely covered with russet and
blushed; flesh very juicy, coarse-grained, sweet and acid, melting and
aromatic; first; Sept.

=Gefundene. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:91. 1856.

Belgian, Van Mons, 1833. Fruit small, light yellow, often entirely
covered with russet, free from dots; flesh fine, strongly aromatic,
with scent of cinnamon, sweet; Sept.

=Geigenschnabel. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:195. 1856.

Wuerttemberg, Ger., 1830. Fruit medium, pyriform, uneven in outline,
entirely covered with yellowish-gray russet; good; Oct.

=Geishirtle. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 548. 1817.

Fruit large, shaped like Winter Rousselet, green with brownish-red
blush on the sun-touched side; flesh soft, breaking, sweet, juicy, with
perfume of the Rousselets; Aug.

=Gelbe fruehe Sommerapothekerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:177. 1856.

Of French origin, 1807. Fruit medium and above; skin glazed and smooth,
greenish-yellow changing to lemon-yellow, with red blush on the side
of the sun; flesh yellowish-white, gritty, soft; good; Aug.

=Gelbe Fuersten-Tafelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:54. 1856.

Widely diffused in Germany. Probably originated in that country about
1766. Fruit medium, rather shortened-pyriform, whitish-yellow changing
to golden-yellow, with pale blush, green dots; flesh yellowish-white,
mild, breaking, full of juice and sugar; first; Sept.

=Gelbe Heckenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:161. 1856.

Grown along the Rhine, Germany. Fruit small, turbinate, broad, light
green changing to yellowish-green, often lightly blushed, russeted;
flesh greenish-white, rather granular, acid, vinous, breaking; first;
Sept.

=Gelbe Holzbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 80, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium, globular-conic; skin firm,
shining yellow when ripe, speckled with numerous green markings and
finely dotted with russet; flesh yellowish-white, granular, very juicy,
astringent, subacid; good for transportation; Oct.

=Gelbe Landlbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 152, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small to medium, long-pyriform,
rather obtuse; skin firm, green turning yellow, dotted with russet;
flesh whitish, coarse, very juicy, astringent and subacid; good for
transportation; Oct. and Nov.

=Gelbe langstielige Alantbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:140.
1856.

German Rheinland. Fruit medium and above, somewhat gourd-shaped; skin
smooth and thin, uniformly lemon-yellow, somewhat marked with russet;
flesh yellowish-white, wanting in juice, sweet, aromatic; third for
table, good for market; Sept.

=Gelbe Laurentiusbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 218. 1889.

_Saint-Laurent Jaune._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:39, 212. 1879.

This pear was known in Saxony early in the nineteenth century. Fruit
medium, conic, uniform in contour, its largest diameter being below
the center; skin rather thick, green at first sprinkled with dots of
gray-green changing at maturity to bright citron-yellow, golden on the
side of the sun of fruits well exposed, washed with a blush of dull
red; flesh white, coarse, semi-breaking, gritty near the core, juicy,
sweet, saccharine, but little flavor; second; Aug.

=Gelbe Leutsbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 106, fig. 1913.

A Lower-Austrian perry pear. Fruit small, long-pyriform, diminishing to
the stalk, sides unequal; light green turning yellow when ripe, russet
dots; flesh juicy and subacid; first for keeping and transportation;
Oct.

=Gelbe Scheibelbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 82, fig. 1913.

An Austrian pear producing a good and clear perry. Fruit medium
to large, globular, flattened at both poles, green changing to
yellow at maturity, dotted with grayish-white; flesh yellow-white,
coarse-grained, with a sweet and acid flavor; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Gelbe Wasserbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 12, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown in Lower Austria. Fruit small to medium,
globular-obtuse but diminishing toward stalk in upper part,
yellow-green, slightly blushed on the sun-touched side, and speckled on
the shaded side with dark green dots; flesh whitish, juicy, very sweet
and slightly acidulous; good for transportation; Sept.

=Gelbmostler. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 108, fig. 1913.

A perry or wine pear grown in Austria and northern Switzerland. Fruit
medium to fairly large, globular and diminishing rather acutely
to the stalk, greenish-yellow changing to light yellow, often
slightly blushed, speckled with russet dots; flesh yellowish-white,
coarse-grained, juicy, very astringent, quickly becomes over-ripe; Sept.

=Gemeine Kochbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 154, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small, globular-conic, green changing
to greenish-yellow at maturity, occasionally with a dark red blush on
the sun-exposed side; flesh yellowish-white, very juicy, saccharine,
astringent and acidulous; Oct. and Nov.

=Gemeine Pfundbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:187. 1856.

Upper-Austria, 1851. Fruit above medium, globular-turbinate, medium
convex, bossed, green turning to light yellow; flesh breaking, wanting
in juice, sweet; third for dessert, best for culinary use; Oct. to Dec.

=General de Bonchamp. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:211, fig. 1869. =2.=
_Horticulturist_ =30=:2. 1875.

A seedling found on the estate of M. Panneton, Coteau, Maine-et-Loire,
Fr. Fruit medium, variable in form, oblong-pyriform or
globular-turbinate, dull greenish-yellow, dotted with russet; flesh
white, melting, buttery, fine-grained, juicy, sweet, rich, aromatic;
good to first; Aug.

=General Bosquet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:213, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 770. 1869.

Obtained by M. Flon-Grolleau, Angers, Fr. The seed bed from which
the tree sprang was made in 1845. Fruit large, conic, very long,
rather swelled at the base and narrowed at the upper end; skin thick,
grass-green, dotted and mottled with fawn and often bearing some small
brownish stains; flesh whitish, fine, semi-melting or melting, rather
granular at center; juice abundant, sweet, vinous, delicate; second;
Sept. and Oct.

=General Canrobert. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:214, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 770. 1869.

From a bed of the seeds of Saint-Germain made about 1843 by M. Robert,
Angers, Fr. Fruit medium, long-conic and irregular, golden-yellow,
dotted, marbled and stained with russet, washed with brown around
the calyx and stem; flesh white, fine, melting and juicy, the juice
being abundant, sweet, acid, rich and aromatic; first, though very
exceptionally second when it has no flavor; Jan. and Feb.

=General Delage. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:155, fig. 270. 1879.

A gain of Van Mons about 1823. Fruit medium, conic-pyriform, clear
green, speckled with gray, changing to pale yellow at maturity, tinged
with dark red on the side of the sun; flesh white, fine, buttery,
melting, full of slightly sugary juice, refreshing and somewhat musky.

=General Dutilleul. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:215, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 585. 1884.

A seedling of Van Mons. Fruit medium to large, pyramidal, uneven in
outline, deep golden yellow, extensively washed with bright crimson
where it is exposed to the sun; flesh firm, not very juicy, sweet, of
good flavor; good; Sept.

=General Duvivier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:217, fig. 1869.

_Beurre Duvivier._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 688. 1869.

Raised from seed by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr., in 1845. Fruit medium,
long-conic, slightly obtuse, greenish-yellow, finely dotted and
reticulated with russet, washed sometimes with dark red on the side
facing the sun; flesh whitish, fine, semi-melting, watery, not gritty;
juice plentiful, sugary, acidulous, aromatic, delicate; first; Mar.

=General Kearney. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., which fruited
in 1862. Fruit large, pyriform, greenish-yellow; flesh fine-grained,
juicy, of rather high flavor; a good market pear; Sept.

=General Lamoriciere. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =18=:296, fig. 22. 1852.

According to Leroy this name is synonymous with _Beurre Citron_. Mas,
however, thought that _Beurre Citron_ was quite different. Fruit
medium, obtuse-pyramidal, greenish-yellow, much reticulated and spotted
and patched with russet; flesh greenish-white, fine, melting, tender,
buttery; juice abundant, sugary, vinous and perfumed; first; Sept. to
Nov.

=General Sherman. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

A seedling of Dr. Shurtleff's submitted to the committee on fruits of
the Horticultural Society of Massachusetts in 1866. "Fruited in 1856.
Diam. 2-3/4 in.; flesh white, melting, breaking and juicy; November to
December, turbinate."

=General Taylor. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:75, 269. 1854.

Introduced by L. N. Rogers, Baltimore, Md., the original tree having
been found by him at Franklin, Md., in 1854. Fruit medium or under,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform, yellow but practically all cinnamon-russet;
flesh yellowish-white, granular, buttery, melting, sweet, highly
flavored; good to very good; Oct. and Nov.

=General Thouvenin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 93. 1895.

Origin unknown. Fruit medium, greenish; flesh rather yellow, fine,
melting, juicy, very sugary and pleasantly perfumed; Dec.

=General Totleben. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:57, fig. 1860. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 177. 1920.

M. Fontaine de Ghelin, Mons, Bel., raised this variety from a seed bed
made in 1839. Fruit large or very large, pyriform, slightly contorted,
one side often rather longer than the other, yellow, covered with dots
and patches of russet; flesh tinted with salmon-rose, melting, juicy,
with a rich, sugary and perfumed juice; excellent; Nov. to Jan.

=General Wauchope. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =30=:474, fig. 144. 1901.

Raised about 1888 by Charles Ross, gardener to Captain Carstairs,
Welford Park, Newbury, Eng., from a cross of Nec Plus Meuris and
Duchesse d'Angouleme. Fruit moderate size, obtuse-pyriform, very
regular, yellowish-green, with fine spotting; flesh soft, free from
grit, rich, sweet, somewhat of the flavor Nec Plus Meuris; Dec.

=Gensbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 32, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry and wine pear. Fruit medium, long-pyriform,
diminishing toward the stalk from the center; skin tolerably fine and
shining yellow when ripe, densely and finely dotted with russet; flesh
white, coarse-grained, juicy, subacid, astringent; Sept.

=George Augustus. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 91. 1872.

A seedling exhibited to the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1872
by Francis Dana. Fruit similar to Winter Nelis, but larger and more
oblong, and not quite so rich.

=Georges Delebecque. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1895.

Raised from seed of Josephine de Malines and distributed by Daras
de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit medium, having some resemblance to
Urbaniste, yellow, dotted with fawn and bronzed around the stem; flesh
sometimes very salmon-colored, melting, with a slight perfume of rose;
a good pear for the amateur; tree of moderate vigor and very fertile;
Dec. and Jan.

=Gerando. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =23=:161, fig. 9. 1857.

Received by C. M. Hovey in 1845 from M. Jamin of Paris. Fruit large,
globular-obovate; skin rather rough, dull greenish-russet, with a
mottled yellow and light russet tinge when mature, thickly covered with
conspicuous dark russet specks; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, melting
and juicy, rich, sugary and slightly perfumed; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Gerardine. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:119, fig. 156. 1878.

Obtained by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., early in the nineteenth
century. Fruit medium, turbinate, more or less short and swelled,
reducing to a point at the top; skin thick, firm, intense green dotted
with large brown specks, changing to dark yellow at maturity, with
golden-russet on the side of the sun and some red blush; flesh white,
rather fine, buttery, melting, gritty about the center, full of rich
sugary juice, vinous and highly scented; Nov.

=Gerdessen. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:61, fig. 223. 1879.

According to Diel, this variety was obtained by the Pastor Gerdessen
of Weigsdorf, in the Oberlausitz, Ger. Fruit rather small or nearly
medium, almost spherical, even in contour, the greatest diameter being
at the center, intense and somber green, without any russet; flesh
yellow, rather fine, buttery; juice sufficient in quantity and richly
saccharine, vinous and highly perfumed; first; Sept.

=Gerippte Pomeranzenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:156. 1856.

Nassau, Bel., 1833. Fruit small, orange-form, ribbed, a good yellow,
lightly blushed with red; flesh juicy, semi-melting, cinnamon-flavored,
sweet; second for dessert, good for the market; Sept.

=Gernroeder Pomeranzenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:160.
1856.

Central Germany, 1773. Fruit small, flattened, green changing to
yellowish, faintly blushed, speckled with gray; flesh greenish-white,
tender; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Gestreiffe Winter-Apothekerbirne. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 132. 1825.

Fruit large; form that of Bon-Chretien d'Ete, light yellow, streaked,
aromatic, sugary; good; Feb. to Apr.

=Ghellinck de Walle. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =11=:24. 1892.

Raised in the garden of M. Ghellinck de Walle near Ghent, Bel.,
described as new. Fruit medium, oblong-obovate, yellowish, speckled
with russet; flesh creamy-white, melting, juicy, sugary, slightly acid
and delicately perfumed. Said by M. Pynaert to be one of the best
autumn pears; Nov.

=Gibb. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:482. 1913.

Raised from seed sent by Charles Gibb from Mongolia to Prof. Budd at
Ames, Ia. Said to be very hardy and productive, coming into bearing
when young. Fruit about the size of Bartlett, pyriform, nearly equal to
Bartlett in quality, according to Prof. Budd. Seems to be of a better
quality than most oriental pears.

=Gilain. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 71. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:33, fig.
113. 1878.

A gain of M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium, pyriform, pale
green changing to yellow, a warm gold and sometimes red on the side
next the sun; flesh white, fine, buttery, melting, rather gritty near
the core; juice sufficient, sugary and perfumed; good; Sept.

=Gilles o Gilles. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:222, fig. 1869. =2.=
Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 219. 1889.

_Girogile._ =3.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 177. 1920.

A French pear of very ancient and uncertain origin. Jean Bauhin in
his _Historia Plantarum_, 1580, wrote of a pear which appears to be
identical with this and said that in Burgundy it was styled a _Poire de
Livre_ or _Pound Pear_. Le Lectier in his catalog of 1628 and Merlet as
well as Claude Saint-Etienne and La Quintinye also mention it though
spelling it variously. Fruit large to very large, nearly spherical;
calyx large, open, set in deep basin; skin thick, pale dull green,
washed with brown-red on the face exposed to the sun, much covered with
thin brown-russet; flesh greenish-white, semi-fine and semi-breaking,
rarely gritty, very juicy, saccharine and sweet, without much perfume,
occasionally spoiled by too much acerbity; third; cooking; Nov. to Feb.

=Giram. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:151, fig. 74. 1866-73.

A wilding found on the estate of Giram at Uryosse, Fr., and propagated
by Dr. Doat. Fruit nearly medium, pyriform, sometimes rather
turbinate; skin thick and firm, green, sprinkled with large dots of
greenish-brown, becomes yellowish-green at maturity and blushed with
red on the sun-exposed side; flesh very fine, tender, melting, very
juicy, sugary and agreeably perfumed; first; Aug.

=Girardon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:225, fig. 1869.

According to Diel this pear was raised in Paris by a M. Girandoux whose
name Leroy identifies with Girardon. It seems to have dated from about
the beginning of the nineteenth century. Fruit below medium, globular,
flattened and deeply depressed at both poles, one side rather less
swelled than the other; skin wrinkled, yellowish-green, dotted with
clear brown and almost entirely mottled and reticulated with dark
russet; flesh white, semi-fine and semi-melting, rather granular; juice
very abundant, saccharine, acidulous, very musky; second; late Sept.

=Glace d'Hiver. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:67, fig. 322. 1880.

_Winter Eisbirne._ =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 300. 1889.

Belgian. Fruit medium, globular-conic; skin rather thick, a lively
green sprinkled with brown dots, changing to lemon-yellow, often
golden on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, fine, breaking; juice
sufficient, sugary, without appreciable perfume; good; end of winter.

=Glastonbury. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =22=:73, 99, 126. 1872. =2.=
Bunyard-Thomas _Fr. Gard._ 140. 1904.

The _Benedictine_ of the English or Glastonbury pear, apparently
originated as a wilding with W. G. L. Lovell, Glastonbury, Eng., but
Bunyard believes it to be an old sort introduced by the monks. Grafts
were first taken from the tree in 1862. Fruit large, oblong-obovate,
russeted; flesh yellowish, melting, juicy, aromatic; Oct.

=Gleck. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 93. 1895.

Distributed by M. Niemetz, Winnitsa, Russia, and on trial with
Simon-Louis Bros. at Metz in 1895. Fruit medium or large, green
changing to yellow at maturity; flesh rather tart in flavor, juicy,
good for drying as it diminishes little in volume; it makes good cider;
Sept. and Oct.

=Gliva. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 61. 1880.

A Russian pear imported by J. L. Budd, from the northern steppes where
the summers are "fully as dry and hot as ours and the winter far more
severe." It shows marked traces of the Chinese forms of the pear in
shape, serration, thickness and size of leaf and in the peculiar
enlarged character of the scaly, terminal buds.

=Gloire de Cambron. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:226, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 772. 1869.

Probably derives its name from the famous Abbey of Cambron near Mons in
Hainaut, Bel. It was in France early in the nineteenth century. Fruit
below medium, acute-pyriform, generally rather contorted in the lower
part, yellow-ochre in color, dotted with very fine gray-russet points;
flesh white, semi-fine, breaking, dry and gritty, sweet and rather
delicate in flavor; third; Nov.

=Gloward. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 280. 1858. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:228, fig. 1869.

Possibly of English origin. It was cultivated in the garden of the
Horticultural Society of Angers, Fr., in 1838. Fruit medium and above;
form rather variable but always ovate, more or less long, irregular,
bossed, clear green sprinkled with grayish dots and a little stained
with russet; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, watery, some grit around
the core; juice sugary, very refreshing, rather savory; second; Oct.

=Gnoico. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:229, fig. 1869.

Italian, with the place of its origin in the old principality of Parma.
Fruit below medium, long, obtuse-pyriform, whitish-gray on the shaded
side, very clear dull green on the other face, dotted with russet,
washed occasionally with fawn around the stalk and partially covered
with a light bluish efflorescence; flesh greenish-white, fine, dense,
breaking or semi-breaking, watery, almost exempt from grit; juice
abundant and sugary, with a flavor of anis; Aug.

=Goat-herd. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:131. 1908.

On trial in the experimental orchard at Agassiz, B. C., in 1900. Fruit
small, acute-pyriform, green, russeted, flesh red, buttery, juicy,
subacid; mid-season.

=Gogal. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

Originated by N. E. Hansen, Brookings, S. D., from Parrot crossed by
_Pyrus ovoidea_, and introduced by him in 1919.

=Gold Dust. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:482. 1913.

Fruit of Bergamot shape, with slender stem; skin very rough; Oct.

=Gold Nugget. 1.= Stark Bros. _Cat._ 28, fig. 1916.

This pear originated with F. H. Davis, Esmeralda, Cal., in the early
seventies. A few years ago Stark Bros., Louisiana, Mo., secured control
of the variety and introduced it to the trade in 1916. Tree vigorous,
healthy, productive; fruit large, roundish-obovate-pyriform; skin
thick; flesh fine-grained, juicy, with a honey-sweet flavor; ripens
late.

=Goldbirne. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 544. 1817. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:48. 1856.

Austrian, 1851. Fruit small, conic, beautiful light yellow; skin thin,
light red blush; flesh semi-breaking, sweet, with muscatel flavor;
best; beginning of Oct.

=Goldbordirte Holzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:196. 1856.

Classed by Dochnahl among varieties of special character. The tree has
its leaves bordered with gold. Fruit small; flesh firm, insipid.

=Golden Bell. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

A seedling fruited by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., in 1862. Tree
prolific. Fruit medium, pyriform, golden-yellow; flesh fine, with good
flavor; Sept.

=Golden Beurre of Bilboa. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 177. 1832. =2.= Hovey
_Fr. Am._ =1=:99, Pl. 1851.

_Beurre Dore de Bilboa._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:351, fig. 1867.

Imported to this country from Bilboa, Spain, in 1821 by J. Hooper,
Marblehead, Mass. Fruit medium to large, obovate-pyriform,
golden-yellow, speckled evenly with small, brown dots, and slightly
marked with russet; flesh yellowish-white, fine, melting, very buttery,
vinous and excellent flavor; first; Sept.

=Golden June. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

Originated with Joe Houghlin, near Bloomfield, Ky., and introduced by
Sunny Slope Nursery, Hannibal, Mo. Tree reported about 75 years old.
Fruit said to have a small core, to be delicious and to ripen about
June 20th.

=Golden Knap. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 587. 1884.

Grown extensively in the orchards of the border countries of Scotland.
The name is a corruption of Golden Knob, the shape being that of a
small knob. Fruit very small, globular-turbinate, russety, of no
particular merit.

=Golden Queen. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 587. 1884.

Raised at the Royal Gardens, Frogmore, near Windsor, Eng., and was
first exhibited in 1872. Fruit small, obovate, straw-colored, strewed
with a few minute dots; flesh very tender and extremely juicy, sweet
and highly perfumed; a delicious pear but when ripe speedily rots at
the core; Sept.

=Golden Russet. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 587. 1884.

A seedling raised at the Royal Gardens, Frogmore, near Windsor,
Eng., and first exhibited in 1863; entirely distinct from Japan
Golden Russet, which bears the same name as a synonym. Fruit small,
obtuse-obovate, bright cinnamon-russet; flesh yellow, fine-grained,
buttery and melting, juicy, sweet and with a flavor resembling that of
Marie Louise; an excellent little pear; Oct.

=Goldwoerther Lederbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 156, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small to medium, turbinate, diminishing
rather acutely to the stalk, green covered with dark brown-russet;
flesh yellow-green, coarse, saccharine, with an unpleasant acidity;
very good for transport; Oct. and Nov.

=Goennersche Birne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:28. 1856.

Hesse, Ger., 1806. Fruit almost medium, turbinate, light green changing
to greenish-yellow, often with a rather pale blush; flesh granular and
rather coarse; second; Sept.

=Goodale. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 773, fig. 1869. =2.= Ont. Dept.
Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 163, figs. 1914.

Raised by E. Goodale, Saco, Me., from seed of the McLaughlin. Fruit
large, oblong-obovate-pyriform, green, yellowing at maturity, shaded
with crimson and fawn in the sun, slightly netted and patched with
russet and sprinkled with small russet dots; flesh white, fine, rather
gritty at core, juicy, sweet, pleasant, perfumed, slightly vinous; fair
for dessert; first for market; Oct.

=Got. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 280. 1858. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:231, fig. 1869.

Origin unknown. According to Leroy this variety has been cultivated
in Belgium ever since 1855. Fruit above medium; form rather variable,
passing from long-conic and slightly obtuse to ovate, a little swelled;
skin rough, fine, dark green; flesh white, semi-fine, breaking or
semi-melting, granular around the core; juice sufficient, sugary,
aromatic, rather delicate; second; Sept. and Oct.

=Governor Carver. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1866.

Fruited in 1863 by S. A. Shurtleff from seed. Fruit "Diam. 3 in.; flesh
firm and very rich in flavor; keeps perfectly until June or July of
following year, and ripens well; fine flavor, and a valuable pear.
Turbinate."

=Grabenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:159. 1856. =2.=
Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 64, fig. 1913.

A German and Austrian pear, common in middle Franconia. Fruit small to
medium, turbinate or conic; skin smooth, shining, yellow-green turning
yellow, with green marblings, sometimes slightly blushed, dotted; flesh
whitish, coarse-grained, breaking, juicy, saccharine, without any
perceptible acid; mid-Oct.

=Graf Moltke. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1876. =2.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._
=II=:No. 80, Pl. 80. 1882.

Named after A. Von Moltke, a Prime Minister of Denmark, 1850. Fruit
rather large, irregular in form although handsome; skin rough,
yellowish-green covered with russet; flesh yellowish-white, fine,
melting, very juicy, aromatic; quality variable; a table fruit; Oct.

=Grand Bretagne. 1.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:83, Tab. II. 1771. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 774. 1869.

Origin French or Belgian. Fruit large, obtuse-obovate, greenish-yellow,
dotted with brown; flesh fine, juicy, buttery and melting; moderately
good; Dec. to Feb.

=Grand Isle. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 3rd App., 176, fig. 1881. =2.=
_Rural N. Y._ =44=:242, figs. 135, 136. 1885.

Raised by Benjamin Macomber, Grand Isle, Vt. Tree vigorous, upright,
somewhat alternate in bearing. Fruit medium, roundish-oblong, straw
color, covered with many small russet dots; stem medium long, rather
slender; calyx small, open, in a small basin; flesh whitish, half-fine,
juicy, melting, sweet, slightly vinous; very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Grand-Soliel. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:233, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 588. 1884.

Introduced by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., in the early half of
the nineteenth century. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate, more or
less bossed; skin rough to the touch, yellow, almost covered with
gray-russet, blushed with red on the side next the sun; flesh whitish,
semi-fine, rather stringy, melting, vinous, sugary, with a particularly
delicate aroma; first; Dec. and Jan.

=Grant. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1866.

A seedling fruited by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass, in 1862. Fruit
large, obtuse-pyriform; greenish-yellow; flesh sweet, fine, rich;
first; Oct.

=Graslin. 1.= _Pom. France_ =3=:No. 106, Pl. 106. 1865. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 775. 1869.

A wilding found in the Commune of Flee, Sarthe, Fr.; introduced about
1840. Fruit large, oblate, somewhat irregular, larger on one side than
the other, yellow-ochre, dotted and marbled with gray-russet, and
stained with large markings of fawn; flesh fine, white, veined with
greenish-yellow, very melting, juicy, sugary, acidulous, perfumed,
delicate; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Grasshoff Leckerbissen. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 305. 1881. =2.=
Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 222. 1889.

German. Fruit medium, pyriform, often rather ovate, inclined or bent at
the head; skin smooth, grass-green changing to yellow-green, thickly
dotted, not much russet; flesh yellowish-white, rather gritty around
the core, melting, fine, juicy, good flavor; very good for dessert and
good for household use; early Oct.

=Gratiola. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

"The Gratiola peare is a kinde of Bon Cretien, called the _Cucumber
peare_, or _Spinola's peare_."

=Graue Herbstrusselet. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:42. 1856.

German, Upper Hesse, 1802. Fruit medium, ventriculous, uneven, rough,
entirely covered with russet, changing at maturity to dull red on the
side next the sun; flesh very juicy, coarsely granular and woody,
sugary and musky; first for household purposes; Sept.

=Graue Holzbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 110, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown throughout Austria under various names. Fruit
medium, globular, diminishing toward the stalk; skin firm, rough,
grayish-green turning at maturity to a dirty greenish-yellow, dotted
with grayish-brown-russet; flesh yellowish-white, coarse-grained, very
juicy, astringent and subacid; mid-Oct.

=Graue Honigbirn. 1.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =2=: No. 84, Pl. 84. 1883.

German. Published by Oberdieck in 1865. Fruit medium, turbinate; skin
thin, rough, yellowish-green or yellow, blushed, and dotted and marked
with cinnamon-russet; flesh yellowish-white, fine grained, breaking,
tender, semi-melting, sweet, with an aromatic flavor of cinnamon.

=Graue Pelzbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 158, fig. 1913.

An excellent Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium, turbinate, inclining
to pyriform; skin firm, rough, yellow ground when ripe, with
cinnamon-brown-russet marking and grayish-brown dots, blushed on the
sun-exposed side; flesh whitish, coarse grained, very juicy, subacid,
with very little aroma; Oct.

=Graue Speckbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:188. 1856.

Reported from Germany, 1801. Fruit large, long, broad, conic, yellow,
strongly and thickly dotted with gray; calyx small; stem fleshy; flesh
granular, somewhat aromatic, sweet; third; Sept.

=Graue Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:40. 1856.

Dutch, 1758. Fruit small, rather oviform, smooth, greenish-yellow,
dotted with green; flesh yellowish, semi-breaking, melting, very sweet,
vinous, juicy; second for dessert, good for the market; Aug.

=Grazbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 184, fig. 1913.

Grazbirne is a variety of wild pear well distributed in Lower Austria.
Fruit medium, globular, regular in form, green, dotted and heavily
marked with russet; flesh subacid, vinous, astringent, wanting in
juice; inferior; early Oct.

=Great Cassolette. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:32. 1831.

There appear to be several varieties of Cassolette three or four of
which bear the synonym of _Lechfrion_. The Cassolette is so named from
its resemblance to a small vessel made of copper and silver in which
pastilles were burnt. Fruit small, globular-turbinate, 2-1/6 inches
in height and 2-1/4 inches in breadth, entirely light green even at
maturity, dotted all over with numerous green specks; flesh melting, of
a very peculiar acid flavor which however, is not disagreeable when the
fruit is ripe; Aug.

=Great Citron of Bohemia. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 775. 1869.

Fruit small, oblong, yellow; flesh sugary, juicy, a little
coarse-grained, having little flavor; Sept.

=Great Mammoth. 1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 239, 240. 1869.

Grown in pioneer days in Indiana, Illinois, and neighboring states.

=Green Chisel. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 132. 1729. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
588. 1884.

_Guenette._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:261, fig. 1869.

The origin of this ancient early summer variety is unknown, but it was
described by Mawe and Abercrombie in 1778, and was also mentioned by
Philip Miller in 1734 as being still "in prime" in July in England.
Under the name of _Guenette_ it was described by Merlet in articles
written in 1675, and 1690 and appears to have been well known in
English and French gardens. Hogg deems Chisel to be a corruption of the
French name Choiseul. Fruit small or very small, growing in clusters,
globular-turbinate, green or rarely yellowish-green, with sometimes a
brownish tinge next the sun, sprinkled with small russet dots; flesh
white, slightly green, fine, semi-breaking, sweet, slightly gritty
around centre; juice ample in amount, sugary, acid, slightly aromatic;
second; Aug.

=Green Mountain Boy. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 386. 1859.

A native variety. Fruit medium, globular-obovate, or obovate-pyriform,
golden yellow, with russety-brown specks; flesh yellowish, melting,
juicy, sweet; very good; Oct.

=Green Pear of Yair. 1.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =4=:214. 1822. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 776. 1869.

_Green Yair._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit. Man._ 589. 1884.

An old Scotch pear raised at Yair on the Tweed, Peeblesshire. Fruit
below medium, obovate, smooth, dark green changing to yellow, patched
and dotted with russet; flesh tender, juicy, sugary; good; Sept.

=Gregoire Bordillon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:237, fig. 1869. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 178. 1920.

Raised by Leroy in 1855 from seed of Graslin, and fruited for the first
time in 1866. Fruit large, ovate, rather larger on one side than the
other, pale yellow on shaded side and dark yellow on the exposed cheek,
mottled, striped, and dotted with brown; flesh yellowish, fine, very
melting, very juicy and sugary; first; Aug.

=Grey Good-Wife. 1.= Mawe-Abercrombie _Univ. Gard. Bot._ 1778.

Fruit medium, globular, brown-red, moderately tender and of good
flavor; Oct. to Dec.

=Grise-Bonne. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:245. 1768. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:238, fig. 1869.

_Franzoesische Gute Graue Sommerbirne._ =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:16. 1856.

The Dutch pomologist Pierre Van den Hoven writing in the middle of
the eighteenth century affirmed that the Grise-Bonne was the _Sucree
Grise de Hollandaise_ and the _Pirum Falernum_ of the Romans. It may
be noted that in 1586 Jacques Dalechamp thought he had found the
_Falernum_ in the French _Autumn Bergamote_; and, again, in 1783 Henri
Manger declared it to be still cultivated under the name _Bourdon_,
the _Orange Musquee_; similarly Sickler wrote in 1802 that the
_Bergamote d'Ete_ appeared to him to be the _Falernum_. Fruit medium;
form variable, sometimes irregular-turbinate, long and ventriculous,
at other times regular-turbinate, clear green, russeted with gray,
clouded with pale yellow on the shaded side and covered with large dots
of golden or orange-yellow; flesh white, fine, dense, semi-breaking,
watery, free from grit; juice very abundant, sugary, acidulous, musky;
second; Aug.

=Groom Prince Royal. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 54, 161. 1841. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 589. 1884.

_Bergamotte Eliza Mathews._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:235, fig. 1867.

_Princesse-Royale._ =4.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:561. 1869.

A Mr. Groom, a nurseryman at Clapham near London, introduced this pear
in 1841. Fruit medium, globular or Bergamot-shaped, greenish-brown,
with a tinge of yellow and slight traces of gray-russet; flesh melting,
buttery, sometimes rather gritty, sweet, vinous, perfumed; a good
second-rate pear; Jan. to Mar.

=Gros Blanquet Long. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:241, fig. 1869.

_Large Blanquet._ =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 602. 1884.

_Kreiselfoermige Blankette._ =3.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 244. 1889.

This is one of a group of pears which in the seventeenth century were
designated by various pomologists with names such as _Blanquet a longue
queue_, _Blanquet d'hiver_, etc. Their origin is ancient, possibly
Roman. The variety here described is the largest of the Blanquettes and
was said by Olivier de Serres in 1600 to be also named _de Florence_
from which it might be adduced that it came originally from Tuscany.
Fruit below medium and often small, obtuse-pyriform, smooth, of a
beautiful yellow color, dotted with bright green and sometimes carmined
on the cheek next the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, breaking, sweet,
full of sugary juice possessing a musky-anis flavor; a dessert pear,
second; July and Aug.

=Gros Blanquet Rond. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:242, fig. 1869.

An ancient dessert pear mentioned by Claude Saint-Etienne in the
seventeenth century and by Mawe and Abercrombie in their _Universal
Gardener and Botanist_ in 1778. Fruit below medium, globular-ovate,
pale yellow covered with very fine russet dots, more or less washed
with rose on the side of the sun; flesh yellow-white, breaking, rather
coarse, almost exempt from grit; juice abundant, sugary, sourish,
musky; third for dessert; Sept.

=Gros-Hativeau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:245, fig. 1869.

This pear has been supposed to belong to a class identified with the
_Pira Hordearia_ of Columella and of Pliny, and was mentioned by
various French and German writers from the sixteenth century onward; if
its origin is not clear it is at any rate one of the three varieties
of the pear bearing the name of _Hativeau_ in the seventeenth century,
_H. blanc_, or _Bergamotte d'Ete_, and the _Petit-H._ being the other
two. Fruit below medium, turbinate-obtuse; skin fine, yellowish-green,
delicately dotted with olive-gray, washed with bright vermilion on
the side next the sun; flesh whitish, coarse, breaking, gritty; juice
rarely abundant, sugary, astringent and slightly aromatic; third; end
of July.

=Gros Loijart. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:126. 1843.

Fruit large, irregular-obovate, green and yellow; flesh breaking, tough
but neither gritty nor austere; for cooking purposes; Apr. and May.

=Gros Lucas. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:246, fig. 1869.

The fruit garden of the Horticultural Society of Angers, Fr. was formed
in 1832 and the Gros Lucas soon afterwards appeared in its catalog.
Fruit large, obtuse-ovate-globular, irregular and much bossed; skin
rather thick, yellow, sprinkled with very small dots of green color,
stained with patches of russet; flesh white, semi-fine, semi-breaking,
spongy, gritty at the center; juice rather deficient, without perfume
or much sugar; second, but good for kitchen use; Jan. and Feb.

=Gros Muscat Rond. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:248, fig. 1869.

Although the origin of this variety is doubtful it is almost certainly
French. Diel received it from Holland but German pomologists appear to
have regarded it as French. Claude Saint-Etienne described it in 1670.
Fruit medium, globular-ovate, mammillate at summit, one side always
more convex than the other, grayish-green on the shaded side and pale
yellow on that exposed to the sun, dotted and slightly stained with
gray-russet; flesh whitish, semi-fine and semi-breaking, watery, rarely
very gritty; juice plentiful, very saccharine, acidulous and aromatic;
second; Aug.

=Gros Rousselet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:250, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 590. 1884.

_Roi d'Ete._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 843. 1869.

Mentioned by Rea as being cultivated in England in 1665 under the name
of _Great Russet of Remes_, under which name it was also known in
France, there being known these two varieties, the _Gros Rousselet de
Rheims_ and the _Petit-Rousselet_. Father Rapin, a French Jesuit, who
wrote in 1666 the poem _Hortorum_, mentioned the pears of Rousselet in
the Valley of Amiterne at the foot of the Apennines. In 1783 the German
pomologist Henri Manger wrote that he believed the French _Rousselet_
was none other than the Roman _Favonianum_ mentioned by Pliny. Fruit
medium, obtuse-pyriform, yellowish or bright green changing to bright
lemon-yellow, covered with numerous small brown spots, red on the
side next the sun; flesh yellowish, semi-melting, semi-breaking, rich
in sugary and perfumed juice; variable in quality, requires a warm,
sheltered position; Aug. and Sept.

=Gros Rousselet d'Aout. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:53, fig. 1860. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 776. 1869.

_Rousselet d'Aout._ =3.= _Pom. France_ =2=:No. 83, Pl. 83. 1863.

This was one of the first seedlings raised by Van Mons and is 201
in his catalog of 1823. Fruit medium, pyriform, yellow washed with
rose-red; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sugary, acidulous, with an
agreeable perfume; a very good early fruit, ripening in August in
Belgium.

=Gros Trouve. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1876.

This seedling was found by Gabriel Everard in a garden at Tournai, Bel.
Fruit very large, fusiform, washed with red on the side next the sun;
flesh breaking; first for kitchen purposes; keeps until the autumn of
the year following.

=Grosse Eisbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:188. 1856.

Reported in 1802. Fruit medium, onion-shaped; skin very smooth, shining
and greasy, yellowish-green changing to light citron-yellow, often
somewhat blushed; flesh coarse, solid and dry; third for the table,
first for culinary use; Oct.

=Grosse Figue. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95, 278. 1876.

Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, yellow stained with brown; flesh
semi-melting, juicy, well perfumed; first; Nov.

=Grosse gelbe Weinbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:49. 1856.

Nassau, 1805. Fruit below medium, globular, obtuse-conic, often
turbinate, light lemon-yellow, dotted with fine brown spots, somewhat
russeted; flesh extremely juicy, vinous, mingled sweet and sour; third
for dessert, very good for the kitchen.

=Grosse-Herbst-Bergamotte. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:169. 1856.

Reported in middle Germany, 1806. Fruit medium, long-pyriform, round,
yellowish-green, russeted, speckled with gray dots; flesh breaking,
firm, white, juicy, sweet; third for dessert, good for household use;
Oct.

=Grosse Landlbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbiren_ 66, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown throughout Austria. Fruit medium, turbinate,
otherwise short-pyriform; skin smooth, shining, yellow when ripe,
blushed on the side opposed to the sun, sprinkled with numerous dots of
cinnamon-brown; flesh coarse-grained, yellow-white, very juicy, sweet,
astringent and without aroma; excellent; Oct. to Dec.

=Grosse Leutsbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 112, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium, long-pyriform, green covered all
over with gray-russet; flesh very juicy, astringent, saccharine, with a
sourish after-taste; good for transportation; Oct.

=Grosse-Louise. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:253, fig. 1869.

A chance seedling found in a garden of the town of Tourcoing, Fr.
Fruit large, conic-turbinate-obtuse, bossed and generally mammillate
at summit, yellow, slightly greenish, dotted all over with russet and
having some small brown stains; flesh white, very fine, dense, free
from grit; juice very abundant, sugary, sweet, delicately perfumed;
first; Sept.

=Grosse Mostputzer. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 114, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown throughout Austria. Fruit medium but variable in
size, globular, turbinate, otherwise pyriform; skin firm, leaf-green
turning bright yellow at maturity, with large russet dots; flesh
yellow-white, coarse-grained, very juicy, subacid and strongly
astringent; very good for transportation on account of its prolonged
season of maturity; Oct. to Dec.

=Grosse Petersbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:168. 1856.

Reported in Thuringia, 1804. Fruit medium, obtuse-conic, yellow,
blushed, some russet, dotted with green, thin-skinned; flesh sweet,
deficient in juice; third for dessert, good for household use, good for
the market.

=Grosse Poire d'Amande. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:97, fig. 1856.

_Grosse Angleterre de Noisette._ =2.= Noisette _Man. Comp. Jard._
=2=:524. 1860.

Belgian. Fruit large, long-conic or obtuse-pyramidal, grayish-green
becoming yellow at maturity, slightly bronzed on the side next the sun,
speckled all over with numerous brown dots; flesh yellowish-white,
fine, melting, buttery; juice very plentiful, sugary; flesh sweet and
tasting strongly of almond; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Grosse Poire de Vitrier. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:107. 1831.

Fruit large, turbinate, yellow, with red blush, perfumed; Nov. and Dec.

=Grosse Queue. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:257, fig. 1869.

This variety probably originated about 1653 when Nicolas de Bonnefond
named it in his _Jardinier francais_. In 1675, however, Merlet gave a
rather complete description of it and a few years later it was admitted
by La Quintinye into the orchard of Louis XIV at Versailles. Fruit
medium, rather variable, always globular in the lower part, bossed and
more or less conic near the summit, a little wrinkled especially on the
side next the sun, olive-yellow, finely rayed and dotted with clear
green, and washed with carmine on the exposed face; flesh very white,
semi-fine, breaking or semi-melting, juice deficient, sweet mingled
with sourness, musky; third; Sept. and Oct.

=Grosse Rommelter. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1876.

A French pear valued for perry making. Fruit medium, globular, green;
first for perry; Oct. Tree very vigorous, extraordinarily fertile and
succeeding everywhere.

=Grosse schoene Jungfernbirne. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 124. 1825.

German. Reported 1805. Fruit below medium, ventriculous-pyriform, sides
rather unequal; skin extremely smooth, light yellowish-green turning to
greenish-yellow, often washed with a slight brownish blush; second for
dessert, first for the kitchen; end of Aug. for two weeks.

=Grosse September Birne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 226. 1889.

_Belle de Septembre._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:211, fig. 1867.

An old variety originated in Prussia and cultivated chiefly in the
north of Germany and especially in Pomerania. Fruit above medium
and sometimes large, oblong or globular-turbinate, generally having
unequal sides, pale yellow, stained with fawn, finely dotted with gray
and sometimes washed with brown-red on the cheek exposed to the sun;
flesh greenish, fine, semi-melting, rarely gritty; juice abundant,
saccharine, perfumed, delicate but rather astringent; second; end of
Sept.

=Grosse Sommer-Zitronenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:24.
1856.

Reported in Saxony in 1803. Fruit medium, long-turbinate, sides uneven;
skin extremely shining, light green changing to lemon-yellow, spotted
with gray, rather rust-colored on the side next the sun; flesh coarse,
melting, rather yellow in the interior, very aromatic, tender and
juicy; first for dessert, household and market; end of Aug. for 14 days.

=Grosse Sommersirene. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:49. 1856.

Holland, 1804. Fruit small, ventriculous-pyriform, smooth, shining
lemon-yellow, without any russet, watery, with a tart sweetness; third
for dessert; best for market.

=Grosse spaete Weinbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:196. 1856.

Switzerland. Reported first in 1848. Fruit above medium,
ventriculous-turbinate, green-yellow, blushed with a brownish tint,
spotted with white, and marked with russet; flesh coarse-grained, very
juicy, astringent, vinous and sourish; very good for perry; Oct.

=Grosser Roland. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:4. 1856.

First reported from Treves, Prussia, in 1801. One of the group of
Volema or Pound Pears. Fruit large, bent and uneven in form, light
green changing to yellowish, blushed; flesh breaking, aromatic, juicy;
first for household use; Sept.

=Groveland. 1.= Budd-Hansen _Am. Hort. Man._ =2=:248. 1903.

A native variety grown in Alabama and southeastern States. Fruit large,
obovate, obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with brownish cheek, washed,
netted and speckled nearly all over with russet; flesh creamy-white,
tender, buttery, juicy, vinous; good; autumn.

=Grubbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 116, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit rather large, irregular in form,
diminishing toward the stem almost acutely, yellow-green slightly
blushed, dotted and speckled with russet; flesh coarse-grained, juicy,
astringent, saccharine and with an agreeable flavor; good for keeping
and transporting; Oct.

=Grumkow. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:260, fig. 1869.

Discovered by M. Koberstein at Ruegenwald, Basse-Pomerania, Prussia.
Diel, first to describe it, placed its origin at about 1806. Fruit
medium, very irregular, long, pyramidal, always obtuse, contorted and
much warted, pale green, sprinkled with a few gray specks, more or
less colored with brown-red on the sunny side; flesh whitish, fine,
breaking, or semi-breaking; juice abundant, saccharine, acidulous, with
a musky flavor; second; Oct. to Dec.

=Grunbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:10. 1856.

A German pound pear. Originated in Wuerttemberg and reported in 1830.
Fruit medium, long, sides unequal, dark green, with dark red blush on
ripening; flesh greenish-white, breaking, granular, glutinous, juicy,
aromatic; first for kitchen; Aug.

=Gruene Confesselsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:193. 1856.

Thuringia, 1797. Fruit small, obtuse-conic, grass-green changing to
yellowish-green, green dots; flesh yellow, firm, insipid; second for
table, good for household; May to Aug.

=Gruene fruehe Gewurzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:32. 1856.

Nassau, 1816. Fruit small, turbinate, yellowish grass-green often
rather blushed, very fine spotting, thick-skinned; flesh granular,
semi-melting, aromatic, musky; second for dessert, good for domestic
and market use; early Sept. for 8 days.

=Gruene fuerstliche Tafelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:135.
1856.

Wetterau, 1797. Fruit small, globular, thin-skinned, light green
changing to yellowish-green, seldom blushed; flesh white, buttery,
melting, juicy, full of flavor; first for table and market; Aug.

=Gruene gesegnete Winterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:174.
1856.

Holland, 1802. Fruit medium, globular, light green changing to
yellowish-green, dotted with small brown specks; flesh coarse-grained
near centre, breaking, juicy, very sweet; good for culinary use; Jan.
to Mar.

=Gruene langstielige Winterhirtenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:83. 1856.

Said to be a Belgian variety, published by Diel in 1802. Fruit medium,
globular-oblate, bossed, dark green changing to light green, a rather
brownish blush, fine gray dots; flesh greenish-white, buttery, melting;
first for table and household; Feb.

=Gruene Pfundbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:6. 1856.

_Poire Livre Verte._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:11, fig. 102. 1878.

A German Rhineland Pound pear, 1826. Fruit very large, regular in form,
five inches long by three and a half broad, uniform green turning to
yellow-green, covered with dense star-like brown spots; flesh breaking,
juicy, aromatic; first for kitchen; Oct.

=Gruene Pichelbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 118, fig. 1913.

A perry pear extensively grown under a variety of names throughout
Austria. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, shining dark green, yellowish
when ripe, white dots; flesh coarse-grained, yellow-white turning more
yellow on ripening, juicy and astringent; Oct. and Nov.

=Gruene Sommer-Bergamote. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:9. 1856.

Saxony, 1803. A Volema or Pound pear. Fruit medium, globular, dark
green changing to yellowish-green, blushed with streaks of brown; flesh
glutinous, juicy, aromatic; first for household; Sept.

=Gruene Sommer-Citronenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:156.
1856.

Thuringia, 1841. Fruit small, ventriculous, rather variable, shining
light green becoming a uniform light greenish-yellow, russeted with
gray, specked with gray dots; flesh granular near the centre, melting,
acid, sweet, strongly scented with musk; first for table and household.

=Gruene Wiedenbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 120, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown throughout Austria. Fruit medium, turbinate,
otherwise short-pyriform, irregular; skin smooth, shining green turning
greenish-yellow when ripe, with numerous very fine green dots; flesh
whitish, coarse, juicy, not particularly firm when ripe, astringent,
sourish and saccharine; mid-Oct. for fourteen days.

=Gruene Winawitz. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 122, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown under a variety of names in Upper and Lower Austria.
Fruit medium, long-ovate, greatest diameter at its center, light green
turning yellowish at maturity, covered with russet and green dots;
flesh yellowish, coarse and juicy, saccharine, astringent; good for
transport; Oct. and Nov.

=Gruenmostler. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 84, fig. 1913.

A perry pear widely distributed in Switzerland and Austria. Fruit
fairly large, globular-oblate, ventriculous, one side larger than the
other; flesh greenish-white, coarse, juicy, saccharine and acidulous;
mid-Oct., for about two weeks.

=Gulabi. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 93. 1895.

Sent out and recommended as one of the best sorts in the Caucasus by
M. Niemetz of Winnitza in the former Government of Polish-Russia. The
varieties of the Caucasus are for the most part highly saccharine,
rather coarse, and the vegetation very vigorous.

=Guntershauser Holzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:196. 1856.

Wuerttemberg, Ger., 1848. Fruit medium, turbinate, uniform
whitish-green, russet dots; flesh fine-grained, very juicy, vinous,
astringent, sweet; good; Oct.

=Gustave Bivort. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 776. 1869.

French. Fruit medium, globular, pale yellow, with stains and nettings
of russet, blushed on side next the sun; flesh white, juicy,
semi-melting, sweet, slightly perfumed; good or very good; Aug.

=Gustave Bourgogne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:262, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 776. 1869.

Gained by Van Mons at Louvain about 1840. Fruit large or medium,
turbinate-ovate, flattened at both poles, whitish-green, speckled with
fine fawn dots, some bronze-green on the side next the sun; flesh
white, semi-fine, almost melting; juice very abundant and sugary,
delicately perfumed, refreshing, and agreeable; second for both eating
and cooking; Sept.

=Gustin Summer. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 575. 1857. =2.= _Ibid._
776. 1869.

Originated in New Jersey. Fruit small, globular, yellow, sweet without
much flavor; Sept.

=Gute Gruene. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 524. 1817.

German. Fruit medium, globular, green changing to yellowish, blushed;
flesh tender, melting; beginning of Sept. for several weeks.

=Habichtsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:146. 1856.

Rhineland. Described by Diel in 1804. Fruit very large, 5 in. x 3 in.,
hook-nosed or like the beak of a bird, crooked, uniformly light green,
densely speckled with light brown dots and marked with russet; flesh
coarse-grained, semi-melting, breaking; third for table and good for
cooking; Nov. and Dec.

=Hacon Incomparable. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 20. 1841. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 591. 1884.

About the year 1792 a Mrs. Rayner sowed the seeds of a Rayner's
Norfolk Seedling at Norfolk, Eng. Subsequently, about 1814, one of the
resultant trees was propagated from grafts by a Mr. Hacon of the same
place. The hardy and productive tree renders it particularly valuable
for climates similar to that of England. The blossoms bear the sharpest
frosts without injury but the tree cannot be made to bear until it is
eight to ten years old. Fruit medium, globular-oblate, flattened and
depressed at both poles, pale yellowish-green, covered with numerous
russety spots and markings; flesh yellowish-white, melting, buttery
with a rich, vinous, sweet, musky flavor; Nov. to Jan.

=Haddington. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:274. 1847.

In 1828 J. B. Smith, a farmer near Haddington, Philadelphia,
raised this pear from seed of a Pound pear. Fruit above medium,
obovate-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with a brownish cheek and minute
russet dots and patches; flesh yellowish, juicy, aromatic; texture
varies, some being quite melting, others inclined to break; good; Jan.
to Apr.

=Haffner Butterbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 230. 1889.

_Beurre Haffner._ =2.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 77, fig, 37. 1866-73.

A variety found as a chance seedling near Nuremberg, Bavaria, by the
Brothers Haffner; first published in 1854 by Biedenfeld. Fruit medium,
ovate-pyriform, pale yellow, speckled and stained with russet; flesh
white, sometimes a little yellow, rather granular but fine, slightly
gritty at center, full of sugary, vinous juice, and has a perfume
similar to that of the Beurre Gris; good; Oct.

=Hagar. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 777. 1869.

French, according to Downing. Fruit medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform,
pale yellow, shade of red in sun, some russet; flesh coarse, dry,
sweet; poor; Oct.

=Haight. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 777. 1869.

An American variety. Fruit medium, globular-pyriform, yellow, shaded
and mottled with red in the sun, with small brown dots and traces of
russet; flesh white, pink at center, a little coarse, breaking, juicy,
sweet and pleasant; good; Oct.

=Hallische gelbe Honigbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:149.
1856.

Saxony. Fruit small, oblate, flattened, sides unequal, yellowish-green
changing to light yellow; flesh breaking, coarse-grained, very juicy
and sweet; second for dessert, good for kitchen; Sept.

=Hamburg. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =14=:12, fig. 2. 1891.

Russian. Fruit medium, yellow-green; flesh juicy, perfumed; Sept.

=Hamburger Birne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:5. 1856.

A North German Pound pear; published in 1816. Fruit medium, turbinate
or conic-obtuse, light green changing to light yellow, with dark russet
markings; flesh breaking, juicy, aromatic; first for the kitchen; Oct.

=Hamilton. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 777. 1869.

Originated in South Carolina, where it is said to be of good quality.
Fruit medium, oblate; skin rough, yellowish, some stains and numerous
dots of russet; flesh yellowish, coarse, wanting in juice; Nov.

=Hammelsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:170. 1856.

Thuringia, 1794. Fruit below medium, ovate, yellow-green changing to
citron-yellow, numerous small dots, thick-skinned; flesh granular,
sweet; third for dessert, not of much value for culinary use.

=Hamon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:264, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 777. 1869.

Raised by M. Nerard, a nurseryman at Vaise near Lyons, Fr., from seed
sown by him in 1834. Fruit medium, irregular-ovate, often a little
bossed, pale green, covered with large fawn dots; flesh slightly
greenish, coarse, melting, juicy, sugary, acerb, with an agreeable
flavor; second; Aug.

=Hampden Bergamot. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 591. 1884.

An old variety of uncertain origin and possessing many synonyms. Fruit
large, globular, narrowing abruptly to the stalk, even and regular in
outline, pale greenish-yellow, with traces of thin russet and greenish
dots, sometimes a tinge of brownish-red next the sun; flesh white,
rather coarse-grained, buttery, sweet, agreeable; handsome, but hardly
more than second class; Sept.

=Hampton Bergamot. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 778. 1869.

Originated with W. C. Hampton, Mount Victory, Ohio. Fruit small,
globular-oblate, yellow, netted and sprinkled with russet and green
dots; flesh whitish, coarse, juicy, semi-melting, vinous; good; Sept.

=Hampton Cluster. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 778. 1869.

Raised by W. C. Hampton, Mount Victory, Ohio. Fruit borne in clusters,
very small, globular, greenish-yellow, shaded with dull red on the
sun-exposed side, netted with russet; flesh juicy, melting, sweet; very
good; Sept.

=Hampton Virgalieu. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 388, fig. 1859. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 778. 1869.

Originated with W. C. Hampton, Mount Victory, Ohio, from a seed of
the White Doyenne. Tree vigorous, hardy and productive. Fruit medium,
globular, or slightly obtuse-pyriform, yellowish-green at maturity,
with many russet dots and marblings of russet, the latter becoming
reddish-brown in the sun; flesh white, buttery, juicy, rich, vinous,
brisk; core small; very good; Oct. and Nov.

=Hancock. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

A seedling fruited by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., in 1861. Fruit
4-1/2 in. long, 3 in. wide, obovate, light green; flesh breaking and
juicy, a great bearer, and an excellent cooking pear, always sells
readily; Sept.

=Hangelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:145. 1856.

Holstein, published 1788. Fruit large, long-gourd-shaped, yellow-green,
yellow on the sunny side; flesh breaking, coarse-grained, fairly juicy,
sweet; third for dessert, good for kitchen; Nov. to Apr.

=Hannover'sche Jakobsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:172.
1856. =2.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=:No. 27, Pl. 27. 1882.

Hanover, Prussia, 1851. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, dull grass-green
changing to yellow, with a brownish blush, dotted with green on the
yellow and with bright yellow on the flush; flesh whitish, fine, sweet,
becoming mealy when over ripe; third for dessert, good for culinary use
and market; July.

=Hannover'sche Margarethenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:40.
1856.

Hanover, Prussia, 1851. Fruit medium, turbinate, light green turning to
light yellow; flesh yellowish-white, breaking, soon becoming mealy when
ripe; second for table, good for kitchen use; end of July for 2 weeks.

=Hanover. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 779. 1869.

From Hanover Furnace, N. J. Fruit below medium, globular-obovate,
green, with dull green-russet markings, and a brown cheek; flesh
greenish-yellow, exceedingly melting and juicy; flavor pleasant, good;
Oct.

=Hardenpont fruehe Colmar. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:100. 1856.
=2.= _Guide Prat._ 96, 280. 1876.

This is not the _Passe Colmar_ of Hardenpont, although regarded as
such by Dochnahl. It ripens in August and September whereas Passe
Colmar is in season during November and December. Fruit medium,
globular-turbinate, a beautiful uniform yellow; flesh fine-grained,
musky; Aug. and Sept.

=Harigelsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:172. 1856.

Wuerttemberg, 1830. Fruit medium, obtuse-conic, light green changing
to golden yellow, with a dark blush; flesh rather astringent, sweet,
breaking, aromatic; third for table, not of much account for cooking;
Oct.

=Harnard. 1.= _N. J. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 11. 1877.

Shown before the New Jersey State Horticultural Society in 1877. Said
to be "a seedling from the farm of John Harnard, Springfield," N. J.,
and to have originated about 30 years previously. A cooking pear,
valued for its regular and abundant bearing and keeping qualities.

=Harris= (Georgia). =1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 779. 1869.

Disseminated from Georgia. Fruit medium, obovate-obtuse to
obovate-acute-pyriform, pale yellow, deep red in the sun, many green
and brown dots; flesh whitish, buttery, not juicy, sweet; good; Sept.

=Harris= (Massachusetts). =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 153. 1874. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 2nd App., 149, fig. 1872.

Raised by Lemuel Clapp, Dorchester, Mass., from Urbaniste crossed with
Beurre Bosc. Fruit above medium, ovate-pyriform, resembling Beurre
Hardy; stem medium long; flesh yellowish-white, fine grained, very
tender, melting, juicy, rich, vinous, spirited, aromatic; very good to
best; Oct.

=Harrison Large Fall. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 575. 1857.

_Rushmore._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:608, fig. 1869.

A fine old baking pear of American origin. Fruit large, irregular,
inclined, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, pale yellow with a red cheek; Aug.
to Oct.

=Hartberger Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 14, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown in Hungary and Austria. Fruit medium, globular
and irregular, somewhat acute toward the stalk, dark green turning
to yellow-green, finely dotted and much covered with russet; flesh
greenish-white, abnormally large core and seeds, firm and juicy; Oct.

=Harte Neapolitanerin. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:192. 1856.

Although cultivated mainly at Naples, Italy, in the middle of the
last century and called the pear of Naples, it appears to have been
first published in France in 1802. Fruit medium, turbinate, medium
ventriculous, light green changing to lemon-yellow, blushed; flesh
firm, sweetish, aromatic; very good for culinary uses; Jan. to summer.

=Harvard. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:457. 1855. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 779. 1869. _Belle de Flushing._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=1=:201, fig. 1867.

Originated at Cambridge, Mass. In 1851 it was taken from America
to France without a label by Parsons, a nurseryman at Flushing, N.
Y., and was named _Belle de Flushing_ by Leroy. Fruit rather large,
oblong-pyriform, russety olive-yellow, with a brownish-red cheek; in
France it seems to develop a vivid red on the side exposed to the sun,
finely dotted with fawn; flesh white, semi-fine, tender, melting,
slightly gritty; juice abundant, saccharine, acidulous and agreeably
musky; second; a fine commercial variety; Aug. and Sept.

=Harvest. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 779. 1869.

An American variety. Fruit below medium, globular, pale yellow, tinged
with brown-red on exposed side, brown and green dots; flesh whitish,
not very juicy or melting, but sweet, pleasant; good; July.

=Hassler. 1.= Cal. Com. Hort. _Pear Grow. Cal._ =7=:No. 5, 260, figs.
52, 53. 1918.

Originated as a chance seedling with J. E. Hassler, Placerville, Cal.
Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with russet dots; calyx
open: basin large, deep, irregular; stem heavy, medium long, inclined
in a deep cavity; flesh, fine, juicy, buttery, pleasant; very good;
Feb. and Mar.

=Hausemerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:194. 1856.

German, published 1847. Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse, light green
changing to whitish-yellow, blushed, with brown spots; flesh firm,
somewhat aromatic; good for kitchen use; Dec. to Mar.

=Hautmonte. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:266, fig. 1869.

Origin unknown but was propagated in the Garden of the Horticultural
Society of Angers in 1840. Fruit medium, long-turbinate,
yellowish-green spotted with russet and washed with rose-carmine on the
side next the sun; flesh whitish, coarse, breaking, juicy, gritty at
center; second for dessert, first for stewing; Feb. to Apr.

=Hawaii. 1.= _Mich. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 84. 1880. =2.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._
=332=:482. 1913.

A Japanese pear; date of introduction unknown. Fruit medium,
apple-shaped, light lemon-yellow, with rough, russet dots; flesh hard,
gritty, wanting in flavor, subacid; Oct.

=Hawes Winter. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 506. 1857. =2.= Elliott _Fr.
Book_ 389. 1859.

Originated on the farm of the Hawes family in King and Queen County,
Virginia. Fruit large, globular, slightly flattened, dull yellow at
maturity, with russet spots; flesh a little coarse, very juicy, rich,
sweet, vinous; Nov. to Jan.

=Hawkesbill. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

"The Hawkes bill peare is of a middle size, somewhat like unto the
Rowling pears."

=Hays. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 61. 1844. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._
238. 1854.

Exhibited, from the Pomological Garden, Salem, Mass., at the sixteenth
annual meeting of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society, September,
1844. Placed on the rejected list of the American Pomological Society
in 1854.

=Heathcot. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:438, fig. 33. 1846.

Raised in 1812 on the estate of Governor Gore in Waltham, Mass. Fruit
medium, obovate, greenish-yellow becoming lemon-yellow, very few dots
and a few russet streaks, slightly browned on the sunny side; flesh
yellowish-white, fine, very melting, buttery and juicy; in flavor it is
rich, sprightly, juicy and excellent, with little perfume; Oct.

=Hebe. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =21=:198, fig. 84. 1866.

Raised by William Sumner of Pomaria, S. C. Fruit large; specimens have
often weighed 28 ounces, 6 of fair size of this pear generally weigh
8 lbs., globular, obovate, with irregular protuberances, lemon-yellow
inclined to greenish, dotted with russet specks and blotches; flesh
melting, sprightly, buttery, slightly vinous, has no matured seeds, and
seldom forms seeds at all; Dec. in South Carolina.

=Hedwig von der Osten. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 231. 1889.

_Hedwige d'Osten_. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3:=173, fig. 183. 1878.

Herr Schmidt, Blumberg, received this variety from Van Mons under
Number 51 and dedicated it to the daughter of a zealous pomologist
of his country. Fruit rather large, long-pyriform, rather deformed
in contour, water-green changing to dull pale yellow, usually rather
golden on the face next the sun; flesh whitish, fine, buttery, very
melting, very juicy and delicately perfumed; good for amateurs; Sept.
and Oct.

=Hegeman. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 780. 1869.

_Hagerman._ =2.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 275. 1867.

Originated on the farm of Andrew Hegeman, North Hempstead, Long Island.
Fruit medium, globular-ovate, rather variable in form and color,
greenish-yellow, netted and dotted with russet; flesh yellowish, juicy,
melting, sweet; good to very good; Sept.

=Heilige Angelika-Birne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:108. 1856.

Coblenz, 1792; published by Diel, 1806. Fruit rather large,
obtuse-conic, with unequal sides, pale green changing to light
yellowish-green, dotted with rusty gray, and rather russeted on the
side touched by the sun; flesh whitish, with light green veinings,
fine-grained, buttery; first for dessert and household use; Nov. and
Dec.

=Helene Gregoire. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:79, fig. 1856. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:270, fig. 1869.

Xavier Gregoire, a tanner at Jodoigne, Bel., obtained this pear in
1840 from a bed of the seeds of the pear Pastorale. Fruit large or
very large, ovate, inclined to be contorted at times, smooth, shining,
dotted and veined with russet, stained with the same around the stem
and calyx; flesh white, fine, melting, semi-buttery, green under the
skin, free from grit, full of sweet juice, delicate and possessed of an
exquisite buttery flavor; first; early Oct.

=Hellmann Melonenbirn. 1.= Koch _Deut. Obst._ 481. 1876. =2.= Lauche
_Deut. Pom._ =II=:No. 39, Pl. 39. 1882.

German; first published in 1860. Fruit large, globular-obtuse, very
variable; skin thick, dark green becoming citron-yellow at maturity,
large russet dots, slightly washed with red on the sunny side; flesh
yellowish-white, melting, agreeably sweet and vinous, very juicy and
having a muscatel flavor; Nov. and Dec.

=Hemminway. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:143. 1908.

_Madame Hemminway._ =2.= Ellwanger & Barry _Cat._ 18. 1900.

Introduced by Ellwanger and Barry. American. Fruit large,
obovate-blunt-pyriform, green turning yellow, russeted; stem long,
thick, in a small, narrow cavity; flesh yellowish, melting, sweet,
juicy; good; Oct.

=Henkel. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:61, fig. 5. 1847. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 781, fig. 1869.

_Henkel d'Automne._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:272, fig. 1869.

Van Mons raised this pear before 1834 and in 1835 or 1836 it was
introduced at Boston by Kenrick and Manning. This is the _Cumberland_
of the Belgians. Fruit rather large, broad-obtuse-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, netted and patched with russet, sprinkled with green
and brown dots; stem rather stout, inclined, inserted by a ring or lip;
calyx partially open; flesh whitish, juicy, melting, rich, slightly
vinous; very good to best; Sept.

=Henri Bivort. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:462. 1854. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:273, fig. 1869.

_Poire Henri._ =3.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:137, fig. 67. 1866-73.

Issued from the last seed beds made at Louvain by Van Mons and bought
in 1844 by Bivort who transplanted the seedlings to Geest-Saint-Remy
near Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit large or above medium, obtuse-pyramidal,
smooth, olive-yellow, dotted with brown, striped and mottled with
greenish russet; flesh yellowish-white, fine, semi-buttery, rather
melting, rarely very gritty, juice plentiful, sweet, acid, aromatic and
delicate; first; end of Aug.

=Henri Bouet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:274, fig. 1869.

Obtained in 1861 by Henri Bouet, a nurseryman at Fougereuse,
Deux-Sevres, Fr., from Duchesse d'Angouleme fertilized by Jargonelle
(French). Fruit large, turbinate-ovate, bossed, mammillate at crown
and generally somewhat contorted, pale yellow, dotted and striated
with fawn, spotted with greenish-russet around stalk; flesh very white
and fine, melting, gritty around the core, extremely juicy, sugary,
perfumed, acidulous and possessing a delicious flavor; first; Oct. and
Nov.

=Henri de Bourbon. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 232. 1889. =2.= Ragan _Nom.
Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:64. 1908.

Published in Germany in 1881. In Experimental Orchard at Agassiz, B.
C., 1900. Fruit medium, pyriform, green changing to yellow, some brown;
flesh juicy, melting, sweet; good to very good; mid-season.

=Henri Capron. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:275, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 592. 1884.

Stated by Baron Biedenfeld in 1854 to have issued from a seed bed of
Van Mons, it was propagated by the Horticultural Society of Angers in
1848. Fruit medium, long-ovate-acute passing at the top into the stem;
skin rough to the touch, gray-green, clouded with dark yellow and
dotted with russet; flesh white, semi-fine, melting or semi-melting,
inclined to decay before falling, very juicy, sugary, aromatic, often
rather astringent; variable in quality; Sept.

=Henri Decaisne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1876. =2.= _Le Bon Jard._ 362.
1882.

On trial with Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit large,
pyriform, greenish-yellow, handsomely washed with vermilion at
maturity; flesh melting, and of agreeable flavor; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Henri Desportes. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:276, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 782. 1869.

Raised by Leroy, Angers, Fr., it fruited first in 1862. Fruit large
or below, turbinate-obtuse, ventriculous, strongly bossed, generally
irregular and much less curved on one side than the other; skin thick,
orange-yellow dotted with gray-russet, slightly vermilioned on the side
next the sun; flesh white, fine, very melting; juice abundant, vinous,
sugary; first; Aug.

=Henri Gregoire. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1876. =2.= _Ibid._ 93. 1895.

On trial with Simon-Louis at Metz, Lorraine, in 1876, and in 1895 and
was "very much recommended" by the firm in both of those years. Fruit
medium; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Henri Ledocte. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1876.

One of M. Gregoire's seedlings. Fruit medium size; flesh melting;
first; Dec. and Jan.

=Henri Quatre. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:173, fig. 6. 1846. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:277, fig. 1869.

_Henry the Fourth._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 782. 1869.

On the authority of Diel it appears that this pear was originated by M.
de Witzthumb before 1815, and was afterward described by the Vicomte
Vilain XIV, mayor of Ghent under Napoleon I. Fruit below medium,
obtuse-pyriform, rather variable, often contorted and always has one
side larger than the other, greenish-white, becoming deep lemon-yellow
as it reaches maturity, much covered with fine cinnamon-russet on
which are small greenish dots; flesh yellowish, coarse or semi-fine,
breaking, gritty at center, very rich, sweet, juicy and with an
aromatic flavor; good; Oct.

=Henrietta. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =4=:231. 1838. =2.= _Ibid._ 487, fig. 42.
1847.

A seedling of Governor Edwards, New Haven, Conn. Fruit a medium-sized
and pretty pear, obovate, inclining to oval, tapering towards each end
and rather obtuse at the stem; skin fair, smooth, dull yellow, tinged
with red in the sun; flesh white, rather coarse, melting, juicy; good;
Sept.

=Henriette. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:37, fig. 1858. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 593. 1884.

Raised from seed by Simon Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel., and produced its
first fruit in 1825. Fruit small or medium, globular-turbinate; skin
rough, almost entirely washed with russet, colored and stained with
red-brown, carmined on the side next the sun; flesh white, rather fine,
melting, full of sugary juice, of an agreeable perfume.

=Henriette Van Cauwenberghe. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:171, fig. 86. 1872.

From Lievin Van Cauwenburghe, a business man at Audenarde, Bel., where
it bore fruit for the first time about 1827. Fruit medium or nearly
large, pyriform-ovate, globular, a little bossed; skin rather thick and
firm, pale water-green and whitish, dotted with gray-brown specks; at
maturity it becomes dull or orange-yellow and golden on the side of the
sun; flesh white, fine, melting, abounding in sweet juice, vinous and
pleasantly perfumed; good; Oct.

=Henry= (Connecticut). =1.= _Cultivator_ N. S. =2=:175, fig. 7. 1845.

A seedling raised by the Hon. H. W. Edwards, Governor of Connecticut
and described by him to the Pomological Society of New Haven in 1845.
Fruit small, turbinate, green turning to yellow, with a coppery blush;
flesh juicy, melting and exceedingly rich and sweet, not surpassed by
any in richness; Sept.

=Henry= (Illinois). =1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 302. 1895. =2.=
_Phoenix Nurs. Cat._ 13. 1906.

Originated from French pear seed planted in 1871 by Henry C. Henry,
Effingham County, Ill. Said to be a hardy and long-keeping pear of good
quality. Fruit large, resembling Bartlett in shape and flavor.

=Herbelin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1876.

Fruit medium, having the appearance of Bartlett; flesh fine, a little
dense, very sugary; Sept.

=Herbin. 1.= _Guide Prat._. 96. 1876. =2.= Baltet _Trait. Cult. Fr._
360. 1908.

A French winter pear cultivated particularly at Saint-Erme, Department
Aisne. Fruit medium, long, red; first; Feb. and Mar.

=Herborner Schmalzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:189. 1856.

Nassau, Bel. Published by Diel in 1806. Fruit medium, nearly pyriform;
skin smooth, with fine scales, light yellow turning to citron-yellow,
without russet; flesh granular, gritty, sweet and acid; good for
kitchen use; Sept.

=Herbst-Citronenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:156. 1856.

Thuringia, published in 1810. Fruit small, globular, yellow-green
changing to citron-yellow, dotted with green, lightly blushed; flesh
yellowish-white, breaking, acidulous, sweet; second for dessert, first
for culinary use; Sept. and Oct.

=Herbst-Kloeppelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:159. 1856.

A seedling of Van Mons, 1852. Fruit small, turbinate-ventriculous,
sides unequal, green turning to yellowish, blushed on the sunny side
with brown; flesh yellowish-white, fine, semi-melting; second for the
table, first for the kitchen; Sept. and Oct.

=Herbsteierbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:190. 1856.

Thuringia and Saxony; earliest report 1801. Fruit small, somewhat
swelled, green-yellow, dotted with dark green, often strongly blushed
with brown, with yellow dots; flesh greenish-white, sweet; third for
the table, very good for kitchen use; Sept.

=Herbstlanger. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 36, fig. 1913.

A perry pear growing in the Voralberg and in Switzerland. Fruit large,
long-pyriform, almost like Calebasse in form, greenish-yellow changing
to lemon-yellow, finely dotted; flesh yellow-white, juicy, saccharine,
with a slightly aromatic flavor; Sept.

=Hericart. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:87. 1842. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
783. 1869.

Cions of this variety were received in 1834 and 1835 by Manning and
Kenrick from Van Mons of Belgium. It was placed on the list of rejected
fruits by the American Pomological Society in 1854. Tree vigorous
and productive. Fruit medium, obovate, often rather oblong, yellow,
russety; stem medium long, rather slender, set in a small cavity; basin
shallow; flesh white, fine-grained, buttery, not rich, peculiarly
aromatic, gritty, slightly astringent; good; Sept.

=Hericart de Thury. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:102. 1853. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 783. 1869. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:281, fig. 1869.

_Thury Schmalzbirne._ =4.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:66. 1856.

Raised from seed by Van Mons and dedicated to M. Hericart de Thury,
president of the Society of Horticulture of France. Tree a good grower,
rather pyramidal, neither an early nor a profuse bearer. Fruit medium
or above, obtuse-ovate-pyriform, yellow, thinly shaded with red in the
sun, slightly netted, thickly sprinkled with russet dots; stem long,
rather slender, curved, set in a small cavity; calyx closed, set in a
small, uneven, basin; flesh white, not very juicy, slightly astringent;
good; Nov. and Dec.

=Herkimer. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 783. 1869.

Originated on the farm of S. Earl, Herkimer, New York, previous to
1869. Fruit medium to large, globular-oblate, pale greenish-yellow,
clouded with dull red in the sun; flesh white, rather coarse-grained at
center, juicy, sweet, melting and agreeable; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Herr Late Winter. 1.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 117. 1880.

Described as a new fruit in 1879 by Barry. It was raised by A. G. Herr
of Louisville, Ky. Fruit medium to large, good in quality and a long
keeper, sometimes until May and June of the following year.

=Hert. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:145, fig. 71. 1866-73.

From Thomas Rivers, Sawbridgeworth, near London, Eng. Fruit medium or
nearly medium, ovate-pyriform; skin thick, firm, very pale green,
sprinkled with gray-brown dots, citron-yellow when ripe and often
golden on the side of the sun; flesh white, fine, semi-melting,
sufficient juice which is sugary, refreshing, agreeable; good, for the
season; end of winter and spring.

=Hessenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:146, 1856.

German; Hesse, 1815. Fruit medium and above, curved, thin-skinned,
greenish-yellow changing to yellow, with a vivid blush, often mottled
with yellowish-brown; flesh sweet, juicy, becoming mealy; second for
dessert, first for kitchen; Sept. and Oct.

=Hessle. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 593. 1884. =2.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy
Fr._ 180. 1920.

Hessle is an old English pear, and takes its name from the village of
Hessle in Yorkshire where it was first discovered. Fruit rather small,
turbinate, greenish-yellow, much covered with large russety dots,
giving it a freckled appearance; flesh nearly white, tender, with an
agreeable, aromatic juice; a good market-garden pear; Oct.

=Hewes. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:269. 1854. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 93.
1852.

Raised at Brandywine, Del., from seed of the White Doyenne which it
much resembles though smaller. In 1852 it was in possession of Aaron
Hewes and was said then to have been in bearing about 28 years. Fruit
medium, globular-obovate, yellow; Sept.

=Heyer Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:55. 1856.

_Sucree d'Heyer._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:85, fig. 235. 1879.

A Van Mons seedling sent in 1838 to his friend Herr Heyer, a grafter at
Luneburg, Hanover, Ger. Fruit medium, long-turbinate, sides unequal,
slightly bossed, light green turning to yellow, often flushed with
vermilion, speckled with russet; second for the table, first for
kitchen; Sept.

=Hilda. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1895.

Distributed by Daras de Naghin of Antwerp, Bel. Fruit resembles
Josephine de Malines; flesh yellowish-white tinted with green near the
stalk, melting, very juicy, having the flavor of the Beurre Gris; Nov.
and Dec.

=Hildegard. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:172, 1856.

A seedling of Van Mons; published in 1852. Fruit medium,
turbinate-ventriculous, light green turning yellow, washed with brown,
sometimes rusty red on the side of the sun; flesh fine, free from grit,
very sweet; very good for general household use; all winter to April.

=Hildesheimer Bergamotte. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 132. 1825. =2.=
Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 13, fig. 5. 1866-73.

_Bergamote d'Hildesheim._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:242, fig. 1867.

Central Germany, 1825. Fruit medium, oblate, medium-ventriculous, sides
unequal, light green turning to citron-yellow, without any red blush
but a good deal russeted: flesh melting, very juicy; a good dessert
pear; end of Sept. for 2 weeks.

=Hildesheimer Spaete Sommerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:189. 1856.

A seedling of Cludius, Hildesheim, Ger., 1821. Fruit medium,
pyriform-ventriculous, sides unequal, yellowish-green, washed with
rusty russet on the side of the sun; flesh rosaceous, spongy, sweet,
wanting in flavor; third for table, first for culinary use; Sept.

=Hildesheimer Winterbirn. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 496. 1817.

German. Fruit medium, Bergamot-shaped, of excellent flavor; Nov. to
Mar.

=Hingham. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 783. 1869.

Originated in Hingham, Mass. Fruit medium, obovate-acute-pyriform, pale
yellow, tinged with red on the side next the sun, freely dotted with
brown specks; flesh whitish, melting, juicy, vinous; good; Oct.

=Hirschbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 16, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear, raised from a wilding in Styria. Fruit one
of the larger perry or wine pears, globular and Bergamot in form,
greenish-yellow, brownish-red flush on the side opposed to the sun,
brown dots; flesh yellow-white, fairly firm, juicy; good; Oct.

=Hirsenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:36. 1856.

Middle Rhineland, Germany, 1802. Fruit small, pyriform, rounded at
the top, sides unequal, light green turning yellowish, often rather
brown-blushed, some russet markings; flesh fine-grained, very juicy;
second for the table, first for the kitchen; Aug.

=Hitzendorfer Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 86, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit large, globular, somewhat like Bergamot
in form, light green, blushed with a beautiful brown-red on the cheek
next the sun, tender, dotted; flesh greenish-white, firm and very
juicy; end of Sept. for two weeks.

=Hoe Langer Hoe Liever. 1.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:93, Tab. III. 1771.

Dutch. Fruit medium, long-pyriform, somewhat ventriculated toward the
lower end, often rather deformed, pale green or yellowish-white; flesh
fine, gritty, juicy, agreeable, savory, when eaten exactly at the right
time, otherwise it is insipid; Sept. and Oct.

=Hofsta. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:145. 1908.

Sweden. C. Gibb called it a fine culinary variety. Fruit medium,
pyriform; good; mid-season.

=Holland Green. 1.= Coxe _Cult. Fr. Trees_ 190, fig. 26. 1817. =2.=
Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 137. 1832.

An old variety described by William Coxe in 1817, and stated by him to
have been imported from Holland by William Clifton of Philadelphia.
It was sometimes called the _Holland Table_ pear. Fruit rather large,
irregular or turbinate in form, green, with numerous indistinct spots
and small cloudings of russet; flesh melting, sprightly, greenish-white
and juicy; thought much of at the beginning of the nineteenth century,
but considered by Manning to be worthless in this country. Was
discarded by the London Horticultural Society before 1837; Sept. and
Oct.

=Hollaendische Butterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:136. 1856.

North Germany, 1804, at Bremen. Fruit medium or below, sides unequal,
light yellow changing to golden-yellow at maturity, blushed with
cinnamon on the sunny side and speckled with brown dots; flesh white,
melting, buttery, juicy and full of flavor; first for dessert; Sept.
and Oct.

=Hollaendische Gewuerzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:14. 1856.

Holland, 1849. Fruit medium, ventriculous-turbinate, covered with rough
russet; flesh semi-melting, very juicy and aromatic; second for the
table, very good for cooking; end of Sept.

=Hollaendische Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:33. 1856.

Possibly of Dutch origin but reported in Thuringia, 1799. Fruit small,
globular but variable, light yellow, blushed and dotted with yellowish
specks becoming greenish at maturity, thin-skinned; flesh breaking,
musky, aromatic; third for dessert, first for kitchen; Aug.

=Holmer. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 594. 1884.

A well-known perry pear in Herefordshire, Eng. Fruit very small,
globular-turbinate, even and regular in outline, dull greenish-yellow
when ripe, and thickly covered with russet dots, so as to form a
kind of crust on the surface; flesh yellowish, firm, crisp, and very
astringent.

=Homestead. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 2nd App., 150. 1876.

Raised by Asahel Foote, Williamstown, Mass., from seed of
White Doyenne. Fruit medium or above, oblong-obtuse-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, often pale yellow when fully matured, sometimes a
shade of brownish-red where exposed, slightly netted and patched with
russet and many russet dots; flesh whitish, rather coarse around the
core, semi-fine, melting, sweet, juicy, slightly vinous and aromatic;
Nov. and Dec.

=Honey. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =2=:216. 1832. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 784. 1869.

_Deux Fois L'An._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:20, fig. 1869.

Although known in this country as Honey, its original European name
is _Deux Fois l'An_, or Two Times a Year, on account of its flowering
twice in the season, the second crop ripening in September or October.
It is of ancient and uncertain origin, but Le Lectier at Orleans
possessed it in his immense orchard in 1598, and Merlet described it
in 1675. Fruit medium or below, globular-pyriform, rarely very obtuse,
generally much swelled in the lower part, diminishing abruptly toward
the stem, rather bright greenish-yellow, stained and dotted with gray
chiefly on the side exposed to the sun where it is also rayed and
washed with carmine; flesh yellowish, coarse, semi-breaking, granular
around the core; juice sufficient, sugary and possessing a pleasant,
musky flavor; Aug.

=Honey= (Russia). =1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 21. 1887. =2.= Ragan _Nom.
Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:146. 1908.

Introduced from Russia in 1879 under the Russian name _Gliva Medovaya_.
Fruit small, globular-pyriform, yellow, blushed red; flesh coarse,
juicy, sweet; mid-season.

=Honey Dew. 1.= Stark Bros. _Cat._ 55. 1921.

Originated by Mr. Raabe of Illinois and introduced by Stark Bros. in
1921. Fruit large, roundish, golden-yellow, almost covered with rich
russet; flesh tender, crisp, very juicy, sweet; early fall.

=Honigbergamotte. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:78. 1856.

Nassau, 1833. Fruit medium, globular, symmetrical; skin smooth,
uniformly greenish-yellow, brownish-red on the side next the sun; flesh
semi-melting, aromatic; second for dessert; first for general culinary
uses; Sept.

=Honnelbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 38, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown in Lower Austria. Fruit fairly large, long-pyriform;
skin rather smooth and shining, greenish-yellow changing to yellow;
flesh whitish, coarse-grained, very juicy, saccharine, rather
astringent and feebly aromatic; Oct.

=Hoosic. 1.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 116. 1880. =2.= Ont. Dept. Ag.
_Fr. Ont._ 166. 1914.

Raised by A. Foote, Williamstown, Mass., from seed of Hacon
Incomparable, and distributed by him about 1870. Fruit large to very
large, obtuse-pyriform, somewhat one-sided, yellow, with russet dots
and light red blush in the sun; flesh fine, white, tender, moderately
juicy, with a rich almond flavor; quality ranking as "best" for all
purposes; first class for near market; Oct.

=Hopfenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:190. 1856.

Hesse, Germany, 1801. Fruit small, obtuse-conic; skin smooth, pale
yellow, blushed with a dark glow; flesh rosy, fine, acid, juicy; third
for the table, first for kitchen; end of Aug.

=Hosenschenk. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =8=:458. 1853. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 784. 1869.

Raised from seed about the year 1803 by John Schenk, Weaver Township,
Pa. Fruit medium, roundish-oblate, light yellowish-green, rarely
blushed; flesh rather coarse, tender, juicy, melting, slightly vinous,
with a mild and pleasant flavor; first; end of Aug.

=Housatonic. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 2nd App., 151. 1876.

Originated in the garden of John J. Howe, Birmingham, Conn. Fruit
rather large, globular-pyriform; surface uneven, greenish-yellow, with
many green and brown dots; flesh white, semi-fine, juicy, melting,
rich, vinous; Nov.

=Houser. 1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 38. 1896.

A native pear reported to the Missouri State Horticultural Society in
1896.

=Hovey. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:284, figs. 1869. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 784. 1869.

Propagated by Andre Leroy in 1853 and dedicated by him to the
American pomologist Hovey. Fruit medium or above, conic-pyriform or
turbinate-obtuse-pyriform, variable but always very long; skin fine
and very smooth, bright yellow, finely dotted with gray and stained
with patches of russet; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine, melting,
watery and slightly granular; juice abundant, sugary, acidulous, and
possessing a musky perfume; first; Nov.

=Howard. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 785. 1869.

Disseminated by D. W. Coit, Norwich, Conn. Fruit medium,
globular-obovate, pale yellow, with patches of russet and thickly
sprinkled with russet dots; flesh white, melting, juicy, sweet, rich,
slightly perfumed, pleasant; very good; Sept.

=Howe Winter. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 273. 1858.

Said to have originated in Virginia. Fruit large, globular,
yellow-russeted; good; late.

=Hubert Gregoire. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876.

In the trial orchards of Simon-Louis Bros. at Metz, Lorraine, in 1876.
Fruit rather large; first; Jan.

=Huffcap. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 415. 1831. =2.= Prince _Pom.
Man._ =2=:209. 1832.

Of several varieties of the Huffcap perry pears such as the Brown, Red,
and Yellow, growing in Herefordshire, Eng., this is the best. Fruit
middle sized, ovate, pale green marked with gray russet.

=Hueffel Bratbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:3. 1856.

Upper Hesse, Prussia, 1819. A variety of the Volema class. Fruit large,
broad-turbinate, with unequal sides, light green turning to yellowish,
often faintly blushed, numerous russet spots; flesh aromatic, breaking,
juicy; first for household use; Dec. to Apr.

=Huggard. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:147. 1908.

Originated at Whitby, Ontario, Can., from Beurre Clairgeau crossed with
Beurre d'Anjou. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, yellow with red blush;
flesh sweet, juicy, good; medium late.

=Huguenot. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 394. 1845.

Originated by a Mr. Johonnot of Salem, Mass. Rejected by the American
Pomologica. Society, October, 1850. Fruit medium, globular, smooth,
pale yellow, sprinkled with large spots of bright red; flesh white,
fine-grained, semi-breaking, sweet but wanting in flavor and juice;
poor; Oct.

=Huhle de Printemps. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:159, fig. 368. 1880.

This pear was received in France by M. Papeleu from M. Hartwiss,
director of the Imperial Gardens at Nikita, Southern Russia, about
1860. Fruit medium, cylindrical-ovate, rather in form like a small
cask or keg, even in contour; skin thick, firm, more or less intense
green, dotted with brownish-gray specks, very small and numerous and
mingled with small strokes of russet over nearly all the surface; flesh
yellowish-white, coarse, semi-breaking, rather gritty near the core,
sufficiently juicy, with a refreshing and agreeable flavor; cooking;
end of winter.

=Hull. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:432. 1843. =2.= _Ibid._ =10=:211. 1844.

The original tree was found in Swansey, Mass., about 1815. Fruit
medium, obovate, yellowish-green, russeted, some dull red on the sunny
side; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, melting, juicy, gritty at core,
pleasantly perfumed; good to very good; Oct.

=Hungerford Oswego. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 786. 1869.

From Oswego, N. Y. Fruit medium, globular, yellow, with brown dots;
flesh white, buttery, melting, juicy, gritty, sweet; good; Oct.

=Hunt Connecticut. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:305. 1846. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 575. 1857.

An American cooking pear. Rejected by the American Pomological Society
in 1854. Fruit medium, oblate, yellowish-green, coarse, dry, and sweet.

=Huntington. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =23=:111, fig. 4. 1857. =2.= Mas _Le
Verger_ =2=:155, fig. 76. 1866-73.

A wilding found by James Huntington, New Rochelle, N. Y. In 1857
it was considered to be 20 or 30 years old. Fruit under medium,
globular-obovate, yellow, with numerous russet dots and sometimes a red
cheek; flesh fine texture, buttery, slightly vinous, with a delicate
aroma; very good; Sept.

=Hurbain d'Hiver. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 594. 1884.

Fruit small, Bergamot-shaped, even and handsome in outline, fine
golden yellow in the shade, strewed and mottled with patches of thin
cinnamon-colored russet, with a patch of russet around the stalk,
washed with bright red on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish,
melting, rather coarse, juicy, sweet, without much perfume; second; Nov.

=Hussein Armudi. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 594. 1884.

An oriental pear, published in 1832. Fruit below medium, obovate,
smooth, bright green at first changing to greenish-yellow, strewed
with russety dots of brown and some traces of russet; flesh whitish,
gritty at core, tender, melting, very juicy, with a rich, vinous, sweet
flavor; first for table; Sept.

=Hutcherson. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:148. 1908.

Reported in the experimental orchard at Agassiz, B. C., in 1900. Fruit
medium, obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow; flesh melting, juicy, sweet;
mid-season.

=Huyshe Prince Consort. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ =12=:89, fig. 1867. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 180. 1920.

Fruited in 1864 by the Rev. John Huyshe of Cullompton, Devon, Eng.,
from Beurre d'Arenberg fertilized by Passe Colmar. Fruit very large,
oblong, uneven and bossed in outline, grass-green becoming sometimes
yellowish-green, thickly covered with large russet dots; flesh yellow,
with a greenish tinge, melting, rather crisp, very juicy, sweet,
vinous, with a very powerful and peculiar flavor unlike any other pear;
a first quality, delicious fruit; Nov.

=Huyshe Prince of Wales. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 51. 1864. =2.= _Jour.
Hort._ =1=:392, fig. 72. 1880.

_Huyshe Bergamot._ =3.= _Gard. Chron._ =4=:836, fig. 1. 1857. =4.=
_Mag. Hort._ =24=:276. 1858.

Of the same origin as Huyshe Victoria. First fruited in 1856 and named
_Huyshe Bergamot_ but later changed to Huyshe Prince of Wales. Fruit
large, globular-oval, even in outline, lemon-yellow covered with a
finely reticulated cinnamon-colored russet; flesh yellowish-white,
tender, melting, juicy and richly flavored; first; end of Nov. to Jan.

=Huyshe Princess of Wales. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 8. 1863. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 180. 1920.

This pear, first fruited in 1863, is of the same origin as Huyshe
Victoria. Fruit medium, oblong, even in outline, abrupt at the
stalk, lemon-yellow sprinkled with patches, veins and dots of pale
cinnamon-russet; flesh of a deep yellow, fine, very melting, abundantly
juicy, richly flavored and highly aromatic; very excellent; Nov.

=Huyshe Victoria. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ =4=:76. 1863. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 181. 1920.

_Victoria._ =3.= _Gard. Chron._ 836, fig. 2. 1857.

_Victoria d'Huyse._ =4.= _Pom. Gen._ =7=:33, fig. 497. 1881.

Rev. John Huyshe, a clergyman at Clysthydon Rectory, near Cullompton,
Devon, Eng., raised, about 1833, three plants from pips of one fruit
from Marie Louise, hybridized with Gansel Bergamot. Of these three
plants one produced fruit in 1854 or 1855 and was named Huyshe
Victoria. The other two fruited in subsequent years and were named
Huyshe Prince of Wales and Huyshe Princess of Wales, respectively;
these three together with a fourth, Huyshe Prince Consort, being known
as the _Royal Pears_. Tree vigorous, spreading, very productive.
Fruit medium in size, ovate-pyriform or ovate-acute-pyriform, yellow,
freckled and veined with thin, smooth cinnamon-russet; stem medium in
length, stout, generally inclined and inserted without depression;
calyx open; flesh yellowish, juicy, melting, vinous; good to very good;
Nov.

=Hyacinthe du Puis. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 93. 1895.

In trial orchards of Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. Fruit
medium; flesh rather fine, salmon tinted, savory, juicy; Nov. and Dec.

=Ickworth. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 194. 1832.

Originated by T. A. Knight, President of the London Horticultural
Society, who in 1832 sent cions to Mr. Lowell and the Massachusetts
Agricultural Society. Fruit melting, rich, rose-flavored; Mar. and Apr.

=Ida. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876.

On trial with Messrs Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit large,
Doyenne-shaped, yellowish-green washed with red-brown; flesh buttery;
first; Oct.

=Ilinka. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1895. =2.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser.
=36=:368. 1904.

This variety was published by Messrs. Simon-Louis, of Metz, Lorraine,
in 1895 as having been received by them from M. Niemetz, Winnitza,
European Western Russia. Fruit medium to large, yellow, blushed with
red on the side of the sun; medium quality; end of July.

=Imperiale a Feuilles de Chene. 1.= Duhamel _Trait Arb. Fr._ =2=:228,
Pl. LIV. 1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:287, fig. 1869.

_Oak-Leaved Imperial._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 822. 1869.

_Imperiale._ =4.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 596. 1884.

The origin of this pear is unknown but it was propagated by the
Chartreux Monks of Paris in 1752. The tree is very vigorous and hardy
and the leaves are singular in that, due to their peculiar indenting
and puckering, they have the appearance of being sinuated like those of
the oak. Fruit large, ovate, irregular, mammillate at the summit and
always having one side larger than the other, dull yellow, covered with
large reddish dots; flesh whitish, coarse, semi-breaking, juicy, gritty
at center, sugary, almost without perfume; first for cooking, third for
dessert; Feb. to May.

=Incommunicable. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 376. 1831. =2.= _Mag.
Hort_. =9=:131. 1843.

Flemish. In a list of pears grown in France and the Netherlands
sent by Joseph Parmentier to the London Horticultural Society in
1824. Fruit above medium, pyramidal and compressed toward the stalk,
pale grass-green, thickly sprinkled with small gray-russety specks;
stem short, stout, inclined; flesh yellowish-white, tinged near the
core with a light shade of orange, a little gritty, melting, juicy,
saccharine, with a slight musky perfume; latter half of Oct.

=Incomparable de Beuraing. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876.

A French pear, presumably, published first by Gregoire and on trial in
the trial-orchard of Messrs. Simon-Louis in 1876. Fruit very large;
flesh fine, melting, juicy; of rather good quality; Nov.

=Indian Queen. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 32. 1870. =2.= _Am. Pom.
Soc. Rpt._ 66. 1875.

Exhibited by Henry McLaughlin, Bangor, Me., before the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society in 1870. Fruit rather large, long-pyriform,
greenish-yellow with a brown cheek; flesh coarse, semi-melting, sweet,
not rich, insipid; good for market only; Sept.

=Infortunee. 1.= Mas. _Pom. Gen._ =3=:69, fig. 131. 1878.

Said to have been shown at the Exhibition of Gotha, Ger., in 1857.
Fruit medium, turbinate-ovoid, ordinarily regular in contour; skin
rather thick, clear green spotted with gray specks, round, small,
numerous; at maturity the basic green becomes a dull pale yellow
and golden on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish, semi-fine and
melting, gritty round the core; juice sufficient and sweet; second; Aug.

=Ingenieur Wolters. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1895.

Sent out by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit medium; flesh fine,
very sugary, perfumed; first; Oct.

=Innominee. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =2=:213. 1832. =2.= Kenrick _Am.
Orch._ 155. 1832.

Raised by Van Mons who in 1831 sent cions of it to the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society. Fruit over 4 inches in length and nearly 3-1/2
in breadth, rather pyramidal, swollen at the middle; skin light green,
mottled with pale fawn color, partially yellow at maturity; flesh
delicate, melting, sweet, and full of a pleasant odor; good; between
summer and autumn.

=International. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1895.

Reported in the trial orchards of Messrs. Simon-Louis at Metz,
Lorraine, in 1895. Fruit medium; first; Dec. to Feb.

=Iris Gregoire. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =23=:155. 1857. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:290, fig. 1869.

A seedling raised by Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., it fruited for
the first time in 1853. Fruit variable in size, sometimes below medium,
long-conic, swelled at base, bossed, and corrugated at apex, a clear
golden-yellow, finely dotted and streaked with gray, washed with fawn
at either pole; flesh white, semi-fine and melting, rather dry and
gritty; juice insufficient, sweet, having a pleasant aroma; second or
even third when especially deficient in juice; Nov. and Dec.

=Isabella. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 46. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass.; it fruited
first in 1866. Fruit medium, pyriform, light green blushed with red on
the side next the sun; flesh white, juicy, sprightly, agreeable; Oct.

=Isabelle de Maleves. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=5=:81, fig. 329. 1880.

This pear is No. 43 in _Les fruits du jardin Van Mons_ by M. Bivort
but is stated by Mas to have been obtained by Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel.
Fruit small or nearly medium, fig-like in form, i. e., ovate-conic,
regular in contour, a lively green speckled with gray dots, some russet
around each pole; at maturity the green becomes yellowish; flesh
whitish, melting, juicy, vinous, refreshing; first; end of July and
early Aug.

=Island. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 273. 1858. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
788. 1869.

Originated with Cornelius Bergen on Bergen Island adjoining Long Island
about 1848. Fruit medium, short-pyriform inclining to turbinate,
often turbinate or Bergamot-shaped, pale yellow, netted, sprinkled,
and patched with russet, covered thickly with small brown spots and
slightly shaded with crimson where exposed to the sun; flesh white, a
little granular, juicy, melting, with a sprightly, perfumed, somewhat
aromatic flavor; very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Italienische Winterbergamotte. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:74.
1856.

Italy, 1819. Fruit medium, turbinate, slightly bossed, light green
changing to yellowish-green, often blushed with brown, speckled with
numerous fine, brown dots; flesh yellowish, coarse-grained, juicy,
melting and sweet; third for the table, first for kitchen; Apr. and May.

=Ives. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 273. 1858. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
788. 1869.

Raised by Dr. Eli Ives, New Haven, Conn. Fruit small to medium, rather
globular, greenish, brownish-red cheek; flesh melting, sugary, juicy;
good; Sept.

=Ives August. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 788. 1869.

Raised by Dr. Eli Ives. Fruit medium, oblong-obtuse-pyriform, green,
with a brownish-red cheek; flesh greenish-white, semi-melting, juicy,
rather astringent; good; Aug.

=Ives Bergamotte. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 273. 1858. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 788. 1869.

Originated by Dr. Eli Ives. Fruit medium or small, globular,
greenish-yellow with some traces of russet; flesh rather coarse,
buttery, melting, juicy, vinous; good; Sept.

=Ives Seedling. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 273. 1858. =2.= Elliott _Fr.
Book_ 392. 1859.

Raised by Dr. Eli Ives. Fruit nearly medium, rather globular,
greenish-yellow, shaded with crimson; flesh whitish, coarse and
granular, melting, juicy, with a refreshing sugary flavor, perfumed;
good; Sept.

=Ives Virgalieu. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 273. 1858. =2.= Elliott _Fr.
Book_ 392. 1859.

Raised by Dr. Eli Ives. Fruit below medium, pyriform, greenish blushed
with dull crimson; flesh whitish, granular, juicy, sweet, vinous,
buttery and melting; good to very good; Oct.

=Ives Winter. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 575. 1857. =2.= _Ibid._ 789.
1869.

Raised by Dr. Eli Ives. Fruit medium, depressed-pyriform, yellowish,
sprinkled with russet spots; flesh white, coarse, granular; cooking;
Dec.

=Ives Yale. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 789. 1869.

Raised by Dr. Eli Ives. Fruit medium, globular, mammillate at base of
stem, dull greenish-yellow, blushed with brownish-crimson in the sun;
flesh greenish-white, moderately juicy; good; early Aug.

=Jablousky. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:28. 1856.

Originated at Wittenberg, Ger., in 1799. Fruit small, nearly round,
symmetrical; skin smooth and polished, greenish-yellow turning to light
waxy yellow, often slightly blushed; flesh semi-melting and rather
coarse, having a musky aroma; second for the table, first for culinary
uses, first for market; Sept.

=Jackson. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 512. 1857. =2.= Elliott _Fr.
Book_ 392. 1859.

Origin, New Hampshire. Fruit medium, obovate, short-pyriform, pale
yellow, somewhat russeted; flesh white and juicy, brisk, vinous; good
to very good; Sept.

=Jackson Elizabeth. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 789. 1869.

Originated with S. S. Jackson, Cincinnati, Ohio. Fruit medium,
globular-obovate-pyriform, greenish-yellow, tinged with crimson on
the sunny side and thickly dotted with russet; flesh whitish, juicy,
melting, sweet, pleasant and slightly aromatic; good to very good; Sept.

=Jacqmain. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:292, fig. 1869.

From Simon Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel., about 1835. Fruit above medium,
long-turbinate, obtuse, swelled at middle circumference, smaller on one
side than the other; skin rugose, thick, greenish, dotted with clear
gray and sometimes vermilioned on the side exposed to the sun; flesh
greenish-white, coarse, semi-breaking, gritty; juice sufficient, sugary
without any pronounced perfume; third; Oct.

=Jacques Chamaret. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:293, fig. 1869.

From the last seed beds made at Laval, France, in 1837 or 1838 by Leon
Leclerc. Fruit above medium, turbinate, slightly obtuse, mammillate at
base, bossed at summit, clear yellow, dotted and stained with russet;
flesh white, fine, semi-melting, watery, rather granular at center;
juice abundant, sweet, very sugary and perfumed; first; Nov.

=Jacques Mollet. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876.

Published by Boisbunel in 1866. Fruit medium or large, oblong; first;
Nov. to Feb.

=Jakobsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:15. 1856.

Reported from Wetterau. Fruit medium, long, green, changing to yellow,
some brown-russet and very fine dots; flesh very sugary, balsamic, mild
and tender; first for dessert, domestic and market uses; Sept.

=Jalousie. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:211, Pl. XLVII, fig. 3.
1768. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 596. 1884.

This is one of the oldest French pears, having been mentioned by the
naturalist Dalechamp before 1586 and thought by him to have come
from the Romans. Merlet mentioned it in 1667. Fruit rather large,
obovate and sometimes obtuse-pyriform; skin rough to the touch,
yellowish-green, very much covered with cinnamon-colored russet, ruddy
on the sun-exposed side, and singularly marked with conspicuous,
lighter-colored specks, which are slightly raised; flesh white,
melting, juicy, sugary, sourish, having a pleasant flavor; hardly first
class; Oct.

=Jalousie de la Reole. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876.

Fruit medium; flesh fine, very melting, very sugary; delicious; Nov. to
Jan.

=Jalousie Tardive. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:297, fig. 1869.

Origin unknown, but it was among the first trees planted in the garden
of the Horticultural Society of Maine-et-Loire, Fr., on its creation in
1833. Fruit large, variable, long-turbinate, more or less obtuse, or
very long-ovate, bossed and contorted, depressed at both poles, clear
russet extensively washed with red-brown; flesh breaking; first for
cooking; Feb. and Mar.

=Jalvy. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:299, fig. 1869.

Fruit above medium, long, slightly obtuse, swelled at the middle,
contracted at both ends especially at the summit; skin rough to the
touch, yellowish-green, dotted and reticulated with gray, washed with
clear brown-russet on the side next the sun and bearing some black
stains; flesh whitish, fine, semi-melting, free from grit, but apt to
rot quickly; juice abundant, refreshing, sugary; second; Jan.

=Jaminette. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 195. 1832. =2.= _Pom. France_
=3=:No. 116, Pl. 116. 1865.

From a seedling in the garden of M. Pyrolle early in the nineteenth
century. Fruit medium, turbinate-obtuse, pale yellowish-green, dotted
and reticulated all over with gray-russet; flesh yellowish, semi-fine
and semi-melting, very juicy, sugary, vinous and aromatic on light
soils, but insipid and without perfume on clayey and humid land; first;
Nov. to Jan.

=Jansemine. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 271. 1865. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:302, fig. 1869.

The origin of Jansemine is unknown but it has been cultivated in the
neighborhood of Bordeaux for some 300 years. Fruit below medium or
rather small, short-turbinate or globular-conic, grass-green, dotted
with gray-russet and clouded with clear maroon on the side of the sun;
flesh greenish-white, semi-fine, granular at the center, slightly
breaking, juicy, sugary and pleasantly perfumed; rather good, but not
first; July.

=Japan. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =23=:71, fig. 34. 1868.

Raised by Gideon Ross, Westfield, N. J., from seeds found in the trunk
of his nephew who died on his way from Japan. Fruit medium, oblate;
skin rough, reddish-russet-yellow with large light-colored specks;
flesh coarse, gritty, firm, with a consistence and flavor much like
that of a delicate quince; of no value for dessert; Oct. to Feb.

=Japan Golden Russet. 1.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 770. 1903.

_Golden Russet._ =2.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:482, fig. 162. 1914.

_Canners Japan._ =3.= _Huntsville Nurs. Cat._ 5. 1915.

Said to closely resemble Gold Dust and Japan Wonder. Tree very hardy
and a young bearer, often blossoming the first year and setting the
fruit the second. Fruit large to medium, apple-shaped, rather flat,
regular, light lemon-yellow, with many fine dots, russeted, especially
about the stem; flesh juicy, aromatic, slightly sweetish; poor; texture
coarse; Oct.

=Japan Wonder. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:483. 1913.

Japanese, introduced to this country by Doctor Whitaker, who says of
it: "the fruit is rather flat, large, apple-like; color light yellow,
with many white dots covering the entire surface; flesh white, brittle,
juicy, poor in quality. Tree an open grower."

=Japanese Sand. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:483. 1913.

Fruit medium, apple-shaped, lemon-yellow, with russet dots; flesh hard,
flavor much like Daimyo; poor; late Oct.

=Jargonelle d'Automne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis at Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit
medium, fusiform, long, yellow, sometimes washed with red; flesh very
fine, very melting and juicy; excellent; Oct. and Nov.

=Jaune Hative. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 282. 1876. =2.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb.
Fr._ =2=:244. 1768.

_Gelbe Fruehbirne._ =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:41. 1856.

French. Fruit small, pyriform, flattened at the lower end, obtuse
at the apex, yellow-green; flesh white, coarse, sprightly, slightly
perfumed; juice deficient; of value only on account of its early
season; July.

=Jaune de Merveillon. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:189, fig. 581. 1881.

An old French variety. Fruit very small, turbinate, pale green, free
from dots or marks, changing at maturity to pale yellow, golden on
the side next the sun; flesh white, tinted with yellow beneath the
skin, fine, semi-breaking, possessing sufficient juice, sugary, and
refreshing, with an agreeable perfume of musk; good; beginning of July.

=Jean Baptist. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:61. 1856. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:305, fig. 1869.

A seedling raised at Ath, Hainaut, Bel.; first described in 1833.
Fruit large, obtuse-conic; skin rough, grass-green, spotted with clear
brown and stained with gray-russet; flesh yellowish, semi-melting and
semi-fine, juicy, sugary, scented and delicate; second for the table,
first for culinary purposes; Oct. and Nov. (Leroy); Jan. and Feb.
(Dochnahl).

=Jean-Baptiste Bivort. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:45, fig. 1858. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 780. 1869.

Originated at Geest-Saint-Remy in 1847. Fruit rather large, regular
turbinate, bright green becoming partially yellow at maturity, marked
and dotted with gray-russet; flesh white, melting, buttery, juicy,
sugary and highly aromatic; Nov.

=Jean-Baptiste Dediest. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:23, fig. 396. 1880.

Obtained by M. Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Brabant; first reported in
1839. Fruit medium, globular; flesh fine, juicy, sugary; good; spring
until July.

=Jean Cottineau. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876. =2.= _Ibid._ 68. 1895.

On trial in the orchards of Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in
1876 and rated by them in 1895 as a third-class summer pear. Fruit
medium, globular, yellowish-green, spotted with red on the sun-exposed
side; flesh white, sugary; good; mid-Aug.

=Jean Laurent. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876. =2.= _Ibid._ 94. 1895.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis at Metz in 1895. Tree of remarkable
fertility; suitable for large orchards. Fruit small or medium; flesh
breaking; first for culinary purposes; Dec. to June.

=Jean Sano. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1895.

Sent out by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel., and on trial in the
orchards of Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. Fruit medium
or rather large; flesh semi-fine, very sugary and aromatic; Nov. and
Dec.

=Jean de Witte. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =7=:286. 1841. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:307, fig. 1869.

_Passe Colmar Francois._ =3.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:7, fig. 1860.

Raised at Brussels early in the nineteenth century by M. Witzthumb,
director of the Botanical Garden. Fruit below but sometimes up to
medium, globular or turbinate, irregular, surface bossed and undulated,
greenish, dotted and marbled with a more or less gray-russet; flesh
white, semi-fine, melting, extremely juicy, sugary, perfumed, with a
buttery flavor, quite delicious; first; Dec.

=Jeanne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1895.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1895, having been
received by them from M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit large or
very large, oblong-obovate; flesh semi-melting, nearly breaking, juicy,
sugary and aromatic; Nov.

=Jeanne d'Arc. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 518, fig. 1904.

Obtained by A. Sannier, Rouen, Fr., from a seedling of Beurre Diel
fertilized with the Doyenne du Comice. Placed in commerce in 1893,
and recommended by the Pomological Society of France ten years later.
Fruit large, obtuse, rather of the aspect of the Duchesse d'Angouleme;
skin slightly rough, pale lemon-yellow, tinted with rose on the side
exposed to the sun, speckled with rose, some marks of fawn color; flesh
white, granular about the core, fine, melting, very juicy, saccharine,
acidulous, agreeable, only slightly perfumed; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Jefferson. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 791. 1869. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
Rpt._ 119. 1873.

In a Report from Georgia to the American Pomological Society in
1873, P. Barry wrote of a Jefferson pear as a native of Alabama and
an early summer fruit. Downing gives the following description of
a pear of the same name originating in Mississippi. Fruit large,
roundish-obtuse-pyriform, straw-color, shaded with red in the sun, and
dotted with small green dots; flesh white, not juicy, sweet, coarse,
decays quickly at core, not highly flavored; Aug.

=Jersey Gratioli. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 598. 1884. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 182. 1920.

In the Island of Jersey this is known as the _Gratioli_ and was at
the beginning of the nineteenth century grown in England under that
name. But as _Gratioli_ is the Italian name of Bon Chretien d'Ete, the
name was changed in England to "Jersey Gratioli." Fruit above medium,
globular-obovate, greenish-yellow, covered with large, rough, russet
spots, tinged with pale brown next the sun; flesh yellowish-white, very
melting, rich, sugary, vinous, sprightly; a dessert pear of the highest
excellence.

=Jerusalem. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

"The peare of Jerusalem, or the stript pear, whose barke while it is
young, is as plainly seene to be stript with greene, red, and yellow,
as the fruit it selfe is also, and is of a very good taste: being baked
also, it is as red as the best Warden, whereof Master William Ward of
Essex hath assured mee, who is the chiefe keeper of the King's Granary
at Whitehall."

=Jeschil Armudi. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 133. 1841.

A Turkish variety, probably of small value. Fruit medium, pyriform,
greenish-yellow; flesh sweet, perfumed; mid-season.

=Jewel. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

Originated with Captain Bankhead near Edgewood, Mo., about 1860. Said
to be productive and not to have blighted.

=Jewess. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:311, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 598. 1884.

From a seedling raised by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., and so named
because the tree grew on a wall fronting the Rue des Juifs (street of
the Jews). It first fruited in 1843. Fruit medium, ovate, always a
little bossed and more swelled on one side than on the other, uniformly
pale yellow, dotted, veined, and mottled with gray-russet and often
slightly roseate on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish, buttery,
melting, very juicy, sugary and rich; first; Nov. to Feb.

=John Cotton. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 32. 1862. =2.= _Ibid._ 45.
1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., and fruited
in 1862. Fruit below medium, turbinate, green; flesh fine-grained,
slightly acid; good market pear, ripens well and bears abundantly; Sept.

=John Griffith. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 791. 1869.

Originated in Westchester Co., N. Y. Fruit medium,
globular-obovate-obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with numerous brown
dots, nettings and patches of russet; flesh whitish, coarse, wanting in
juice, melting, sweet, pleasant; good; Sept.

=John Monteith. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 598. 1884.

A good quality pear esteemed highly in Perthshire, Scotland. Fruit
medium, angular toward the calyx where it becomes rather foursided;
skin bright green changing to yellowish-green at maturity; flesh
greenish-yellow, melting, buttery, sweet and pleasantly flavored; good.

=John Williams. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 111. 1873. =2.= _Ibid._ 37,
136. 1875.

An old American variety but not propagated until about 1870. In 1875
it was reported to be the best winter pear for Tennessee. Fruit large,
pyriform, clear yellow washed with red; flesh white, very juicy,
sugary, vinous and perfumed; good; Nov. and Dec.

=Johonnot. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 177. 1832. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=13=:484, fig. 40. 1847.

Raised by George S. Johonnot, Salem, Mass., and first came unto bearing
about 1823. Fruit medium, globular-obovate, irregular, swollen on one
side, hardly tapering to the stem; skin slightly rough, very thin,
pale greenish-yellow, partially covered with dull russet, and a little
browned on the sunny side; flesh white, coarse, melting and very juicy,
rich, brisk, with a delicious, musky aroma; core large and slightly
gritty; good; Sept.

=Joie du Semeur. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1895.

Issued from a seed bed of Josephine de Malines, which fruit it
resembles in size and form, and was disseminated by M. Daras de Naghin,
Antwerp, Bel. Flesh fine, melting, saccharine and aromatic; Nov.

=Jolie Lille de Gust. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 792. 1869.

Belgian. Fruit small, globular, acute-pyriform, pale yellow shaded with
crimson; flesh white, coarse, dry; of no value except for its beauty;
Sept.

=Joly de Bonneau. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
599. 1884.

First published by de Jonghe. Fruit medium or above, curved obovate,
pale green, strewed with spots and veins of brown-russet; flesh
reddened, or white with a pink tinge, fine, melting, juicy, sugary,
vinous; first; Dec.

=Jonah. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =15=:70. 1849.

Known early in the last century in the city of New Haven, Conn., and
said to be one of the parents of Howell. Fruit, "a very hard and tough
winter pear, producing enormous crops every year that seldom becomes
mellow and fit for dessert fruit, but when it does, it is very good,
being full of rich, subacid, slightly astringent juice."

=Jones. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 515. 1857. =2.= _Ibid._ 79, fig.
1869.

Originated at Kingsessing, near Philadelphia. Fruit medium or below,
pyriform, broad at calyx, tapering to the stem which meets it by a
fleshy junction; yellow shaded with russet, bright cinnamon on the
sunny side; flesh coarse, granular, buttery, sugary, brisk and vinous;
very good; were it a little larger would be one of the most valuable;
Oct.

=Joseph Lebeau. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876.

Originated by Dr. Nelis. Fruit large; flesh melting; first; Mar. and
Apr.

=Joseph Staquet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:309, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 793. 1869.

Obtained by Bivort from a seed bed made at Fleurus, Bel., in 1844.
Fruit medium, often smaller, pyriform, somewhat obtuse; skin fine,
tender, dull green passing to dark yellow, dotted, veined and stained
with fawn; flesh whitish, fine, melting; juice sufficient, sugary, with
a rather delicate aroma; second; end of Aug. and early Sept.

=Josephine de Binche. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876.

Described in 1869. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate, bright yellow
ground washed with brown; flesh semi-melting, very juicy, sugary, with
an exquisite flavor; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Josephine de Maubrai. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ N. S. =18=:183. 1882.

Fruit medium, globular-turbinate; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sugary;
first; Nov. to Jan.

=Josephsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:166. 1856.

Austrian. Published in 1819. Fruit medium, obtuse-conic, light
green turning to yellowish, often somewhat blushed; flesh granular,
semi-melting, sweet; third for table, first for kitchen; Sept.

=Joyau de Septembre. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 501, fig. 152. 1897.

Obtained by A. Herault, Angers, Fr., and first published in 1870. Fruit
medium, turbinate, obtuse, curved, golden yellow at maturity, slight
greenish near the summit, dotted with gray and often marbled with
bronze-russet; flesh white, fine, free from grit, melting, very juicy,
sugary, pleasantly acid and perfumed; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Judge Andrews 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 794. 1869.

Originated in Pennsylvania. Fruit medium, oblong-obovate-pyriform,
yellowish, traced and mottled with red in the sun; flesh coarse,
breaking, dry; of no value; Sept.

=Jules d'Airoles= (Gregoire). =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:105, fig. 53.
1872.

Raised by M. Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel, and first published in
1857. Fruit medium or rather large, spherical but somewhat irregular,
often a little bossed or deformed in contour; skin rather firm
and rough to the touch, bright green speckled with very numerous,
irregular, blackish dots; at maturity the basic green becomes
whitish-yellow; flesh white, semi-fine, buttery, melting, gritty at
center; juice abundant, sugary, slightly acid and perfumed; good; Oct.

=Jules d'Airolles= (Leclerc). =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:312, fig.
1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 599. 1884.

Obtained in 1836 by Leon Leclerc, Laval, Mayence, Fr. Fruit rather
large, long-conic, greenish-yellow washed with carmine; flesh
semi-melting, very sugary, juicy and perfumed; first; beginning of
winter.

=Jules Blaise. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:315. 1869. =2.= _Guide Prat._
73. 1876.

Stated to have been a gain of M. Millet, Nancy, Fr., and to have
been known also as the _Bonne-Gris de Nancy_. Fruit small or medium,
pyriform, mottled and dotted all over with fawn; flesh yellowish,
buttery, melting, juicy, sugary, perfumed, refreshing; first; Oct.

=Jules Delloy. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 600. 1884.

Fruit rather small, globular-obovate, yellow covered with speckles and
network of cinnamon-russet; flesh melting, pasty, flavorless; inferior;
Dec.

=Julie Duquet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:316, fig. 1869.

Originated at Chalons-sur-Marne, Fr., about the year 1860. Fruit
medium, globular-oblate, dark yellow stained and dotted with fawn;
flesh whitish, breaking, granular; juice sufficient, insipid; third for
dessert, second for the cuisine; end of Apr. to end of June.

=Julienne. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 340. 1845. =2.= _Ibid._ 794.
1869.

A beautiful and productive fruit and profitable for the market. Fruit
medium but varying on different soils, obovate, regularly formed, very
smooth, skin fair, clear bright yellow all over; flesh white, rather
firm at first, semi-buttery, sweet, moderately juicy, rich, sprightly;
should be gathered a few days before ripe and kept in the house; Aug.

=Juvardeil. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:317, fig. 1869.

Originated at Juvardeil, Maine-et-Loire, Fr.; its age is unknown. Fruit
below medium though occasionally rather larger, turbinate, regular
in form, slightly obtuse, swelled at the base, pale yellow, evenly
dotted with russet and slightly tinged with rose on the side next the
sun; flesh white, semi-fine and breaking, gritty about the core; juice
plentiful, sugary, acidulous and scented; second; Nov. and Dec.

=Kaestner. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1876.

Belgian. Raised by Van Mons. Fruit medium to small, oval, lemon-yellow,
without russet, small light brown spots; skin scentless; flesh
fine-grained, melting, very juicy, acid, sweet and aromatic; good; Sept.

=Kalchbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 40, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown throughout Austria and the Northern Tyrol though
under various names. Fruit fairly large to very large, long-pyriform,
crooked toward the stalk; skin smooth and shining, green turning
lemon-yellow at maturity, with a rather shining red blush, fine green
dots; flesh whitish, coarse, very juicy, saccharine, aromatic, rather
astringent, slightly acid; among the richest of the wine pears; Sept.

=Kalmerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:53. 1856.

Dutch, published 1758. Fruit large, conic, slightly obtuse, yellow
flecked with brown; flesh rather tender and succulent, sweet and
agreeable; second for table, first for culinary use; Aug.

=Kamper-Venus. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 300. 1881. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =7=:49, fig. 505. 1881.

_Camperveen._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:556, fig. 1867.

Of ancient and unknown origin. The Kamper-Venus has been cultivated
in Holland for some centuries and a Dutch writer, De Lacour, writing
in 1752, said, as M. Leroy thinks, that "the Romans possessed it and
called it the _Pear of Venus_." Fruit large, pyriform, obovate, smooth,
shining, very pale green, sprinkled with dark brown spots; at maturity
the green changes to a beautiful bright lemon-yellow, marbled on the
side of the sun with red; flesh white, rather fine, firm, melting;
juice abundant, vinous, acidulous, perfumed; first class for kitchen
use; winter.

=Kathelenbirne. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort_. 301. 1881.

German. Fruit small, in form of an orange and Bergamot; surface
polished, grass-green becoming rather golden, russeted, without any red
blush; flesh yellowish-white, juicy, aromatic; best for household use;
Oct. and Nov., 6 weeks.

=Katy. 1.= _Pearfield Nursery Cat._ 5. 1910.

Said to have originated at New Ulm, Tex., and to be a seedling of Le
Conte. It is reported that the tree is a rapid, upright grower, and an
early and abundant bearer; and that the fruit resembles Howell in size,
shape, and color, and is very juicy, buttery and refreshing, with a
pleasant vinous flavor.

=Keiser. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 377. 1831.

Fruit medium, turbinate, gradually tapering from the middle to the
stalk, pale green becoming yellowish-green, thickly sprinkled with
small, gray-russety specks, and russet around the stalk; flesh
greenish-white, a little gritty, melting, juicy, saccharine, without
any particular flavor; keeps some weeks from mid-Oct.; hardy, and bears
plentifully upon an open standard.

=Kelsey. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =23=:363, fig. 106. 1868. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 794. 1869.

About 1853 a pear seedling came up in the garden of William Kelsey,
Columbus, Ohio, and was named Kelsey. Fruit above medium to large,
globular-obovate, surface uneven, dull green becoming yellow at
maturity, traces of russet all over the fruit, many small dark green
spots; flesh greenish-yellow, melting, sweet, buttery, juicy, vinous,
slightly aromatic; good; Oct. to Feb., ripening gradually.

=Kennedy. 1.= _Cal. Bd. Hort. Rpt._ 74. 1891. =2.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B.
P. I. Bul._ =126=:156. 1908.

Originated by General Bidwell, Rancho Chico, Cal. Fruit
globular-oblate, small, russet; flesh tough, gritty; mid-season.

=Kentucky. 1.= _Mich. Sta. Sp. Bul._ =27=:22. 1904.

Fruit small, turbinate, obovate, yellow, russeted; flesh white,
melting, granular, mild; very poor; Sept.

=Kenyon. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 523. 1904.

Originated at McGregor, Iowa, about 1894. Fruit 2 to 2-1/2 inches in
diameter, globular, begins to drop in September or October and then
apparently of no account, but if picked then and properly cared for
until the middle of November or later, changes in color from a dark
green to a golden yellow or straw color and is tender, juicy, and
sweet, with a very fine flavor.

=Kermes. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:141. 1856.

Raised by Van Mons, 1827. Fruit medium; gourd-shaped, green becoming
yellowish-green, speckled with russet; flesh yellowish-white,
semi-melting, full of juice; second for dessert, first for domestic
use; Sept.

=Kilwinning. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:131 1843. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 600.
1884.

Fruit medium, oblong, dark green, strewed all over with gray dots, with
some patches of russet, brownish-red next the sun, changing at maturity
to yellowish-green and a livelier red; flesh yellowish-white, tender,
pleasant, with a strong perfume; second; Oct.

=King. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 794. 1869.

Originated at Oswego, N. Y. Fruit medium or below,
globular-oblate-pyriform, greenish-brown in the sun, with many green
and brown dots; flesh whitish, coarse, semi-melting, sweet; good; Sept.
and Oct.

=King Edward. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:319, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 601. 1884. =3.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 182. 1920.

An English variety cataloged by the Horticultural Society of London
in 1842. Fruit enormous, sometimes 5-1/2 in. long and 3-1/2 wide,
pyriform, gradually tapering to the stalk; skin smooth and shining, of
a beautiful grass-green changing to yellow, speckled with dark green
dots on the shaded side, red on the exposed cheek; flesh yellowish,
buttery, melting, very juicy, sweet and acidulous, with a slight
rose-water perfume; good for cooking; Sept. to Nov.

=King Seedling. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 795. 1869. =2.= Thomas _Am.
Fruit Cult._ 770. 1903.

Origin uncertain but probably American. Fruit medium, oblate, uneven,
yellowish-green, rough; flesh granular, whitish-green, juicy, sugary,
aromatic, perfumed; good; Sept. and Oct.

=King Sobieski. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:156, 232.
1908.

Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, yellow, with red blush; flesh juicy,
sweet, perfumed; good; mid-season.

=Kirtland. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =16=:112. 1850. =2.= _Horticulturist_
=4=:476, fig. 409. 1850.

In 1819 Professor Kirtland, Cleveland, Ohio, raised several trees
on his farm in Poland, Ohio, of which this is one. Fruit medium,
globular-ovate, rich crimson-russet, varying to a dull green; flesh
white, fine, melting, juicy, rich, sweet, aromatic; first; Sept.

=Klein Landlbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 68, fig. 1913.

A perry pear known as _Landlbirne_ in Lower Austria, _Green Landlbirne_
in Upper and Lower Austria, and by other names in Upper Austria and
Istria. Fruit small to medium, globular or turbinate and very even in
contour, leaf-green changing to greenish-yellow when ripe, densely
sprinkled with very fine russet spots; flesh whitish, fine-grained,
juicy, astringent, saccharine, acidulous; good for transportation; end
of Oct. to Dec.

=Kleine Fuchselbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 160, fig. 1913.

A pear used for perry in Lower Austria. Fruit small, turbinate to
ovate, very regular in contour, yellow when ripe, covered with
cinnamon-russet and finely dotted with green specks, some red on the
sunny side; flesh white, tolerably fine, juicy, highly saccharine, only
slightly astringent, very aromatic; Sept.

=Kleine gelbe Bratbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:41. 1856.

Rhineland. Reported in Diel in 1812. Fruit small, ovate, pale
yellow-green turning to waxy yellow, dotted with fine, green specks;
flesh granular, very juicy, sweet; second for table, first for kitchen;
Aug.

=Kleine gelbe Hessenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:31. 1856.

Hesse, Ger. Reported in 1804 by Diel. Fruit small, pyriform,
symmetrical, yellowish light-green changing to lemon-yellow, very fine
dots; flesh breaking, white, granular, wanting in juice; first for
culinary use; Sept.

=Kleine gelbe Maukelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:31. 1856.
=2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 241. 1889.

Hesse, Ger. Published by Diel in 1804. Fruit small, round-ovate,
symmetrical, smooth, light green changing to yellowish green, often
lightly blushed; flesh snow white, buttery, semi-melting, musky,
aromatic; first for the table, household and market purposes; Sept.

=Kleine gelbe Sommer-Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:39. 1856.

German. Published by Sickler, 1801. Fruit medium, variable in form,
obtuse-conic, greenish-yellow turning to yellow, with very minute green
and gray specks; flesh semi-breaking, very white, very sweet; second
for table, first for cuisine, good for market; Aug.

=Kleine gelbe Sommermuskatellerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:29. 1856.

_Petite Bergamotte Jaune d'Ete._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:185, fig.
285. 1879.

Nassau. Published by Diel, 1805. Fruit very small, turbinate, shining
skin, lemon-yellow, seldom blushed, very finely dotted with light
green; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, semi-melting, musky, aromatic;
first for household, good for market; mid-July.

=Kleine gruene Backbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:189. 1856.

German. Published by Diel, 1802. Fruit small, ovate, symmetrical, light
green turning to yellow-green, very finely dotted, rather russeted;
flesh glutinous, very sugary, aromatic; first for household use; end of
Sept. for two weeks.

=Kleine Lange Sommer-Muskatellerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:39. 1856. =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 241. 1889.

_Petite Muscat Long d'Ete._ =3.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:151, fig. 268.
1879.

Thuringia, Ger., 1798. Fruit small, sometimes ovate-turbinate,
sometimes conic-ovate, regular in contour; skin thick and firm, clear
green at first, sprinkled with dots of a darker shade changing to
lemon-yellow with the dots little visible, orange-red on the side of
the sun; flesh white, tinted with yellow, rather fine, semi-buttery,
very sugary and musky; moderately good; early Aug.

=Kleine Leutsbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 241. 1889. =2.= Loeschnig
_Mostbirnen_ 162, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown in Upper Austria under the name of _Holzbirne_
and by that of Kleine Leutsbirne and other names in Lower Austria.
Fruit below medium, variable in form, mostly long-obtuse-pyriform,
gray-green with dark green streaks downward from the stalk, changing
to yellow-green when ripe, densely covered with minute dots; flesh
whitish, moderately fine, juicy, acidulous, saccharine, unusually
astringent; Nov. and Dec.

=Kleine Pfalzgrafin. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 563. 1817. =2.= Dochnahl
_Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:46. 1856.

_Petite Comtesse Palatine._ =3.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:5, fig. 195. 1878.

Appears to be an ancient and perhaps Roman variety. Reported in Germany
in 1794. Fruit small, conic-ovate or ovate-pyriform, water-green dotted
with small brown points; flesh yellowish, semi-fine, breaking, gritty
near the center; juice sufficient and rich in sugar and perfume; good
for the table, and first class for all the purposes of the cook; Sept.
and Oct.

=Kleine Pfundbirne. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 559. 1817. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:186. 1856.

Wetterau, Ger., 1789. Fruit large, globular-turbinate, grass-green
changing to yellowish-green, rough, dotted with gray; flesh tender,
pleasant, good for household; Oct. to Dec.

=Kleine runde Haferbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:162. 1856.

Thuringia, Ger., 1804. Fruit small, globular, light green changing
to pale lemon-yellow, strongly blushed with dark red, dotted; flesh
yellowish-white, coarse-grained, rather astringent, sourish; good for
cooking, early Sept.

=Kleine schlesische Zimmbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:46.
1856.

German. Published 1801. Fruit small, pyriform, yellow-green with vivid
red blush, finely dotted with gray and yellow-green; flesh breaking,
very aromatic and sweet; second for table, first for cooking; Aug.

=Kleine Sommer-Zuckerratenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:31.
1856.

Rhineland, 1805, Dr. Diel. Fruit medium, turbinate, often rather conic,
yellow-green turning to lemon-yellow, with dark red blush; flesh
gritty, sugary, aromatic; second for dessert, first for kitchen; Sept.

=Kleine Zwiebelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:171. 1856.

Reported in Thuringia, 1819. Fruit small, bulbous or
globular-turbinate, lemon-yellow, blushed, dotted with gray, splashed
with gray-russet; flesh whitish, sweet, firm, breaking, juicy; good for
culinary use; autumn.

=Kloppelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:8. 1856. =2.= Mathieu
_Nom. Pom._ 242. 1889.

Hesse, Ger. Reported by Diel, 1805. One of the Volemas. Fruit medium,
almost round, yellowish-white, changing to lemon-yellow with pale
blush; flesh breaking, aromatic, juicy, perfumed; second for table,
first for cooking; Dec.

=Knabenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:32. 1856.

German. Published by Diel, 1805. Fruit medium, turbinate, swelled,
sides unequal; skin polished, light green changing to greenish yellow,
often has a dark blush, green dots; flesh granular, very juicy, sweet
and acid; second for dessert, first for household; end of Aug.

=Knausbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:172. 1856. =2.= Mathieu
_Nom. Pom._ 242. 1889. =3.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 42, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown under a variety of names in Austria and Germany.
Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, sides unequal, greenish light-yellow,
washed and streaked with reddish-brown; flesh yellow-white, breaking,
astringent, saccharine, with little flavor or aroma; third for the
table, but good for cooking use, perry or drying; end of Sept.

=Knechtchensbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:2. 1856.

Thuringia, Ger., 1797. Fruit small, round pear-shaped, yellow, russet
dots, blushed; flesh firm, insipid; good for cooking; Aug. and Sept.

=Knight. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:449. 1847. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
796. 1869.

Raised by William Knight of Cranston, R. I., and first exhibited
before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1835. Fruit medium,
oblate-pyriform, yellowish pale-green with grayish specks; flesh
melting, juicy, sweet, rich, aromatic; Sept. and Oct.

=Knollbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 186, fig. 1913.

A perry pear of Swiss origin introduced into Austria about 1885.
Fruit medium to rather large, long-ovate; skin leaf-green turning to
yellow-green at maturity, half the fruit on the sun-exposed side often
being a dark brown-red; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, very juicy,
saccharine and astringent; good for transporting; Oct. and Nov.

=Knoops Simmtbirne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98, 283. 1876. =2.= Mathieu _Nom.
Pom._ 242. 1889.

_Poire Canelle._ =3.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:143, fig. 552. 1881.

Origin uncertain, possibly Dutch. Dr. Diel received it from Harlem
under the name of _Franse Canneel-Peer_. Knoop described under the name
_Fondante de Brest_, a variety to which he gave the synonym _Franse
Canneel-Peer_, but it is not the _Fondante de Brest_ of Duhamel and
other French authors. Fruit medium, nearly short-conic, and sometimes
conic and somewhat pyriform; skin fine and thin, clear green sown
with numerous small, brown dots changing to dull yellow; flesh white,
slightly tinted with yellow, buttery or semi-buttery, gritty around the
core, juice sufficient, sweet and perfumed; good for eating raw and
very good for cooking; Sept.

=Kolmasbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 164, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small, globular or longish-pyriform,
smooth, shining, dirty greenish-yellow, golden on the sun-exposed side,
dotted with red; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, very juicy, saccharine,
astringent; late Sept.

=Kolstuck. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:113, fig. 441. 1880.

_Koolstock._ =2.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:158. 1908.

Origin unknown. Reported on trial at the Experiment Station, Agassiz,
B. C, in 1900. Fruit medium or nearly medium, obtuse-conic-pyriform,
rather like Calebasse in form, often a little irregular in contour,
clear green on which, in parts, are visible very small specks of
gray-black; at maturity the basic green changes to pale yellow and the
cheek exposed to the sun is extensively washed or flamed with bright
vermilion; medium early.

=Koenig Karl von Wuerttemberg. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 242. 1889. =2.=
Lucas _Tafelbirnen_ 239, fig. 98. 1894.

_Roi Charles de Wurtemberg._ =3.= _Guide Prat._ 61. 1895.

Obtained about 1886 by Herr Mueller, gardener to the King of
Wuerttemberg. Fruit large to very large, oval, bossed, obtuse, pale
yellow, speckled with russet and brown dots; flesh fine, nearly
melting, agreeably perfumed, juicy, good for dessert and is decorative
for the table; Oct. and Nov.

=Koenigliche Weissbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:35. 1856.

Holland, 1804. Fruit medium, obtuse-conic, rounded at the apex,
regular; skin shining, smooth, light green turning to greenish-yellow,
green dots; flesh breaking, white, sweet, aromatic, fairly melting;
second for dessert, first for cuisine; early Sept.

=Koenigsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:142. 1856.

North German, 1773. Fruit large, sides unequal, smooth, light green
turning to yellow, dotted with fine gray; flesh breaking, tender,
sweet; second for table, first for household; Aug. and Sept.

=Konstanzer Langler. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 44, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown in the Voralberg, Austria, and in Bavaria, Baden
and other parts of Germany. Fruit medium to large, long-pyriform,
greenish, speckled with brownish-red dots and patches of russet; flesh
greenish-white, juicy, of a saccharine and acidulous flavor; end of
Sept.

=Kraft Sommer Bergamotte. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 244. 1889.

_Bergamotte d'ete de Kraft._ =2.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1895.

Fruit small, spherical-oblate, fine, bright yellow; flesh breaking,
sugary; end of Aug. and beginning of Sept.

=Krauelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:162. 1856.

Reported in Holstein, Ger., 1788. Fruit small, globular, wrinkled and
uneven; flesh granular, sweet, wanting in juice; third for dessert,
good for culinary use; Nov. to Whitsuntide.

=Kreiselfoermige Flegelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:5. 1856.

Upper Hesse, Ger., 1806. Reported by Diel. Fruit large, turbinate,
entirely covered with russet, with very dark dots, breaking, fragrantly
scented; first for household; Jan.

=Kriegebirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:2. 1856.

Switzerland, Schwaben, published 1804. Fruit small, globular,
yellow-green, shining, dark blush with gray specks; first for household
and market; Oct.

=Krivonogof. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =27=:291. 1894.

Originated in the Province of Toula, Russia. Tree very hardy. Fruit of
good quality.

=Krockhals. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:101. 1856.

Nassau, 1806. Published by Diel. Fruit medium, pyriform, bent or
acutely sloping, lemon-yellow, cinnamon-russeted, often having a dark
blush, heavily dotted; flesh rather white, granular, buttery, melting,
juicy and extremely aromatic; first for table and cooking; Nov. and Dec.

=Krull. 1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 36, 112. 1890. =2.= Budd-Hansen _Am.
Pom. Man._ =2=:252. 1903.

_Krull Winter._ =3.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 330. 1888.

Originated on the farm of Mr. Krull, St. Charles, Mo., about 1808,
and brought to notice by C. T. Mallinckrodt in 1888. Fruit type of
Lawrence, medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, green with a tinge of
yellow; stem short, thick, in a shallow cavity; calyx open, in a
shallow basin; flesh yellowish, firm, granular, tough, rather dry,
sweet, flat; poor to above; keeps into winter.

=Krummgestielte Feigenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:191.
1856.

Saxony, 1807. Fruit medium, pyriform, thick-skinned, yellow-green with
brown blush and rather rust-colored on the side next the sun, speckled
with very fine dots; flesh yellowish-white, glutinous, very sweet,
wanting in flavor; third for dessert, first for domestic use; Oct.

=Kuhfuss. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 245. 1889.

_Pied-de-Vache._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:35, fig. 210. 1879.

The origin of this pear, probably German, is not definitely known,
but according to Oberdieck it was cultivated in almost all the large
gardens of Hanover, and bore the name of _Pfundbirn_ or _Pound Pear_
at Hildesheim, Goettingen and Cassel. Fruit large, globular-turbinate;
skin rather thick, of an intense green, speckled with dots of a darker
shade, the green turning to yellow at maturity; flesh white, tinted
with green, coarse, semi-melting; juice abundant, saccharine, acidulous
and refreshing; good; Aug.

=Kurskaya. 1.= _Neb. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 30. 1890.

Introduced from Russia in 1879. Fruit oblong-obtuse-pyriform,
brownish-green changing partially to deep yellow when fully ripe; stem
set in a narrow, shallow depression; calyx open in a rather wide,
smooth basin; flesh nearly white, tender, not very juicy, nearly sweet;
fair; Oct.

=L'Inconnue Van Mons. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =17=:67. 1851. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 596. 1884.

_Unbekannte Von Mons._ =3.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 334. 1881.

Fruit large, pyriform, rough to the touch, greenish-yellow, covered
with large gray dots and patches of cinnamon-russet; flesh yellowish,
firm, very juicy, rich and sugary, with an agreeable aroma; first; Feb.

=L'Inconstante. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:63, fig. 530. 1880.

_Inconstant._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 788. 1869.

A seedling raised either by Van Mons or by his successor, Bivort. Fruit
medium, conic or conic-pyriform, a little variable in form; skin thin,
tender, pale green, sprinkled with very small and inconspicuous dots of
gray fawn; on ripening the basic green changes to clear yellow, often
preserving a green tint on the side next the sun, sometimes tinted with
light red; flesh whitish, semi-fine, very melting, rather granular near
the core; juice abundant, saccharine and more or less perfumed; good;
Oct.

=La Bearnaise. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 94. 1895.

Obtained by P. Tourasse, Pau, Basses Pyrenees, Fr. Fruit above medium
or large, well colored; flesh melting, juicy; first; Nov.

=La Cite Gomand. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:105, fig. 149. 1878.

Attributed by Van Mons to M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit small,
short-obtuse-turbinate, usually regular in outline, very clear green,
whitish, speckled with very small dots not clearly visible; at maturity
the basic color changes to pale yellow, slightly golden or washed with
a suggestion of red on the side next the sun; flesh white, rather fine,
semi-buttery; juice slightly deficient, sugary, faintly perfumed;
second; end of Sept.

=La France. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3d Ser. =27=:350. 1900. =2.= _Cat. Cong.
Pom. Fr._ 282, fig. 1906.

Obtained by Claude Blanchet, Vienne, Isere, Fr., about 1864. Fruit
medium or rather large, globular-conic, irregular, strongly bossed,
greenish, sometimes pale yellow, freely dotted with gray; flesh white,
fine or nearly fine, very melting; juice very saccharine, perfumed;
very good; Oct. and Nov.

=La Moulinoise. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 797. 1869.

A foreign variety, probably French. Fruit large, oblong-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, partially netted and patched with russet and thickly
sprinkled with brown-russet dots; flesh yellowish, juicy, melting,
sweet, slightly vinous; first; Sept.

=La Quintinye. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:570, fig. 1869.

Raised from a bed made in 1846 by M. Boisbunel, a nurseryman at Rouen,
Fr.; first published in 1860. Fruit above medium or sometimes less,
globular, irregular, bossed, sides unequal, pale yellow, thickly dotted
and shaded with gray-russet, and sometimes reddened on the side next
the sun; flesh white, fine, semi-melting; juice abundant, saccharine,
slightly aromatic but agreeably tart; second and sometimes first when
the flesh is well perfumed; Mar. to May.

=La Savoureuse. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:25, fig. 19. 1866-73. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 797. 1869.

Probably of German origin. Fruit nearly medium, globular-oblate,
intense green with greenish-brown dots; flesh greenish-white, buttery,
sweet, fine, agreeably refreshing, perfumed like the Bergamots, a
little gritty around the center, third; all winter.

=La Solsticiale. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895.

Reported on trial in the orchards of Messrs. Simon-Louis at Metz,
Lorraine, in 1895. Fruit rather large, elongated, obtuse, yellowish
tinted with russet; flesh saffron in hue, semi-breaking, very sugary
and strongly perfumed; May to July.

=La Vanstalle. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 178. 1832.

"Fruit perfectly pyramidal; highly colored with red; of medium size;
flesh granulous, becoming insipid, and finally soft; it keeps till the
middle of October. I did not find this fruit excellent; it is however,
better than the Doyenne, (St. Michael)."

=Lacroix. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3d Ser. =1=:442. 1887.

Published in _Revue Horticole_ in 1887. Fruit medium, regular pyriform,
yellow blushed and spotted with red on the exposed side; flesh white,
flavor said to be like that of Easter Beurre; Dec. and Jan.

=Lady Clapp. 1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 178. 1896. =2.= Ellwanger &
Barry _Cat._ 17. 1900.

Fruit large, yellow; flesh juicy, melting, vinous; first; Sept.,
following Bartlett.

=Lafayette. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 796. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=4=:13, fig. 199. 1879.

Originated in Connecticut. Fruit small, globular-pyriform, pale yellow,
stained with russet, passing at maturity to lemon-yellow and the russet
becoming golden, numerous dots of gray-brown; flesh yellowish, rather
fine, melting, slightly gritty at the core, buttery, very juicy, sweet
but lacking flavor; medium; Oct.

=Laherard. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:324, fig. 1869.

Origin uncertain, but attributed to Van Mons. Fruit above medium,
ovate, mammillate at summit, sometimes rather elongated but
generally more swelled at the middle, thin-skinned, yellow-ochre or
greenish-yellow, vermilioned on the face exposed to the sun, dotted
with fine specks and stains of gray especially around the calyx; flesh
white, fine, melting, juicy, rather granular around the core; juice
abundant, very sugary, acid, and having an exquisite savor; first; Oct.

=Lammas. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 418. 1831. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 601. 1884.

Originated possibly in the Highlands of Scotland, being recommended for
that district by Lindley. Grown also in England. Fruit below medium,
pyramidal, regular pale yellow, streaked with red next the sun; flesh
melting, tender, juicy, agreeable; good; Aug.

=Laemmerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:54. 1856.

German. Franken, Bavaria, 1809. Fruit below medium, ovate-conic,
whitish-green; flesh hard, juicy, somewhat aromatic, and sweet and
acid; third for table, first for cooking and market; July.

=Lancaster. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 119. 1875.

A seedling grown by T. S. Lancaster, Gloucester, Mass., and exhibited
in 1875. Fruit medium, oblong-pyriform, yellow, with brown-russet;
flesh coarse, juicy, buttery; hardly good; late autumn.

=Landsberger Malvasier. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:126. 1856.

Raised by Burchardt at Landsberg, Ger., 1851. Fruit medium, often
large, conic, even sides, dark yellow, speckled with russet dots; flesh
rather white, buttery, melting; very valuable, first for dessert and
market; Nov. and Dec.

=Langbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:2. 1856. =2.= Mathieu
_Nom. Pom._ 245. 1889.

_D'Ane._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:129, fig. 1867.

Switzerland and Germany, 1804; particularly popular in the former
country where it is very generally cultivated, and often known as the
_Etrangle_. Fruit medium or above, very long, like Calebasse in form,
greenish-yellow turning to lemon-yellow, somewhat blushed, and speckled
with dots of greenish-gray; first for culinary use; end of Aug.

=Lange gelbe Bischofsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:140.
1856.

Holland, 1804. Fruit medium, oblong; sides unequal; skin smooth,
yellowish-green turning to light yellow, sometimes slightly blushed,
dotted with yellow; flesh spongy, lacking juice, glutinous, sweet and
scented with rose; third for table, first for kitchen and market; end
of Aug.

=Lange Gelbe Muscatellerbirne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1876. =2.= _Ibid._
68. 1895.

German. Tree vigorous, fertile, resisted the phenomenal frost in Europe
1879-1880. Fruit small, yellow, dotted with carmine; of moderate
quality; second half of Aug.

=Lange Gruene Winterbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 245. 1889.

_Longue Verte d'Hiver._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:137, fig. 549. 1881.

A German variety cultivated especially in Saxony and Thuringia. Fruit
medium or nearly so, conic-pyriform, often rather deformed, one side
being longer than the other at either end; skin firm, water-green,
sprinkled with numerous indistinct dots regularly spaced, the basic
green changing to greenish or yellowish-white; flesh white, rather
fine, semi-melting; juice plentiful, sweet, sugary, agreeable but
wanting in perfume; good; autumn and early winter.

=Lange Mundnetzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:112, fig.
1856. =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 246. 1889.

Thuringia, 1794. Fruit medium, ventriculous, grass-green turning to
greenish-yellow, often faintly blushed, dotted with green; very good
for dessert, good for household and market; Aug.

=Lange Sommer-Bergamotte. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:39. 1856.

Thuringia, 1794. Fruit below medium, long-turbinate, yellow-green
turning to whitish-yellow, rough, heavily dotted with brown, slightly
russeted, thick-skinned; flesh yellowish-white, breaking, granular
becoming glutinous; first for table; Aug.

=Lange Wasserbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 46, fig. 1913.

This perry pear is found spread throughout Upper and Lower Austria.
Fruit medium, long-pyriform, very regular in contour; skin fine,
smooth, shining, yellow-green when ripe, very densely dotted with fine
spots, some cinnamon-brown russet around the stem and calyx; flesh
whitish, coarse-grained, juicy, sweet but insipid and without aroma;
Sept.

=Langstieler. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:171. 1856. =2.=
Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 246. 1889.

Switzerland, Baden and Wuerttemberg, published 1830. Fruit small,
pyriform, grass-green, russeted on the side next the sun, gray dots;
flesh yellowish-white, fine-grained, tartish; third for the table,
first for cider and culinary use; Oct. Suitable for every situation.

=Langstielige Pfaffenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:43. 1856.

Germany. Published by Diel in 1825. Fruit medium, pyriform, otherwise
conic; skin rough and entirely covered with cinnamon-colored russet,
often faintly blushed; second for table; third for household; Sept.

=Langstielige Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:141. 1856.

German. Published by Diel, 1833. Fruit medium, long-pyriform or even
gourd-shaped, light green changing to light yellow, without russet or
red blush, semi-melting, fine, juicy, sweet, with cinnamon flavor;
second for dessert, first for culinary use; Nov.

=Lansac. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:241, Pl. LVII. 1768. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:326, 327, fig. 1869. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 602.
1884.

_Herbstbirne ohne Schale._ =4.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:86. 1856.

Originated at Haze near Tours, Fr. Merlet described it in 1667. In the
catalog of the Chartreuse Fathers, Paris, there occurs in 1736 the
following passage. "The Pear _de Lansac_, or _Dauphin_, which many
authors name _Satin_ ... was presented for the first time to Louis
XIV ... by Madame de Lansac...." As King Louis ascended the throne in
1638 the pear would seem to have been originated between that year and
1857, the year in which Madame de Lansac died. Fruit medium, sometimes
less, globular-turbinate, dull yellow, sprinkled with numerous minute,
russet dots; flesh fine, yellowish-white, melting, juicy, sweet, rich,
aromatic, with an after-flavor of anis; second, but first when the
flesh is well perfumed; Oct. to Dec.

=Large Duchess. 1.= _Ala. Sta. Bul._ =30=:12. 1891.

A variety of Oriental type planted at the Agricultural Experiment
Station at Auburn, Ala., in 1885. It was reported in 1891 as free from
blight, and still on trial.

=Larissa. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:517. 1853.

Submitted to the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society in 1853 as a
seedling by a Mr. Ladd of Philadelphia. Fruit small, obovate-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, a good deal russeted, with a mottled red cheek; flesh
rather dry, saccharine and pleasant; scarcely good.

=Laure Gilbert. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895.

Distributed by M. Gilbert, Antwerp, Bel., in 1886. The fruit bears
much resemblance to that of the Chaumontel, but its flesh is much more
melting and its flavor more sprightly; Oct.

=Laure de Glymes. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:328, fig. 1869.

The parent tree was raised from a seed bed made by Van Mons in 1827
at Louvain. Fruit ovate, or more or less globular and swelled, nearly
always mammillate at summit; skin thick, bronzed, having on the side
next the sun some orange-yellow; flesh white, semi-melting, watery,
gritty about the core; juice sufficient, sweet, vinous, perfumed;
second; Sept.

=Laxton Bergamot. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ =26=:497. 1886. =2.= _Jour. Hort._
=13=:339. 1887.

A new seedling pear shown by a Mr. Laxton, Bedford, Eng., at the Royal
Horticultural Society's meeting at South Kensington in October, 1886.
Tree fertile and the fruits are not easily blown off by the wind. Fruit
small, exceedingly juicy and rich; a delicious pear.

=Le Breton. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 798. 1869.

Origin unknown. Fruit medium, obovate, obtuse-pyriform, irregular,
yellow, netted and patched with russet, with numerous russet dots;
flesh yellowish, rather coarse at core, melting, juicy, sweet,
aromatic; good; Nov. to Jan.

=Le Brun. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:503, fig. 1867. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 183. 1920.

M. Gueniot, nurseryman at Troyes, Fr., sowed seeds the plants from
which fruited in 1862. One of these he named Le Brun. Fruit above
medium to large, oblong-conic, slightly obtuse and generally bossed
and rather contorted about the summit, bright yellow, sprinkled with
bright brown spots, and largely stained with fawn about calyx and
stem and often also on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish-white,
semi-fine, and dense, melting, seldom gritty and rarely has seeds;
juice abundant, sugary, acidulous, savory but often with an excessive
taste of musk, spoiling its delicacy; first; end of Sept.

=Le Congo. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895.

Distributed by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel., and in the trial
orchards of Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. Tree vigorous
and fairly prolific. Fruit medium; flesh semi-fine, very saccharine and
highly scented; Nov. and Dec.

=Le Lecher. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =4=:334. 1888.

This seedling, raised by A. Lesuer, Ypres, Bel., resulted from Bartlett
fertilized with Fortunee. Fruit large, pyriform, yellow, spotted with
drab spots; flesh white, juicy, sugary, brisk and perfumed, free from
grit; Jan. to Mar.

=Leclerc-Thouin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:330, fig. 1869.

Raised by M. Andre Leroy at Angers, Fr., and fruited first in 1867.
Fruit above medium, conic, very obtuse and generally more curved on one
side than on the other; skin uneven, clear yellow, clouded with green
and partially covered with russet on which appear small specks of gray;
flesh whitish, semi-fine, watery, very melting, granular around the
core; juice sugary, vinous and slightly acid, perfumed flavor; first;
Sept.

=Lederbirne. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 89. 1845. =2.= Loeschnig
_Mostbirnen_ 202, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium, truncated-pyriform, somewhat
bossed and irregular in outline, leaf-green turning greenish-yellow,
gray russet dots, blushed on the sunny side; flesh yellow-white,
coarse-grained, very juicy, subacid; Oct. to Dec.

=Lee. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 375. 1854.

Originated at Salem, Mass. Fruit small to medium, globular-oval,
greenish-russet, brown in the sun; flesh white, coarse, juicy, good;
Sept.

=Lee Seckel. 1.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 565. 1885.

Fruit medium to large, obovate, rich russet; flesh buttery, rich,
perfumed; very good; Sept.

=Leger. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895.

Obtained from a seed bed of Winter Nelis by M. Sannier. Tree of
moderate vigor, fertile and suitable for all forms of culture. Fruit
medium, globular-ovate; flesh fine, acidulous; Oct.

=Lehoferbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 126, fig. 1913.

A perry pear widely distributed in Upper and Lower Austria under
various names. Fruit medium to large, globular-pyriform, leaf-green
turning yellow at maturity, dotted and marked with russet, well-exposed
fruit blushed; flesh yellow-white, coarse-grained, very juicy,
astringent, saccharine, acidulous; mid-Oct. and keeps in storage till
end of Nov.

=Leipziger Rettigbirn. 1.= Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=:No. 92, Pl. 92.
1883.

_Radis de Leipsick._ =2.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:125, fig. 61. 1866-73.

_Leipsic Radish._ =3.= _Can. Exp. Farms. Rpt._ 379. 1902.

Originated at Duben near Leipsic, Saxony. It was published by Diel
in 1807. Fruit small, nearly spherical or spherical-ovate, a little
more constricted at the stem end then toward the calyx, light green
turning to yellow-green and slightly golden on the cheek next the sun,
brown around the summit, and with numerous light brown dots; flesh
yellowish-white, buttery, juicy, very pleasantly perfumed, having a
slight Bergamot flavor; good for dessert, first for cuisine; Aug. to
Oct.

=Lemon= (Massachusetts). =1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

A seedling of S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass.; first fruited in 1862.
Fruit large, turbinate, yellow.

=Lemon= (Russia). =1.= _Ind. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 82. 1886. =2.= _Ia. Hort.
Soc. Rpt._ 170. 1894.

Imported from Russia in 1879. It was reported in 1894 to have fruited
in Iowa, and collectively with some other varieties was described as
"generally 'off' in color, coarse, some of them leathery and corky, and
all without melting qualities or flavor."

=Lenawee. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 106. 1856. =2.= Field _Pear Cult._
273. 1858.

Origin unknown. Distributed in Lenawee County, Mich., in 1856; it
was named by the Adrian Horticultural Society. At that time it was
supposed to have been introduced from western New York some twenty-five
years previously. Fruit medium to large, oblate-pyriform, one side
generally being larger than the other; surface frequently irregular,
lemon-yellow, with small russet specks, washed with bright vermilion on
the side next the sun; flesh yellowish-white, tender, buttery, with a
high and peculiar, aromatic flavor; very good; early to mid-Aug.

=Leochine de Printemps. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:236. 1854. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 98. 1876.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit
medium, obovate-pyriform, yellow, netted and patched with russet,
sprinkled with russet dots; flesh melting, white, firm, not very juicy;
a beautiful and good fruit; Feb. and Mar.

=Leon Dejardin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1876.

Obtained at Boussoir, Maubeuge, Nord, Fr. Fruit medium, pyriform,
ventriculous, resembles the Beurre Bollwiller, semi-melting, juicy,
sugary, refreshing; good for its season; May and June.

=Leon Gregoire. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:63, fig. 1856. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:618, fig. 1869.

This variety was gained by Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel.,
and was fruited first in 1852. Fruit large, sometimes medium,
oblong-obtuse-pyriform, sometimes more or less globular, dull yellow,
dotted and marbled with fawn on its shaded side and entirely stained
with grayish-russet on the exposed face, becoming pale yellow and
golden at maturity; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, semi-melting, sweet,
watery, acidulous, vinous, agreeable; second, inconstant in quality,
sometimes good; Dec. and Jan.

=Leon Leclerc Epineux. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:333, fig. 1869.

In the bulletin of the Society Van Mons, 1857, this variety is
stated to have been obtained by Van Mons, though some doubt has been
raised as to its origin. Fruit large, ovate-pyriform, often rather
contorted; skin rough, thick, grayish-yellow, finely dotted with russet
and stained with the same around the calyx and stalk and sometimes
clouded and streaked with red on the face exposed to the sun; flesh
yellowish-white, coarse, breaking, granular at the center; juice
sufficient, vinous and sugary; third for dessert, first for cooking;
Nov.

=Leon Leclerc de Laval. 1.= _Pom. France_ =3=:No. 99, Pl. 99. 1865.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 603. 1884.

This, which is different from Leon Leclerc (Van Mons), was obtained at
Louvain in 1825 by Van Mons. Fruit large, turbinate-obtuse-pyriform,
yellow-ochre, finely dotted with gray-russet and marked with some
tracing of russet, occasionally washed with a little red; flesh very
white, semi-melting or semi-breaking, watery, gritty, juicy, sweet,
slightly perfumed; third for dessert, first for stewing; Jan. to May.

=Leon Recq. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1895, who
received it from M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit large or
nearly large, pyriform, lemon-yellow when ripe; flesh fine, slightly
acid, sugary, perfumed; Nov. and Dec.

=Leon Rey. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:336, fig. 1869.

In 1856, M. Rey, Toulouse, Fr., sowed seeds of the best French pears,
and in the following year selected the most promising seedlings, one
of which received the name Leon Rey. Fruit medium and sometimes rather
larger, turbinate, very round in its lower part, and conic-obtuse at
the top, golden-yellow, finely dotted and stained with fawn and nearly
always washed with tender rose on the face exposed to the sun; flesh
very white and fine, melting, free from grit; juice very abundant,
sugary, acidulous, having a delicious flavor; first; Oct.

=Leonce de Vaubernier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 72. 1876.

Tree vigorous on quince, very fertile. Fruit rather large, ovate, very
pale green, touched with russet and washed with dark carmine; flesh
yellowish, fine, dense, of a highly agreeable flavor; third; second
half of Sept.

=Leonie. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895.

Sent out by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit medium, of Doyenne
form, globular-obovate; flesh melting, sugary; good.

=Leonie Bouvier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 56. 1895.

Obtained by M. Simon Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel. Tree vigorous on
quince, fertile. Fruit medium, pyriform, whitish-yellow blushed with
orange-red; flesh fine, very melting and juicy, sugary, vinous,
perfumed; a very beautiful and excellent fruit; Sept.

=Leonie Pinchart. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 800. 1869.

Described in 1869 as a new Belgian variety. Fruit medium,
globular-obovate, greenish-yellow, much covered, netted, and patched
with yellow-russet and minute russet dots; flesh whitish, juicy, sweet,
melting; very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Leontine Van Exem. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 108. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=3=:181, fig. 187. 1878.

Obtained by Henri Gregoire, Beurechin, Bel. Fruit small, turbinate or
conic-turbinate, very clear green changing to pale yellow at maturity,
dotted with specks of darker green; some clear russet covers the calyx
and the summit, and the side next the sun becomes golden; flesh white,
fine, melting, full of juice rich in sugar and perfume of the almond;
Oct.

=Leopold I. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 518. 1857. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:338, fig. 1869.

A posthumous gain of Van Mons which gave its first fruit in 1848. Fruit
above medium, ovate, regular, swelled in the lower part, obtuse,
grass-green, often yellowish, dotted, streaked, and stained with
russet; flesh white, with some yellow tinge, fine, very melting, juicy,
sweet, vinous, aromatic and delicate; good to very good; Nov.

=Leopold Riche. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 801. 1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 603. 1884.

One of M. de Jonghe's seedlings. Fruit rather large, obovate, yellow,
thickly sprinkled with large cinnamon-russet dots; flesh rather
coarse-grained, crisp, buttery, melting; juice abundant, rich, thick
and sugary, with a fine almond flavor; a very richly flavored pear; Nov.

=Lepine. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 801. 1869.

Tree of moderate growth but very productive. Fruit small, oblate,
yellowish, shaded with crimson, slightly russeted; flesh coarse,
granular, melting, juicy, brisk, vinous, good; Nov. and Dec.

=Lesbre. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 415. 1863. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:339,
fig. 1869.

Raised from seed at Boulogne-sur-Mer, before 1838, by M. Bonnet. Fruit
medium or above, turbinate, very obtuse and swelled, nearly always
mammillate at the top; skin rough, olive-yellow, sprinkled with many
large russet dots and small brownish stains; flesh white, fine and
melting, juicy, rather granular at the core; juice abundant, sugary,
vinegary, with a delicate scent of anis; first; end of Aug.

=Levard. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:340, fig. 1869.

Grown on the seed beds of M. Leroy, Antwerp, Bel., and fruited in 1863.
Fruit below medium, globular-turbinate, irregular, bossed and always
less swollen on one side than on the other; color yellowish-green,
dotted with brown and fawn, and entirely covered with bronze-russet on
the cheek exposed to the sun; flesh greenish-white, fine, melting and
juicy, gritty around the core, sugary, acidulous, musky and very rich
in flavor; first; Nov.

=Levester Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:172. 1856.

Hanover, 1852. Fruit small, obtuse-turbinate, sides unequal, light
green changing to greenish-yellow, often streaked with red and finely
dotted with greenish-russet; flesh fine, deficient in juice, granular
near the center, highly aromatic; first for household and market
purposes; Sept. and Oct.

=Lewes. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

Described by John Parkinson in 1629, in England, as "brownish greene
pears, ripe about the end of September, a reasonable well rellished
fruit, and very moist."

=Lewis. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:140. 1831. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 801. 1869.

Originated on the farm of John Lewis, Roxbury, Mass., about 1811. Fruit
below medium, globular, obovate, obtuse, dark green in autumn, pale
green at maturity, with numerous russet specks; flesh yellowish-white,
rather coarse, melting, juicy and rich in flavor, with a slight spicy
perfume; Nov. to Feb.

=Lexington. 1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 187. 1896. =2.= Budd-Hansen _Am.
Hort. Man._ =2=:253. 1903.

Originated in Kentucky and is said to resemble Bartlett, but to ripen
two weeks earlier. Hardy and free from blight, but described as "too
poor" in quality.

=Liberale. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =21=:519. 1855. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 801. 1869.

Belgian. Introduced to this country as a new variety about 1850. Fruit
large, obtuse-pyramidal or truncate-pyriform; skin fair, smooth,
yellowish-green, very thickly dotted with large, conspicuous, russety
specks, and patched with russet; flesh yellowish-white, a little
coarse, melting, juicy, sweet, rich, with a peculiar almond, aromatic
perfume; a very handsome and fine fruit; Oct.

=Liegel Honigbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 248. 1889.

_Poire de Miel de Liegel._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:47, fig. 24. 1872.

Origin uncertain, probably German. Fruit medium, ovate-pyriform; skin
fine and smooth, at first pale green turning to pale yellow, more
golden on the side next the sun and very rarely touched with rose;
flesh yellow, fine, melting, full of sugary juice, vinous, and with a
distinct savor of musk; first; Oct.

=Lieutenant Poidevin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:344, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 604. 1884.

Flon-Grolleau, a Frenchman, obtained this variety in 1853. Fruit large,
obovate and undulating; skin fine, yellow-ochre dotted with gray; flesh
yellowish-white, semi-fine, breaking, gritty around the center, sugary,
vinous; second for dessert, first for cooking; Mar. and Apr.

=Limon. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:57. 1842. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
802. 1869.

A Van Mons seedling. Fruit rather small, obovate, yellow, with a faint
red cheek; flesh white, buttery, melting and juicy, with a sprightly
flavor; very good; mid-Aug.

=Linzer Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 188, fig. 1913.

A perry pear taking its name from the town of Linz near Hauptstadt
in Upper Austria. Fruit medium, globular to pyriform, yellow,
strongly carmined on the sun-exposed side and dotted with red; flesh
yellow-white, coarse-grained, with a saccharine, astringent flavor; Oct.

=Livingston Virgalieu. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 803. 1869.

An old variety, grown to some extent along the Hudson River. Fruit
globular-obovate, greenish-yellow, patched and dotted with russet;
flesh whitish, juicy, nearly melting, sweet, pleasant; good; Sept.

=Locke. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =3=:52. 1837. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
442. 1845.

Raised from seed in the garden of James Locke, West Cambridge, Mass.,
in 1830. Fruit medium, globular-obovate, full at the crown, ending
obtusely at the stem; skin fair, slightly rough, yellowish-green
changing to lemon-yellow when ripe, spots of darker hue mingled with
russet, tinged with red on the sunny side; flesh yellowish-white,
coarse, melting and juicy, rich, sweet and perfumed; good; Dec.

=Lodge. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 178, 179. 1832. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 803. 1869.

A native of Pennsylvania and understood to have originated near
Philadelphia. Fruit medium, pyriform, tapering to the stem and larger
on one side than on the other, greenish-brown, the green becoming a
little paler at maturity and much covered with patches of dull russet;
flesh whitish, a little gritty at the core, juicy, melting, with a
rather rich flavor, relieved by a pleasant acid; Sept. and Oct.

=Loire-de-Mons. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:109, fig. 151. 1878.

A gain of M. Loire, at Mons, Bel. Fruit medium, turbinate, or
globular-turbinate, usually regular in contour; skin rather fine
and tender, clear and bright green, sprinkled with gray-green dots;
at maturity the green becomes clear lemon and golden on the side of
the sun; flesh white, fine, very melting, full of juice, acidulous,
delicately perfumed; first; end of Sept.

=London Sugar. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 343. 1831. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 605. 1884.

English. Much cultivated in Norfolk for the Norwich market. Fruit below
medium, turbinate, pale green approaching lemon-yellow at maturity,
with a slight brownish tinge; flesh tender, melting; juice saccharine
and of a rich, musky flavor; an excellent early fruit; end of July.

=Long Green. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 803. 1869.

_Belgische Zapfenbirne._ =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:139. 1856.

_Longue-Verte._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:349, fig. 1869.

_Gruene Lange Herbstbirne._ =4=. Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 228. 1889.

This French pear is distinct from the _Verte Longue_ which is
synonymous with _Verte Longue d'Automne_, though these two pears have
been confused and have various names in common. It has been cultivated
in France for the last 100 years. _Longue Verte_ has ten French
synonyms. Fruit above medium, very long, fig-like in form, narrowed
from middle to stalk, acute, grass-green passing to brownish-green
on the face exposed to the sun, uniformly sprinkled with dots of
gray-russet; flesh greenish-white, fine or semi-fine, melting, rather
granular around the seeds; juice abundant, saccharine, sweet, with a
characteristic perfume, often very slight; second; Sept.

=Long Green of Autumn. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 804. 1869.

_Verte-Longue d'Automne._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:729, fig. 1869.

_Lange gruene Herbstbirne._ =3.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 112. 1825.

The Long Green of Autumn, better known abroad as the _Verte-Longue
d'Automne_ or _Verte-Longue_, must be distinguished from the Long Green
or _Longue-Verte_. It is of very ancient origin and mentioned in the
catalog, published by Le Lectier, King's Attorney, in 1628, of the
immense nursery he created in 1598. The German author Henri Manger,
1783, considered the _Verte-Longue_ identical with the _Viridium_ of
Pliny. Fruit medium to large, turbinate, slightly obtuse, often larger
on one side than on the other, green clouded with pale yellow, speckled
with large gray spots and very rarely blushed on the exposed side;
flesh white, fine, melting, very full of a saccharine, well-flavored,
musky juice; first when its juice is well perfumed, but rather
variable; Oct.

=Long Green of Esperin. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 804. 1869.

Belgian. Fruit medium, oblong-ovate-pyriform, greenish-yellow, blushed
with crimson on the cheek next the sun, patched and netted with russet,
with numerous brown dots; flesh yellowish-white, juicy, semi-melting,
vinous; good; Sept.

=Longland. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 415. 1831. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 605. 1884.

A very old English perry pear chiefly grown in Herefordshire. Fruit
small, turbinate, even, rather handsomely shaped, bright gold, tinged
and mottled all over with a lively russety orange, the side next the
sun having a pale red cheek; flesh yellow, very astringent.

=Longue du Bosquet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:348, fig. 1869.

A seedling raised by Leroy. It was reported in 1863. Fruit
medium, conic, elongated, regular, obtuse and round at the top,
greenish-yellow, dotted with gray, washed with brown at the
extremities; flesh greenish, semi-fine, melting, rather gritty at the
center; juice abundant, very saccharine, acidulous and deliciously
perfumed; first; Sept.

=Longue-garde. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1876.

On trial in the orchards of Messrs. Simon-Louis at Metz, Lorraine, in
1876. Fruit large, highly perfumed; in season until May.

=Longue-Sucree. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:49, fig. 217. 1879.

Either German or Austrian. Cataloged by Jahn in 1864. Fruit nearly
medium, conic-pyriform, dark green, dotted with gray-brown, changing
to pale yellow, clouded with red on the side of the sun, speckled with
whitish-gray; flesh whitish, fine, breaking, deficient in juice and
sugar, acidulous, with an unpleasant perfume; third; end of Aug.

=Longueville. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 605. 1884.

Much grown in the South of Scotland. It has been conjectured that
the tree was brought to Scotland from France by Douglas when Lord of
Longueville in the fifteenth century. Fruit large, obovate, regular
in outline and handsome, greenish-yellow, with a tinge of pale red
next the sun, covered with numerous gray-russet specks, so numerous
sometimes as to appear like network; flesh yellowish, breaking, tender,
very juicy, sweet and richly flavored; good.

=Longworth. 1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 172. 1892. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
Cat._ 41. 1909.

Originated at Dubuque, Iowa. Its great hardiness and freedom from
blight make it valuable in breeding for the North though its fruit is
not of such quality as to recommend it where choice varieties can be
grown. Fruit medium to large, obtuse-ovate, green turning to yellow;
good; mid-season.

=Lorenzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:47. 1856.

Saxony, 1803. Fruit medium, obtuse-conic, light green, blushed with
dark brown on the sunny side changing to light yellow, washed with
vivid red, green dots and some cinnamon-russet; flesh yellowish-white,
melting, rather gritty around the center; first for kitchen and market,
second for dessert; Sept.

=Loriol de Barny. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:351, fig. 1869.

A gain of Leroy from his seed beds at Angers, Fr.; it fruited for the
first time in 1862. Fruit medium or above, very long ovate-pyriform,
often bossed in its contour; skin thin, yellow-ochre, speckled with
minute gray dots and showing some stains of russet; flesh white, fine,
melting, almost free from grit; juice very abundant and sugary having a
delicate aroma; first; end of Aug. and beginning of Sept.

=Lothrop. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 46. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass.; it first
fruited in 1866. Fruit diameter 2-1/2 in., yellow with russet; flesh
white, with good flavor; mid-Sept.

=Loubiat. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98, 285. 1876.

This variety bears the name of the owner of the parent tree living
in the Dordogne. Fruit large, of handsome appearance; flesh yellow;
third, yet of good quality for its season; spring until July.

=Louis Cappe. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1876.

A seedling of Easter Beurre and of similar quality. On trial in the
orchards of Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Tree very
fertile and vigorous. Fruit medium to large, Bergamot in form; Nov. and
Dec.

=Louis Gregoire. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:147, fig. 72. 1866-73. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 606. 1884.

M. Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., obtained this pear from a seed
bed made in 1832. Fruit below medium, obtuse-turbinate, irregular in
form, much larger on one side than on the other, rather rough to the
touch, greenish-yellow, dotted and mottled with russet and generally
stained with fawn on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine and
semi-melting, juicy, sugary, highly acid, often rather astringent,
slightly musky, and sometimes rather delicate; second and sometimes
third when the astringency of its juice is too pronounced; Oct.

=Louis Noisette. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1876.

Published by Boisbunel in 1867. Tree very vigorous and fertile. Fruit
rather large, globular-turbinate; flesh fine, very melting and very
juicy, sugary and sprightly; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Louis Pasteur. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 223. 1909.

Obtained by Arsene Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Fruit smooth and fine, clear
yellow, strongly washed with fawn on one face and covered with patches
of the same color on the other side; flesh yellowish-white, the yellow
being more noticeable near the skin, very fine, melting, and sugary,
sprightly and perfumed; very good; Dec.

=Louis-Philippe. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 169. 1841. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:354, fig. 1869.

Origin uncertain, though it was described by Prevost, Rouen, Fr.,
in 1848. Fruit large, turbinate, very obtuse and very irregular
in form, swelled, especially on one side on its lower half; skin
rough and bronzed all over on a basis of gray-green, sprinkled with
numerous large, prominent, brownish dots; flesh white, semi-fine and
semi-breaking; juice not abundant, more or less acid, wanting in sugar,
slightly perfumed; second; early Oct.

=Louis Van Houte. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 108. 1876.

Classed by Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, with varieties of
doubtful or little merit.

=Louis Vilmorin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:355, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 1st App., 128. 1872.

Originated from seed of Beurre Clairgeau about 1863 by Andre Leroy,
Angers, Fr. Tree vigorous, rather spreading, very productive. Fruit
medium to large, pyriform, variable, yellow, netted and dotted with
russet, sometimes shaded with red; stem short, curved; calyx large,
open; basin medium, uneven, russeted; flesh white, half fine, juicy,
melting, sweet, slightly perfumed; good to very good; Dec.

=Louise-Bonne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:357, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 606. 1884.

Merlet the French pomologist was the first to write of this pear in
1675. Fruit above medium, variable in form, ovate-obtuse and swelled
in lower half, or long-pyriform, narrowed toward the stalk; skin thick,
smooth, bright green changing as it ripens to yellowish-green, strewed
with small dots and some markings of russet; flesh greenish-white,
coarse, semi-melting, gritty at center, juicy, only slightly
saccharine, generally sweetish and deficient in perfume; variable for
dessert, but first for compotes; Dec.

=Louise Bonne d'Avanches Panachee. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 607. 1884.

A variegated form of Louise Bonne de Jersey, the wood and fruit being
marked with golden stripes. It originated as a bud sport.

=Louise-Bonne de Printemps. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:359, fig. 1869.
=2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 804. 1869.

Obtained by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr., and first published in 1857.
Fruit above medium, long obtuse-pyriform, regular in contour,
mammillate at summit and slightly bossed at base, yellow-ochre, dotted
with greenish-gray; flesh semi-fine and semi-melting, white, gritty
around the center, very juicy, rarely sugary, slightly sweet and
slightly aromatic; grafted on pear and trained on espalier in a good
situation it is a pear of high merit; Feb. to Apr.

=Louise Bonne Sannier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876. =2.= _Cat. Cong.
Pom. France_ 291, fig. 1906.

M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr., obtained this pear; it was first reported
in 1868. Fruit rather small or medium, oval, obliquely obtuse near
the stem, dark yellow, touched with bright red; flesh yellow, juicy,
melting, remarkably saccharine, sprightly and perfumed; good to very
good; Oct. to Dec.

=Louise de Boulogne. 1.= Barry _Fr. Garden_ 317. 1851. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:361. 1869.

Described by Barry in 1851 among "new and rare pears, recently
introduced, that give promise of excellence." Leroy wrote of it as a
seedling of Van Mons. Fruit large, breaking, keeps through the winter.

=Louise Dupont. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:59, fig. 1854. =2.= _Mag.
Hort._ =23=:301. 1857.

Louise Dupont was the product of one of the last seedlings raised by
Van Mons and was harvested for the first time in 1853. Fruit rather
large, sometimes of Doyenne form but usually longer and more turbinate;
skin thin, dull green passing to golden yellow at maturity, colored
with russet-fawn on the sunny side, dotted and marked with fawn all
over; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, full of juice, saccharine and
well perfumed; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Louise d'Orleans. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =1=:140. 1846. =2.= _Ann. Pom.
Belge_ =2=:35, fig. 1853.

From seed sown by Van Mons in 1827 at Louvain and first bore fruit in
1843. Fruit medium, oblong-obtuse; skin is of a fine bronzed-green,
covered with gray speckles; flesh very white, fine grained and very
melting; juice exceedingly rich, sugary and delicious; early Nov.

=Louise de Prusse. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:362, fig. 1869.

Obtained by Van Mons and published by him in September, 1832, but it
had already been reported in 1826. Fruit large, turbinate-obtuse, more
or less long, considerably swelled toward its lower end; skin thick
and rough, yellow-ochre clouded with green, speckled with fine gray
dots and stained with light brown around the calyx and stem; flesh
white, semi-fine, breaking or semi-breaking, granular at center; juice
abundant, very saccharine, acidulous, pleasantly perfumed; second; Sept.

=Louison. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:86. 1831.

French. Fruit large, oblong and almost conical, terminated obtusely;
skin delicate and smooth, sometimes washed on the sunny side, and in
other cases pretty deeply tinged with red, speckled with brownish-red
dots, the other side being of a beautiful yellow, scattered with specks
of russet; flesh very white, melting, full of very pleasant juice,
slightly perfumed but not of high flavor; early Oct.

=Lovaux. 1.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 48. 1871.

Reported by the Committee on Foreign Fruits of the Ohio State
Horticultural Society as a new variety which they recommended. Fruit
large to medium, juicy, sweet, melting; good; Sept.

=Luebecker Prinzessin Birne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 249. 1889.

_Princesse de Lubeck._ =2.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1876.

German; extensively cultivated about Lubeck, Ger. Fruit medium,
long-pyriform, beautiful yellow, extensively covered with brilliant
crimson; flesh breaking, juicy; good; beginning of Aug.

=Lubin. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:187, fig. 579. 1881.

A seedling found by M. Pariset of Curciat-Dongalon, Ain, Fr.; first
reported in 1869. Fruit medium, conic-pyriform, regular in its contour,
obtuse, having its largest circumference well below its middle; skin
fine, delicate, at first a clear and bright green, sprinkled with very
numerous round, small, brown dots only very slightly visible on the
side of the sun; at maturity the basic green passes to lemon-yellow,
with a golden hue on the exposed side; flesh whitish, very fine,
melting, juicy, saccharine, slightly vinous, acidulous; good; winter.

=Lucie Audusson. 1.= _Pom. France_ =4=:No. 172, Pl. 172. 1865.

Obtained by Alexis Audusson, Angers, Fr.; first published in 1861.
Fruit large, long, nearly cylindrical, obtuse and slightly narrowed
toward the stem, grass-green, finely dotted and speckled with
fawn-colored russet; flesh yellowish-white, fine or semi-fine, melting;
juice abundant, sugary, vinous, delicately perfumed; first; mid-Nov. to
end of Dec.

=Lucien Chaure. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895.

Obtained by Arsene Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Tree healthy, vigorous and
adaptable for all forms of growth. Fruit medium, grayish-yellow; flesh
melting, juicy, fine and sugary; Oct. and Nov.

=Lucien Leclercq. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:366, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 806. 1869.

From a seed bed made by Van Mons in 1829, but it did not bear fruit
till after his death in 1844. Fruit below medium and sometimes rather
larger, globular-ovate, regular, rarely bossed, pale yellow on the
shaded side and darker yellow where exposed, dotted all over with fine
gray and green spots; flesh white, coarse, semi-melting and juicy,
sugary, acidulous, and aromatic, very gritty around the core; second;
latter half of Aug.

=Lucne Hative. 1.= Noisette _Man. Comp. Jard._ =2=:525. 1860.

Tree vigorous and productive. Fruit medium, elongated, pale green;
flesh semi-melting, sugary, moderately perfumed; good; Sept.

=Lucy Grieve. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 607. 1884.

English; bore fruit first in 1873. Named in honor of the little girl
who planted and tended the seed, but died before the tree fruited.
Fruit large, oval, rather uneven in outline, bossed around the waist
and about the calyx, lemon-yellow, with occasionally a brownish-red
blush on the side next the sun, sprinkled with cinnamon-colored dots;
flesh white, tender, melting, very juicy and richly flavored; first;
Oct.

=Luola. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

Said to be a cross between Seckel and Dana Hovey originated by W. C.
Eckard, Watervliet, Mich., about 1907. Fruit very small, globular,
greenish-yellow, with faint blush, very rich; excellent; Oct.

=Lutovka. 1.= _Me. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 62, 63. 1899.

Russian. Introduced in 1882. Fruit large; good; mid-season.

=Lutzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:190. 1856.

German, published in 1801. Fruit medium, obtuse-conic, dull
greenish-yellow, slightly blushed, strongly dotted, marked with russet,
and covered with rusty russet on the sun-exposed side; flesh granular,
gritty near center, semi-melting, aromatic; first for culinary uses;
Sept.

=Luxemburger Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 128, fig. 1913.

A perry pear widely distributed in France, Luxemburg, Germany and
Austria. Fruit large, globular-oblate, like Bergamot in form,
gray-green turning yellow-green when ripe sprinkled with large russet
dots and specklings; flesh whitish, coarse-grained, unusually juicy,
astringent and sweet flavor; end of Sept.

=Lycurgus. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =12=:365. 1857. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 806, fig. 1869.

Originated with George Hood, Cleveland, Ohio, from seed of Winter
Nelis. The tree is productive, and of rather spreading growth. Fruit
small, oblong-pyriform, greenish-yellow, much covered with thin
brownish-russet, many large grayish dots; flesh yellowish, juicy,
melting, sweet, rich, rather aromatic, having some perfume; first, one
of the best in quality of late winter pears; Dec. to Feb.

=Lydie Thierard. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 806. 1869. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 99. 1876.

Originated from a seed of Crassane by Jules Thierard, Bethel, Fr. Fruit
rather large, Bergamot-shaped, clear green, dotted; flesh fine, very
melting, sugary, perfumed; first; Jan. to Mar.

=Lyerle. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1897.

Raised by a Mr. Lyerle, Union County, Ill., in 1881 from seed of
Bartlett. Fruit medium, pyriform, yellowish-green, with numerous
patches of russet; flesh sugary; good; early July, four weeks ahead of
Bartlett.

=Lyon. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 807. 1869.

Originated at Newport, R. I. Fruit medium, oblong-obovate or
Doyenne-shaped, yellow, thick and smooth skin, finely dotted, blushed;
flesh coarse, a little gritty at core, vinous; very good; Oct.

=Mace. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 50. 1860.

Francis Dana showed this among other seedlings of his to the Fruit
Committee of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1860. Fruit
medium, oval, russet; flesh has something of the honeyed sweetness as
well as some external resemblance to Dana Hovey.

=Machlaender Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 48, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit large, pyriform, green turning to
yellowish-green, russeted; flesh granular, green under the skin,
subacid; Sept. and Oct.

=Mackleroy. 1.= _South. Nurs. Cat._ 4. 1921.

This variety, introduced by the Southern Nursery Company, Winchester,
Tenn., in 1921, is said to have been brought to Tennessee by Davis
Mackleroy from South Carolina over 100 years ago.

=McLaughlin. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:62. 1842. =2.= _Ibid._ =13=:251.
1847. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 807, fig. 1869.

In October, 1831, General Wingate of Portland, Me., stated "That a
person in Oxford County, many years since raised a number of pear trees
from seeds, all of which produced inferior fruit, with the exception of
one tree; and from that tree, the scions were taken and engrafted by
a Mr. McLaughin, of Scarborough." Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform; skin
slightly rough, bright cinnamon-russet, tinged with brownish-red on the
sunny side, with some traces of a bright yellow ground on the shaded
side; flesh yellowish, rather coarse, melting, juicy, rich, sugary;
Nov. to Jan.

=Macomber. 1.= _Rural N. Y._ =44=:263, figs. 145, 146. 1885.

Raised by J. T. Macomber, Grand Isle, Vt. Fruit medium, pyriform, green
changing to yellow, blushed; flesh buttery, melting, juicy, sweet; very
good; Oct. and Nov.

=McVean. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =9=:340. 1854. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 807. 1869.

Originated in Monroe County, N. Y., about 1850 or earlier. Fruit large,
obovate-acute-pyriform, yellow, with nettings and patches of russet,
and numerous green and brown dots; flesh coarse, not juicy, or melting,
sweet; good; Sept.

=Madame Alfred Conin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:371, fig. 1869.

Raised by Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr., in 1867. Fruit medium, turbinate,
obtuse, much swelled around central circumference, fairly regular,
clear yellow often covered all over with a layer of bronze on which are
scattered, uniformly, numerous grayish-brown dots, scarcely visible;
flesh whitish, fine, melting, watery, rarely gritty around the center;
juice abundant, sugary, with an extremely delicious perfume; first;
late Sept.

=Madame Andre Leroy. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:372, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 608. 1884.

Obtained from his seed beds by M. Andre Leroy at Angers, Fr.: first
published in 1862. Fruit medium to large, long-conic, slightly obtuse,
irregular, more or less misshapen, yellowish-green, entirely dotted,
especially at its extremities, with small points and slight patches of
gray; flesh greenish-white, fine or semi-fine, very melting, slightly
granular at center, juicy, sugary, vinous, with a very delicate flavor;
first; end of Sept.

=Madame Antoine Lormier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 57. 1895.

Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Tree vigorous and fertile. Fruit
medium or large, regular pyriform, yellow, dotted; flesh fine, melting,
very sugary; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Madame Appert. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:373, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 608. 1884.

Raised by M. Andre Leroy at Angers, Fr., in 1861. Fruit medium, long
pyriform, slightly obtuse, largest circumference around its middle,
much reduced at the extremities, especially at the summit, yellow, with
gray-russet, and numerous fawn-colored dots on the side of the sun and
around the stem; flesh whitish, fine, very melting, rarely gritty,
juicy, sugary, with a delicate flavor of almond, acidulous; first;
early Oct.

=Madame Arsene Sannier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895.

Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Fruit medium to large; flesh sugary,
slightly perfumed and of a pleasant flavor; Oct.

=Madame Ballet. 1.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 292, fig. 1906.

Obtained by M. Ballet, nurseryman at Parenty, Fr., and was placed on
the market in 1894. Fruit large, ovate, yellow, dotted with gray, and
brightened with a rose blush on the side next the sun; very good; Jan.
to Mar.

=Madame Baptiste Desportes. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:374, fig. 1869.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 608. 1884.

A seedling from the nurseries of Andre Leroy at Angers, Fr., which
ripened for the first time in 1863. Fruit above medium, globular-ovate,
rather regular, often a little bossed about the base; skin rather fine,
yellow-ochre, mottled, stained, and dotted with gray-russet; flesh fine
or semi-fine, melting, excessively juicy, saccharine, vinous, with a
very agreeable flavor; first; early Oct.

=Madame Blanchet. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 76. 1895.

Fruit medium, greenish-yellow covered with fawn; flesh fine, buttery,
of a delicate flavor; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Madame Bonnefond. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 135, fig. 164.
1866-73.

Obtained in 1848 by M. Bonnefond, Rhone, Fr., and placed on the market
for the first time in 1867. Fruit large, like Calebasse in form,
often irregular in contour; skin fine, delicate, clear yellow-green,
sprinkled with very small points of darker green; flesh white, slightly
greenish under the skin, fine, very melting and juicy, delicately
perfumed; very good; end of autumn.

=Madame Charles Gilbert. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis at Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. Fruit
medium sized, having much in common with Winter Nelis; Jan. to Apr.

=Madame Chaudy. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ N. S. =18=:211. 1882. =2.= _Cat.
Cong. Pom. France_ 296, fig. 1906.

Obtained by M. Chaudy at Chaponost, Rhone, Fr., from a seed bed made
in 1861. Fruit large, sometimes of the form of the Bartlett, generally
turbinate, swelled and bossed in its circumference; skin slightly
rough, pale yellow, dotted with gray, reddened on the side next the
sun, marbled and washed with clear fawn around the two ends; flesh
rather white, granular at center, rather fine, melting, very juicy,
saccharine, and agreeably acid and perfumed; very good; Nov.

=Madame Cuissard. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:375, fig. 1869.

Cuissard and Barret, nurserymen at Ecully-les-Lyon, Fr., obtained
this variety in 1865 and placed it on the market in 1867. Fruit above
medium, oblong and obtuse, swelled at its lower part and generally
more enlarged on one side than on the other; skin fine, golden-yellow,
sprinkled with large gray dots and some russet markings, and more or
less stained with clear brown around the stem; flesh white, semi-fine,
melting, gritty at the center; juice deficient; rather savory, but
slightly acerb; second; mid-Aug.

=Madame Delmotte. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 139. 1871. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =3=:73, fig. 133. 1878.

Obtained by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform,
dull green dotted with greenish-gray; flesh white, or slightly tinted
with yellow, very fine, buttery, melting, full of sweet juice,
delicately perfumed.

=Madame Ducar. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:376, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 808. 1869.

This was a posthumous gain of Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., dating
from 1846. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, regular in form, slightly
undulating around the summit; skin fine, rather dull yellow, finely
dotted and streaked with fawn; flesh white, coarse, semi-melting, very
gritty; juice sufficient, sugary, sweet, almost without perfume but
having a certain delicacy of taste; second; end of Aug.

=Madame Duparc. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:149, fig. 267. 1879.

Gained by M. Bessard-Duparc, near Savenay, Fr., and fruited first
about 1845. Fruit medium, ovate-obtuse-pyriform, regular in contour;
skin rather thick, lively green, speckled with indistinct darker green
spots, the green becoming brighter at maturity, a rather dense russet
sometimes covering the calyx and the summit; flesh white, coarse,
semi-buttery, gritty around the core; juice rather deficient, sugary
and only slightly scented; indifferent; Oct. and Nov.

=Madame Durieux. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:377, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 609. 1884.

A variety which came from the seed beds of Van Mons but did not fruit
till 1845. Fruit medium, globular, rather Bergamot-shaped, grayish or
greenish-yellow, covered with patches of thin cinnamon-colored russet,
yellowish, semi-fine, very melting, buttery, juicy, sugary, vinous,
aromatic; first; Oct.

=Madame Elisa. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:31, fig. 1856. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 808, fig. 1869.

Raised in the seed beds of Van Mons and first bore fruit in 1848. Fruit
large, obtuse-pyriform, often rather irregular in its upper half,
greenish-yellow passing to lemon-yellow at maturity, with numerous
small blackish-gray dots; flesh white, a little yellow next the skin,
fine, melting, free from grit, full of rich saccharine juice, vinous;
first; Sept. to Nov.

=Madame Elisa Dumas. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:19, fig. 298. 1880.

A seedling raised by M. Bonnefoy, near Lyons, Fr. He disseminated it
in 1857. Fruit medium, conic-ovate, regular in contour; skin thick, at
first whitish-green speckled with grayish-black dots, changing to pale
yellow, and more golden on the side next the sun; sometimes stains of
rough brown-russet are dispersed over its surface; flesh white, only
slightly firm without being breaking, rather gritty around the center,
full of sugary juice, vinous and refreshing; handsome and of good
quality; Aug.

=Madame Ernest Baltet. 1.= Baltet _Trait. Cult. Fr._ 317, fig. 208.
1908.

French. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, reddish-brown-yellow, with light
russet; flesh very fine, melting, very juicy, sugary, sprightly; very
good; Sept. and Oct.

=Madame Favre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:379, fig. 1869.

Obtained by M. Favre, president of the section of Arboriculture of the
Agricultural Society of Shalon-sur-Marne, Fr.; it first fruited in
1861. Fruit above medium and often larger, globular surface unequal
and bossed; skin rough, greenish-yellow, dotted, streaked, marbled,
stained with gray-russet and vermilioned on the cheek next the sun;
flesh white, very fine, melting; juice abundant, very sugary, vinous,
deliciously perfumed; first; end of Aug.

=Madame Flon. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 99. 1876.

Published by M. Flon in 1868. Fruit medium, globular, yellow and
gray-russet; flesh very melting and juicy, saccharine, sprightly,
perfumed; first; end of Dec.

=Madame Gregoire. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:97, fig. 1860. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 809. 1869.

Obtained in 1860 by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., and was published the
same year. Fruit medium to large, long-oval, obtuse; skin greasy, clear
green becoming yellow at maturity, marked with gray-russet, especially
around the stem, and some dots of whitish-gray; flesh yellowish-white,
fine, melting, very juicy, sugary, vinous, perfumed and acidulous; good
or very good; Dec. and Jan.

=Madame Henri Desportes. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:380, fig. 1869.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 609. 1884.

Raised by Leroy, Angers, Fr.; first fruited in 1863. Fruit large,
turbinate, uneven in outline, yellow, covered with russety dots and
patches; flesh yellowish-white, very fine and very melting, seldom
gritty, very juicy, saccharine, acidulous, with a decided aroma and
delicious flavor; excellent; first; Oct.

=Madame Loriol de Barny. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:381, fig. 1869.
=2.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 92. 1872.

Raised by Leroy in 1866 at his nurseries at Angers, Fr., from seed of
Bartlett. Fruit large, ovate and nearly cylindrical, always rather
irregular, clear yellow clouded with green, more or less streaked and
mottled with russet, covered with large, grayish-brown or greenish
dots and often stained with fawn around the calyx and stem; flesh
yellowish-white, excessively melting and fine, juicy, rarely gritty,
sugary, perfumed, with a tart flavor and a delicate and agreeable
after-taste of musk; first; Nov.

=Madame Lye-Baltet. 1.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 301, fig. 1906. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 185. 1920.

Obtained by Ernest Baltet, nurseryman at Troyes, Fr.; placed on the
market in 1877. Fruit medium or rather large, turbinate, obtuse,
swelled, truncated at base; skin fine, green or yellow-green all over,
dotted with russet and touched with fawn; flesh white, fine, melting,
juicy, sugary and perfumed; very good; Dec. and Jan.

=Madame de Madre. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 95. 1895. =2.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd
Ser. =30=:271. 1901.

Sent out by Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel., who raised it from Delices
d'Hardenpont, in 1881. Fruit medium, pyriform, rather elongated,
contracted at the lower end terminating in an oblique cone at the
base, compressed on two sides at the narrow end, rounded at the upper
end, citron-yellow lightly speckled with rust-red; flesh amber-white,
very delicate, melting, very juicy, sweet, with a pleasant perfume,
nutty and rather spicy; very good; Oct.

=Madame Millet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:382, fig. 1862. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 610. 1884.

Raised by Charles Millet of Ath, Bel., in 1840. Fruit large,
short-obovate or turbinate, rather uneven in its outline; flesh tender,
semi-melting, juicy, richly flavored; first; Mar. and Apr.

=Madame Morel. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 99. 1876.

Published by M. Morel in 1872. Fruit large; flesh very fine, compact,
very melting, juicy, sugary, vinous, sprightly; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Madame Planchon. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 99. 1876.

Belgian. Fruit large or very large, in form similar to Bartlett, golden
yellow dotted with russet; flesh granular, very juicy; cooking; end of
Oct. and beginning of Nov.

=Madame Du Puis. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 147. 1891. =2.= _Cat. Cong. Pom.
France_ 298, fig. 1906.

A gain of Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel., in 1878. Fruit rather large
or large, long, obtuse-pyriform, rounded at lower end, yellow but
nearly covered with smooth fawn-russet; flesh very fine, melting, very
juicy, sugary, sprightly and perfumed; very good; Dec. to Feb.

=Madame de Roucourt. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 58. 1895.

Distributed by Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit medium to large,
yellowish, dotted with dark brown; flesh fine, saccharine, perfumed;
good; Oct.

=Madame Stoff. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ =2=:220. 1887.

Obtained from seed by M. Stoff. Fruit large or medium,
regular-pyramidal, olive-green speckled with red; flesh fine, melting,
buttery, delicate and brisk in flavor; Feb.

=Madame Torfs. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1895.

Described as a new variety and distributed by Daras de Naghin, Antwerp,
Bel., in 1895. Fruit medium to large, greenish-yellow, sprinkled with
patches of fawn-russet; flesh fine and juicy, white around center,
clouded with green toward the skin, very sugary; Oct.

=Madame Treyve. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:383, fig. 1869. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 185. 1920.

_Souvenir de Madame Treyve._ =3.= _Pom. France_ =2=:No. 63, Pl. 63.
1864.

From seed sown in 1848 by M. Treyve, Trevaux, Fr. Fruit large, obtusely
obovate, bossed and always very much swelled around its lower part,
greenish-yellow, dotted, streaked, and often touched with fawn on the
shaded side, but brilliantly encrimsoned on the side exposed to the sun
and dotted on that side with gray; flesh white, semi-fine, melting,
very juicy, saccharine, acidulous, with a delicate and fine aroma;
first, a delicious dessert pear; Sept.

=Madame Vazille. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:384, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 610. 1884.

From the seed beds of M. Leroy, Angers, Fr.; first fruit in 1866. Fruit
above medium, conic-obtuse, fairly regular in outline but always having
one side larger than the other; skin thick, somewhat uneven, bronzed
all over, sprinkled with dots widely apart and only slightly visible;
flesh whitish, fine, melting or semi-melting, very juicy, saccharine,
vinous, having a very pleasant flavor; first; Sept.

=Madame Verte. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:385, fig. 1869.

Origin uncertain, but it was first sent out by M. de Jonghe, Brussels,
Bel., and then extensively propagated in France. Fruit medium,
globular-ovate, irregular, yellowish-green, much washed with brown-fawn
and speckled with small ashen-gray dots; flesh yellowish, semi-fine,
semi-melting, granular at center; juice abundant, sugary, acidulous,
with a somewhat savory perfume and after taste of anis; second,
variable; from end of Nov. to Jan.

=Madame Von Siebold. 1.= =Guide Prat.= 115. 1876. =2.= _Cornell Sta.
Bul._ =332=:485. 1913.

Japan. The following description was made on the grounds of Messrs.
Simon-Louis Bros., Metz, Lorraine: "Madame Von Siebold.--Fruit very
large, rounded, a little narrow toward the cavity, where it is angular;
truncated at the base and indented at the circumference.... Skin rather
smooth, of a pretty brown color, dotted with large gray specks which
are very regular and very apparent. Flesh white, slightly yellowish,
medium fine, crisp, juicy, sweet, perfumed like quinces, almost eatable
raw. The most beautiful of the Japanese--Simon-Louis Freres."

=Madeleine d'Angers. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:386, fig. 1869.

From the environs of Segre or of Beaupreau, districts in the same
department (Maine), where it has been generally grown for 150 years.
Fruit medium and sometimes below, conic and very elongated, somewhat
contorted at the upper end, grass-green passing to greenish-yellow
on the part near the stalk and dotted with gray-russet; flesh white,
semi-fine or coarse, rather melting, watery and gritty; juice abundant,
sugary, more or less acid, and only slightly perfumed; third; end of
July.

=Mademoiselle Blanche Sannier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1895.

A French variety. Fruit large, oblong-pyriform; flesh fine, melting,
perfumed, juicy; Oct.

=Mademoiselle Marguerite Gaujard. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1895.

Obtained by M. Gaujard at Ghent, Fr.; described as a new variety
in 1895. Fruit oblong, rather gourd-shaped in form, covered with
gray-russet and slightly blushed on the exposed side; flesh melting, of
a sprightly taste, perfumed; Jan. to Mar.

=Mademoiselle Solange. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =15=:120. 1888.

Described by the Fruit Committee of the Royal Horticultural Society of
England in 1887 as a new variety. Fruit small, nearly globular, green,
juicy and of good flavor.

=Magherman. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 110. 1876.

Tree very vigorous, beautiful in aspect and extremely fertile. Fruit
large or very large, long-pyriform, regular in outline, yellow streaked
with carmine; flesh yellowish, excessively melting and very juicy,
sugary and having an exquisite perfume; first; second half of Sept.

=Magnate. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 610. 1884. =2.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy
Fr._ 186. 1920.

A seedling raised by Rivers of Sawbridgeworth, Eng., from Louise
Bonne de Jersey prior to 1880. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, even and
symmetrical in outline, yellow covered with rather dark brown-russet,
thickly strewed with large russet freckles, blushed and streaked with
crimson; flesh yellow, tender, melting, rather gritty at the core,
richly flavored, and with a slight perfume of rose-water; very good;
Oct. and Nov.

=Magnolia. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Cat._ 41. 1909. =2.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._
=332=:484. 1913.

An oriental hybrid which originated in southern Georgia. Fruit large,
globular to pyriform, smooth, yellowish-russet, with numerous irregular
dots; flesh white, crisp, tender, juicy, mild, subacid; fair; "three or
four weeks later than Kieffer in the South."

=Malconnaitre d'Haspin. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 810. 1869.

Tree vigorous, hardy and productive. Fruit large, globular-obovate,
dull yellow, with brownish-red cheek, stippled with coarse dots, and
russeted at the calyx; flesh juicy, tender, and melting, rich, subacid,
perfumed; Oct. and Nov.

=Malvoisie de Landsberg. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:171, fig. 182. 1878.

Obtained by Judge Burchardt, Landsberg, Brandenbourg, Ger. Fruit rather
large, pyriform, more or less swelled, even in contour, but often
irregular in form; skin somewhat firm, at first water-green, dotted
with gray, the green changing to yellow and the side next the sun being
at maturity slightly washed with rosy red; flesh white, rather fine,
buttery, juicy, sweet, acidulous, having a sprightly and somewhat musky
flavor; good; Oct.

=Manchester. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 810. 1869.

Originated in Providence, R. I. Fruit medium, obovate-pyriform, yellow,
with traces and numerous dots of russet; flesh white, moderately juicy,
semi-melting, sweet, agreeable; good; Oct.

=Mandelblaettrige Schneebirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:199.
1856.

A French wilding; published 1810. Tree dwarf. Fruit small,
globular-turbinate, green, smooth; flesh firm, astringent; winter.

=Manning. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff of Brookline, Mass. Fruited in
1866. Fruit large, obovate, yellow with russet streaks and dots; flesh
fine-grained, white, juicy, with a rich, pleasant flavor; first; Sept.

=Mannsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:187. 1856.

Wuerttemberg, Ger., 1830. Classed among the Pound pears or
Libralia. Fruit large, globular-turbinate, dull green changing to
yellowish-green, blushed, both ends covered with russet, rusty dots;
third for table, first for kitchen; Nov. and Dec.

=Mansfield. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 811. 1869.

A native variety of uncertain origin. Fruit medium, globular-oblate,
yellowish-green, with considerable russet and many green and brown
dots; flesh whitish, coarse, buttery, melting, sweet, a little
astringent; good; Sept.

=Mansuette. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:220, Pl. LVIII, fig. 1.
1768. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 611. 1884.

_Solitaire._ =3.= Christ _Handb._ 534. 1817.

Origin unknown. Fruit large, long-obovate, irregular, obtuse, pale
green, spotted with brown and much covered with the same color on the
shaded side, and tinged with red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh
white, semi-melting, moderately fine, inclined to grow soft, juicy,
pleasantly acid and well flavored; a dessert pear; Sept. and Oct.

=Mansuette Double. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:388, fig. 1869.

This French cooking pear was first described in 1805. Fruit sometimes
considerable, rather variable in form, often conic, obtuse, very
swelled in the lower part and slightly bossed, sometimes very long
ovate having one side near the base larger than the other, dark yellow,
much covered with cinnamon-russet and large dots of ashy gray; flesh
greenish-white, coarse, juicy, semi-breaking or breaking, very gritty
at the core; juice abundant, deficient in sugar, wanting in perfume,
often too acid; second; Oct. to Dec.

=Marasquine. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:123, fig. 1866-73. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 99. 1876.

Raised by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel. Fruit medium, regular-pyriform,
tender green, sprinkled with grayish dots, golden at maturity; flesh
very white, fine, buttery, melting, slightly gritty at the center;
juice sufficient, having a characteristic perfume; end of Aug.

=March Bergamot. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 811. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 611. 1884.

Raised by T. A. Knight, President of the Horticultural Society of
London. Fruit small or medium, globular, green or yellowish-brown,
partially covered with russet; flesh yellowish-white, buttery, slightly
gritty at the core, but very rich; in Europe it is a dessert pear of
high merit; in this country, however, it seems to be of small worth;
Mar. and will keep later.

=Marechal de Cour. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:390, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 612. 1884.

A seedling of Van Mons of which he sent grafts to Alexandre Bivort,
five months before his death, in April, 1842. Fruit large, sometimes
very large, oblong-pyriform or obtuse-turbinate, one side always
smaller than the other, thickly encrusted with russet so that but
little of the yellow ground is visible; flesh white, semi-fine,
melting, gritty at center, extremely juicy, sugary, vinous, perfumed;
first; Sept. to Nov.

=Marechal Dillen. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:391, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 612. 1884.

Raised by Van Mons in 1818 and was published by him in 1820. Fruit very
large, obtuse-obovate, yellowish-green, mottled with patches and dots
of brown-russet; flesh white, fine, melting, juicy, very saccharine,
having a very agreeable flavor of vinegar and musk; first, an excellent
dessert pear; Oct. and Nov.

=Marechal Pelissier. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 523. 1857. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:393. 1869.

This pear was raised by M. Flon, Senior, the well-known horticulturist,
of Angevin, Fr., in 1845. Fruit medium, ovate, yellow, blushed with red
on the side next the sun; flesh tender, juicy; Sept. and Oct.

=Marechal Vaillant. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:393, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 612. 1884.

A seedling of M. Boisbunel of Rouen, Fr., gained in 1864. Fruit very
large, obovate, uneven in outline, yellowish-green, mottled and
dotted with russet; flesh whitish, rather fine, semi-melting; juice
sufficient, sugary, vinous, richly flavored and musky; an excellent
pear; mid-Dec. to end of Jan.

=Margarethenbirne. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 119. 1825. =2.= Dochnahl
_Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:30. 1856.

German. Reported in 1789. Fruit small, turbinate, greenish-yellow and
heavily dotted with green, seldom blushed; flesh semi-breaking, juicy
and aromatic; third for dessert, first for kitchen and market; mid-July.

=Marguerite d'Anjou. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:394, fig. 1869.

M. Flon, Angers, obtained this from a seedling in 1863. Fruit above
medium, irregular-ovate, and bossed, more enlarged on one side than on
the other and often slightly contorted, clear yellow, slightly tinted
with pale rose on the side next the sun; flesh white, fine, dense,
melting, watery, free from grit; juice abundant, highly saccharine,
acidulous, possesses a delicious flavor recalling the perfume of the
violet; first; Oct.

=Marguerite Chevalier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 99. 1876.

Fruit medium, nearly spherical, almost entirely covered with
fawn-russet; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sprightly; good; end of autumn.

=Marguerite Marillat. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 45. 1895. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 186. 1920.

Similar to Souvenir du Congres but of brighter golden hue, obtained
by M. Marillat, Craponne, near Lyons, Fr., 1874. Fruit large,
pyriform-turbinate, pale yellow touched with fawn-russet, blushed
with red on the side next the sun, sometimes a rich golden yellow at
maturity; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine, very juicy, saccharine,
acidulous, aromatic, slightly musky, very rich; second; early Sept.

=Maria. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1895.

Sent out by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit rather large,
oblong-ovate; flesh yellowish, very agreeable; Feb. and Mar.

=Maria de Nantes. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:39, fig. 1854. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 812. 1869.

Raised by M. Garnier near Nantes, Fr., and reported in 1853. Fruit
nearly medium, globular-turbinate or oval-turbinate, greenish-yellow
covered with fawn-russet; flesh fine, buttery, melting; juice
saccharine, highly perfumed, and acidulous; first; Oct. to Dec.

=Maria Stuart. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:69. 1856.

Belgian, 1851. A Van Mons seedling. Fruit large, conic, bent, with
unequal sides, lemon-yellow, covered densely with gray dots, lightly
russeted; very good for all purposes; Oct.

=Marianne de Nancy. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:396, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 812. 1869.

A seedling of Van Mons who sent cuttings of it a few days before
his death to M. Millot, a pomologist at Nancy, Fr. Fruit medium,
obtuse-turbinate, very regular and even in contour, grass-green,
stained with brown-russet; flesh whitish, fine, melting or
semi-melting; juice abundant, very sugary, acidulous; second, though
sometimes first when its flesh is very melting and its juice full of
flavor; mid-Aug.

=Marie Benoist. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:397, fig. 1869. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 187. 1920.

Obtained from seed by Auguste Benoist, Brissac, Maine-et-Loire, Fr., in
1853. Fruit large, turbinate, very irregular, obtuse and mammillate at
the summit, globular at the base and generally much more enlarged on
one side than on the other, clear green, dotted and veined with russet,
stained with fawn especially around the calyx and stem; flesh white,
fine, melting, a little gritty; juice abundant, saccharine, vinous,
delicately perfumed; first; Dec. to Feb.

=Marie Guisse. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:398, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 613. 1884.

Grown from seed of St. Germain in 1834, near Metz, Lorraine. Fruit
medium, obovate-oblong-pyriform, surface uneven, yellow, with shades
of red in the sun, and large, dull dark specks; flesh yellowish-white,
granular, melting, sweet, vinous; Dec. to Feb.

=Marie Henriette. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1895.

Sent out by Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit small or medium,
globular; flesh granular, very juicy and sugary; first; Oct.

=Marie Jallais. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1876.

Obtained by Jules Buneau, 1868. Fruit medium, form variable; flesh
melting, juicy, very sugary and perfumed, of a sprightly flavor; first;
Oct. to Dec.

=Marie Louise Nova. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 400. 1845. =2.= _Ibid._
813. 1869.

Sent by Van Mons to Mr. Manning, and though in some seasons
very good, it cannot compare with Marie Louise. Fruit medium,
regular-acute-pyriform, yellow, with a brownish-red cheek; flesh at
first melting, juicy, but quickly decays; good; end of Sept.

=Marie Louise d'Uncle. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 1060, 1179. 1865. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 187. 1920.

Marie Louise d'Uncle is a seedling of Marie Louise raised by M.
Gambier, a neighbor and contemporary of Van Mons. It produced its first
fruits in 1846. Fruit rather large, pyriform, pale cinnamon-colored
russet, rather similar to Marie Louise; flesh very fine, very melting,
buttery, saccharine, very juicy and richly flavored; good to very good;
Sept. and Oct.

=Marie Mottin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1895.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis at Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. Fruit
large; flesh melting; first; Oct.

=Marie Parent. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:401, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 814. 1869.

Raised by Bivort, director of the nurseries of the Society Van Mons
at Geest-Saint-Remy, Bel., from a seed bed formed in 1844 from seeds
of the last generation of Van Mons' seedlings. Fruit above medium,
oblong, more or less cylindrical and bossed, or turbinate, very much
swelled at the base and bossed at either extremity; skin fine ochre or
golden yellow, dotted and stained with russet, washed with brick-red
on the cheek next the sun; flesh white, fine, melting or semi-melting,
containing numerous small grits around the core, juicy, sugary, vinous,
perfumed; first; Oct., often till Dec.

=Marietta. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:484. 1913.

An oriental hybrid. Tree is said to be inclined to grow tall, with a
single main stem. Fruit light yellow, with red blush; Oct.

=Mariette de Millepieds. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:403, fig. 1869.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 614. 1884.

A very late pear which came from the seed beds of Maurice Goubalt, a
nurseryman in the suburbs of Angers, Fr., fruiting after his death, in
1854. Fruit large, ovate, irregular and bossed or turbinate, slightly
obtuse, one side larger than the other, rough to the touch, rather
thick, yellowish-green, washed with dark russet on the cheek next the
sun; flesh white, very fine, melting, juicy and scented, refreshing,
sugary, acidulous, having an exquisite flavor; first; Mar. often till
May.

=Markbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:103. 1856.

Mid-Germany, 1797. Fruit fairly large, ventriculous, faint light green
turning to pale green, often blushed and dotted with greenish-gray
specks and marked with russet; flesh white, fairly soft, buttery,
melting, full of flavor; very good for the table and good for culinary
purposes; Dec. and Jan.

=Marksbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:162. 1856.

Thuringia, Ger., 1799. Fruit small, globular, flattened,
greenish-yellow, speckled with yellowish-gray and greenish dots; flesh
firm, breaking, juicy and acidulous; first for household; Sept.

=Marmion. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 814. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=3=:29, fig. 111. 1878.

According to the Bulletin of the Societe Van Mons this was either
obtained or propagated by M. Bivort in Belgium. Fruit nearly medium,
turbinate, dull water-green, sprinkled with numerous and rather large
brown spots, the basic green passing at maturity to lemon-yellow
and warmly golden on the side of the sun; flesh white, rather fine,
breaking, fairly juicy, saccharine and sprightly; dessert; Sept.

=Marquise. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:221, Pl. XLIX. 1768. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 614. 1884.

Of French origin. Merlet described it in 1675 in his _Abrege des bons
fruits_. Fruit above medium, turbinate, globular in the lower part,
conic and slightly obtuse in the upper, bright green changing to
yellowish, with a brownish tinge on the side next the sun, thickly
covered with dots, which are green on the shaded side and brown or gray
on the other; flesh white, semi-fine, breaking, full of sugary juice,
slightly acid and musky, and very delicate; a good dessert pear; Nov.
and Dec.

=Marquise de Bedman. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 814. 1869.

Foreign. Fruit medium or below, roundish-pyriform, pale
greenish-yellow, with a few traces and patches of russet and many green
and brown dots; flesh white, sweet, rather firm; good; Sept.

=Marsaneix. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:406, fig. 1869.

A cooking pear of no particular merit which originated at the market
town of Marsaneix, Department of Dordogne, Fr., and was cultivated on
the farms of that country in the middle of the eighteenth century.
Fruit small, globular, regular in form; skin rough, entirely russeted,
dotted with yellowish-gray; flesh whitish, semi-fine, breaking,
scented, gritty; juice abundant but deficient in sugar, insipid; second
and for cooking only; Jan. and Feb.

=Marshall. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 3rd App. 179. 1881.

Said to have originated on the farm of William Marshall, Cambridge, N.
Y., some years previous to 1881. Fruit medium, globular, inclining to
obtuse-pyriform, yellow, netted and patched with russet over nearly
the whole surface and thickly sprinkled with russet dots; flesh white,
semi-fine, juicy, semi-melting, slightly vinous and slightly aromatic;
very good; end of Sept.

=Marshall Wilder. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:407, fig. 1869. =2.=
_Horticulturist_ =27=:150. 1872.

Originated in the nurseries of M. Leroy at Angers, Fr., in 1866. Fruit
large, long-conic, very irregular, somewhat like Calebasse in form,
more or less bossed; skin rough, clear green slightly yellowish, dotted
with gray-russet, marbled with brown and scaly; flesh yellowish-white,
fine or semi-fine, juicy, very melting, sugary, deliciously perfumed
and refreshing; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Martha Ann. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =16=:547. 1850.

A seedling raised by Francis Dana, Roxbury, Mass. Fruit medium or
below, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, yellowish-green, with patches and dots
of russet; flesh coarse, juicy, astringent; poor; Oct.

=Martin. 1.= _Kans. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 171. 1886.

Originated in Cowley, Kans., and reported as a new fruit and a
good substitute for the Vicar of Winkfield. Fruit medium to large,
oblate-pyriform, irregular, greenish changing to yellowish-white,
smooth; flesh firm, fine grained, buttery, juicy; fair; Jan.

=Martin-Sec. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:408, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 615. 1884.

_Trockener Martin._ =3.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 216, fig. 1913.

Hogg tells us that this and the Martin Sire are among the earliest
varieties known to have been grown in England, for they are mentioned
among the fruits delivered into the Treasury by the fruiterer of
Edward I in 1292. In 1530 Charles Estienne of Paris wrote of it as
being cultivated in France and affirmed the Pears of Saint Martin were
so named because their time of ripening coincided with the Festival
of that Saint. Again, in 1675 Merlet in his _Abrege des bons fruits_
spoke of the Martin-Sec of Provins or of Champagne. Fruit medium or
above, long-pyriform-obtuse, regular in form, yellowish and russeted,
dotted with gray points and extensively washed with carmine on the face
exposed to the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine, very breaking, rather
dry, but sweet and perfumed, very gritty when grafted on quince; third;
mid-Nov. to Feb.

=Martin-Sire. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:145, Pl. XIX, fig. 5.
1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:410, fig. 1869. =3.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 615. 1884.

This pear, sometimes known as _Lord Martin Pear_, was grown in
England in the thirteenth century. By Claude Saint-Etienne in 1628 it
was mentioned under two of its most ancient names, Martin-Sire and
_Ronville_. In the eighteenth century Mayer in the _Pomona franconica_
said the name Martin-Sire which was the most generally recognized of
its many names originated from a former Lord of Ronville whose name was
Martin. Fruit medium, pyriform, obtuse and very regular; skin fine,
smooth and shining, bright green changing to a fine deep yellow, dotted
and marked with fawn, carmined on the side next the sun; flesh whitish,
semi-fine, breaking, fairly juicy, sweet, perfumed and often with an
after-taste of musk; more fit for stewing than dessert; Dec. to Feb.

=Marulis. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:388. 1843. =2.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 397.
1854.

Foreign. Fruit small, globular, greenish-yellow; poor; Sept.

=Mary (Case). 1.= Downing. _Fr. Trees Am._ 815. 1869

Originated in the grounds of William Case, Cleveland, Ohio. Fruit small
to medium, globular-pyriform, greenish-yellow, slight blush in the sun
and many minute brown dots; flesh white, juicy, almost buttery, sweet
and acid; very good; last of July.

=Mary= (Van Mons). =1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:411, fig. 1869.

A seedling obtained by Van Mons, which gave its first fruit at Brussels
about the year 1818. Fruit medium and often above medium, ovate,
obtuse, rather regular but generally a little depressed on one side at
the calyx, yellow-ochre stained with fawn-brown around the stem and
sprinkled with light marblings and large dots of green and russet, very
numerous around the base; flesh whitish, very fine, melting; juice very
abundant, sugary, with a vinegary flavor both delicate and refreshing;
first; mid-Oct.

=Mascon Colmar. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:106. 1856.

Originated from seed at Nassau, Ger., 1825. Fruit medium, obtuse-conic,
distorted in form, light green turning yellowish-green at maturity,
free from any red blush, but much russeted and dotted; flesh white,
buttery, melting, juicy, full of flavor; good for dessert and culinary
purposes; Feb.

=Masselbacher Mostbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:193. 1856.

A perry pear. Wuerttemberg, Ger., 1847. Fruit small, almost a sphere,
green turning to yellow, much covered with russet; flesh firm,
granular, acidulous; very good for perry and good for household use;
end of Sept. and early Oct.

=Masuret. 1.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 374. 1908.

One of the best French perry pears suitable for commercial and amateur
growers; good for the production of sparkling perry; juice clear and
very full of perfume; end of Nov.

=Mather. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 82. 1856. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 815. 1869.

The Mather pear originated with John Mather, Jenkintown, Pa., from seed
planted by him about 1810. Fruit below medium, obovate, yellow, with
occasionally a red mottled cheek and russeted at the insertion of the
stem; flesh rather coarse, buttery, of delicate flavor and agreeable;
good; Aug.

=Mathilde. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:55. 1856.

A Van Mons seedling, 1852. Fruit medium, ovate, greenish changing
to greenish-yellow, blushed, and speckled with gray dots; flesh
semi-melting, granular, sweet, vinous; second for dessert, first for
kitchen and market purposes; end of Aug. for 14 days.

=Mathilde Gomand. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1876.

Published by Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium; skin russeted;
flesh melting; first; Jan.

=Mathilde Recq. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1895.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, at Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. Tree
vigorous and fertile. Fruit, flesh fine, very saccharine and highly
perfumed; Nov.

=Mathilde de Rochefort. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1895.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis at Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. Tree
vigorous, forming good pyramids. Fruit small, ovate, covered with
russet; flesh fine, melting, very juicy and sugary; Dec.

=Matou. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:414, fig. 1869.

A variety, known also as _Chat-Grille_ and _Chat-Roti_ in France
and which must not be confounded with the _Chat-Brule_, already
described, which ripens in December. Its origin is unknown. Fruit
medium, obtuse-pyriform and enlarged around central circumference,
golden-yellow, dotted and marbled with gray-russet, washed with carmine
on the face exposed to the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine, breaking,
watery, very granular at the center; juice rather abundant, rarely very
saccharine, astringent, almost devoid of perfume; third; mid-Aug.

=Matthews. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 82. 1903. =2.= _Hopedale Nurs.
Cat._ 17. 1913.

Brought from New Jersey about 1835 by a Mr. Chiever and planted at
Delavan, Ill. Tree long-lived, a late bearer. Fruit medium to large,
apple-shaped, green turning yellow, sweet, juicy; Oct. to Feb.

=Maud Hogg. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ =20=:30. 1871. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
615. 1884.

Raised by John Mannington, Uckfield, in the Weald of Sussex, Eng.; bore
fruit in 1871 for the first time. Fruit above medium, oblong-obovate;
skin entirely covered with a crust of warm brown-russet like that of
the Beurre Gris, and has a slight orange glow on the side exposed to
the sun, very much like the Chaumontel, no yellow or ground color
visible; flesh yellowish-white, tender and buttery, very juicy, sweet,
richly flavored; a dessert pear of the first quality; Oct. to Dec.

=Maude. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1876.

A French perry pear abundantly cultivated in the Haute-Savoie, Fr.
Fruit medium, globular, grayish-green washed with red; flesh coarse,
remarkably juicy.

=Maurice Desportes. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:415, fig. 1869.

This came from the seed beds of M. Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr., and first
fruited in 1863. Fruit medium, oblong-conic, yellow, dotted with gray,
blushed on the sunny side; stem long, rather stout, continuous with the
fruit; calyx small, open, in a large cavity; flesh white, rather fine
and rather melting, slightly granular, juicy, sweet; first; Sept.

=Mausebirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:138. 1856.

Hanover, Ger., 1852. Fruit medium to large, variable in form,
distorted, bossed; skin fine, greenish turning to yellow when ripe,
almost entirely covered with cinnamon-russet, sprinkled with green
spots; flesh yellowish-white, sweet and scented with rose; first for
the table and kitchen use; Oct.

=Mayflower. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

A seedling raised by Dr. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., which fruited
first in 1863. Fruit "short diameter 2-1/2 inches, long diameter 3
inches; flesh rather dry and firm; skin yellow, with red cheek; keeps
soundly without extra care until May. A most prolific bearer. Short
pyriform."

=Maynard. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 52. 1857. =2.= _Ibid._ 815. 1869.

Origin unknown but thought to have been first grown in Lancaster
County, Pa. Fruit medium, obovate-pyriform, yellow with russet dots and
a crimson cheek; flesh white, juicy and sugary; moderately good; end of
July.

=Mayr fruehzeitige Butterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:113.
1856.

Reported at Gratz, Styria, Austria, 1833. Fruit medium,
turbinate-pyriform, uniformly light yellow, slightly russeted on the
side next the sun, often with no russet; flesh white, soft, melting,
full of flavor, keeps well; first for dessert, good for culinary use
and market; Sept. and Oct.

=Max. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 73. 1895.

A seedling of Flemish Beauty grown in Ohio. Fruit medium,
globular-pyriform, yellow brightly blushed, flavor vinous, subacid;
good; Sept. in Ohio.

=Mecham. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 195. 1867.

A seedling pear reported from St. George, Utah, in 1867. Fruit very
large, bright green, ripens in Oct.

=Medaille d'Ete. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1876.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis of Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit
large, ovate-pyramidal, lemon-yellow; flesh semi-breaking, very juicy,
highly perfumed; Aug.

=Medofka. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =17=:292. 1894.

Russian. Fruit very small, conical, clear yellow; flesh very melting,
agreeable.

=Meissner Grossvatersbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:34. 1856.

Reported to be of Saxon origin, 1833. Fruit small, turbinate, almost
entirely covered with light brown-russet, and sprinkled with round red
spots; flesh juicy, semi-melting, having a strong aroma of cinnamon.

=Meissner Hirschbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:7. 1856.

Saxony, 1803. Fruit medium, conic, bossed, pale light green changing
at maturity to light lemon-yellow, often washed extensively with dark
blood-red, numerous reddish dots, scentless; flesh breaking, juicy,
aromatic; first for household and market; Aug.

=Meissner langstielige Feigenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:167. 1856.

Saxony, 1805. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, ventriculous and flat,
crooked, somewhat uneven, light green changing to yellowish-green,
often blushed with dark red, without dots, marked with russet; flesh
yellowish-green white, coarse-grained, sweet, firm, breaking; third for
dessert, first for kitchen; Oct.

=Meissner Liebchensbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:167. 1856.

German, chiefly found in Saxony. Fruit small,
globular-ventriculous-conic; skin shining, lemon-yellow, becoming
highly polished, strongly dotted with round red spots, often marked
with fine russet on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish-white,
coarse-grained, firm, breaking, wanting in juice; third for the table,
first for kitchen and market.

=Meissner Zwiebelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:34. 1856.

Saxony, 1833. Fruit small, globular, light yellow, speckled with
numerous fine russety spots; flesh often melting, with musky aroma,
fine-grained; first for table and very good for culinary purposes; end
of Aug. for three weeks.

=Melanie Michelin. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:55, fig. 412. 1880.

Gained by M. Boisbunel, Junior, Rouen, Fr. Fruit medium,
ovate-pyriform, even in contour; skin rather thick, whitish-green,
sprinkled with fairly numerous and rather large green spots, scarcely
visible and often absent altogether; when ripe the basic green
takes a more yellow tone on the side of the sun, and in the case of
well-exposed fruits is blushed with a very light rosy red; flesh
whitish, slightly tinted with green, tender, a little soft, melting,
full of sweet juice and delicately perfumed; good; mid-July.

=Mellish. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 815. 1869.

Fruit below medium, globular-pyriform, pale yellow, netted, patched and
dotted with russet; flesh whitish, juicy, melting, sweet, pleasant;
good to very good; Oct.

=Melon. 1.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:77, Tab. 1. 1771. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:417, fig. 1869.

Of Dutch origin; first described in the Pomology of Knoop in 1766.
Fruit medium, typically pyriform, slightly obtuse, regular in outline,
sometimes a little uneven and crooked, greenish-yellow when ripe
and more or less marked with black, or dark brown, stains, of poor
appearance; flesh delicate and gritty, rather succulent and savory but
having no particular flavor, not sprightly nor does it justify its
name; Aug. and Sept.

=Melon de Hellmann. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:83, fig. 330. 1880.

Grown by M. Hellmann, Meiningen, Ger. Fruit large, spherical, even in
outline, intense green passing to decided yellow when ripe and warmly
golden on the side of the sun, numerous dark green spots; flesh white,
coarse, semi-breaking; juice sugary, perfumed and agreeable; second,
good for cooking; Sept.

=Menagere Sucree de Van Mons. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:127, fig. 160.
1878.

A seedling of Van Mons who distributed it without name. Fruit medium,
conic-turbinate; skin thick, at first very clear green sprinkled with
gray dots, numerous, very small but clearly visible; towards maturity
the green changes to brilliant lemon-yellow and warmly golden on
the side next the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine, semi-buttery and
distinctly perfumed with clove; Oct.

=Mendenhall. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 88. 1900.

Mentioned as one of the "newer" varieties of pears, having given its
first ripe specimens on July 5th, 1900. Fruit small, pyriform, yellow,
much better in quality than Early Harvest.

=Meresia Nevill. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 616. 1884.

A seedling of John Mannington, Uckfield, Sussex, Eng.; first fruited
in 1872. Fruit below medium, roundish-obovate or oval, even and
regular in outline, entirely covered with thick, dark-brown russet;
flesh semi-melting, crisp, juicy, sweet, with a rich vinous flavor; an
excellent dessert pear; Dec. and Jan.

=Merlet 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:418, fig. 1869.

Merlet came from the nurseries of M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr.; it fruited
first in 1861. Fruit medium, turbinate, slightly obtuse and bossed;
skin smooth, fine and shining, yellowish-green, delicately dotted with
gray; flesh greenish-white, semi-fine, melting, watery, granular around
the core; juice abundant and saccharine, refreshing and having a highly
delicate flavor; first; Aug.

=Merriam. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 524. 1857. =2.= Thomas _Am. Fruit
Cult._ 284. 1867.

Originated at Roxbury, Mass.; popular in Boston in 1867. Fruit large,
globular, somewhat flattened at base and crown, smooth, rich yellow,
covered with pale russet around the stem and calyx, and netted with
russet all over; flesh yellowish, rather coarse, melting, juicy,
sugary, perfumed, very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Meruault. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:184, fig. 576. 1881.

Obtained by M. Pariset from a seed bed of the Easter Beurre made in
1856. Fruit medium, ovate, shortened and thick, water-green sown with
dots of fawn-brown, more often almost wholly covered with russet
of fawn color; on ripening the basic green changes to an intense
lemon-yellow, the russet clears, and the side next the sun becomes
golden; flesh whitish, fine, buttery, melting, without grit; juice
abundant, rich in sugar, delicately perfumed with musk; first;
throughout winter.

=Merveille de Moringen. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1876.

Originated in the environs of Moringen, Ger., where it is very well
thought of. Tree large, very fertile, resisted the phenomenal frost of
1879-1880 in Europe. Fruit small, turbinate, a beautiful lemon-yellow;
flesh breaking; for cooking; Oct.

=Messire Jean. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:173, Pl. XXVI. 1768.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 616. 1884.

Of ancient and untraceable origin, but mentioned by Venette, Rochelle,
Fr., in 1678 and 1683. Fruit medium, turbinate, sometimes slightly
obovate, surface slightly bossed; skin rough, thick, dark green,
passing to buff, washed with dark red on the side of the sun, strewed
with speckles of darker russet; flesh white, slightly tinged with
lemon, rather fine, breaking, juicy, richly saccharine, perfumed,
sprightly; good, either for dessert or kitchen use; Nov. and Dec.

=Messire Jean Goubault. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:422, fig. 1869.

This variety dates from 1847 and came from a seed bed of M. Goubault,
Angers, Fr. Fruit large or medium, turbinate, more or less globular,
often irregular, bossed and much larger on one side than on the other;
skin fine and wrinkled and entirely reddened and dotted with large
grayish spots; flesh whitish, coarse, semi-melting, always doughy and
containing some grit around the core; juice rather scanty, sugary,
tart, slightly perfumed and very agreeable; second; Nov.

=Michaelmas Nelis. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ N. S. =30=:272, fig. 82. 1901.
=2.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 188. 1920.

A seedling from Winter Nelis, which Messrs. Bunyard, nurserymen,
Maidstone, Eng., found by chance in a cottage garden, and sent out
in 1901. It was given an award of merit at a meeting of the Fruit
Committee of the Royal Horticultural Society in October, 1902. Fruit
medium, pyriform, very shapely, light greenish skin, somewhat russety;
flesh white, melting, very little grit, juicy and of delicious flavor;
end of Sept.

=Michaux. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =6=:45. 1840. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 239.
1854.

Origin not clear but R. Manning, Salem, Mass., stated that he
had received it from a town in Alsace, Fr. Fruit medium, nearly
globular-pyriform, light yellowish-green changing to yellow, with a
slight blush of red; flesh white, coarse, semi-buttery, juicy, sweet;
second; Sept. and Oct.

=Mignonne d'Ete. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Obtained by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr., and placed in commerce in 1874.
Fruit medium to large, like Calebasse in form; skin glossy and yellow,
finely dotted and streaked with gray-russet; flesh fine and melting;
Aug.

=Mignonne d'Hiver. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 816. 1869.

An old Belgian variety. Fruit medium, obovate to oblong-ovate-pyriform,
light yellow, mostly covered with thick, rough russet, and veined with
crimson and fawn; flesh yellowish, rather granular, juicy, melting,
sweet, vinous, aromatic; good; Nov. and Dec.

=Mikado. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 115. 1876. =2.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._
=332=:449, 484. 1913.

Among the most successful importers of oriental plants was Freiherr V.
Siebold who maintained a nursery and botanic garden in Leyden, Holland,
during the first half of the nineteenth century. Of the pears imported
by him, Mikado was one. This was procured from Von Siebold's nursery
in 1873 by Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine. Fruit rather large,
globular-ovoid; skin rough to the touch, yellowish-olive, dotted with
gray specks; flesh white, fine, breaking, rather juicy, perfumed, with
a pronounced quince flavor, subacid; poor, uneatable raw; end of Sept.

=Milan d'Hiver. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:424, fig. 1869.

A very old pear described in 1675 by Merlet, the French pomologist.
Fruit large, globular-turbinate, usually mammillate at the summit and
very regular; skin thick and rough to the touch, gray-russet, sprinkled
around the stalk with large whitish-gray dots; flesh yellowish, fine,
semi-melting, granular at the core; juice rarely plentiful, only
slightly saccharine, acidulous, feebly aromatic; third; Nov. to Jan.

=Milan de Rouen. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:425, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 617. 1884.

Gained by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr.; distributed in 1859. Fruit medium,
globular, a little conic toward the summit, slightly bossed and one
side less swelled than the other; skin thick, dull yellow, dotted and
streaked with fawn, much stained with gray around the stem; flesh
yellowish, semi-fine, and semi-melting, juicy, rather granular at the
core, sugary; juice aromatic, often spoiled by an unpleasant acerbity;
second; end of Aug.

=Miller. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:426, fig. 1869.

Raised from seed by Andre Leroy; first reported in 1864. Fruit medium
and sometimes larger; in form it passes from rounded conic to globular,
slightly flattened especially at the base; skin rough to touch,
bronzed all over, dotted with russet, and dotted and mottled with
greenish-yellow; flesh white, fine, melting, a little granular at the
core, juicy, sugary, sourish, with a delicious aroma; first; Oct.

=Millot de Nancy. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:427, fig. 1867.

Produced in the nurseries of Van Mons at Louvain; first reported in
1843. Fruit medium, ovate, very obtuse, more or less regular and
bossed, often rather globular, yellow-ochre dotted with gray-russet,
mottled with olive-brown, sometimes washed with clear fawn on the cheek
exposed to the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine, melting or semi-melting,
gritty at the center; juice rarely abundant, but very saccharine,
aromatic and full of flavor, sometimes a little too acid; second; Oct.

=Milner. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:181. 1908.

Cataloged by Silas Wharton in 1824 under the name of _Milner's
Favorite_. Fruit small, pyriform; good.

=Mima Wilder. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 152. 1874. =2.= _Ibid._ 120.
1875.

A seedling of Colonel Wilder, in a collection of new pears shown by
him in 1874. In November of the following year it was found to have
retained its previous good quality.

=Ministre Bara. 1.= _Ga. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 49. 1892. =2.= _Guide Prat._
96. 1895.

A gain of Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. It was exhibited by P. J. Berckmans
of Augusta, Georgia, before the Georgia State Horticultural Society in
1892 and 1893.

=Ministre Pirmez. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Published by Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium to large; flesh
melting; first; Jan. and Feb.

=Ministre Viger. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 113. 1901.

Raised by Messrs. Baltet of Troyes, Fr., from seed of the Pierre
Tourasse. It was much noticed at the International Exhibition at Paris
in 1900. Fruit large, turbinate, bossed, tender yellow clouded with
ochre, washed with rosy gray and salmon on the side next the sun,
with speckles of fawn; flesh fine, melting, very juicy, saccharine,
with perfume noticeable on the skin, and flavor recalling that of the
Duchesse d'Angouleme; mid-Dec. to mid-Jan.

=Minot Jean Marie. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1876.

A seedling of Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit large, pyriform,
shortened, covered with russet on a yellow foundation; flesh yellowish,
breaking, very juicy, sugary; first; Dec. to Feb.

=Missile d'Hiver. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 169. 1841.

A foreign variety recommended by M. Dalbret and M. Jamin, well known
pomologists. Fruit large, buttery, valuable according to M. Jamin; Nov.
and Dec.

=Mission. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 73. 1895.

Originated at the old mission near Capistrano, California. Fruit
medium, acutely pyriform, long, yellow, nearly covered with russet;
flesh very fine and buttery; very mild or sweet; ripe in Sept. in
southern California.

=Mr. Hill's Pear. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 132, Pl. LXIII, figs. 2, 4. 1729.

Mentioned by Batty Langley, Twickenham, Eng., as bearing two crops in
the year. Fruit rather small, obtuse-pyriform, usually distorted at the
upper end, grows in clusters; in 1727 the first crop matured on Aug.
24, and the second crop on Oct. 1.

=Mitchell Russet. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 525. 1857. =2.= _Ibid._
817. 1869.

Originated at Belleville, Ill. Fruit medium or small, obovate inclining
to conic; skin rough, dark russet, thickly covered with gray dots;
flesh juicy, melting, rich and highly perfumed, astringent; scarcely
good; Oct.

=Mitschurin. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =17=:292. 1894.

Probably Russian. Fruit very large; a good kitchen fruit; mid-season.

=Moccas. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 717. 1841. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 617. 1884.

Raised from seed by Thomas Andrew Knight, Downton Castle, Eng. Fruit
medium, oval, uneven, and bossed in outline, lemon-colored, marked with
patches and veins of thin pale brown-russet and strewed with russet
dots; flesh yellowish, fine, melting, tender, full of rich vinous
juice, musky in flavor; a delicious dessert pear.

=Mollet Guernsey Beurre. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 36, 85. 1842.

Raised from seed by Charles Mollet of Guernsey, Channel Islands, who
died in 1819. Fruit medium, obovate or somewhat pyramidal, with a
remarkable fleshy extension of about 1/2 inch at the insertion of the
stalk, surface of the pear uneven, yellow, but much obscured with
ferruginous russet, sometimes equally scattered, but often disposed in
broad, longitudinal stripes; flesh yellowish, very melting, buttery,
with a rich Chaumontel flavor though distinct; Dec.

=Monarch. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 312. 1866. =2.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy
Fr._ 188. 1920.

_Knight Monarch._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 796. 1869.

Raised by Thomas Andrew Knight, Downton Castle, Eng., in 1830. Bunyard
says: "Tree easily recognized in winter by its very large oval buds,
which stand out like those of a red currant." Fruit medium, globular,
yellowish-green, much covered with brown-russet and strewed with
gray-russet specks; flesh yellowish, buttery, melting and very juicy,
with a rich, vinous, sugary, and agreeably-perfumed flavor; first, one
of the most valuable; Dec. and Jan.

=Monchallard. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:429, fig. 1869. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 189. 1920.

Found about 1810 by M. Monchallard at Valeuil, Dordogne, Fr. Fruit
above medium to large, long-obovate, very obtuse; skin delicate,
yellow, clear and dull, speckled uniformly with greenish dots and often
washed with dark red on the cheek next the sun; flesh very white, fine
or semi-fine, extremely melting, juicy, saccharine, acidulous, slightly
aromatic and of delicious flavor; first; end of Aug. and Sept.

=Mongolian. 1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 215. 1896. =2.= _Cornell Sta.
Bul._ =332=:482. 1913.

Considered by Budd of Iowa to be the best of the oriental varieties yet
tested in this country. Obtained from seed at Ames, Iowa. Fruit medium
to large, globular-oval, narrowing at both ends, with its greatest
diameter near the middle, similar to Kieffer in shape, inclined to
ridging near the apex, greenish, with blushed cheeks and russet dots;
flesh tender, melting, juicy; good when ripened indoors.

=Monseigneur Affre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom_. =2=:430, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 618. 1884.

Raised by Van Mons though the tree did not produce fruit until
1845, three years after his death. Fruit medium, form variable,
globular-obtuse-truncate, pyriform, greenish-yellow; flesh white,
reddish under the skin, very melting, juicy, sugary, acidulous,
aromatic, with a fine flavor; first; Nov.

=Monseigneur des Hons. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:431, fig. 1869.

M. Gibey-Lorne, Troyes, Fr., raised this pear from seed in 1856.
Fruit below medium and often small, usually turbinate, rather long
and obtuse, but sometimes cylindrical and bossed, olive-green dotted
with russet on the shaded side, golden on the exposed face, sometimes
blushed with carmine; flesh yellowish-white, fine, melting; juice
abundant, saccharine, acidulous, aromatic; second; end of Aug.

=Monseigneur Sibour. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:432, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 817. 1869.

Originated at Jodoigne, Bel., from a bed made by Xavier Gregoire; it
dates from 1855. Fruit above medium but often less, ovate, swelled in
its lower half, yellowish-green, dotted, marbled and streaked with
gray-russet and more or less washed with brown-fawn on the side of the
sun; flesh whitish, rather coarse, semi-melting, juicy, containing
numerous grits around the core; juice saccharine, vinous and aromatic;
second; end of Oct.

=Moon. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:183. 1908.

Cultivated by Silas Wharton in 1824. Its synonyms, _Moon's Pound_, and
_Pound, Moon's_, are significant of its size. Fruit described by Ragan
as medium sized, yellow; flesh melting, juicy; good; late.

=Moorcroft. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 619. 1884.

Often called in England the _Malvern_ pear, being much grown about that
place; esteemed for perry. Fruit small, globular, even and regular
in outline, greenish-yellow on the shaded side, and with a brownish
tinge on the side next the sun, strewed all over with large ashy gray
freckles of russet; flesh breaking.

=Moorfowl Egg. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 361. 1831.

_Muirfowl Egg._ =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 619. 1884.

An old Scotch dessert pear partaking somewhat of the character of
Swan Egg. Fruit below medium, globular, dull green changing to
yellow-green, mottled with red next the sun, and thickly strewed with
pale brown-russety dots; flesh yellowish, semi-buttery, tender, sweet
and with a slight perfume; Oct.

=Morel. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =21=:151. 1855. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:434, fig. 1869.

Propagated by Alexandre Bivort, successor of Van Mons, and can be
traced earlier than 1843. Fruit below medium or small, ovate, sensibly
hexagonal, flattened at either extremity, and one side usually more
enlarged than the other, yellowish-green, dotted and marbled with
russet; flesh yellowish, fine, breaking, rather granular at the center;
juice abundant, wanting in sweetness, insipid and of a very unpleasant
astringency; second, but good only for cooking; Apr.

=Morgan. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =14=:250, fig. 1859. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=25=:541. 1859.

Originated on the farm of a Mr. Morgan in New Hanover County,
North Carolina. Fruit large, oblate varying to obtuse-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, speckled with gray-russet intermingled with some
tracery of the same; flesh white, a little gritty, juicy, sweet,
slightly vinous; very good, nearly best; Oct.

=Morley. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

Mentioned in Parkinson's list of orchard pears as a "very good peare,
like in forme and colour unto the Windsor but somewhat grayer."

=Morosovskaja. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 61. 1880.

Mentioned in a paper read by Mr. J. L. Budd before the Horticultural
Society of Iowa in 1880. It is a Russian variety, having gritty,
thorn-like wood.

=Moskovka. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:184. 1908.

A Russian variety said to be largely grown for cooking. Fruit small,
pyriform, juicy; early season.

=Mostbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:173. 1856.

Nassau, Ger., 1802. Fruit medium, pyriform, sides rather unequal,
whitish-yellow skin changing to lemon-yellow, without any blush, dotted
indistinctly, russeted; flesh yellow, breaking, coarse-grained, juicy,
aromatic, sweet; third for dessert, but first for cooking and perry;
Sept. and Oct.

=Moyamensing. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:274. 1847. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 818. 1869.

Supposed to be a native. The original tree stood in 1847 in the garden
of J. B. Smith of Philadelphia. Fruit medium, variable in form, some
globular, others obovate, uniform light yellow, with patches and dots
of russet; flesh whitish, buttery, melting, coarse, sweet; with a rich,
spicy and delicious flavor; good to best; Aug. and Sept.

=Mrs. Seden. 1.= _Garden_ =76=:36, figs. 1912.

A cross between Seckel and Bergamotte Esperen; exhibited by James
Veitch and Sons, Chelsea, Eng., before the Royal Horticultural Society
in January, 1912, and received an award of merit. Fruit small, round,
yellow, toning to a bright crimson on the sunny side; flesh is free
from the grittiness which sometimes characterizes the fruits of
Bergamotte Esperen; the flavor is remarkably fine; Jan.

=Muddy Brook. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1866.

A seedling from S. A. Shurtleff of Brookline, Mass., which fruited in
1862. Fruit diameter 2-1/4 inches, short pyriform; skin dark green;
flesh white, melting and juicy, with good flavor; great bearer and good
market pear; Sept.

=Muir Everbearing. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

Originated with Hal Muir, Bloomfield, Ky., about 1870. Reported as
"delicious; August to November."

=Mungo Park. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:160, 1856. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 100. 1876.

A seedling of Van Mons named after the celebrated Scotch voyager. Fruit
small, turbinate-pyriform or globular-ovate, very pale green sprinkled
with fawn dots, very small, numerous, and feebly visible, the basic
green passing at maturity to pale whitish-yellow and becoming a little
golden on the side of the sun; flesh white, very fine, melting, free
from grit, full of sugary juice, sprightly and agreeably perfumed;
first; Oct.

=Munz Apothekerbirne. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =30=:370. 1891.

Presumably German. A medium-sized pear, obovate, oblong, with a stalk
rather more than an inch long, continuous with the fruit, yellowish;
flesh white; of good flavor; Aug.

=Muscadine. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =1=:364. 1835. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 818. 1869.

The original tree is supposed to have grown on the farm of a Dr. Fowler
near Newburgh, N. Y., and the pear was introduced to notice by Downing.
Fruit medium, globular-obovate, regular in form, pale yellowish-green,
thickly sprinkled with brown dots; flesh white, buttery, semi-melting,
with an agreeable rich, musky flavor; good to very good, a valuable
late summer variety; end of Aug. and beginning of Sept.

=Muscat Allemand d'Automne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:437, fig. 1869.
=2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 256. 1889.

Found in the Horticultural Society's Garden at Angers, Fr., in
1833. Its origin is uncertain but the name indicates that it came
from Germany. Fruit medium and sometimes below, rather variable in
form, from long-pyriform, slightly obtuse and regular in contour, to
irregular-ovate and strongly bossed, somber yellow, dotted with clear
gray, extensively washed with russet, and vermilioned on the side
exposed to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, rather granular,
watery; juice abundant and saccharine, vinous, musky and almost always
marred by too great an acidity; second; Oct.

=Muscat Fleuri d'Ete. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:121. 1768. =2.=
Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:441, fig. 1869.

Known at Orleans at the end of the sixteenth century under the name
_Muscat a longue queue_. Fruit small, globular-turbinate or
turbinate slightly ovate, olive-yellow finely dotted with fawn and
washed with red-brown on the cheek next the sun; flesh yellowish,
coarse, semi-breaking, juicy, saccharine, acidulous, musky; second; end
of July.

=Muscat Robert. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:120, Pl. II. 1768.
=2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 818. 1869.

This pear was mentioned by Le Lectier in 1628 and by la Quintinye in
1690 under the name of _Pucelle de Saintonge_. Its name of Muscat
Robert dates from about 1672 and Merlet wrote of it in 1675 as the
_Amber Pear_ or Muscat Robert. It has also been widely known as the
_Amber Pear_. Fruit small, globular, very round in all its lower
part but slightly conic at its other extremity where it is a little
wrinkled, yellowish-green, finely and uniformly dotted with olive-brown
and sometimes rather carmined on the cheek exposed to the sun; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, breaking or semi-breaking, inclined to rot before
ripe, granular, very juicy, sugary, very musky; second; mid-July.

=Muscat Royal. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:120. 1768. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:444, fig. 1869.

An old French pear growing in kitchen garden at Versailles planted
about 1670 by La Quintinye for Louis XIV. It was then called _Muscat
fleuri d'Autumne_ or _Muscat a longue queue_, on account of its long
stem. Fruit small, globular in its lower half but somewhat conic-obtuse
in its upper half; skin fine, grayish-yellow, dotted with clear brown
and partly covered with russet which often passes into brownish-red
of a somber hue on the side next the sun; flesh white, semi-fine,
melting or semi-melting, watery, rather granular round the seeds; juice
abundant, very saccharine, more or less acid and having a pleasant
flavor; second; Sept.

=Muscat Royal de Mayer. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:225, fig. 111. 1866-73.

This is the Muscat Royal described by the German Mayer in his _Pomona
Franconia_, 1779, and by Diel in 1804, and must not be confused with
the Muscat Royal of Duhamel. Fruit small or nearly medium on a pruned
tree, globular-turbinate, largest circumference around the middle, very
obtuse; skin thick, green, covered with a sort of white bloom which
dulls it, sprinkled with numerous round, whitish-gray dots, especially
apparent on the side next the sun where they are nearly white; at
maturity the green brightens somewhat; by the time it becomes yellow
the fruit is already over ripe; flesh greenish, coarse, gritty at the
core, semi-buttery, fairly full of sugary juice, with an agreeable
musky flavor; third, should be eaten promptly on ripening; end of July.

=Muscat Roye. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:134. 1831.

Fruit small, oblong; skin rough to the touch, yellowish-green on the
shaded side, and of a "pleasant red" next the sun; flesh breaking and
perfumed; end of Aug.

=Muscatelle. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:448, fig. 1869.

One of the last gains of Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., who died
in 1847. Fruit small, nearly globular or globular-conic, at first
water-green dotted with numerous round points brown in color, changing
to lemon-yellow; flesh yellowish, transparent, semi- or nearly melting,
full of sugary juice strongly scented with musk; first; Feb. and Mar.

=Musette d'Anjou. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:446, fig. 1869.

Claude Saint-Etienne wrote of this pear briefly in 1687, being the
first writer to mention it. Probably it originated in the old province
of Anjou. Its name and form recall the rural bag-pipes which the Breton
country folk play, and dance to. Fruit below medium, very elongated,
flattened at its extremities, constricted at the middle, the upper
part being often bent so as to make it resemble the musical instrument
after which it is named, lemon-yellow or yellow-ochre, dotted uniformly
with gray and brown points; flesh white, coarse and breaking, watery
and gritty; juice sufficient, rarely very saccharine, more or less
astringent, slightly perfumed, and with a disagreeable after-taste;
third; Sept.

=Musette de Nancy. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 621. 1884.

Fruit large, pyramidal and handsome, with an uneven and undulating
outline, shaped like Beurre de Rance, lemon-yellow covered with a
fine, warm, orange-brown or bright cinnamon-colored russet; flesh
yellowish-white, rather crisp like the texture of Passe Colmar; juice
abundant, rich, saccharine and very finely perfumed; first; end of Oct.
and beginning of Nov.

=Muskateller-Bergamotte. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:21. 1856.

Origin uncertain, probably German. Fruit small, globular, light
grass-green changing to yellowish-green, uniform in color, washed with
brown on the side exposed to the sun, strongly dotted with brown; flesh
melting, extremely musky; first for the table; Oct.

=Muskingum. 1.= Cole _Am. Fr. Book_ 153. 1849. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 819. 1869.

Origin uncertain, but probably either Ohio or Connecticut is its native
habitat. Fruit medium, globular to obovate, greenish-yellow, with dark
specks and much russet; flesh breaking, yellow-white, with many dark
specks and much russet, juicy, sprightly, vinous, pleasantly perfumed,
aromatic flavor; good; middle and last of Aug.

=Muskirte Wintereirbirne. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 508. 1817. =2.= Dochnahl
_Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:57. 1856.

A Dutch variety, published in 1801. Fruit small, ovate, medium
ventriculous; skin fine and smooth, light straw-yellow changing to
a waxy lemon-yellow and often washed with a golden blush; flesh
semi-breaking, sweet, having a musky aroma; second for dessert, first
for household; Dec. to Feb.

=Musquee d'Esperen. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:448, fig. 1869.

A seedling of Major Esperen; probably first reported in 1845. Fruit
medium, variable in form, passing from ovate rounded at each end to
ovate nearly cylindrical and more or less bossed; greenish-yellow,
dotted and streaked with russet; flesh whitish, fine, breaking,
perfumed; juice very abundant, saccharine, acidulous and very musky in
flavor and agreeable; first; beginning of Feb. and through Mar.

=Mussette. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:169. 1856.

A Normandy perry pear. Fruit medium, rather long-pyriform; skin a dirty
greenish-yellow changing to brown-green; flesh gritty, juicy, sweet,
sharp and vinous; good for household use, first class for perry; end of
Oct.

=Muetzchensbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:162. 1856.

German, 1807. Fruit small, in clusters, short-turbinate, upper end
flat, greenish-yellow, covered with cinnamon and dotted; flesh
whitish-yellow, tender, sweet, vinous; third for dessert, first for
culinary use; Oct.

=Naegelgesbirn. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 80. 1876.

A Rhenish-Prussian perry pear which is exceedingly prolific but
produces a perry of inferior quality.

=Nain Vert. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 914. 1860. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:450, fig. 1869. =3.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =32=:256. 1896.

This strange variety was obtained from seed by M. de Nerbonne, in the
commune of Huille (Maine-et-Loire), Fr., and first fruited in 1839.
The tree forms a bush between 3 and 4 feet high; it is remarkable for
its dwarf habit, and its erect, thick, fleshy branches, Fruit medium
and sometimes larger, globular, irregular, but variable in form; skin
thin, slightly rough, yellowish-green, uniformly covered with large
gray-russet dots; flesh white, semi-fine and semi-melting, rather dry;
juice deficient, sugary, sweet, almost without perfume; third; Oct.

=Napa. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68. 1895.

Originated in California and was introduced by Leonard Coates in 1886.
Fruit very large, mid-season.

=Naples. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:451, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 621. 1884.

This old variety known in France for many centuries and described
by Claude Saint-Etienne in 1670 was also known as the _Feuille de
chene_ or _Oak leaf_. Its name indicates that it came from Italy.
Henri Manger said in 1780 that it appeared to him to be identical
with the pear _Picentia_ described by Pliny. Fruit medium and often
less, turbinate-obtuse much swelled at central circumference, and more
or less bossed at both extremities, olive-yellow or bright green at
first, changing to a beautiful lemon-yellow, finely dotted with fawn,
brownish-red next the sun, changing to bright red as the ground color
changes; flesh whitish, semi-fine, semi-breaking, almost free from
grit; juice plentiful, sweet and sugary, possessing usually a slight
after-taste of anis; second; Jan. to Mar.

=Napoleon. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 819. 1869. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 189. 1920.

_Napoleon I._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:453, fig. 1869.

_Napoleon Butterbirne._ =4.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 257. 1889.

Napoleon was raised in 1808 by M. Liard, a gardener at Mons, Bel. Fruit
large, obtuse-pyriform, swelled toward the base; skin thin, smooth,
bright green changing to greenish-yellow, covered with numerous brown
dots, seldom blushed; flesh white and fine, tender, melting, rather
granular, very juicy, with a very saccharine, refreshing and aromatic
flavor; first, a valuable dessert pear; mid-Oct. or nearly Nov. to Dec.

=Napoleon Savinien. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:71, fig. 1856. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 819. 1869.

Obtained in the garden of the Society Van Mons at Geest-Saint-Remy,
Bel., in 1854. Fruit medium, turbinate-ventriculous or
pyriform-ventriculous, acute at the top which passes into the stalk;
greenish-yellow, dotted with gray-russet; flesh white, semi-fine,
melting, juicy and perfumed, saccharine; juice musky, delicate; Oct. to
Mar.; the long period of its ripening is its very valuable quality.

=Napoleon III. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:457, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 622. 1884.

The seedling which bore this beautiful fruit came from the seed beds
of Andre Leroy. It was first reported in 1864. Fruit large, obovate,
obtuse, uneven, deep yellow, dotted and streaked with russet, and
marked with numerous brownish stains; flesh white, fine, juicy and
vinous, saccharine, tastes sourish; an excellent pear, first; Sept.

=Naquette. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:109, fig. 53. 1866-73.

Under the name Naquette this pear was described by Claude Saint-Etienne
in 1670. After that time it appears to have been classed in the Caillot
family with the name _Caillot_. Later still it received among other
names that of _Bergamot Early_ (Lindley) and _Bergamote Precoce_
(Calvel). Fruit medium or smaller, spherical, flattened at both poles;
skin thin, smooth, grass-green dotted with fawn, when ripe clouded with
yellow on the shaded side and washed or streaked with red on the cheek
next the sun; flesh white, rather transparent, fine, melting, full of
sugary juice, acidulous, pleasantly perfumed, very delicate; first;
mid-Aug.

=Nassau Ehre. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:47. 1856.

Belgian, 1823. Fruit medium, pyriform, blushed, somewhat streaked
with vermilion, slightly russeted; flesh semi-breaking, fine,
cinnamon-flavored, sweet; second for dessert, first for household use;
end of Aug.

=Naudin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 101. 1876.

Published in the _Revue Horticole_, Fr., in 1869. Fruit medium,
long-pyriform, grass-green stained with gray; flesh extremely melting,
very juicy, pleasantly relieved with a fresh savor; first; Aug. to Oct.

=Naumkeag. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 149. 1841.

Originated at Salem, Mass., by George Johonnot; derives its name from
the old Indian name of Salem. Fruit medium, globular, yellow-russet;
flesh juicy, melting but rather astringent in flavor; good; Oct.

=Navez Peintre. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 622. 1884.

Received by Hogg, the English pomologist, from M. Papeleu,
Wetteren, Bel., in 1857. Fruit medium, ovate, even and regular in
form, yellowish-green on the shaded side and marked with bands of
brown-russet, but with a blush of brownish-red next the sun; flesh
yellowish, melting, very juicy, piquant and sugary, with a fine aroma;
a very fine pear; end of Sept.

=Neapolitan. 1.= Brookshaw _Hort. Reposit._ =2=:Pl. 72. 1823.

Described by Brookshaw in 1823 as a valuable acquisition to English
collections. Fruit thin-skinned, green changing to yellow when quite
ripe, rich in flavor, and so juicy that it cannot be pared without a
considerable quantity of the juice running from it; Nov.

=Nec Plus Meuris. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 622. 1884. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 189. 1920.

This is not the Nec Plus Meuris of France which is our Beurre
d'Anjou. The origin is uncertain. Fruit small, round-oval, uneven,
greenish-yellow, nearly covered with rough brown-russet; stem very
short, stout, continuous with the fruit; calyx large, open, in a small
basin; flesh pale, yellow, melting, deliciously perfumed; Feb. and Mar.

=Nectarine. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 622. 1884.

Fruit medium, globular-obovate, yellow covered with large dots and
patches of pale brown-russet; flesh yellowish, buttery, rich, with a
fine, brisk, acidulous flavor and agreeable aroma; first-rate, with a
good deal of the character of the Passe Colmar; Oct.

=Negley. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =26=:267, 397. 1860. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 820. 1869.

Introduced in 1860 by J. S. Negley, Pittsburg, Pa. Fruit above medium,
obtusely obovate, nearly regular, sometimes a perfect pyriform, rich
lemon shaded with bright crimson in the sun, sprinkled with minute
brown-russet dots; flesh white, a little coarse, moderately melting,
juicy, richly saccharine, vinous, slightly aromatic; good to very good;
Sept.

=New Bridge. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =2=:204. 1832.

Described in the London Horticultural Society's catalog in 1832 as
having been produced in the Horticultural Garden at Chiswick. Fruit
below medium, turbinate, dull gray covered with thin gray-russet, and
light, lively, shining brown on the sunny side; flesh melting, a little
gritty, with a sugary juice, but without flavor; Oct.

=New Haven. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =3=:327. 1837.

A seedling raised in the garden of Dr. Ives, New Haven, Conn. It was
said to partake of the habit of White Doyenne, to be a good cropper,
and of excellent quality.

=New Meadow. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 623. 1884.

A perry pear, grown in Herefordshire, England. Fruit very small,
turbinate, covered with brownish-gray russet, and a brownish cheek next
the sun.

=Newhall. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 37. 1867. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 820. 1869.

A seedling of F. and L. Clapp, exhibited before the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society in 1867. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, inclining
to oval, surface rather uneven, yellow at maturity, with some traces of
russet, occasionally blushed on the side next the sun; flesh melting,
buttery, tender, very juicy, sweet, with a musky aroma; very good; Oct.

=Newtown. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 820. 1869.

Originated at Newtown, Long Island. Fruit medium, globular-obovate,
lemon-yellow, netted and patched with russet; flesh whitish, rather
coarse, semi-melting, sweet, and pleasant; good; Sept.

=Nicholas. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 10. 1869.

A seedling shown by Messrs. F. and L. Clapp in November, 1869. Fruit
medium, obovate; skin thin, yellow; very juicy and highly flavored.

=Nickerson. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 820. 1869.

Originated from seed planted at Readfield, Me. Fruit large,
oblong-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with a dull red cheek on the side
next the sun; flesh white, juicy, melting, vinous, sweet; good; Oct.

=Nicolas Eischen. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 101. 1876.

Reported in 1876 by Messrs. Simon-Louis as on trial in their nurseries
at Metz, Lorraine. It was said to be a beautiful fruit, speckled and
very musky like the Bartlett, but more perfumed; Dec. to Feb.

=Niell d'Hiver. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:189. 1908.

Shown at a meeting of the Cincinnati Horticultural Society in 1855. A
late variety, acid in flavor.

=Nikitaer Gruene Herbst-Apothekerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:182. 1856.

_Bon-Chretien de Nikita._ =2.= _Guide Prat._ 282. 1895.

German, published 1852. Fruit medium, conic, light green changing to
light green-yellow, without any blush, numerous fine dots, russeted on
the sun-exposed side; flesh yellowish-white, sweet, vinous; first for
household purposes; Oct., eight weeks.

=Niles. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:76. 1854. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
821. 1869.

This variety was imported from France about 1850 by the Hon. J. M.
Niles, Hartford, Conn., without a name. It was consequently designated
"Niles." Some pomologists have considered it to be the Easter Beurre,
but it appears to be more oblong in form, more yellow in color, to
have a longer stem and to be earlier in time of maturity. Fruit large,
obtuse-pyriform, yellow thickly covered with russet dots; flesh juicy,
buttery, sweet and pleasant; Dec.

=Niochi de Parma. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 101. 1876.

A summer variety highly esteemed in Piedmont, Italy. It is suitable
for cultivation on a large scale and is hardy, having resisted the
phenomenal European frost of 1879-1880.

=Noir Grain. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 180. 1832.

A variety very highly esteemed in Flanders in the early part of the
last century. Fruit is of medium size and matures in Sept., the flesh
being buttery as is indicated by its synonym _Beurre noire graine_.

=Noire d'Alagier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 96. 1895.

A Caucasian variety sent out by M. Niemetz, Winnitsa, Podolia, Russia.
On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis of Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. The fruit
is said to resemble Winter Nelis, gray, bronze-russeted, rough; flesh
fine, juicy.

=Nonpareil. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 821. 1869.

A seedling raised by Judge Livingston, of New York. Fruit
globular-oblate, russety-yellow, mostly overspread and shaded with
red in sun, and bright fawn-russet in shade; flesh yellowish-white,
melting, juicy, sweet, perfumed; Nov.

=Nordhaeuser Winter-Forellenbirne. 1.= _Deutschland Obst._ =2=:Pt. 6,
Pl. 1906.

A North German variety of the Forelle or Trout Pear. It is known as the
_Winter Forelle_ or _Northern Forelle_. Fruit medium, conic-obtuse;
skin smooth and shining, greenish-yellow, speckled and washed with red
on the side next the sun, dotted all over on the shaded face with fine
brownish-red; flesh white, melting, sweet, aromatic and agreeable; Jan.
to Mar.

=Norfolk County. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff of Brookline, Mass., and submitted
by him to the Fruit Committee of the Horticultural Society of that
state in 1866. Fruit, long diameter 3-3/4 inches, short diameter 3-1/4
inches, long turbinate, green with dots, good grain, juicy, with
pleasant flavor, ripens well, a handsome fruit and large bearer; Oct.
11.

=Normaennische Ciderbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 168, fig. 1913.

This pear was found growing wild in Normandy, Fr., and in Upper
Austria, and is excellent for making perry and for distillation. Fruit
very small, turbinate, greenish-yellow covered with cinnamon-russet and
ashy-gray dots; flesh yellowish-white, rather dry, sweet but with some
sprightliness; Sept.

=Notaire Lepin. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 449. 1889.

Notaire Lepin was obtained by M. Rollet, a horticulturist at
Villefranche, Rhone, Fr., about 1860 and was placed on the market in
1879. Fruit large or very large, variable in size, obtuse-pyramidal but
variable, skin fine, somewhat rough to the touch, yellow, dotted with
russet, marbled with fawn, flesh white, granular around the core, fine,
melting, very juicy, saccharine, slightly but agreeably perfumed; its
quality very variable, rather good, and rarely very good; Jan. to Apr.

=Notaire Minot. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:465, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 821. 1869.

A posthumous gain of Van Mons of only very moderate merit. It fruited
in nurseries at Geest-Saint-Remy, Jodoigne, Bel., in 1844. Fruit
medium, rather variable in form, but usually irregular ovate-globular
or very obtuse-turbinate and ventriculous; skin thick and rather rough,
grass-green, dotted all over with fawn and blushed with dark red on
the side of the sun; flesh yellowish, semi-fine and semi-melting, very
gritty around the core; juice insufficient, saccharine, aromatic,
having a disagreeable astringency; third; Oct.

=Nouveau Doyenne d'Hiver. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:9, fig. 5. 1872.

Stated by Diel to have been a gain of Van Mons. Fruit medium, spherical
or spherical-conic, slightly depressed at the two poles, even in
its outline; skin thick and firm, of a very clear green, sprinkled
with small brown dots regularly placed in a characteristic manner;
at maturity the basic green passes to pale yellow and the side next
the sun becomes a little golden; flesh white, rather fine, compact,
breaking or semi-breaking; juice deficient, saccharine but wanting in
perfume; not very desirable; end of winter.

=Nouveau Poiteau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:466, fig. 1869. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 190. 1920.

According to Leroy this was a seedling of Van Mons raised in his
nursery at Louvain from a bed made in 1827. Fruit large and sometimes
enormous, oblong or irregular-ovate, always much bossed, swelled
around the middle and often more so on one side than on the other,
grass-green, covered with numerous fawn dots, and with some squamose
patches of brown-russet on the side of the sun; flesh white, greenish
near the core, very fine, melting, juicy, saccharine, acidulous,
savory; first; Oct.

=Nouvelle Aglae. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 101. 1876.

Obtained by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Brabant. Fruit medium,
long-obtuse-oval, dark yellow touched with fawn; flesh fine, juicy;
first; end of autumn.

=Nouvelle Fulvie. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:59, fig. 1857. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 190. 1920.

_Belle de Jarnac._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:203, fig. 1867.

A gain of M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. First reported in 1854. Fruit
large or very large, pyramidal-pyriform, strongly bossed, lemon-yellow
when ripe, colored with vivid red on the side exposed to the sun,
marked and dotted with russet; flesh yellowish-white, very fine,
melting, buttery; juice very abundant, sugary, having an exquisite
perfume; good; Nov. to Feb.

=Nussbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:162. 1856.

Schwarben, Thuringer Wald, Ger., 1800. Fruit small, globular-turbinate,
green, thick skin; flesh firm, breaking, vinous and acidulous; first
for household; end of Aug.

=Nypse. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 101. 1876.

A winter pear received by Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, from
Italy, and on trial in that firm's orchards in 1876.

=Oakley Park Bergamotte. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:152. 1847.

Raised from seed by T. A. Knight, Downton Castle, Eng. former President
of the London Horticultural Society. Fruit medium, globular-obovate,
greenish-yellow, with russet; flesh buttery, melting; good; Oct.

=Ochsenherz. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:185. 1856.

_Coeur-de-Boeuf._ =2.= _Guide Prat._ 90, 258. 1876.

South Germany, 1801. Fruit large, pyriform, crooked, light green
turning to lemon-yellow, almost entirely blushed with dull light red,
dotted with green; flesh pulpy and tender, not juicy, very sweet and
musky; third for table, first for household and market; end of Oct.

=Ockletree. 1.= _Hist. Mass. Hort. Soc._ 37. 1880.

This was a seedling brought from Pittsburg, Pa., in 1804 and planted
near Vincennes, Ind. In 1837 it produced 140 bushels of pears, the
largest crop recorded from it. In 1855 it measured ten and one-half
feet in circumference at the smallest place below the limbs,
seventy-five feet across the top, and sixty-five feet in height. In
1867 it was split down by a tornado, and seven or eight years later the
trunk also died. It took its name from Mr. Ockletree its owner. The
fruit was of inferior quality.

=Octave Lachambre. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:469, fig. 1869.

M. Octave Lachambre, Loudon, Vienne, Fr., found this variety in
the orchard of the Chateau of Gueriniere about 1825. M. Lachambre
propagated it and offered it to Leroy who placed it on the market in
1860. Fruit medium or less, globular-ovate, bossed, flattened at the
top, and always smaller on one side than on the other, dull yellow,
finely dotted and streaked with russet, slightly mottled with fawn on
the cheek exposed to the sun and around the calyx and stalk; flesh
whitish, fine, melting or semi-melting, rather granular around the
core; juice extremely abundant, acidulous and saccharine, more or less
aromatic but always full of flavor; first; May.

=Oesterreichische Muskatellerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:24. 1856.

Austria, 1851. Fruit medium, globular, medium ventriculous; skin thick,
greenish-yellow, somewhat blushed with brown and without russet; flesh
firm, somewhat gritty, very melting and juicy; first for dessert,
household and market; Sept.

=Oeuf de Woltmann. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:221, fig. 109. 1866-73.

Of German origin. Fruit small to medium, exactly ovate, bright green,
sprinkled with numerous dots, some gray and some dark green; at
maturity the basic green changes to pale yellow the dots becoming less
visible and on well-exposed fruits the side next the sun is slightly
blushed with earthy-red on which are some dots of whitish-gray; flesh
very white, semi-fine, semi-breaking, sugary, with a refreshing and
agreeable perfume; good; end of July.

=Ogereau. 1.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._ =177=:39. 1899.

Believed to be European. Fruit obovate-oblong-pyriform, yellow blushed
with red, some russet; flesh white, buttery, vinous, medium quality,
for market; Oct. and Nov.

=Ognon. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 70. 1895.

Sent out by M. Gilbert, Antwerp, Bel. Fruit small to medium, globular,
irregular, green covered with russet; third class; Sept.

=Ognonnet. 1.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 375. 1908.

A cider pear used in France for the production of alcohol by
distillation.

=Oignon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:473, fig. 1869. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 191. 1920.

This is a variety which Leroy found cultivated in the western
Departments of France which he thought might be the same as the pear
called by Le Lectier in 1628 _Oignon d'Ete de Bretagne_. In England it
is one of the most fertile pears grown. Fruit above medium, spherical,
much flattened at both ends and often smaller on one side than on the
other; skin thick and rough, gray-fawn, entirely covered with large
grayish dots; flesh whitish, coarse, breaking, rather granular around
the core; juice moderate in amount, sweet, saccharine, only slightly
perfumed; second; end of Sept.

=Oignonet de Provence. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:474, fig. 1869.

The origin of this pear is unknown, but it was propagated by M.
Urbain Audibert, a nurseryman near Tarascon in the South of France.
In 1812 M. Audibert sent it to M. Loiseleur-Deslongchamps who later
published at Paris the _Nouveau Duhamel_. In this work it was described
and illustrated in 1815. Fruit small, globular or ovate, decidedly
rounded; skin fine and thin, grass-green, covered with small gray dots,
generally speckled with fawn and washed with clear reddish-russet on
the side of the sun; flesh greenish-white, fine or semi-fine, melting,
gritty at the center; juice sufficient, saccharine, vinegary, with a
rather agreeable taste of anis; second; end of July.

=Oken. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:21. 1856. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:475, fig. 1869. _Winter Oken._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 668.
1884.

A seedling of Van Mons which fruited about 1826. Fruit medium, nearly
globular or globular-ovate; skin fine, tender, pale green sprinkled
with gray, extensively stained with fawn and slightly vermilioned on
the side next the sun; flesh very white and fine, melting, watery,
rather granular around the core; juice abundant, saccharine and having
an exquisite aroma; first; mid-Oct. to end of Nov.

=Oldfield. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =2=:210. 1832. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
624. 1884.

This is one of the most popular English perry pears, and took its name
from the field where it was raised near Ledbury in Herefordshire.
Fruit small, globular, even and regularly formed; skin uniform yellow,
covered with minute dots, and with a patch of russet around the stalk;
flesh yellowish, firm, breaking and very astringent.

=Olivenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:188. 1856.

German Rhineland, 1806. Fruit medium or small, globular-turbinate, dark
olive-green turning to dull yellowish, dotted, and somewhat blushed
with brownish-red; flesh white, fine, cinnamon-flavored, gritty toward
center; third for dessert, first for household; Nov.

=Oliver Russet. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =10=:212. 1844. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 579. 1857.

Oliver Russet originated about 1832 and was shown before the
Massachusetts Horticultural Society in the autumn of 1843 by G. W.
Oliver, Lynn, Mass., in whose garden the parent tree was found growing.
Fruit medium or below, obovate, obtuse; skin fair cinnamon-russet on
a yellow ground, with a blush; flesh yellowish, coarse, melting, juicy
without much flavor; Oct.

=One-third. 1.= _Iowa Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 219. 1879.

Reported to be growing on the Iowa State College Farm and to have been
called One-third, from the fact that it is the third generation from
seeds originally sown in Wisconsin.

=Oneida. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 823. 1869.

Originated in western New York. Fruit medium or below, globular, pale
yellow, partially netted and patched with light russet; flesh white,
coarse, juicy, semi-melting, agreeable; good; Sept.

=Onion. 1.= Mawe-Abercrombie _Univ. Gard. Bot._ 1778.

_La Grosse Oignonette._ =2.= Brookshaw _Pomona_ =2=:Pl. LIII. 1817.

The Onion, or La Grosse Oignonette, is a rare pear and is distinct from
Oignonet de Provence. Fruit medium, globular, brown-skinned; flesh
sweet, well flavored but rather dry, and when too ripe becomes pithy;
Sept.

=Orange, 1.= _Mass. Hort Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

A seedling fruited by S. A. Shurtleff of Brookline, Mass., in 1862.
Fruit diameter 3-1/2 inches, globular; skin tough and bright yellow,
with dots; flesh fine-grained, keeps well and is a good cooking pear;
end of Dec.

=Orange-Bergamot. 1.= Bradley _Gard._ 199. 1739. =2.= Brookshaw
_Horticultural Repository_ =1=:63, Pl. 31. 1823. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
625. 1884.

Of English origin. Tree hardy, free bearer, succeeding on either pear
or quince stock. Fruit small, globular-turbinate; skin smooth, pale
green changing to yellow or yellow-green at maturity, blushed with dull
red on the side next the sun, strewed with whitish-gray dots; flesh
white, semi-melting, juicy, with a sweet, orange flavor; dessert pear;
early Sept.

=Orange d'Hiver. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:144, Pl. XIX, fig.
4. 1768. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 824. 1869.

_Winter Pomeranzenbirne._ =3.= Christ _Handb._ 507. 1817.

_Winter Orange._ =4.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 390. 1831.

This is a very old pear, probably of French origin. Tree rather
vigorous, said to be a late but heavy bearer. Fruit medium, round,
somewhat flattened at base and apex, bright yellow, covered all over
with numerous brown dots and lined with russet; stem medium long,
stout, inserted in a small, oblique cavity; calyx small, open, set in
a small, round, very shallow depression; flesh white, rather gritty,
firm, crisp, very juicy, with a pleasant, slightly musky, aromatic
flavor; a good cooking pear and a fair dessert pear; Feb. to Apr.

=Orange Mandarine, 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:483, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 625. 1884.

Raised from seed by Leroy at Angers, Fr., and fruited first in 1863.
Fruit below medium and sometimes a little larger, globular, rather
regular in outline, more or less mammillate at the summit, pale yellow,
passing to clear russet on the cheek exposed to the sun, and covered
with minute brown dots; flesh white, very fine and very melting,
slightly gritty at the center; juice abundant, saccharine, acidulous,
endowed with an exquisite perfume; first; Oct.

=Orange Musquee. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:140, Pl. X. 1768.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 625. 1884.

_Mueskierte Pomeranzenbirne._ =3.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 255. 1889.

This is an old pear of uncertain origin, though probably French or
Italian. Fruit medium, globular, more or less bossed, flattened at both
ends though sometimes rather conic and obtuse at the top; smooth skin
punctured like an orange, yellow-green changing to fine lemon, with
a lively red next the sun but rather variable; flesh white, coarse,
breaking, gritty at center; juice not very abundant, rather saccharine,
sweet, possessing a musky flavor and perfume; quality variable, on the
whole, good; end of Aug.

=Orange Rouge. 1.= Duhamel _Trait Arb. Fr._ =2=:141. 1768. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:486, fig. 1869.

_Red Orange._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 636. 1884.

An old variety of obscure origin. Henri Manger wrote in 1783 that it
appeared to him to be the _Favonianum Rubrum_ mentioned by Pliny, but
it appears according to M. Leroy more likely to have originated at
Poitiers, and to be the _Rousette_ or _Orange du Poitou_ or _Poire
de Poitiers_. Fruit medium, round, even, regular or inclining to
turbinate; skin thick, clear grayish-yellow, clouded with green on
the shaded side, sprinkled with pale gray dots and extensively washed
and streaked with a lively dark red; flesh whitish, semi-fine; juice
abundant, more or less saccharine, acidulous and musky; second, often
third; end of Aug.

=Orange Tulipee. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:202, Pl. XLI. 1768.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ 488, fig. 1869.

An old French pear grown in the south of France and sold in Paris at
a very low price. It is known to have been cultivated for some three
centuries, but is not worth growing today. Described in the _Jardinier
Francois_ in 1665. Fruit medium and often below, globular-ovate, or
turbinate-rounded, with one side larger than the other; skin thick
and rough, yellow-green, sprinkled with large, gray, scaly dots, and
well colored with red-brown on the side next the sun, and numerous
carmine streaks and marks on the other side; flesh white, semi-fine and
semi-melting, more or less granular around the core; juice sufficient,
saccharine, slightly astringent, with a slight perfume of fennel;
third; Sept.

=Orange de Vienne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 101. 1876.

_Wiener Pomeranzenbirne._ =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:150. 1856.

A Van Mons seedling, 1825. Fruit small to medium, short-turbinate,
clear yellow, with light brown dots; flesh granular, semi-melting, very
sweet and sugary, having a Bergamot flavor; first for table and all
purposes; mid-Sept.

=Ordensbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:132. 1856.

Originated in Nassau, a former German duchy, 1806. Fruit medium,
even-sided; skin smooth and tender, yellowish-green turning to light
yellowish and light green, seldom blushed, grass-green dots; flesh
white, juicy, semi-buttery; very good for dessert and good for cooking
and the market; mid-Aug.

=Orel 15. 1.= _Ill. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 187. 1896. =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc.
Rpt._ 41, 42. 1915.

Introduced from Russia about 1880 by Professor Budd of the Iowa
Agricultural College. Free from blight and apparently valuable as a
stock for top-grafting.

=Orpheline Colmar. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =2=:77, fig. 1854. =2.=
Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 260. 1889.

The Orpheline Colmar was a gain of Van Mons a few years before his
death and is a beautiful and handsome fruit. Fruit very large, pyriform
and obtuse-pyramidal, clear green becoming yellow at maturity, streaked
and dotted with grayish-brown and black and stained with russet-fawn on
the side of the sun and around the calyx; flesh yellowish-white, fine,
melting, rather granular around the core, full of saccharine juice and
pleasantly perfumed; good.

=Osband Summer. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =1=:211, fig. 59. 1846. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:492, fig. 1869.

Originated in the vicinity of Palmyra in Wayne County, N. Y., about
1840 and was at first known as _Summer Virgalieu_ and so published in
the _Genesee Farmer_ in 1845 or 1846. Fruit small, obovate-pyriform,
clear yellow, thickly dotted with small greenish and brown dots, with
a warm cheek on the side next the sun and with some traces of russet
especially around the stem and calyx; flesh white, juicy, melting, with
a rich sugary flavor and agreeable perfume of musk; first in quality
and appearance; early in Aug.

=Osborne. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:338. 1846. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
825. 1869.

A native variety which originated on the farm of John Osborne, Economy,
Ind. It was introduced by Ernst, and published in the _Western Farmer
and Gardener_ (Vol. 5), having first fruited in Ernst's nursery in
1844. Fruit small, short-pyriform, stem planted on one side; skin thin,
yellowish-green, with numerous gray dots; flesh white, tender, juicy,
brisk, sweet, vinous, with a slight astringency and highly-perfumed
flavor; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Oswego Beurre. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 825. 1869.

Raised by Walter Read, Oswego, N. Y. Tree vigorous, hardy, and
productive. Fruit medium, oblate, sometimes inclining to conic,
yellowish-green, streaked and mottled with thin russet; flesh melting,
buttery, juicy, with a fine, sprightly, vinous and aromatic flavor;
good; Oct. and Nov.

=Oswego Incomparable. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 826. 1869.

Originated at Oswego, N. Y. Fruit rather large,
obtuse-obovate-pyriform, yellow, slightly netted and patched with
russet, a tinge of crimson in the sun and many russet dots; flesh
whitish, coarse, semi-melting, sweet, juicy, agreeable; moderate
quality, sometimes good; Sept.

=Ott. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =14=:424. 1848. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
826. 1869.

Ott is a seedling of Seckel and was originated by Samuel Ott,
Montgomery County, Pa., and introduced to the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society by Dr. Brinckle of Philadelphia in the summer of
1848. Fruit small, globular-obovate, regular, largest about the middle,
rounding off to the calyx end and narrowing to the stem where it is
obtuse; skin slightly rough, dull green changing to yellow when mature,
some russet, bronzy-red on the sunny side and dotted with russet specks
intermixed with some greenish spots; flesh greenish-white, coarse,
melting, very juicy, rich, sugary, with a spicy aroma resembling the
Seckel; very good; end of Aug.

=Owen. 1.= Cole _Am. Fr. Bk._ 174. 1849. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
826. 1869.

Originated in the garden of John Owen, Cambridge, Mass. Fruit small,
globular-obtuse-pyriform, dark green, shaded with dull red in the
sun and thickly sprinkled with green and light dots; flesh tender,
delicious and finely colored; one of the finest cooking pears in its
season; Oct. to Dec.

=Owener Birne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:10. 1856.

Wuerttemberg, 1830. Fruit globular-turbinate, greenish-yellow,
with rather dark blush, russeted all over; flesh yellowish-white,
astringent, juicy, breaking, aromatic, first for household use and the
making of perry; end of Sept.

=Ozark. 1.= _U. S. D. A. Pom. Rpt._ 38. 1895.

Originated about 1845 from seed taken by a Mr. Rooks from Kentucky to
Polk County, Missouri. Fruit large, oblate, greenish-yellow, with a few
russet veinings and patches, dots numerous, minute, russet; stem medium
long, in a large, deep basin; calyx large, open; flesh white, with
yellow veins, buttery, granular, mild subacid; good; Aug.

=Paddock. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 530. 1857. =2.= _Ibid._ 826. 1869.

Sent out by Chauncey Goodrich, Burlington, Vt. Fruit rather below
medium, oblong-ovate-pyriform, light yellow, sometimes with a faint
blush; flesh fine-grained, melting, sweet, but not very highly
flavored; good; end of July.

=Pailleau. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:58. 1842. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
826. 1869.

Attributed to Van Mons, Belgium. Fruit large, oblong, greenish-yellow,
rough, with brown and green dots and patches of russet; flesh juicy,
sweet, rich, good, but rather coarse-grained; excellent quality; early
Sept.

=Pain-et-Vin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:494, fig. 1869.

Cultivated in Normandy early in the nineteenth century under the two
names of _Pain-et-Vin_ and _Chene-Vert_ or _Green-Oak_. Fruit medium,
ovate, rather long and swelled; skin thin, rough, dark yellow ground
covered with bronze, freely stained and dotted with gray and reddened
on the side of the sun; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine, very firm,
although semi-melting, rather gritty at core, very juicy, saccharine,
acid, very vinous, with a particularly pleasant flavor; second; about
mid-Sept, to beginning of Oct.

=Palmischbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:171. 1856. =2.=
Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 190, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown in Germany and Upper Austria and known in different
localities by various names. It was published in Germany in 1823.
Fruit small, turbinate, regular in contour, greenish-yellow turning
to light yellow, often with a dark blush, covered all over with large
gray spots; flesh whitish, coarse-grained, very juicy, acidulous and
saccharine, aromatic; third for the table, but first for perry; Sept.

=Paradiesbirne. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 525. 1817. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:182. 1856.

Thuringia, Ger., 1797. Fruit small to medium, conic, yellow-green
changing to golden yellow, slightly blushed, and dotted with brown,
thin skin; flesh yellowish-white, very sweet, juicy; second for
dessert, first for household; end of Oct.

=Pardee. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 530. 1857.

Raised by S. D. Pardee, New Haven, Conn. Fruit small, globular,
greenish-yellow, much covered with russet; flesh coarse, granular,
buttery, juicy, melting, with a high vinous flavor, strongly perfumed;
Oct.

=Parfum d'Aout. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:136. 1768. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:496, fig. 1869.

The Parfum d'Aout described here is the variety described under that
name by Jean Merlet in 1675 and 1690 and afterwards by Duhamel in 1768.
It probably originated in the village of Berny, not far from Paris.
Fruit small, long, nearly pyriform, enlarged on one side more than the
other at the lower end; skin smooth, pale yellow, slightly tinged with
green, covered with dots and small speckles of fawn, tinged with a
beautiful red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine,
breaking or semi-breaking, some grit around the core; juice rarely
abundant, saccharine, sweet, with a perfume of musky-anis; second; end
of Aug.

=Parfum d'Hiver. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 151. 1846. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:497, fig. 1869.

As early as 1600, this variety was grown in France under the name
_Bouvert Musque_. Tree rather vigorous, very productive. Fruit medium,
roundish-turbinate, olive-yellow washed with bright red; stem rather
long; calyx large, partially open; flesh brittle, juicy; good for
cooking; Feb. to Apr.

=Parfum de Rose. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 185, fig. 91. 1866-73.

Obtained by Bivort and first introduced in 1849. Fruit small,
long-pyriform, rather irregular in contour; skin fine, a little
thick, water-green and whitish at first, sprinkled with small dots of
grayish-green, combined with many stains of the same color, passing
at maturity to dull yellow; flesh nearly white, very fine, buttery,
melting; juice sufficient, having a distinct perfume of rose, which is
its chief distinguishing feature; end of Sept.

=Parfume. 1.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =3=: 1807.

Fruit medium, globular; skin rather thick and tough, of a deep red
color, spotted with brown; flesh melting, but dry and has a perfumed
flavor; end of Aug.

=Parfumee. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:186, fig. 578. 1881.

French. Gained by M. Pariset, Courciat-Dongalon, Fr., and fruited for
the first time in 1869. Fruit medium, globular-ovate, short and thick;
skin thick, pale green, sprinkled with numerous greenish-gray dots only
slightly visible on the side next the sun, at maturity pale yellow
and the exposed cheek more or less warm gold; flesh white tinted with
yellow, fine, melting, gritty around the center; juice abundant, sugary
and perfumed; first; beginning of winter.

=Parrot. 1.= Bunyard-Thomas _Fr. Gard._ 140. 1904.

Introduced in England about 1900. Fruit like Bergamot in form; very
richly flavored; Oct.

=Parsonage. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 530. 1857. =2.= _Ibid._ 828.
1869.

Originated at New Rochelle, N. Y. Fruit medium to large,
obovate-obtuse-pyriform, often inclined, orange-yellow, rough,
generally shaded with dull crimson, netted and patched with russet
and thickly sprinkled with russet dots; flesh white, slightly coarse,
somewhat granular, juicy, melting, with a refreshing vinous flavor;
good; Sept.

=Passa-tutti. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 497. 1817. =2.= _Guide Prat._ 101.
1876.

An Italian autumn pear. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, greenish-yellow,
much covered with yellowish-gray russet, lighter yellow on the sunny
side, with some red blush; flesh agreeable, with a Muscat flavor;
third; Nov. and Dec.

=Passans du Portugal. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =4=:390. 1838. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 626. 1884.

Passans du Portugal would seem from its name to be of Portuguese
origin. It should not be confused with Summer Portugal although the two
varieties have various synonyms in common and have some qualities in
common. Fruit medium, oblate, flattened after the Bergamot type, lively
green changing to pale yellow on ripening, red next the sun brightening
toward maturity to a more vivid shade; flesh white, breaking, juicy,
with a fine sugary and perfumed flavor; an excellent dessert pear; Aug.

=Passe-Colmar des Belges. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:502. 1869.

Origin unknown but was found growing under this name in the collection
of the Horticultural Society of Angers early in the last century. Fruit
above medium, turbinate-obtuse and bossed, yellow, dotted and streaked
with russet; flesh white, coarse, semi-breaking, wanting in juice and
sugar, sharp and acidulous; third; Nov.

=Passe Colmar d'Ete. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 101. 1876.

French. Fruit small, turbinate, olive-green; flesh very juicy; good;
Sept.

=Passe Colmar Musque. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:45, fig. 1857. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 627. 1884.

Obtained by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., from a bed of mixed seeds
he made about 1831. It yielded its first fruit and was published in
1845. _Passe Colmar Musque_ is also known as _Autumn Colmar_ but is
distinct from the variety most usually known by that name. Fruit
medium and sometimes less, turbinate, otherwise obtuse-conic, rather
variable in form; skin thick, tender, green changing to golden-yellow,
dotted, mottled and patched with pale cinnamon-russet and often washed
on the side next the sun with a light transparent red; flesh slightly
yellowish, very fine, melting, very saccharine, richly flavored,
aromatic and scented; first; Nov.

=Passe Crassane. 1.= _Pom. France_ =2=:No. 82, Pl. 82. 1863. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 192. 1920.

This winter pear was raised by M. Boisbunel, a nurseryman at Rouen,
Fr., from a bed of mixed seeds which he made in 1845; it bore fruit and
was first published at Rouen in 1855. Fruit medium or rather large,
turbinate or globular-conic, flattened in Bergamot fashion; skin rough,
thick, of a dull pale green, mottled with russet markings and passing
to yellow on the side turned to the sun; flesh white, fine, melting,
very juicy, saccharine, perfumed, and agreeably sprightly; very good;
Jan. to Mar.

=Passe-Goemans. 1.= Mas. _Pom. Gen._ =3=:111, fig. 152. 1878.

_Goemans Gelbe Sommerbirne._ =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:91.
1856.

Belgian, and probably from Van Mons in 1825. Fruit medium, globular,
ventriculous, sides unequal, very obtuse, uniformly citron-yellow,
blushed with cinnamon on the sun-exposed side; flesh very full of
flavor; first; end of Sept.

=Passe Madeleine. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:131. 1843.

Probably a French variety. Tree vigorous and very productive. Fruit
medium, long, lemon-yellow, lightly tinted with gray on the side next
the sun; flesh melting, sugary, rather perfumed; beginning of Sept.

=Passe-Tardive. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ 506. fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 829. 1869.

Obtained by Major Esperen of Mechlin, Bel., and first published in
1843. Fruit above medium to large, turbinate, regular, bossed and much
swelled in all its lower part and greatly contracted at the summit;
flesh white, semi-fine and semi-melting, gritty around the core; juice
seldom abundant, sugary, agreeable, though but slightly perfumed;
second or third for dessert, first for the kitchen; Apr. to June.

=Pastor. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:197. 1908.

Reported in the Experimental orchard at Agassiz, Br. C., in 1900
and at various Canadian Experiment Farms in 1902. Fruit medium,
oblate-pyriform, yellow; flesh melting, sugary, juicy, perfumed flavor;
good; late season.

=Pastorale, 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:231, Pl. LV. 1768. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 628. 1884.

Mayer, director of the gardens of the Grand Duke of Wurtzburg, Bavaria,
described this pear in his _Pomona franconica_ in 1776 and 1801, and
Duhamel du Monceau wrote of it in 1768. Earlier still Le Lectier
spoke of its cultivation before 1628 under the name _Musette d'Hiver
rosate_, Merlet called it _Pastorale_ in 1675, and La Quintinye named
it _Pastourelle_ and _Musette d'Autumne_ in 1688. Fruit above medium,
pyriform, slightly obtuse, much puckered at the summit and generally
larger on one side than on the other; skin greenish, nearly covered
with gray-russet, sprinkled with large brown dots, vermilioned on the
side of the sun; flesh whitish, semi-fine, more or less gritty around
the core; juice abundant, rather sugary, slightly acid; Nov. to Jan.

=Pater Noster. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 532. 1857. =2.= _Ann. Pom.
Belge_ =6=:33, fig. 1858.

Mentioned in the Van Mons catalog of fruits cultivated from 1798 to
1823. Fruit above medium, and often large, variable in form, oblong
or long-turbinate, slightly obtuse, contorted and bossed, clear
olive-yellow; flesh white, fine, melting or semi-melting, watery; juice
abundant, saccharine, very vinous, acidulous, with an agreeable aroma;
first; Nov.

=Paul Ambre. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 830. 1869. =2.= _Guide Prat._
101. 1876.

A Belgian variety resembling Nec Plus Meuris; origin unknown. Fruit
globular or globular-oval, pale greenish-yellow, shaded with crimson
on the side next the sun, dots and markings of russet; flesh whitish,
buttery, melting, juicy, sweet; good to very good; Oct.

=Paul Bonamy. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:215, fig. 106. 1866-73.

M. Bonamy, a nurseryman at Toulouse, Fr., obtained this pear and named
it after his son. It was first published in 1865. Fruit large, ovate,
bossed; skin fine, thin, oily and scented at maturity; flesh white,
semi-fine, a little fibrous when the fruit is too ripe, melting or
semi-melting, streaming with sugary juice, sprightly, highly perfumed;
good; Sept.

=Paul Coppieters. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1895.

Sent out by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel., previous to 1895. Fruit
rather large, pyriform-turbinate, yellow, dotted and heavily marbled
with reddish-yellow; flesh white, very fine, free from granulations,
buttery, saccharine and aromatic; beginning of Nov.

=Paul d'Hoop. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1895.

Sent out in 1895 as a new variety by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel.
Fruit medium, covered with fawn-russet; flesh fine, yellowish-white,
buttery, vinous, saccharine, having a delicious aroma; Jan. and Feb.

=Paul Thielens. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:510, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 830. 1869.

Paul Thielens came from a seed bed made by Van Mons in 1829 in his
nursery at Louvain, Bel. Fruit large, ovate, very irregular, bossed and
swelled, or ovate, nearly globular; skin a little rough, transparent
greenish-yellow, dotted and marked with grayish-russet, slightly
blushed with dull red on the side next the sun; flesh white, semi-fine
and semi-melting, gritty at the center; juice rarely abundant, more or
less saccharine, slightly aromatic; second; Oct.

=Pauls Birne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876.

_Poire de Paul._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:15, fig. 488. 1881.

Fruit large or rather large, globular-conic or conic-obtuse, dull
water-green, usually entirely covered with a wash of cinnamon color
which at maturity becomes golden, and the side exposed to the sun is
blushed with a garnet red on which are numerous small gray dots; flesh
white tinted with yellow, rather fine, breaking, gritty about the core,
juicy, sugary, vinous, slightly perfumed; first for cooking; winter,
lasting well toward the end.

=Payen. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:511, fig. 1869.

Raised by M. Boisbunel, a nurseryman at Rouen, Fr., from a mixed seed
bed made in 1845. It was reported on in 1860 and propagated in 1863. It
is distinct from both Beurre Payen and President Payen. Fruit medium,
obovate-pyriform, bright greenish-yellow, mottled with fawn and covered
with large and numerous brownish dots; flesh white, fine, melting,
juicy, sweet; first class; Oct.

=Payenche. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:512, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 830. 1869.

_Paquency._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 404. 1845.

Found in a hedge at the village of Payenche in Perigord, Fr. It was
taken to Paris in 1805. Fruit nearly medium, oblong-ovate-pyriform,
light yellow stained or marbled and dotted with gray-russet and colored
with brick-red on the side of the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, melting
or semi-melting, some grit around the core; juice extremely abundant,
very saccharine, acidulous, with a savory perfume and a slight
after-taste of anis; first; Oct.

=Payton.=

According to letters from Nicholas Hallock, Queens, N. Y., this variety
originated on the premises of a Mr. Payton of Flatbush, L. I., and had
been known locally as Payton for some time previous to 1898. Fruit
obovate-obtuse-roundish, about the size of Doyenne Boussock, dull green
becoming yellow, thickly sprinkled with small brownish dots; stem
short, stout, set in a rather shallow, russeted cavity; calyx open,
placed in a shallow, wide basin; flesh not coarse, not gritty, not
stringy, white, moderately juicy, good but not highly flavored; Sept.,
later than Bartlett.

=Peach. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 533. 1857. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
629. 1884.

_Peche._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:513, fig. 1869.

A variety obtained by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., from a bed of mixed
seeds he made in 1836, and first reported in 1845. Fruit small to
medium, globular-obovate; skin smooth, pale greenish-yellow when ripe,
occasionally tinted with a faint blush of red on the side toward the
sun, dotted and mottled with brown; flesh white, citrine, fine, very
melting, very juicy, sweet, richly flavored and delicately perfumed;
first in France, but variable according to climate; Aug.

=Pei-li. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 376. 1881.

Pei-li or _Snow pears_: A race of pears grown in northwestern China;
globular, white, juicy and generally regarded as the best fruits in the
country.

=Pemberton. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 831. 1869.

A seedling of S. A. Shurtleff, Boston, Mass. Fruit medium, inclining to
oval, light green, thickly sprinkled with dark dots, yellowish on the
side of the sun, with sometimes a red cheek; flesh somewhat coarse, but
juicy, sweet; good; Feb. and Mar.

=Penderson. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 831. 1869.

Raised by Samuel Penderson, New Haven, Conn. Fruit medium, globular,
greenish-yellow; flesh white, breaking, semi-melting, brisk, rather
astringent; good; Oct.

=Pendleton Early York. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =14=:381, fig. 41. 1848.

_York-precoce de Pendleton._ =2.= _Guide Prat._ 114, 313. 1876.

Originated by Mrs. Jeremiah York, Connecticut, about 1826 from seed
of Rousselet Hatif. Fruit medium or below, obovate, varying to
obtuse-pyriform, pale greenish-yellow, with russet specks, sometimes
with a faint blush; flesh white, tender, sweet, melting, slightly
perfumed; good; last of July.

=Pengethley. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 197. 1832.

Raised by T. A. Knight, President of the London Horticultural Society,
who, in February, 1832, sent cions of the variety to Mr. Lowell and the
Massachusetts Agricultural Society. Fruit medium, inclining to oval,
obovate, pale green, covered with dark dots, changing to yellow as it
ripens, sometimes having a red cheek; flesh somewhat coarse, but juicy,
sweet, and good; Feb. and Mar.

=Penn. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =18=:58, fig. 1863. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 831. 1869.

The original tree was planted at the beginning of the last century
close to the old Penn Manor in Pennsylvania and on the margin of land
which became the track of the Camden and Amboy Railroad. Inasmuch as
its position was so close to the railway the company threatened to cut
it down. Hence it acquired the name of _Railroad Fuss_ by which it was
known for many years. Fruit medium, oblate, sometimes globular-oblate,
angular, pale lemon-yellow, thickly sprinkled with small grayish and
russet dots, sometimes with a few patches and dots of russet around the
calyx; flesh white, a little coarse, very juicy, melting, with a sweet,
pleasant, refreshing flavor, slightly aromatic, with a little musky
perfume; good to very good; Oct.

=Pennsylvania. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =10=:213. 1844. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 832. 1869.

A seedling found on the ground of J. B. Smith of Pennsylvania. In
1845 the original tree was stated to be nearly forty feet high, of a
pyramidal form and remarkably robust habit. Fruit medium, obovate,
tapering toward the stem, obtuse, brown-russet on dull yellow ground,
ruddy on the sunny side; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, melting, juicy,
rich, sugary, slightly perfumed and with a musky flavor; good but not
strictly first rate; as an American fruit it may be ranked with Buffum,
Cushing and Fulton; Oct.

=Pepin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:515, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 629. 1884.

This pear was growing in the orchard of Le Lectier in Anjou, Fr., in
the year 1600 and was described by Claude Saint-Etienne in 1670. Fruit
below medium and sometimes small, globular, bossed, always mammillate
at the summit, meadow-green, clouded with pale yellow, dotted with gray
and extensively washed with brick red on the side turned to the sun;
flesh whitish, fine or semi-fine, breaking, watery; at the center are
numerous granulations; juice very saccharine, sweet and savory; second;
mid-Aug.

=Perpetual. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 832. 1869.

Said to have originated on Long Island, N. Y. Disseminated by Messrs.
Berckmans, Augusta, Ga. Fruit medium, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, green
and yellow, beautifully blushed in the sun; flesh whitish, firm,
moderately juicy, sweet; good; keeps till May.

=Perrier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Obtained by M. Morel in 1873. Fruit medium, globular, green; flesh
fine, melting, juicy; good; beginning of Aug. Tree vigorous and fertile.

=Pertusati. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:516, fig. 1869.

Raised in the nurseries of M. Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr., in 1867. Fruit
medium, globular-ovate, irregular, having one side larger than the
other; skin rough, golden-yellow, finely dotted with gray, marbled with
clear brown around the calyx and the stem; flesh white, fine, melting;
juice abundant, very saccharine, with an acidulous flavor, very
pleasant and delicately perfumed; first; Nov.

=Petersbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:33. 1856.

_Petite Poire de Pierre._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:101, fig. 243. 1879.

_Kleine Petersbirne._ =3.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 242. 1889.

Altenburg, Ger., 1799. Fruit small, clear green, sprinkled with
numerous minute blackish-green dots, turning to dull yellow at
maturity and washed over a large area of its surface with dark red, on
which the dots are of a darker red; flesh greenish-white, very fine,
semi-breaking, sufficiently juicy and agreeably perfumed; a good fruit
to preserve or to dry; Aug.

=Petit-Blanquet. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:132, Pl. VI. 1768.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:517, fig. 1869.

_Little Blanquet._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 802. 1869.

_Small Blanquet._ =4.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 646. 1884.

This variety was known in French gardens in the middle of the sixteenth
century under the name _Poire Perle_, and some years later also by
that of _Petit-Blanquet_. Fruit small or very small; form rather
inconstant, slightly obtuse-pyriform, or more obtuse-ovate; skin smooth
and transparent and shining, clear pale yellow or of a white, waxy
and pearl-like tone, sprinkled with greenish dots, with occasionally
a blush of tender rose on the side next the sun; flesh very white,
semi-fine, breaking and firm; juice rarely abundant, saccharine, savory
although only slightly perfumed; a second class dessert pear; Aug.

=Petit Catillac. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:3, fig. 98. 1878.

_Kleiner Katzenkopf_. =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 242. 1889.

This pear is probably of German origin. It has points of resemblance in
common with the old French Catillac but is distinguished by its size,
being often less than that of the latter, its time of maturity being
earlier, its flesh being less breaking, more saccharine and without
any tartness. Fruit large, ovate-pyriform and much swelled, even in
contour, green at first, sprinkled with large, regularly spaced,
prominent, brown dots, the green passing to lemon-yellow at maturity,
with a blush of red-brown on well-exposed fruits on the side next the
sun; flesh white, coarse, semi-buttery; juice abundant, rather vinous
and without any appreciable perfume; good for the kitchen; Oct. and Nov.

=Petit-Chaumontel. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:519, fig. 1869.

From the old garden of the Horticultural Society of Angers, Fr., and
sometimes erroneously confused with Oignon which ripens some six weeks
earlier. Fruit medium, globular, very bossed and irregular in form,
clear green, dotted, veined with russet and extensively washed with
carmine on the side turned to the sun; flesh very white, semi-fine,
breaking, gritty at center; juice sufficient, saccharine, vinous,
slightly astringent; second; latter half of Aug.

=Petit-Hativeau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:520, fig. 1869.

A variety of ancient and unknown origin, but cultivated among a group
of pears termed _Hativeau_ for over the last five centuries. It was
called by the name _Petit-Hativeau_ by Claude Saint-Etienne in 1670 to
distinguish it from the _Gros-Hativeau_. Fruit small, ovate, obtuse
and more or less globular; skin smooth and fine, lemon-yellow, dotted
with exceedingly minute greenish points and more or less stained
with gray-russet around the calyx and stem; flesh whitish, breaking,
semi-fine, scented, juicy and gritty, juice sugary, acid, and slightly
musky; third; July.

=Petit-Muscat. 1.= Knoop _Fructologie_ =1=:75, Tab. 1. 1771. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:522, fig. 1869.

_Little Muscat_. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 802. 1869.

Jean Mayer, director of the gardens of the Grand Duke of Wurtzburg,
Bavaria, in his _Pomona franconica_ published in 1801 showed that the
Petit-Muscat was the antique pear _Superba_ described by Pliny. Various
other pomologists wrote of it prior to Mayer as for instance Jacq.
Dalechamp, 1615; Jean Jonston, 1662; and Henri Manger, 1783. Charles
Estienne was the first to write of it in France, 1530, and he named
it _Musquette_. Fruit very small, turbinate, more or less obtuse and
sometimes globular-turbinate; the eye is placed in a regular-formed
cavity and is always naked in consequence of the segments of the
calyx falling off, pale greenish-yellow, finely dotted and slightly
clouded with rose on the side of the sun (in France); flesh yellowish,
semi-fine, breaking, not very juicy, sugary, acidulous and with a
pleasant musk flavor; second; June.

=Petit-Oin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:524, fig. 1869.

_Winterwunder_. =2.= Christ Handb. 497. 1817.

_Mueskirte Schmeerbirne_. =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:13. 1856.

_Merveille d'Hiver_. =4.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 616. 1884.

Valerius Cordus was the first to describe this pear which originated in
Germany and belongs to the Schmeerbirne or greasy class. About 1650 it
was cultivated in France under the name of _Oing_ or _Oin_, the French
equivalent of the German _speck_ or _lard_. Fruit medium or less,
globular-ovate or turbinate, slightly obtuse at summit, with thick but
smooth and greasy skin, dull yellow-green, more or less gray, dotted
and flecked with greenish-russet; flesh whitish, granular, scented,
exceedingly melting and juicy, very saccharine, free from acid and
having an exquisite flavor; third; Sept. to Nov.

=Petite Charlotte. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876.

French. Fruit small, pyramidal, greenish-yellow, highly colored on the
side of the sun; flesh breaking, juicy, vinous; excellent; Aug. and
Sept.

=Petite Fondante. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:153, fig. 461. 1880.

_Kleine Schmalzbirne_. =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 242. 1889.

Origin unknown. Fruit small, nearly spherical, sometimes depressed at
both poles, even in contour; skin rather thick and yet tender, pale
water-green, sown with numerous very faint, very small, brown dots; at
maturity the basic green whitens a little and the side next the sun of
fruits well exposed becomes a lighter yellow; flesh whitish, semi-fine,
semi-melting, rather gritty around the core, highly saccharine, vinous
and sprightly; good; end of Aug.

=Petite Marguerite. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:526, fig. 1869. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 192. 1920.

Raised in the nurseries of M. Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr., in 1862 and
propagated in 1863. Fruit medium, irregular ovate, bossed, swelled at
the base and having one side always larger than the other, grass-green,
dotted with gray and brown and slightly bronzed on the cheek exposed to
the sun; flesh greenish-white, fine and very melting, slightly gritty
at the center; juice extremely abundant and saccharine, acidulous, with
a very pleasant perfume; first; Aug.

=Petite Tournaisienne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

A variety on trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz. Fruit medium, oval,
oblong, yellow; flesh very fine, semi-melting; Apr. and May.

=Petite Victorine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:528, fig. 1869.

A seedling of M. Andre Leroy raised in 1863. Fruit below medium,
globular, flattened at the base but slightly conic at its other
extremity, greenish, dotted and marbled with russet; flesh white,
fine, melting, generally free from grit; juice sufficient, saccharine,
acidulous, with a specially exquisite, musky flavor; first; Dec. and
Jan.

=Petre. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =2=:437. 1836. =2.= _Ibid._ =3=:83. 1838.

This valuable variety was raised by John Bartram, the proprietor of
a botanic garden near Philadelphia, from seed received in a letter
from Lord Petre of England about the year 1735. The tree still stands,
although becoming decrepit. Fruit medium, obovate, truncate at both
ends; skin thin, greenish-yellow, with small pale spots; flesh white,
soft, juicy and buttery, with a delicious flavor, very slightly musky
and vinous; very good; mid-Sept. to Dec.

=Pfaffenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:193. 1856.

Wuerttemberg and Baden, Ger., 1847. Fruit small, turbinate, yellow,
tinted with a dark cinnamon-colored blush on the side next the sun; the
summit is covered with russet, thickly sprinkled with gray dots; flesh
firm and tasteless.

=Pfingstbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:96. 1856.

German seedling, 1851. Fruit medium, globular, green turning
yellowish-green, speckled and dotted with gray; skin thin and
scentless; flesh rather white, sweet and musky; first for table,
household and market; early summer.

=Philiberte. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

French. Fruit rather large, nearly globular, a beautiful lemon-yellow;
flesh very fine, melting, very juicy, agreeably perfumed; first; Dec.
and Jan.

=Philippe-Le-Bon. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:161, fig. 81. 1872.

_Philipp der Gute_. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:4. 1856.

According to the catalog of Van Mons of 1823 this was one of his
seedlings. Fruit hardly medium, ovate, or turbinate-ovate, short and
thick, usually even in outline; skin thick, firm, glossy, pale green,
whitish-brown dots; at maturity the basic green passes to pale dull
yellow, washed with some clear cerise-red; flesh white, rather coarse,
buttery, not much juice, but vinous and perfumed; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Philippe Couvreur. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 264. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 72. 1895.

Of Belgian origin. Fruit medium to large, orange-yellow dotted with
russet; flesh white, tinted with salmon, fine, juicy, perfumed; good;
beginning of Oct.

=Philippe Goes. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:51, fig. 1855. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 833. 1869.

A posthumous gain from the seed beds of Van Mons. The parent tree
gave its first fruit in 1846. Fruit above medium, obovate, uneven and
undulating in outline; skin rough to the touch, of a dark olive, much
covered with a bright russet; flesh semi-melting, gritty, sweet, rather
granular at the center, juice rarely abundant, saccharine, vinous and
fairly well perfumed; second; Dec.

=Philippot. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:530, fig. 1869.

Originated with M. Philippot, a nurseryman at Saint-Quentin, Aisne, Fr.
In 1852 it fruited for the first time and was propagated in 1860. Fruit
large to very large, globular-conic, obtuse, swelled and fleshy at the
base; skin yellowish, in part dotted and marbled with brownish-fawn;
flesh very white, coarse, semi-breaking, watery; juice abundant, sweet,
having little sugar or perfume although rather delicate; third for
dessert, first for cooking; Jan. to Mar.

=Philopena. 1.= _W. N. Y. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 24. 1904.

A chance variety brought to notice by Reuben Ragan of Indiana,
about 1850 and named Philopena by him. Fruit small to medium,
oblong-pyriform, yellow, with purple blush; calyx open, in a small,
shallow basin; stem short, cavity small or absent; quality medium;
three or four weeks after Bartlett.

=Picciola. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 833. 1869.

Of Belgian origin. Fruit small, globular-oblate, greenish-yellow,
sometimes slightly blushed in the sun, with traces of russet; flesh
whitish, very juicy, melting, with a vinous flavor; good to very good;
Sept.

=Pie IX. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:86. 1854. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:531, fig. 1869.

_Pius IX._ =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 631. 1884.

The parent tree of Pie IX sprang from seed sown in 1834 by Van Mons in
his nurseries at Louvain, Bel. Fruit large, turbinate, more or less
obtuse and elongated, much swelled at the middle, bossed and contorted
at its summit, lemon-yellow, dotted and striped with fawn; flesh
white, coarse or semi-fine, juicy and melting, rather gritty at the
center, saccharine, sour, fairly well perfumed, sometimes disagreeably
astringent; second; Sept.

=Pierre Corneille. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1895.

Pierre Corneille was obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr., from a
seedling of Beurre Diel crossed with Doyenne du Comice; introduced
about 1894. The fruit has the appearance of Duchesse d'Angouleme. Tree
vigorous, fertile and pyramidal in form. Fruit large globular-obovate,
greenish-yellow; flesh fine, melting, juicy, sugary, deliciously
perfumed; Dec. and Jan.

=Pierre Curie. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 174. 1907.

This is a seedling from Doyenne d'Alencon crossed with Beurre Henri
Courcelle by M. Arsene Sannier, a nurseryman at Saint-Sever-Rouen, Fr.,
and placed on the market in 1907. Fruit medium, oval, of the form of
the Doyenne d'Alencon; skin gray; flesh extremely fine, with a very
agreeable perfume; Jan. to Mar.

=Pierre Mace. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876.

French, attributed to Andre Leroy. Tree vigorous and fertile. Fruit
rather large, globular-turbinate, yellow dotted with fawn; flesh fine,
melting, juicy, highly perfumed; first; second half of Sept. and early
Oct.

=Pierre Paternotte. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 60. 1895.

Raised from seed of the Marie-Louise by Pierre Paternotte, at
Molenbeck-Saint-Jean, near Brussels, Bel. Tree vigorous and fertile.
Fruit large, long, yellow, dotted and marbled with gray; flesh white,
fine, melting, juicy; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Pierre Pepin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:532, fig. 1869.

A seedling raised by Leroy, Angers, Fr., and first reported in 1868.
Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform, bossed, and swelled in its lower half,
more or less hollowed at either end, lemon-yellow, slightly clouded
with green and much speckled and spotted with brown; flesh whitish,
fine, melting, some grit around the core; juice abundant, saccharine,
vinous, and agreeably perfumed; first; mid-Sept.

=Pierre Tourasse. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 542. 1894.

Exhibited in France by M. Tourasse, its originator, in 1894. Tree
vigorous, upright, stocky, productive. Fruit of good size, broadly
turbinate, spotted with brilliant fawn color upon a clear yellow
ground, washed with orange and saffron; flesh fine, melting, very
juicy, rich in sugar; last of Sept. and first of Oct.

=Pimpe. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

"The Pimpe peare is as great as the Windsor peare, but rounder, and of
a very good rellish."

=Pinneo. 1.= _Cultivator_ 304. 1845. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 833.
1869.

_Hebron_. =3.= _Mag. Hort._ =24=:419. 1858.

_Boston_. =4.= _Ibid._ 500. 1858.

The parent tree of this variety was found growing in a woodland, New
Haven, Conn., by Dea. Pinneo who transplanted it to a spot near his
dwelling about the year 1745. It was propagated and distributed over
many farms and found a good market in Boston. By error it acquired
also the names of _Boston_ and _Virgalieu_. Fruit medium or below,
globular-oblate, slightly pyriform, pale yellow, netted, patched,
and dotted with russet, slightly blushed on the sunny side; flesh
yellowish-white, fine, melting, juicy, rich, sugary, brisk, with a
refreshing and delicious aroma; good; Aug.

=Piton. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:533, fig. 1869.

A seedling found by M. Piton who lived at Cholet, Maine-et-Loire, Fr.
The Horticultural Society of Angers described it in its Pomology,
and it was named after its propagator. Fruit large to very large,
long-turbinate-obtuse, depressed at each pole, clear dull green, sown
with large russet dots; flesh white, semi-breaking and semi-fine,
watery, containing some grit below the core; juice rather vinous,
sugary, and more or less perfumed; second for dessert, first for
compotes.

=Pitson. 1.= _Gard. Mon._ =27=:14. 1885.

A handsome pear from Stone and Wellington, Fonthill, Ont. Fruit medium,
regularly pyriform, brown inclining to russet; good; Jan.

=Pius X. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =37=:309. 1905.

Described in 1905 as a new pear raised by the Alexiens Brothers at
Tirlemont, Bel. Fruit large, somewhat cylindric, greenish-olive, with a
few brown spots; flesh creamy-white, perfumed; reported to be of first
rate quality; Oct.

=Plantagenet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:534, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 834. 1869.

The Plantagenet was raised from seed by the old Horticultural Society
of Maine-et-Loire, The parent tree gave its first fruit in 1858 in
the Society's garden at Angers. Fruit above medium, irregular-ovate,
bossed, swelled at the central circumference, of a uniform bright
green, some russet around the calyx and sprinkled with numerous dark
brown dots; flesh whitish, fine or semi-fine, extremely melting; juice
very abundant, extremely saccharine, acidulous, possessing a delicious
perfume which gives an after-taste of musk; first; end of Sept. and
early Oct.

=Plascart. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:37,
fig. 115. 1878.

Sent out by the Society Van Mons, Bel., without any account of its
origin. Fruit below medium, turbinate-ovate, even in outline; skin
firm, pale water-green, covered with numerous large, brown dots, very
prominent, the green changing at maturity to a beautiful golden yellow,
washed on the side next the sun with a lively vermilion on which the
dots are golden yellow; flesh yellowish, semi-fine, rather firm and
breaking; juice rich in sugar and perfumed; good; Oct.

=Platt. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 535. 1857. =2.= _Ibid._ 834. 1869.

Originated on the farm of Thomas Tredwell, Beekmantown, Clinton County,
N. Y. Fruit medium, globular-oblate, pale yellow, netted and patched
with russet and sprinkled with russet dots; flesh whitish, juicy,
buttery, semi-melting, agreeable; good; Oct.

=Platte Honigbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:189. 1856.

Nassau, 1801. Fruit medium, obtuse-turbinate, light yellow-green,
with a pale blush, numerous gray dots, marked with russet; flesh
coarse-grained, aromatic; third for dessert, first for household; Sept.

=Pocahontas. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:525. 1847. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 834. 1869.

Originated at Quincy, Mass., and was exhibited before the Horticultural
Society of that State in October, 1847. Fruit below medium,
obovate-pyriform, yellow, netted, patched, and dotted with russet,
sometimes shaded in the sun with bright crimson; flesh white, juicy,
melting, sweet, slightly musky; pleasant; good to very good; Sept.

=Poeckelbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 192, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown in Lower Austria. Fruit small to medium,
globular-turbinate; skin tough, shining, smooth, green changing to
greenish-yellow, blushed and streaked with red on the sunny side,
dotted with yellow-brown; flesh yellowish-white, coarse-grained, juicy,
subacid; good; Nov.

=Poete Beranger. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:536, fig. 1869.

A seedling of Leroy which first fruited in 1867 and was placed in
commerce in 1870. Fruit medium; form rather inconstant, nearly always
having unequal sides, globular, or obtuse-turbinate; skin fine, rough,
bright yellow shaded with green, dotted with gray and almost entirely
washed and mottled with brown-russet, more or less scaly; flesh
greenish-white especially under the skin, fine, extremely melting, free
from grit; juice very abundant, saccharine, acidulous, vinous, with a
delicate perfume; first; mid-Sept.

=Poire d'Abbeville. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 81. 1876. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=5=:99, fig. 338. 1880.

The Poire d'Abbeville probably originated at the city of that name in
the Department of the Somme, Fr.; for M. Jamin, Senior, propagated it
about 1837 when he received it from M. Bennet of Boulogne-sur-Mer,
who stated it was very well known and esteemed in the neighborhood
of Abbeville. Fruit large, globular-conic but irregular, water-green
sprinkled with numerous and large dots of fawn; at maturity the green
changes to lemon-yellow; flesh white tinted with yellow, coarse,
breaking, slightly gritty at the core, not very juicy or perfumed;
first for culinary purposes, keeps easily for a long period; winter.

=Poire d'Ange de Meiningen. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:105, fig. 341. 1880.

This pear has been in much request in the neighborhood of Meiningen,
Ger., for many years and should be distinguished from the ancient
_Poire d'Ange_, now called Boutoc, which it does not resemble. Fruit
small, ovate or ovate-pyriform, even in contour; skin fine, delicate,
bright green changing to beautiful bright lemon-yellow, the side next
the sun being blushed and streaked with vermilion; the very numerous
brown dots change on the blushed part to yellow; flesh tinted with
yellow, rather fine, semi-breaking; juice sweet and agreeably perfumed
but rather deficient; second; latter half of Aug.

=Poire d'Avril. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 536. 1857. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 488. 1884.

Stated by Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, to have been received by
them from England under this name. Fruit large, pyramidal, obtuse; skin
smooth and shining, of a lively dark green, with a brown tinge next the
sun, and patches of gray-russet on the shaded side, the whole surface
being covered with very large pale-colored specks; flesh crisp, juicy
and sweet; first class for cooking according to Messrs. Simon-Louis;
Mar. and Apr.

=Poire Brune de Gasselin. 1.= _Pom. France_ =4=:No. 165, Pl. 165. 1867.

Gained by M. Durand-Gasselin, architect at Nantes, Fr., from a seed
bed made in 1845. Fruit medium, ovate-pyramidal, yellow washed with
fawn-russet; flesh very tender, juicy, very sugary and perfumed; first;
Oct. and Nov.

=Poire de Casserole. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 89. 1876.

_Casserule._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 715. 1869.

Of foreign origin, probably French. Fruit large, obovate-pyriform,
yellow, with much russet and brown on cheek; flesh whitish, coarse,
granular, breaking, very juicy, rich, with high aroma; first quality
for cooking; Oct. and Nov.

=Poire des Chartriers. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:133, fig. 451. 1880.

This variety is mentioned by Van Mons in his Catalog and is therein
considered to be of Belgian origin. Fruit medium, globular-pyriform,
irregular and bossed; skin a little thick at first, water-green, rather
dark, sprinkled with very small and numerous dots of gray-brown, the
basic green becoming brilliant lemon-yellow and on maturity covered
on the side next the sun with golden russet; flesh yellow, very fine,
firm, buttery, melting, full of saccharine juice, vinous, perfumed;
first; Oct.

=Poire des Chasseurs. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:31, fig. 1857.

_Des Chasseurs._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 735. 1869.

A posthumous gain of Van Mons tasted for the first time in 1842 and
reported on by M. Simon Bouvier of Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium to
large, ovate-pyriform, greenish, dotted with russet, and much stained
with russet on the sun-exposed side; flesh yellowish, coarse, watery,
melting, granular; juice vinous, agreeably perfumed; first; Oct.

=Poire de Coq. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:600, fig. 1867.

This variety is distinct from the _Poire de Coq_ synonymous with the
Beurre de Bruxelles, and is of unknown origin. It was cultivated for
many years in the old gardens of the Horticultural Society of Angers.
Fruit large, long-turbinate, bossed, strongly mammillate at apex,
citron-yellow, dotted and stained with dark gray, and washed with
bright carmine on the side exposed to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine
and melting; juice sweet with slight perfume but delicate flavor;
second; Sept.

Poire de Graisse. 1=.= Knoop _Pomologie_ =1=:111, Tab. IV. 1771.

Probably of Belgian or French origin. In Holland it is known as the
_Smeer-Peer_. Fruit medium, oblong, terminating acutely toward the
stalk, greenish and speckled with blackish-brown; flesh rather gritty,
soft, with a slightly spicy flavor; not of much value.

=Poire de gros queue. 1.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =3.= 1807.

Fruit large, taking its name from its very thick stalk, globular,
yellow, flesh breaking; wanting in juice, having a very musky flavor.

=Poire de Hert. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =1=:145, fig. 71. 1866-73.

Mas states he received this variety from Thomas Rivers, the well known
English nurseryman of Sawbridgeworth near London, Eng. Fruit medium
or nearly medium, ovate-pyriform, symmetrical in contour; skin thick,
firm, very pale green all over, sprinkled with dots of gray, changing
when ripe to lemon-yellow; flesh white, fine, semi-melting; juice
sufficient, flavor refreshing, agreeable; good, of real merit for the
season; end of winter and spring.

=Poire de Houblon. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:101, fig. 51. 1872.

Origin unknown, but cultivated for a long time in many localities in
Germany. Fruit small, ovate or globular-ovate, swelled, usually regular
in contour, bright green, sown with grayish dots, passing to golden
yellow on the side of the sun; flesh whitish, a little yellow near the
center, coarse, semi-breaking, fairly full of sweet juice, with a fresh
perfume of rose; second rate for eating raw but an excellent variety to
dry; end of Aug.

=Poire de Klevenow. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:121, fig. 59. 1866-73.

Originated in the environs of Klevenow, a village of Pomerania,
Prussia. Fruit small or nearly medium, regular pyriform, sombre green
and yellow blushed with carmine; flesh white, slightly greenish, fine,
buttery; juice very sugary and abundant, vinous, perfumed; good;
mid-Aug.

=Poire Noire a Longue Queue. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:165, fig. 563.
1881.

Origin thought to be German. Fruit nearly medium, ovate-pyriform,
symmetrical in outline; skin thick, firm, dull green covered with a
network of gray-russet, through which a light yellow shows at maturity;
on the shaded side are some gray dots and on the sun-exposed side are
numerous large black-red spots; flesh white, transparent, semi-fine,
buttery; juice sufficient, saccharine, slightly acid; good for cooking;
Aug.

=Poire du Pauvre. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876. =2.= _Rev. Hort._ 163.
1889.

This pear was raised from seed of the Urbaniste sown in 1846. Fruit
medium or large, oval, pyriform, ventriculous; skin fine and shining,
white tinted with green, much covered with fawn around the two ends;
flesh white, rather fine, a little gritty around the center, very
melting; juice abundant, saccharine, and pleasantly perfumed, with a
fresh flavor and agreeable astringency; Oct. and Nov.

=Poire des Peintres. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Described by Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876 as a
new variety. Tree vigorous and very fertile. Fruit rather large,
oval-pyriform, dark yellow, extensively washed with lively red; flesh
melting, juicy, saccharine and highly perfumed; end of Aug. and Sept.

=Poire de Pendant. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:84. 1831.

"It is from the long stem by which this pear is suspended, which is
near two inches in length, that it obtains its title." The _Pendar_
of La Quintinye, and the _Hanging pear_ of Evelyn, although quoted as
synonyms of this pear, are probably not the same as they are said to
ripen in October. It is also very doubtful whether the synonyms of
_Pendar_ and _Knaves' pear_ given by Miller and Forsyth apply to this
fruit. Fruit, "The entire height of the fruit is twenty-eight lines,
and its breadth two inches, and sometimes a line more;" turbinate;
skin is ash-colored, approaching russet, and dotted over with small
points of russet; flesh greenish-white, melting, sweet, and partially
perfumed; end of Sept.

=Poire de Preuilly. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Published in the French _Revue Horticole_, 1870. Tree vigorous and very
fertile. This is a very large fruit used for decorative purposes. In
form it is similar to the Bartlett; skin yellow-green, speckled; flesh
breaking.

=Poire de Rateau. 1.= Noisette _Man. Comp. Jard._ =2=:532. 1860.

Tree very vigorous when grafted on pear. Fruit very large, turbinate,
greenish-white, reddish and sown with russet dots on the side next the
sun; flesh breaking, slightly saccharine and perfumed; eatable raw, and
good for cooking; mid-Dec.

=Poire Rigoleau. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:136. 1854.

Introduced in 1854 as a new variety. Origin unknown. Fruit small,
nearly globular; skin thick, greenish-yellow, covered with russet
specks, little russet at either stem and calyx; flesh white, tender,
juicy, of a very pleasant flavor; first part of Nov.

=Poire du Roeulx. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1876.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876; it was
published in the _Revue de l'Arboriculture_ in France. Fruit medium,
pyriform, short, irregular, yellow clouded with fawn; flesh yellowish,
very melting, exceedingly juicy, very saccharine and with a very
exquisite perfume; first; latter half of Sept.

=Poire Souvenir d'Hortoles Pere. 1.= _Pom. France_ =4=:No. 173, Pl.
173. 1865.

A variety unpublished previous to 1865 but cultivated in France,
where it had already existed for more than sixty years. Fruit small,
pyriform, usually growing in clusters strongly attached to the tree,
green, dotted, passing to yellow and washed with dark brilliant red on
the side of the sun; flesh white, firm, melting, slightly gritty; juice
abundant, with a strong perfume of Muscatel; good; July.

=Poire Thouin. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:177, fig. 473. 1880.

According to Diel, Poire Thouin was obtained by Van Mons. Fruit medium,
ovate, more or less short, usually symmetrical in contour, largest
circumference at center; skin a little thick and firm, bright green,
sprinkled with numerous inconspicuous spots of a darker shade, changing
to pale yellow, and washed with orange-red on the side next the sun of
well-exposed fruits; flesh white, coarse, breaking, full of saccharine
juice, perfumed; third, for the season of its maturity; early Sept.

=Poire de Torpes. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 107. 1876.

Tree hardy, very productive. Fruit rather large, globular, yellow
stained with russet; flesh fine, melting; good; Oct. to Dec.

=Poire des Trois Freres. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 71, 308. 1876.

A wilding found near Maizieres-les-Metz, Fr. It was propagated by
Messrs. Maline and placed in commerce in 1863. Tree vigorous, very
fertile, and suitable especially for wind-blown situations. Fruit
medium, long, green; flesh whitish, buttery, sugary and perfumed;
first; end of Aug.

=Poire des Trois Jours. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 149. 1841.

_Trois Jours_. =2.= _Cultivator_, 340. 1847.

Kenrick says: "New and large; beurree; of first-rate excellence,
ripening at Paris in November, according to M. Jamin."

=Poire de Vitrier. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:139, Pl. XLIV,
fig. 4. 1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:746, fig. 1869.

This is probably a variety of German origin, for Valerius Cordus, who
was a native of Hesse and died in 1544, spoke of it as abounding in
Saxony, in the suburbs of Eisleben, and very common in all Germany.
Duhamel du Monceau described it in France in 1768. Fruit medium, rather
regular-ovate, wrinkled and mammillate at the summit, dull yellow, much
clouded over with gray-russet, dotted with light brown, and vermilioned
on the side toward the sun; flesh whitish, watery, semi-fine and
semi-melting, gritty around the center; juice sufficient, sugary,
vinous, slightly musky; second; Nov. and Dec.

=Poire du Voyageur. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 107, 311. 1876.

Originated by M. Boisbunel of Rouen, Fr. Tree vigorous and fertile.
Fruit medium, pyriform, yellowish-green; flesh juicy, granular around
the core; third; summer.

=Poirier de Jardin. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr_. =2=:143, Pl. XIX,
fig. 3. 1768.

_Garden Pear._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 770. 1869.

Origin unknown; probably French. Fruit large, globular-oblate,
orange-shaped, surface a little bossed, on the side of the sun a
beautiful deep red, spotted with golden-yellow, the shaded side being
streaked and rayed with bright red on yellow; flesh semi-breaking, a
little coarse and somewhat gritty around the core; juice sugary and of
a very good flavor; good; Dec.

=Poiteau. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:537, fig. 1869.

Raised by Van Mons, and first fruited at Louvain, Bel., in 1823. Fruit
above medium, long-ovate, variable in form, sometimes being short-ovate
and ventriculous, orange-yellow, dotted with brown, stained with
greenish-russet around the calyx and stem, and mottled with the same on
the cheek next the sun; flesh whitish, rather coarse, melting, gritty,
full of saccharine juice, sometimes astringent, without pronounced
perfume; second; Oct.

=Polish Lemon. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 61. 1887.

Known as _Cytrymova_ in Poland. It was received in 1882 by the Iowa
State Agricultural College, and was subsequently propagated and
distributed by the College.

=Polk. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =11=:252. 1845.

A seedling raised by H. W. Edwards, New Haven, Conn., at one time
Governor of that state. It came into bearing in 1844. Fruit larger than
the Seckel, like Bergamot in form; flesh juicy, melting, subacid, sweet
and rich; first; Sept to Nov.

=Pollan. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 834. 1869.

A Pennsylvania pear. Fruit below medium, nearly globular,
greenish-yellow, with a shade of brown in the sun; flesh whitish, a
little coarse, moderately juicy, vinous, pleasant; good; Aug.

=Pollvaskaja. 1.= _Iowa Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 61. 1880.

A Russian variety growing on the Iowa State College Farm in 1880, and
having thorny wood; it unites very imperfectly with the apple. It shows
"marked traces of the Chinese forms of the pear in shape, serration,
thickness and size of leaf, and in the peculiar enlarged character of
the scaly terminal buds."

=Polnische gruene Krautbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:155.
1856.

Galicia, 1819. Fruit small, globular-flattened, distorted, grass-green
changing to yellowish grass-green and often with a dark blush
and brown-russet on the side next the sun; scentless skin; flesh
coarse-grained, melting, vinous, very juicy, acidulous; second for
dessert, first for household; mid-Sept.

=Polnische Seidenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:145. 1856.

Galicia, 1812. Fruit medium to large, regular in form, light
lemon-yellow, often rather blushed, sprinkled with numerous small,
prominent, light brown and often greenish dots; flesh breaking, and
coarse-grained, sweet, Muscatel in flavor; third for dessert, very good
for household purposes; Sept.

=Pomeranzenbirn von Zabergaeu. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 90, fig. 1913.

A perry pear found in Germany and Upper Austria. Fruit large,
globular-turbinate; skin smooth, shining, of a light leaf-green
changing when ripe to light greenish-yellow, finely dotted, without
russet; flesh yellow-white, rather coarse-grained, with small grits
around the center, very juicy, saccharine, acidulous, having a strong
scent; Oct.

=Pomme d'Ete. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:539, fig. 1869.

The origin of the Pomme d'Ete is uncertain, except that M. Leroy of
Angers received it from the old garden of the Horticultural Society of
Angers about 1849. Fruit medium and below, globular, much flattened
and similar to the form of Caillot rosat and Naquette, yellow-ochre,
entirely covered with gray dots; flesh white, fine and breaking,
watery, rather granular around the core; juice abundant, saccharine,
sweet and very musky; second; end of Sept.

=Pope Quaker. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 834. 1869.

Origin, Long Island, N. Y. Fruit very fair, medium-size,
oblong-pyriform, smooth, yellows-russet; flesh melting, juicy and
pleasant; hardly good; Oct.

=Pope Scarlet Major. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =3=:15. 1837. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 834. 1869.

Origin, Long Island, N. Y. Fruit nearly large, obovate, yellow, blushed
on exposed side with bright red; flesh white, breaking, rather dry;
very indifferent; Oct.

=Portail. 1.= Miller _Gard. Dict._ =3.= 1807. =2.= Christ _Handb._ 503.
1817.

Origin unknown beyond the fact that it was discovered in the old
province of Poitou, Fr., and was held in high esteem there. Fruit
"longer than it is round," greenish; flesh yellowish, dry, gritty and
hard unless in very favorable seasons and upon very good soil, but may
at times be tender and have an unforgetable musky aroma; it bakes well;
Jan. to Mar.

=Porter. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass. No. 16. Fruited
in 1862 Diameter 2-1/2 inches, melting, sweet and juicy; ripens
soundly; good market pear; Oct.

=Portingall. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

"The Portingall peare is a great peare, but more goodly in shew then
good indeed."

=Posey. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1897.

Found in a fence row on the farm of Jacob Grabel, where it originated
about 1880. It was reported by A. R. Ryman, Cedar Grove, Ind. Fruit
medium, pyriform, moderately smooth, lemon-yellow, with small brown
spots; flesh whitish, buttery, mild subacid; good to very good; Sept.
to Dec.

=Prager Schaferbirne. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst. Sort._ 321. 1881.

Germany. Fruit medium (3-1/2 x 2-1/2 in.), ovate and pyriform, smooth,
greenish turning to lemon-yellow blushed on the sunny side, very finely
dotted; flesh yellowish-white, tender, agreeably aromatic and sweet;
first for kitchen and household purposes; Oct. to end of Jan.

=Prairie du Pond. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 835. 1869.

Introduced by A. H. Ernst, Cincinnati, Ohio. Fruit small, nearly
globular, greenish-yellow, with many brown and green dots; flesh
whitish, moderately juicy, semi-melting, vinous, astringent; poor;
Sept.

=Pratt. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =1=:210, fig. 58. 1846. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ 2:542, fig. 1869.

The Pratt pear was first brought into notice by Owen Mason, Providence,
R. I., who obtained cions from the original tree at Scituate, R.
I., and distributed them in the spring of 1844. It appears to
have originated at Johnson, R. I. Fruit above medium, obovate,
greenish-yellow, sprinkled with numerous gray dots and russet spots;
flesh white, tender, melting, fine-grained, abounding with saccharine,
well-flavored juice; second; Sept.

=Pratt Junior. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 151. 1862.

Another native which originated on the same farm as the preceding
variety and named by the Rhode Island Society in order to designate its
origin; in appearance similar to Winter Nelis.

=Pratt Seedling. 1.= _Chico Nurs. Cat._ 13. 1904.

Originated in Salem, Oregon, with Captain Pratt. Shape and color of
Sheldon; keeps until Mar.

=Precilly. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 835. 1869.

Belgian. Fruit medium to large, obovate-acute-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, netted and patched with russet and sprinkled with
brown dots; flesh yellowish-white, coarse, breaking, juicy; good for
cooking; Oct.

=Precoce de Celles. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Described by Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876 as a new
variety received from Belgium. Fruit medium, like Bergamot in form;
very good in quality for its season; early summer.

=Precoce de Jodoigne. 1.= _Mas Pom. Gen._ =5=:101, fig. 339. 1880.

Obtained by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Brabant, Bel., and first published
in 1865. Fruit rather small or nearly medium, ovate-pyriform, regular
in contour, vivid green covered with a sort of whitish bloom and
sprinkled with green dots of a darker shade, changing to yellow and
occasionally tinged with red on the side of the sun; flesh whitish,
fine, buttery, melting, full of sweet juice, saccharine but not highly
flavored; fairly good quality; July.

=Precoce de Tivoli. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876.

Fruit medium, pyriform, pale yellow, flesh white, gritty,
semi-breaking, saccharine; good; Aug.

=Precoce de Trevoux. 1.= _Cat. Cong. Pom. France_ 328. 1906.

Obtained by M. Treyve, Trevoux, Ain, Fr., and first published in 1862.
Fruit full medium size, pyriform-truncate, fine and tender skin of a
vivid yellow, very finely dotted with green and washed and streaked
with carmine on the side next the sun; flesh white, fine, melting,
juicy, sugary and richly flavored, agreeable perfume; good to very
good; beginning of Aug.

=Precoce Trottier. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 352. 1912.

A French pear described by M. de la Bastie in the _Journal of the
Pomological Society of France_ in 1890. Fruit medium or a little
above medium, turbinate-ventriculous; at first the skin is a very
bright green changing to pale yellow with some green markings, and
blushed with somber red on the side next the sun, dotted with brown;
flesh white, semi-fine, nearly melting, juicy, saccharine, agreeably
perfumed; good to very good; mid-July.

=Premature. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 157. 1832.

Originated in Scotland about 1830. Fruit below medium; flesh very juicy
and delicious, superior to the Crawford, of Scotland, reputed a most
superior early fruit; early Aug.

=Premices d'Ecully. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:544, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 632. 1884.

Obtained by M. Luizet, a nurseryman at Ecully-lez-Lyon, Rhone, Fr.,
from a bed of mixed seeds made in 1847. Fruit rather large, irregular
ovate, round and bossed, yellow, with here and there a green tinge,
thickly spotted and stained with small blotches of brown-russet; flesh
tender, whitish, fine, melting, juicy, easily becoming soft, sweet,
saccharine, with a flavor of musk; Sept.

=Premices de Wagelwater. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 836. 1869.

Fruit below medium, globular-obovate-pyriform, sides unequal, yellow
with a few traces of russet and thickly sprinkled with brown dots;
flesh whitish, melting, juicy, very sweet; good to very good; Oct.

=Premier. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 632. 1884.

Raised at the Royal Garden, Frogmore, Eng., and first exhibited in
1871. Fruit above medium, oblong, terminating abruptly and bluntly at
the stalk, undulating in outline and contracted with a waist at the
middle; skin covered with cinnamon-colored russet; flesh semi-melting,
very juicy, sweet, and brisk, with a flavor resembling pineapple; good;
Nov.

=Premier President Metivier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:545, fig. 1869.

A variety raised in Leroy's nurseries at Angers, Fr., in 1867. Fruit
above medium or large, globular, flattened at the poles, more enlarged
on one side than on the other; skin rough, grass-green, dotted and
veined with olive-russet on the shaded side, and bronzed and dotted
with bright fawn on the face exposed to the sun; flesh very white,
melting, fine or semi-fine, free from granulations, very juicy,
acidulous, highly saccharine, with delicious perfume and flavor; first;
Oct.

=Present de Van Mons. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:546, fig. 1869.

A seedling of Van Mons raised at Louvain, Bel., but which first fruited
with General Delaage at Angers, Fr., in 1844. Fruit large, turbinate,
shortened and ventriculous in its lower part, very much narrowed
and slightly constricted at the top which is rarely very obtuse,
lemon-yellow, strewn with large gray dots, fully colored with dull
red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh white, fine, or semi-fine,
melting, gritty below the core; juice abundant; saccharine, sourish and
vinous, with an aromatic flavor; first; Feb. to Apr.

=President. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc._ Rpt. 44. 1865. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 836. 1869. A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline,
Mass., and fruited in 1861. Fruit very large, globular-obovate,
somewhat irregular; skin slightly rough, greenish-yellow, pale red in
the sun, considerable russet next the base of the stalk and traces of
russet and conspicuous dots all over; flesh yellowish-white, rather
coarse, melting, juicy, slightly vinous; good; early Nov.

=President Barabe. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1895. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 193. 1920.

First fruited in 1870 from a seed of Bergamotte Esperen with M.
Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Fruit medium to below, short-turbinate, deep
golden in color; flesh white, fine, melting, a little acid, juicy and
of exquisite flavor; Jan. to Mar.

=President de la Bastie. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 265. 1889. =2.= _Cat.
Cong. Pom. France_ 330, fig. 1906.

Originated with M. Boisselot, Nantes, Fr. Fruit large, shape of
Bartlett; flesh white, fine, melting; good to very good; Feb. and Mar.

=President Boncenne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 97. 1895.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1895. This firm
had received it from Poitiers. Tree very vigorous and makes a shapely
pyramid. Fruit medium, pyramidal, greenish, slightly blushed with red
on the side next the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, melting, very juicy,
perfumed, saccharine and with a flavor of almond; beginning of Sept.

=President Campy. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876 and stated
to have been received from Belgium.

=President Clark. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 98. 1881.

This was a hybrid produced from the crossing of Seckel with Belle
Lucrative. It was raised by Francis Dana, who, before he died, put
several seedlings into the hands of Colonel Stone, Dedham, Mass.,
saying he thought there might be some very good varieties among them.
This variety was among them, and was named after the first President of
the Massachusetts Agricultural College. Fruit full medium, turbinate,
somewhat irregular and variable, clear lemon-yellow, with a carmine
cheek next the sun; flesh white, fine-grained, very melting, juicy,
slightly astringent, sweet and rich; very good to best; a little later
in season than Bartlett.

=President Couprie. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876.

French. Fruit medium, oval; flesh yellow, very tender, melting, juicy,
highly saccharine and perfumed; Sept. and Oct.

=President Deboutteville. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876.

Published by M. Boisbunel. On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz,
Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit rather large; first; Dec.

=President Dr. Ward. 1.= _N. J. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 157. 1905.

Awarded a premium by the New Jersey Horticultural Society in 1905.

=President d'Estaintot. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Obtained at Rouen, Fr., from a seed of Soldat-Laboureur, and published
by Collette. The fruit is of first quality and is in season from Aug.
to Oct.

=President Felton. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 836. 1869.

Originated with W. D. Brinckle, Philadelphia, Pa. Fruit medium,
globular-oblate, pale yellow, with a crimson cheek in sun, nettings and
tracings of russet, and many brown and gray dots; flesh fine, juicy,
yellowish, semi-melting, slightly vinous, sweet; good; Oct.

=President Fortier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1895.

Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Fruit medium, ovate, slightly
swelled; flesh white, very fine, melting, sugary, perfumed; Jan. to
Apr.

=President Heron 1.=. _Rev. Hort._ 6. 1897.

A new pear placed on the market in 1897 by Arsene Sannier, a nurseryman
at Rouen, Fr. Fruit medium; form recalling that of Urbaniste, obovate
or oblong-obovate; flesh very fine, juicy, and perfumed.

=President Mas. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 836. 1869. =2.= _Cat. Cong.
Pom._ France 333, fig. 1906.

First reported in 1865 as having been raised by M. Boisbunel,
horticulturist at Rouen, Fr., and adopted by the Pomological Congress
of France. Fruit large, sometimes very large, ovate-conic-obtuse and
bossed round the stalk; skin rough, yellowish-green, much dotted with
russet, marbled with fawn around the eye; flesh whitish, fine, melting,
juicy with a sugary flavor, vinous and very pleasantly perfumed; very
good; Nov. to Jan.

=President Muller. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876.

Published by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Brabant, and on trial with Messrs.
Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit large; first; Nov.

=President Olivier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Gained by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., not long previous to 1876.

=President d'Osmonville. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:547, fig. 1869.
=2.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 194. 1920.

This variety was a posthumous gain of M. Leon Leclerc, Laval, Fr., in
1834, an amateur well known among French pomologists. Fruit medium,
ovate-pyriform; skin smooth, fine and tender, very pale green changing
to pale yellow, more golden on the side of the sun, or occasionally
washed on the more-exposed fruits with a suggestion of rosy red; flesh
yellow, very fine, entirely melting, filled with saccharine juice,
vinous, and penetrated with a lively musk flavor; first; Oct.

=President Parigot. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:548, fig. 1869.

A variety originated by Count Nouhes near Pauzauges in the Vendee, Fr.,
where the seedling gave its first fruit in 1852. Fruit above medium,
long-conic, narrowed in its upper part and bossed; skin rather rough,
orange-yellow, dotted with greenish-gray and extensively washed with
clear gray; flesh whitish, semi-fine, melting, watery, granular around
the core; juice abundant, very saccharine, vinous and with a delicious
flavor; first; Oct.

=President Payen. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:549. 1869.

This pear issued in 1860 from a seed bed made by M. Briffaut, Sevres,
Fr. It was awarded a silver medal in 1861 by the Horticultural Society
of Paris. Fruit medium, long-pyriform, golden-russet sometimes washed
with a red blush; flesh fine, melting, juicy, saccharine, perfumed, and
of good flavor; of moderate merit; beginning of winter.

=President Pouyer-Quertier. 1.= _Guide Prat_. 111. 1876.

A French pear dedicated to a President of the Horticultural Society of
Rouen. Fruit medium, rather long, covered with gray-russet; flesh very
fine, juicy, saccharine; first; Dec. and Jan.

=President Royer. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:549, fig. 1869.

M. Xavier Gregoire, the Belgian tanner of Jodoigne, obtained this
pear in 1762 when it fruited for the first time. Fruit medium; form
recalling that of the quince, very bossed, rather obtuse, base flat,
bright yellow, dotted, streaked and mottled with russet and extensively
washed with tender rose on the side of the sun; flesh fine, firm
although quite melting, rather granular at core; juice abundant,
saccharine, highly perfumed, possessing a slight acidity which renders
it agreeable and refreshing; first; Oct.

=President Le Sant. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 102. 1876.

Tree vigorous and fertile. Fruit medium, Bergamot-shaped; skin oily,
symmetrical, yellow dotted with fawn; flesh fine, melting, juicy,
saccharine, with an agreeable aroma; first; Oct. and Nov.

=President Watier. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1895.

Obtained about 1880 by the Chevalier de Biseau d'Hauteville, at
Binche, Bel. Fruit long-gourd-shaped; flesh salmon-colored, melting,
saccharine, well-flavored; Nov.

=Presidente Senente. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1895.

Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. On trial in 1895. Tree healthy, of
moderate vigor and pyramidal. Fruit small to medium, globular-oblate;
flesh melting, perfumed, very juicy with a pleasant acidity; Dec. and
Jan.

=Prevost. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:552, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 633. 1884.

Obtained by Alexandre Bivort, director of the nurseries of the Society
Van Mons at Geest-Saint-Remy, Jodoigne, Bel, in 1847. Fruit above
medium, rather irregular-ovate, bossed, often much swelled in the lower
half, lemon-yellow or golden, dotted and a little speckled with bright
maroon, carmined on the cheek turned to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine
and semi-melting, having a pleasant muscat flavor; second; Jan. to Mar.

=Pricke. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

"The peare pricke is very like unto the Greenfield peare, being both
faire, great, and good."

=Primating. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

Mentioned by John Parkinson in 1629, as "a good moist peare, and early
ripe."

=Prince Albert. 1.= _Pom. France_ =4=:No. 141, Pl. 141. 1865. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 836. 1869.

This was a seedling of the eighth generation raised by Van Mons at
Louvain, Bel., sown about 1840. Fruit medium, conic, obtuse and
irregular, often contorted, sides unequal, greenish, striped and dotted
with fawn, washed with russet around the stem; flesh white, semi-fine
and semi-breaking, gritty; juice abundant, saccharine, aromatic, rather
savory; second; Nov. and Dec.

=Prince Harvest. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 837. 1869.

Raised by William Prince, Flushing, L. I., N. Y. Fruit small,
ovate-pyriform, pale yellow, rarely a brownish blush, red cheek in the
sun, sprinkled with brown dots, and sometimes patched with russet;
flesh white, firm, breaking, moderately juicy, sweet, slightly musky;
good; end of July.

=Prince Imperial. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 65. 1876.

Obtained by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Brabant, Bel., in 1850. Tree
vigorous and fertile. Fruit large, ovate, bright yellow all over;
flesh salmon-colored, buttery, rather juicy, saccharine and having an
agreeable perfume; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Prince Imperial de France. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:554, fig. 1889.
=2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 837. 1869.

M. Gregoire, the well-known Belgian seedsman, obtained this variety
at Jodoigne in 1850 from seed of Pastorale sown in 1835. Fruit above
medium, irregular-ovate and rather swelled, having one side usually
more enlarged than the other, bright green, dotted, streaked, patched
and spotted with fawn-russet; flesh white, fine, juicy, melting,
slightly gritty below the core; juice abundant, refreshing, saccharine,
acidulous, perfumed; first; Sept.

=Prince de Joinville. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 837. 1869.

Belgian; first fruited in 1848. Fruit medium, globular, green changing
to golden yellow, with a vivid blush on the cheek next the sun, brown
spots and some russet; flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine, melting,
acidulous, sweet, agreeably aromatic; first for dessert, household and
market; Nov.

=Prince Napoleon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:556, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 837. 1869.

Raised by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr., from seed of the Passe Crassane
in 1864. Fruit medium and sometimes above, globular, rarely regular
and often mammillate at the top, olive-yellow, covered largely with
mottlings of brown and sprinkled with indistinct gray dots; flesh
white-greenish or yellowish, semi-fine, semi-melting; juice sufficient,
saccharine, vinous, with a delicate perfume; first; Feb. and Mar.

=Prince d'Orange. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =21=:146. 1855.

Raised by Van Mons at Louvain and numbered 891 in his Catalog of 1823,
second and third series, and regarded by J. de Jonghe, Brussels, as one
of Van Mons' more remarkable fruits; form and flavor of Passe Colmar.

=Prince de Printemps. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 198. 1832.

A Flemish pear imported by a Mr. Braddick in 1819. Fruit small,
turbinate, green; flesh buttery, sweet; good; very late.

=Prince Saint-Germain. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 447, fig. 207. 1845.

Raised by William Prince, Flushing, Long Island, N. Y., and known
also as _Brown Saint Germain_. Fruit medium, obovate inclining to
oval-pyriform, green nearly covered with brownish-russet and blushed
with dull red on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish-white, melting,
juicy, with a vinous and very agreeable flavor; very good; Nov. to Mar.

=Prince Seed Virgalieu. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:163, fig. 562. 1881.

Origin unknown. Fruit medium, turbinate-conic and ventriculous, usually
regular in form, pale green, slightly tinted with yellow, sprinkled
with brownish-gray dots, small but numerous; at maturity the basic
green becomes brilliant lemon-yellow and the side exposed to the sun
washed with pale red; flesh white, fine, buttery, very melting; juice
sufficient, saccharine; good; Oct.

=Princess. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ N. S. =3=:260. 1882. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 194. 1920.

Raised by Messrs. Rivers, Sawbridgeworth, Eng., from seed of Louise
Bonne de Jersey. Growth compact, upright, free bearer, valuable for
market culture, and one to be depended upon in poor seasons; fine as a
cordon. Fruit medium, long-pyriform, tapering almost to stalk, not very
symmetrical, smooth and shining, rarely russety, green and pale green
with a brownish tinge, dark green dots under the skin; flesh white,
juicy and melting, briskly acid; very good; Oct. to Christmas, rather
variable in season.

=Princess Maria. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 580. 1857.

A seedling from Van Mons. Fruit medium or below, pyramidal, yellow,
considerably covered with rough, dull russet, and thickly sprinkled
with dots; flesh whitish, rather coarse, juicy, melting, vinous,
aromatic; good; Sept.

=Princesse Charlotte. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:558, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 633. 1884.

A pear raised in 1846 by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel. Fruit medium,
variable in form, much bossed and rather contorted, turbinate-obtuse
to globular-ovate, grass-green with brown or orange glow on the
sunny side, dotted and marbled with russet; flesh white, semi-fine,
semi-melting, watery and gritty, but juicy, saccharine, acidulous, with
a fine aroma; a fine pear, evidently of the Passe Colmar race, but
quite distinct from that variety; Nov. and later.

=Princesse Marianne. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:559, fig. 1869.

_Calebasse Princesse Marianne_. =2.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =5=:67, fig.
1857.

Although very similar in color and form, this pear is distinct from
Calebasse Bosc with which it has been confused. It was obtained by Van
Mons at the Fidelite nursery near Brussels before 1817 from a graft of
a wilding. Fruit large, pyriform and gourd-shaped, swelled in its lower
part, more or less contracted near the summit and not very obtuse; skin
rough, greenish-russet, dotted with clear gray and marbled or speckled
with brown, flesh white or semi-fine, melting, some grit around the
core, juicy, very saccharine, vinous and with a highly delicate aroma;
first; Oct.

=Princesse d'Orange. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:560. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 634. 1884.

According to Van Mons this was found by Count de Coloma in the garden
of the Riches-Claires Nunnery at Mechlin, Bel, about 1788, but remained
unnamed for forty years. Fruit medium, globular or globular-ovate,
bossed, seldom very regular in form, lemon-yellow, largely covered
with reddish-brown russet, and more or less carmined on the side next
the sun; flesh white and fine, melting or semi-melting, juicy, vinous,
saccharine, slightly perfumed with anis; a first-class dessert pear;
Oct.

=Princiere. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:562, fig. 1869.

Of uncertain origin. Leroy received it in 1864 from Charles Baltet,
Troyes, Fr., who also described it in the _Revue Horticole_ that year.
Fruit above medium, globular, irregular, bossed, often much contorted
and usually mammillate at the summit, golden yellow or bright yellow
covered all over with large russet dots, streaked with fawn around
the calyx; flesh white, fine, melting, full of juice, only slightly
saccharine, vinous and slightly aromatic; second; Oct.

=Priou. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:563, figs. 1869.

This pear which is one of the best ripening in spring-time was
made known in 1863 by M. Priou, a miller at Rondard, near Brissac,
Maine-et-Loire, Fr. The parent tree stood in an open pasturage, and was
then about fifty years old. Fruit above medium, rather inconstant in
form, globular-ovate, irregular, bossed, mammillate at the summit, and
pentagonal at its base or almost completely globular, bright yellow,
dotted and streaked with gray-russet; flesh white, fine and juicy,
melting, slightly gritty at the center, saccharine, agreeably acid,
with a delicious perfume; first; May.

=Professeur Barral. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:565, fig. 1869.

M. Boisselot, Nantes, Fr., a well known seedsman, obtained this pear
from seeds of Bartlett, in 1862. Fruit very large, globular, rather
irregular and bossed; skin thick, orange-yellow, dotted with gray and
lightly washed with bright russet on the exposed side; flesh whitish,
fine or semi-fine, melting, watery; juice abundant, sugary, vinous,
acidulous and full of flavor; first; Oct. and beginning of Nov.

=Professeur Bazin. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 494. 1898.

A posthumous variety raised from a seed bed of M. Tourasse and placed
on the market in 1898 by M. Baltet, Troyes, Fr. Fruit large, often very
large, pyramidal, ventriculous at the middle, water-green, passing
to lemon-yellow, mottled with fawn-brown; flesh extremely fine and
melting, juicy, saccharine, with a delicate perfume; very good; Dec.
and Jan.

=Professeur Dubreuil. 1.= _Pom. France_ =3=:No. 97, Pl. 97. 1865. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 634. 1884.

Obtained by M. Dubreuil, professor of horticulture, from a bed of seeds
of Louise-Bonne de Jersey made at the Botanical Garden of Rouen in
1840. Fruit medium, pyriform, more or less swelled; skin rather thick,
oily, green changing to lemon-yellow, dotted with russet and carmined
on the side of the sun; flesh white, fine, buttery, full of sugary
juice, with an agreeable perfume; first; end of Aug. and early Sept.

=Professeur Grosdemange. 1.= Baltet _Cult. Fr._ 340, 342, fig. 243.
1908.

Fruit large, obovate-pyriform; coloring bright yellow with vermilion
blush; flesh of good quality; Jan. to Mar.

=Professeur Hennnau. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:77, fig. 1860.

M. Xavier Gregoire, a tanner at Jodoigne, Bel., obtained this variety
from seed. Fruited in 1860. Fruit above medium, ovate, more or less
irregular, swelled and bossed, often a little contorted in its lower
part, olive-yellow dotted with ashen gray, veined or speckled with fawn
and washed with golden russet on the cheek exposed to the sun; flesh
white, rather coarse, semi-melting, watery, very granular around the
center; juice abundant, saccharine, tartish, delicate although slight
perfume; second; Nov.

=Professeur Hortoles. 1.= _Guide Prat_. 57. 1895.

Raised by M. F. Morel, a horticulturist at Lyons, Fr. Tree vigorous
and fertile, suitable for all forms of growth. Fruit rather large,
pyriform-ventriculous, greenish-yellow, blushed with brownish-red on
the side next the sun; flesh white, fine, melting, very juicy; first;
Sept. and Oct.

=Professeur Opoix. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 532, fig. 240. 1901.

A seedling from the establishment of Baltet Brothers, Troyes, Fr.
Reported in 1901. Fruit rather large, globular, slightly oval, a little
bossed, bright green passing to whitish-yellow, dotted with brown;
flesh fine, yellow-butter tinted, very juicy, melting, saccharine, with
a pleasant aromatic perfume; excellent; Jan. to Mar.

=Professeur Willermoz. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1895.

Obtained by M. Joanon at Saint-Cyr near Lyons, Fr. Fruit large or
rather large, pyriform ventriculous; flesh very fine, juicy, melting,
saccharine and perfumed; Aug. and Sept.

=Prud'homme. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1895.

Published in the _Journal of the National Society of Horticulture_ of
France in 1875. Tree vigorous and very fertile. Flesh saccharine, very
sprightly; Sept. to Dec.

=Pudsey. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 97. 1875.

A native of Nova Scotia which compares "favorably in flavor, richness,
and other qualities with some of the most popular sorts at present
cultivated."

=Puebla. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:568, fig. 1869.

A seedling of M. Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr., reported in 1863. Fruit
large, ovate, rather ventriculous and much bossed, with one side nearly
always less swelled than the other; skin thick and rough, yellow,
covered with large patches of russet and grayish dots; flesh very white
and very fine, melting, with some grit at the center, full of sugary
juice, with an acid taste and agreeable perfume; first; Oct.

=Pulsifer. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =8=:460, fig. 1853.

Dr. John Pulsifer of Hennepin, Ill., in the spring of 1843 planted in
his garden a pear seed which produced a tree bearing fruit of great
merit. An early and prolific bearer, hardy, vigorous. Fruit hardly
medium, pyriform, dull golden-yellow, covered with an open network of
slight russet; flesh white, melting, juicy, sweet, and delicious, much
like Louise Bonne de Jersey, but superior to it; Aug.

=Pushkin. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

_Pyrus ovoidea_ x R. & K. 533, a Russian pear. Originated by N. E.
Hansen, Brookings, S. D., and introduced by him in 1919.

=Queen Jargonelle. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3d Ser. =2=:369. 1887.

Of unknown origin but it appears to have been disseminated by the Rev.
W. Kingsley, Thirsk, Yorkshire, Eng. Fruit soft, juicy and agreeable;
Aug.

=Queen Victoria. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 635. 1884.

Raised by Mr. W. Willison, a florist at Whitby, Yorkshire, Eng. Fruit
medium, obovate, even in its contour, greenish-yellow at maturity, with
a crust of cinnamon-russet on the side next the sun; flesh tender,
juicy, sweet, and with an almond flavor; end of Aug.

=Quiletette. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:388. 1843. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 840. 1869. This is a Van Mons seedling, and was exhibited at the
fifteenth annual exhibition of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society
in September, 1843, by R. Manning of Salem. Fruit nearly medium,
globular, a little flattened, greenish, nearly covered with dull
iron-colored russet; flesh white, buttery, melting, rich, sweet and
perfumed; an odd-looking fruit, scarcely good; Nov.

=Quince. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 46. 1866. A seedling raised by S.
A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., and fruited in 1862. Fruit diameter 3
inches; skin lumpy and nodular; flesh fine-grained, juicy and sweet;
great bearer; Sept.

=Quinn. 1.= _Horticulturist._ =22=:42, 117, fig. 25. 1867.

P. T. Quinn, Newark, N. J., submitted specimens of this pear to the
Committee of the Farmers' Club of the American Institute which issued
a report upon it on January 2d, 1867. The pear had been imported
by Professor Mapes and the name lost, and at a previous meeting the
Committee had named it Quinn. Fruit below medium, pyriform, tapering
rapidly toward the stem end; skin inclined to golden-russet; flesh rich
and juicy and in flavor and aroma occupies the first rank; good; Jan.
and keeps till Mar.

=Rainbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:166. 1856.

Hesse, Ger., 1816. Fruit medium, ovate, somewhat swelled; skin
polished, pale light green turning to lemon-yellow, without any red
blush, sprinkled with numerous fine light brown dots, fine russet on
the side next the sun; flesh granular, vinous and highly aromatic;
first for culinary use; mid-Oct.

=Rallay. 1.= Elliott _Fr. Book_ 382. 1854.

An old variety of unknown origin. Fruit small to medium,
globular-acute-pyriform; skin rough, dull yellow, dull reddish cheek,
dotted all over with russet; flesh yellowish-white, breaking, juicy,
gritty; good; Nov. and Dec.

=Rameau. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 239. 1854. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:572, fig. 1869.

_Silberaestige Gewuerzbirne._ =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:15.
1856.

A seedling of Van Mons distinct from _Besi des Veterans._ Fruit above
medium, oblong-oval; skin thick, rough, greenish, gray or bronzed on
sunny side, stained and dotted with dark russet; flesh yellowish-white,
very fine, melting, juicy, sweet, acidulous, aromatic; inferior.

=Ramilies. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 165. 1841. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 195. 1920.

Described in 1842 in the London Horticultural Society's Catalog of
Fruits. Fruit large, obovate, yellow obscured with russet, red next the
sun, beautiful in appearance; flesh breaking; very good for cooking;
Nov. to Feb.

=Rankin. 1.= _Van Lindley Nurs. Cat._ 53. 1913.

Introduced by J. Van Lindley Nursery Company about 1905 and said to
be a seedling of Duchesse d'Angouleme picked up from the side of the
Southern Railway by W. H. Rankin, Guilford County, N. C. Tree strong,
hardy. Fruit similar to Duchesse d'Angouleme but two weeks earlier.

=Rannaja. 1.= _Iowa Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 61. 1880.

Imported by Professor Budd from the northern steppes of Russia, where
the summers are fully as dry and hot and the winters far more severe
than those of Iowa; said to unite well with the apple when root or top
grafted.

=Rapelje. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =1=:239, fig. 62. 1846.

A native variety introduced by Professor Stephens, Astoria, Long
Island. Fruit medium, obovate, sometimes obtuse, and sometimes
acute-pyriform, yellowish, covered with cinnamon-russet; flesh whitish,
somewhat granular, juicy, melting, with a sweet, vinous, aromatic
flavor; variable, sometimes poor; Sept.

=Rastlerbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 18, fig. 1913.

Found in Northern Tyrol and the Austrian Province of the
Voralberg. Fruit large, globular-turbinate, almost acute, green
turning yellow-green when ripe, faintly blushed; flesh granular,
greenish-white; a very good perry pear and suitable for baking; Oct.
and Nov.

=Rateau Blanc. 1.= _Pom. France_ =4=:No. 155, Pl. 155. 1865.

A variety of unknown origin, but cultivated from very early times in
the Gironde, Fr., and much esteemed in the markets of the Pyrenees.
Fruit above medium, irregular in form, usually pyramidal or long-ovate,
sides unequal; skin rough to the touch, orange-yellow, shaded with
green, whitish on the cheek opposed to the sun, stained with fawn
around the stalk and covered, particularly on the lower part, with
russet and large gray dots; flesh whitish, coarse, semi-breaking; juice
rather deficient, slightly acidulous, somewhat saccharine; second for
the table, first for the kitchen; Mar.

=Ravenswood. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 196. 1858.

Ravenswood was a seedling found in the woods of Astoria, L. I.,
and transplanted to the grounds of Charles Ehrard. Fruit small,
obovate-pyriform, pale yellow, with sometimes a tinge of red in the sun
and thickly sprinkled with green dots; flesh whitish, slightly coarse,
extremely full of vinous, carbonated juice, with a rich aromatic
flavor; good to very good, superior to most pears of its period;
mid-July to mid-Aug.

=Ravut. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 71. 1876.

_Ravu._ =2.= _Mag. Hort._ =25=:256. 1859.

Described by M. Baltet, Troyes, Fr., as a new fruit, in 1859. Tree
moderately vigorous and very productive. Fruit medium, turbinate, pale
yellow, dotted with russet; flesh fine, melting, sugary, remaining
sound when ripe; Aug. and Sept.

=Raymond. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 183. 1832.

Raised by Joseph Wight, Raymond, Me. Fruit medium, obovate-pyriform,
yellow, marked with russet near the stalk and tinged with a little
red toward the sun, thickly sprinkled with russet dots; flesh white,
buttery, melting, juicy, sweet, aromatic; good to very good; Sept.

=Raymond de Montlaur. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 103. 1876.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876, and in
1895 placed in their list of pears of little value. Fruit very large,
beautiful in form and color; flesh very white, fine, melting and very
juicy, saccharine, and agreeably aromatic; Oct.

=Raymould. 1.= _Ohio Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 8. 1895.

Mentioned in a report of the Committee on New Fruits of the Ohio State
Horticultural Society in 1895. Fruit fair but not of sufficient size or
quality to be recommended for cultivation.

=Re Umberto primo. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 224. 1896.

Published in France in 1896 as a new Italian variety. Fruit ovate,
lemon-yellow, dotted with small rough points; flesh rather breaking,
slightly acidulous, very saccharine and highly perfumed.

=Reading. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:173. 1853. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
841. 1869.

A native variety, new about 1853. Introduced by Charles Kessler.
Originated in Oley Township, Reading, Pa. Fruit medium to large,
obovate-pyriform, tapering to the crown, yellow, thickly dotted with
brown points and sprinkled with russet; flesh greenish-white, abounding
in juice of a mild and agreeable flavor, melting, vinous; good; Jan. to
Mar.

=Recq de Pambroye. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1895.

Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1895 classed this among "new
varieties" and stated that they had received it from M. Daras de
Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Tree rather vigorous, forward according to
accounts, fertile. Fruit medium or rather large, bronze in color,
washed with red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh fine, juicy,
sugary, vinous; Jan.

=Red Garden. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 841. 1869.

Raised by Josiah Youngken, Richlandtown, Pa. Fruit medium,
obovate-pyriform, pale yellow, shaded and mottled with a few crimson
dots on the side next the sun, netted and patched with russet and
thickly sprinkled with brown dots; flesh whitish, a little coarse,
juicy, melting, sweet, pleasant; good to very good; Sept.

=Red Pear. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 636. 1884.

A perry pear grown largely in Herefordshire, Eng. Fruit small,
globular, even and regular in outline, inclining to turbinate, almost
entirely covered with rather bright red, yellow around the stalk where
shaded, sprinkled all over with pale gray dots; flesh quite yellow,
firm, dry and gritty.

=Redfield. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 195. 1867.

Raised from seed by J. W. Crosby, St. George, Utah, and first fruited
in 1861. Fruit in size, shape and color resembles Bartlett, but is a
little more tapering at the stem, yellowish-green, with a brownish-red
cheek; flesh sweet, sprightly, melting; ripens a little later than
Bartlett.

=Refreshing. 1.= _Rural N. Y._ 242, figs. 133, 134. 1885.

Raised by Benjamin Macomber, Grand Isle, Vt. Fruit below medium, bright
golden yellow; stem stout, medium long, in a small cavity; flesh
whitish, juicy, melting, sweet; very good; Sept.

=Regina Margherita. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 224. 1896.

An Italian pear published in 1896 as a new variety. Fruit in form
similar to that of Passe Crassane, greenish-yellow, washed with green;
flesh very saccharine, somewhat acid, buttery, perfumed.

=Regine. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 841. 1869.

A Van Mons seedling. Fruit medium, globular-pyriform, greenish-yellow,
with slight nettings of russet and thickly sprinkled with green and
brown dots; flesh white, juicy, melting, sweet, pleasant; good; Sept.

=Regnier. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 185. 1854.

A native variety which originated with Madame Regnier, Philadelphia,
Pa. Reported by the Committee on Fruits of the American Pomological
Society in 1854. Fruit above medium, ovate, yellow, with usually a
colored cheek; very good.

=Reichenaeckerin. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:10. 1856.

Wuerttemberg, Ger., 1847. Fruit medium, globular, dark green, with
brownish blush, gray dots; first for household; mid-Dec. and Jan.

=Reine des Belges. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:578, fig. 1869.

A seedling raised by Van Mons at Louvain, Bel., in 1832, Fruit above
medium, ovate, tending to globular, always slightly mammillate at
the top; skin fine and shining, pale yellow, sprinkled with very
small russet dots, and slightly blushed with tender rose on the side
exposed to the sun; flesh very white, a little coarse, melting or
semi-breaking, watery, rather granular at center; juice saccharine,
vinous, perfumed; second; Sept.

=Reine d'Hiver. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 841. 1869.

Fruit small, globular-oblate, yellow, with a brownish tinge on the
cheek exposed to the sun and with nettings, patches and dots of russet;
flesh yellowish, melting, juicy, sweet, pleasant; good; Nov.

=Reine des Poires. 1.= Manning _Book of Fruits_ 84. 1828. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:581, fig. 1869.

The Count de Coloma came into possession of the garden of the Nunnery
of the Riches-Claires, Mechlin, Bel., directly after the suppression of
the order in 1786 and two years later made seed beds from which were
raised, among other good varieties, the Reine des Poires. Fruit below
medium, turbinate-ovate but irregular in form; skin rather thick and
yet tender, green dotted with small brown points, changing to yellow,
much covered with a brownish-red russet; flesh whitish, semi-fine,
melting; juice abundant, saccharine and acidulous, with an exquisite
perfume; first; Oct.

=Reine des Precoces. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:201, fig. 99. 1866-73.

Probably of Belgian origin. Fruit small, globular-turbinate or nearly
globular, regular in contour; skin thick, at first intense green
sprinkled with numerous large, prominent, gray-green dots; the basic
green changes to yellow on the shaded side and intense brownish-red on
the side of the sun; flesh white, rather coarse, semi-buttery, a little
gritty at the center, little juice or sugar, rather agreeable; second;
end of July.

=Reine des Tardives. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1876.

Published by M. Bruant in 1865. Fruit rather large, vivid yellow; flesh
juicy, saccharine; easily keeps till June.

=Reine Victoria. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 842. 1869.

Said to be a seedling from Van Mons. Fruit medium,
obovate-acute-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with shades and patches of
fawn; flesh white, tinted with rose, fine, melting, juicy, sweet; Dec.

=Reliance. 1.= _Ga. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 24. 1890.

Introduced by P. J. Berckmans to the Georgia State Horticultural
Society and accepted by that Society in 1890. It was raised from seed
sown in 1857, and named Reliance "because it bears every year." Fruit
small; a dessert pear almost as good as Seckel, rated as very good;
summer season.

=Remy Chatenay. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1895.

Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Tree healthy and of fair vigor, very
fertile, and suitable for all forms of cultivation. Fruit of the form
and appearance of Beurre d'Arenberg though not so large or delicate;
matures in the spring.

=Rene Dunan. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1895.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis at Metz, Lorraine, in 1895 and at
Agassiz, British Columbia and other Canadian Experiment Stations
in 1900. The tree pyramidal and very fertile. Fruit very large,
lemon-yellow, vermilioned on the side of the sun; flesh fine, melting,
acidulous, recalling the flavor of the Beurre Gris; Nov. and Dec.

=Rettigbirne. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 527. 1817. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:34. 1856.

Of German origin. Reported in 1815. Fruit small, globular-pyriform,
medium ventriculous, light yellow, dotted with gray, and speckled with
brown; flesh acid and aromatic; first for all purposes; beginning of
Sept. for three weeks.

=Reuterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:189. 1856.

Nassau, Prussia, 1807. Fruit almost small, ovate, ventriculous, uneven
in outline, pale yellow-green turning to light lemon-yellow, often
covered with thin russet on the side of the sun; flesh dense, juicy,
wanting in flavor, sweet and acidulous; third for dessert, first for
household; Oct.

=Rewell. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

"The good Rewell is a reasonable great peare, as good to bake as to
eate rawe, and both wayes it is a good fruit."

=Reymenans. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:152. 1856.

A Van Mons seedling. Belgium, 1825. Fruit small, turbinate-globular,
even in contour, light green turning to lemon-yellow, without any red
blush, sprinkled with fine dots, with delicate russet on the cheek
next the sun; skin without scent; flesh semi-melting, sweet, aromatic;
second for dessert, first for household and market; Feb. and Mar.

=Reynaert Beernaert. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =26=:220. 1860. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ 6:21, fig. 395. 1880.

Obtained by M. Bivort, director of the Society Van Mons, Bel. Fruit
medium or nearly large, globular, flattened at both poles, regular
in contour; skin rather thick, water-green, sprinkled with numerous
large and regularly-spaced, gray dots, turning at maturity to dull
yellowish-green and the side next the sun golden or orange colored;
flesh whitish, coarse, semi-melting, wanting in juice and sugar, vinous
but without appreciable perfume; second; Nov.

=Rheinische Birne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:6. 1856.

Westphalia, a province of Prussia, 1802. Fruit large, ovate, light
green turning pale yellow, without any blush, strongly dotted; flesh
breaking, juicy, aromatic; first for household use; Oct.

=Rheinische Herbstapothekerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:178. 1856.

Nassau, Prussia, 1805. Fruit very large, conic, often very irregular in
form, light yellow-green turning to pale light yellow, often stained
blood-red, covered with very numerous and minute spots, speckled and
marked with russet; flesh whitish, granular, semi-melting, sweet and
aromatic; second for table, first for cooking.

=Rheinische Paradiesbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:169. 1856.

Thuringia, Ger., 1801. Fruit large, conic, yellow, blushed and streaked
with light red, dotted with yellow; flesh yellow, gritty around the
center, sweet; third for the table, first for culinary use; end of Oct.
and Nov.

=Rhenser Schmalzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:63. 1856.

The German Rhineland, 1833. Fruit fairly large, pyriform, smooth,
yellow, blushed with blood-red, covered with fine dots; flesh
yellowish, breaking, sweet, aromatic; third for dessert, first for
kitchen; Jan. to Mar.

=Richards. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =22=:540. 1856. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 842. 1869.

Originated at Wilmington, Del. It was placed on the list of the
American Pomological Society in 1856 at its biennial session at
Rochester. Fruit medium, obovate-acute-pyriform, yellow sprinkled
with numerous small russet dots and patches of russet; flesh buttery,
melting, granular, with a sweet, pleasantly vinous flavor; good; Oct.

=Richardson. 1.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 570. 1885.

Fruit rather large, obovate; flesh melting, sprightly, pleasant; Oct.

=Riche Depouille. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =2=:205. 1832.

A French variety introduced early in the last century. Its name may
be translated Rich-skinned. Fruit large, oblong-obovate, rather
irregular in its outline and resembling in form the Saint Germain,
clear lemon-yellow, with a tinge of scarlet on the side exposed to the
sun, a little mottled with russet, and the whole skin rough like the
skin of an orange; flesh white, melting, without perfume but sweet and
pleasant; late autumn or winter.

=Ridelle. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 87. 1845. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 842. 1869.

Shown at the seventeenth annual exhibition of the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society in September, 1845, by the President of the
Society. Fruit medium, oblate-turbinate, remotely pyriform, yellow
covered nearly all over with bright red; flesh semi-fine, rather juicy,
not melting or delicate in flavor; scarcely good; Sept.

=Riocreux. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1876.

Probably French. Fruit rather large, like Calebasse in form,
symmetrical, yellowish-green; flesh fine, extremely melting, juicy,
with an exquisite perfume; first; Aug. and Sept.

=Ritson. 1.= Ont. Dept. Agr. _Fr. Ont._ 175, figs. 1914.

Originated at Oshawa, Ontario, Can. W. E. Wellington stated that his
grandmother, Mrs. John Ritson, planted the seeds from a pear sent
to her from Boston, and that the tree had stood on the homestead as
long as he could remember. Fruit medium, obovate-pyriform, usually
one-sided, yellow, shaded with golden-russet and numerous minute dots
of a darker hue; flesh medium, creamy-white, fine, tender, buttery,
juicy, sweet, delicately perfumed; dessert, very good to best; Oct.

=Ritter. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =23=:106. 1857.

Dr. Brinckle, chairman of the Committee on Native Fruits of the
American Pomological Society, reported in 1857 that specimens had been
received from Louis Ritter, Reading, Pa. The tree from which they were
obtained was purchased in the spring of 1851 for Seckel, but the tree
instead of having a rounded head is pyramidal in growth. Fruit small,
obovate, greenish-yellow, a good deal russeted, with occasionally a
faint brown cheek; flesh fine texture, melting and buttery, saccharine,
with the full Seckel aroma; best; Oct.

=Rival Dumont. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876. Fruit rather large,
oval-turbinate, russet washed with yellow; flesh melting,
buttery-juicy, aromatic; first; Nov. and Dec.

=Rivers. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:583, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 637. 1884.

A delicious pear raised in 1864 by Leroy at Angers, Fr., and dedicated
by him to Thomas Rivers, the distinguished English pomologist. Fruit
medium, turbinate, regular in outline, greenish, dotted with brown and
almost entirely covered with bright brown-russet; flesh very melting,
white, fine, juicy, saccharine, vinous, refreshing, with a delicate
musky perfume; first; Sept.

=Robert Hogg=. 1. Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:584, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 637. 1884.

Raised by Leroy, Angers, Fr., and named after Doctor Robert Hogg, the
English horticulturist. It first fruited in 1868. Fruit above medium,
ovate, more or less irregular and generally rather swelled in its
lower part; skin slightly rough, rather deep green, much covered with
fawn-colored mottles of russet and small gray dots; flesh whitish,
watery, semi-fine, melting; juice very abundant, saccharine, richly
flavored, aromatic, with an agreeable acidity; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Robert Treel. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1876.

Published by J. de Jonghe, Bel. Tree very fertile. Fruit medium; flesh
melting; first; Feb.

=Robine. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:174, Pl. XXVII. 1768. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 637. 1884.

This is an ancient pear of unascertained origin, though the pomologists
Turpin and Poiteau and others have regarded it as French. It is often
known as the _Royale d'Ete_, and has had various other synonyms. Fruit
below medium, globular-turbinate, bright green changing to yellow,
dotted with greenish-gray; flesh white, fine or semi-fine, almost
breaking, rather dry, very saccharine, sweet and having an agreeable
musky flavor; second; mid-Aug.

=Robitaillie pere. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 463. 1906.

A French pear raised at the beginning of the present century by M.
Robitaillie. Fruit very large; skin yellow, dotted with green and fawn,
becoming golden at full maturity; flesh fine, saccharine, acidulous,
very juicy; first; season late and prolonged until Jan.

=Rockeneirbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:2. 1856.

South Germany, 1847. Fruit small, smooth and shining; flesh
yellow-white, somewhat blushed; first, for household use and perry;
Sept.

=Roe Bergamot. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 843. 1869.

_Bergamotte de Roe_. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:117, fig. 59. 1872.

Raised by William Roe, Newburgh, N. Y. Fruit medium in size, form
oblate or Bergamot-shaped, rather irregular; skin smooth, yellow, with
minute yellow dots on the shaded side, washed with red on the side of
the sun; flesh rather coarse, sweet, rich, perfumed flavor suggestive
of Gansel Bergamot but much more sugary; good to very good; Sept. Tree
fairly vigorous and prolific.

=Rogers. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 157. 1867.

Reported as a new pear in 1867. Fruit said to be similar to the Louise
Bonne de Jersey in shape and size but like the Washington in dots,
markings and flavor; end of Sept.

=Roggenhoferbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 170, fig. 1913.

A perry pear which came first probably from Lower Austria. Fruit small
to medium, turbinate to pyriform, the apex being rather acute; skin
firm, grass-green turning to greenish-yellow, blushed on the sunny
side, dotted all over with numerous gray-brown dots; flesh whitish,
coarse-grained, fairly juicy, subacid; good for cider and drying; end
of Aug.

=Roi-Guillaume. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:91, fig. 238. 1879.

Gained by Van Mons. Fruit medium, ovate, uneven on all its surface;
skin at first pale water-green, sprinkled with brown dots, changing to
lemon-yellow, more golden on the side next the sun and often washed
with orange-red; flesh-white, coarse, granular, rather gritty at core;
juice saccharine and perfumed but rather wanting in amount; third for
the table, good for the kitchen; Sept.

=Roi de Rome. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:51, fig. 1858. =2.= Downing _Fr
Trees Am._ 843. 1869.

The Abbe Duquesnes, to whom we are beholden for many good fruits, found
this pear in Hainaut, Bel. Fruit very large, pyriform, pyramidal,
olive-green, with dark gray shading around the stalk and calyx,
strongly blushed with orange-red and dotted with bright gray on the
side next the sun, and yellow at maturity on the shaded cheek, with
brown-black dots; flesh fine, semi-melting, yellowish-white; juice
abundant, saccharine, with an agreeable perfume; second for table,
first for household; Sept.

=Roitelet. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 843. 1869.

A Flemish pear. Fruit small, globular, yellow,--netted, shaded and
sprinkled with russet; flesh whitish, semi-melting, juicy, sweet; good;
Sept.

=Rokeby. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 844. 1869. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._
=1=:73, fig. 37. 1872.

Gained by M. Bivort, Bel., and first published in 1848. Fruit medium
or below, pyriform, swelled in lower half, lower end flat, bright
green turning to bright yellow in the shade and blood-red on the cheek
exposed to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine, juicy, wanting in quality;
second; Aug. and Sept.

=Rolmaston Duchess. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =29=:148. 1874.

Published in 1874. Fruit medium, pyriform, yellow-green; flesh fine,
melting, juicy, vinous; very good; Oct.

=Ronde du Bosquet. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:586, fig. 1869.

Raised from seed and bore the name of the place where the parent tree,
which was first described in 1863, grew in M. Leroy's grounds, Angers,
Fr. Fruit below medium, irregularly globular and strongly bossed,
bright yellow, dotted with brown, much mottled with russet; flesh
whitish, watery, very fine, melting, rarely gritty; juice abundant,
vinous, saccharine, possessing a delicious perfume; first; Oct.

=Rondelet. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:340. 1846. =2.= _Ibid._ =18=:436, fig.
32. 1852.

Obtained in France by M. Francois Dehove. Fruit medium, remarkably
oblate, with a slightly uneven surface, much flattened at each end;
skin fair, smooth, green turning yellow at maturity, faintly blushed on
the side next the sun, and thickly dotted with russet intermixed with
a few greenish specks; flesh yellow-white, buttery, melting, juicy,
saccharine and musky; first; Oct.

=Ropes. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =12=:500. 1846. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
844. 1869.

Originated with Mr. Ropes, Salem, Mass., about 1846. Fruit medium,
obovate, cinnamon-russet; stem short; cavity inclined; calyx small,
open, set in a shallow basin; flesh whitish, coarse, melting, juicy,
sugary, aromatic; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Rorreger Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 50, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit large, globular-turbinate to pyriform;
skin smooth, shining green turning yellow, numerous small green dots;
flesh whitish, rather coarse-grained, subacid and very juicy; mid-Oct.
and Nov.

=Rosabirne. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =8=:65. 1853.

A foreign pear introduced to this country as a new variety in the
middle of the last century. Fruit medium, obovate-acute-pyriform,
surface uneven, dull greenish-yellow, almost entirely overspread with
russet; flesh white, melting and juicy, with a delicious, brisk,
subacid flavor, vinous, resembles Brown Beurre; promised to be very
good, one of the best; Oct. and Nov.

=Rosalie Wolters. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 98. 1895.

Published in 1878. Fruit medium, oblong, whitish yellow; flesh
yellowish, fine, very saccharine; first; Oct.

=Rosanne. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:69, fig. 227. 1879.

Origin unknown; Diel states he had received it from Strasland, Prussia.
Fruit medium, ovate-pyriform, symmetrical in contour, green marked with
gray dots, changing at maturity to lemon-yellow, extensively washed on
the side next the sun with wine red, over which are scattered numerous
very distinct, brighter-red dots, giving the pear a great resemblance
to Vermont Beauty; flesh whitish, rather fine, buttery; juice somewhat
deficient but pleasantly acid; good; mid-Aug.

=Rose Doyenne. 1.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 713. 1897.

Fruit rather large, obovate, yellow and crimson; flesh coarse,
granular, flavor poor, rots at core; Oct.

=Rose Water. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

An old English pear. Fruit medium, globular, rough skin, brownish-red;
flesh breaking, of a fine and delicate flavor; of fair quality but
superseded; mid-Sept.

=Rosenhofbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 92, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium, globular-oblate; skin tough,
shining, light yellow when ripe, blushed slightly on the sunny side,
with numerous fine dots; flesh yellow-white, coarse-grained, juicy,
very astringent; Oct.

=Rosenwasserbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:41. 1856.

Rheinfalz, Bavaria. Fruit medium, long-turbinate, even in outline;
tender skin, green turning yellowish-white, without dots, often flecked
with dark specks; flesh juicy, with a rose-like aroma, very white,
semi-melting, very good; mid-Aug.

=Rosinenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:73. 1856.

On the Rhine, Ger., 1802. Fruit small, globular-flattened, light green
turning to yellow-green, without any blush, covered with small dots and
russet on the side next the sun, often flecked with dark russet; flesh
breaking, fine, very sweet and aromatic; third for dessert and first
for kitchen; Nov.

=Roslyn. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 844. 1869.

A wilding found on the land of W. C. Bryant, Roslyn, L. I. Fruit
medium, almost spherical, yellow, netted, patched and dotted with
russet; flesh whitish, melting, juicy, slightly vinous; good to very
good; end of Aug.

=Ross. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 165. 1841.

A seedling introduced by Thomas Andrew Knight in 1832. Fruit large,
obovate, yellowish-green interspersed with russet; flesh inclining to
yellow, gritty near the center, rich, juicy, saccharine; second-class
dessert pear; Jan.

=Rossney. 1.= _Pioneer Nurs. Co. Cat._ fig. 1898. =2.= _U. S. D. A.
Yearbook_ 402, Pl. LII. 1904.

Raised in Salt Lake City, Utah, from a mixed lot of Winter Nelis and
Bartlett seed planted for stocks by William Woodberry about 1881,
and introduced by the Pioneer Nurseries Company, Salt Lake City,
in 1898. Fruit medium to large, oval-pyriform, somewhat angular and
ribbed towards the apex, golden yellow, blushed with scarlet and thinly
overspread with a bluish-white bloom; dots numerous, minute, russet;
stem rather long, moderately stout; calyx closed; flesh yellowish,
buttery, juicy, subacid; good; ten days later than Bartlett.

=Rostiezer. 1.= Manning _Book of Fruits_ 72. 1838.

Origin uncertain. It was, however, received from A. N. Baumann,
Bollweiler, Alsace, by R. Manning, Salem, Mass., in 1834 or 1835. Often
called _Early Seckel_ in the west. Fruit medium or below, pyriform,
regular in form, grass-green on the shaded side, reddish on the exposed
face and sprinkled with small gray dots; flesh greenish-white, fine,
melting, rather granular below the core; juice very abundant, vinous,
acidulous, very saccharine, with a most delicate flavor; first; last of
Aug.

=Rote Hanglbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 196, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small to medium, spherical; skin
tough, lemon-yellow when ripe, no blush, dotted with russet; flesh
yellowish-white, coarse-grained, juicy, subacid; very good for
transportation; Nov.

=Rote Holzbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 198, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate, greenish to
citron-yellow, slightly blushed on the sunny side and densely dotted
with cinnamon; flesh yellowish, rather coarse-grained, very juicy,
subacid; Oct.

=Rote Kochbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 200, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small, globular-turbinate, greatest
diameter at center, flat at base; skin tough, rough, grayish-green,
dull blush on the exposed side; flesh yellowish-white, very firm,
juicy, excessively astringent, subacid; Nov. and Dec.

=Rote Pilchelbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 52, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear of second quality. Fruit fairly large,
pyriform-obtuse, also conic, golden yellow when ripe, red on the
sunny side, plentifully sprinkled with small dots; flesh yellowish,
coarse-grained, very juicy, with subacid flavor; Sept. and Oct.

=Rote Scheibelbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 94, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small to fairly large,
flattened-globular, symmetrical in outline, smooth, polished, dark
green changing to greenish-yellow, blushed on the sunny side, densely
and finely dotted; flesh whitish, coarse, with an aroma peculiar to
itself, subacid and very juicy; Oct.

=Rote Winawitz. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 204, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small to medium, turbinate to pyriform,
very variable; skin firm and rough, yellow when ripe, without any
blush, dotted with numerous fine, russet spots; flesh yellow-white,
coarse-grained, very juicy, subacid, aromatic; Oct. and Nov.

=Rotfleischige Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 220, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small, globular-turbinate, calyx end
flat, leaf-green, dotted with russet and flecked with red; flesh under
the skin firm but near the core softer, coarse-grained, juicy, subacid;
Oct. to mid-Nov.

=Rothbackige Sommerzuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:49.
1856.

Germany, 1801. Fruit small, pyriform, smooth, pale green turning to
shining lemon-yellow, lightly blushed on the sunny side, dotted; flesh
rose-tinted, saccharine, semi-melting, granular, deficient in flavor;
second for dessert, first for cuisine and market; Sept.

=Rothe Confesselsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:14. 1856.

German, published in 1766. Fruit medium, oblong, somewhat swelled, skin
thick, gray-green with brown russet; flesh yellowish, semi-melting,
juicy, aromatic, tender; second for table, good for culinary use; Oct.

=Rothe Jakobsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:48. 1856.

Nassau, Ger., 1806. Fruit small, ovate, light green turning
yellow-green, with brownish-red russet; flesh granular, agreeable,
sweet; second for the table, good for household and market purposes;
July.

=Rothe langstielige Honigbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:11.
1856.

Originated near the Rhine, Ger., 1804. Fruit medium, pyriform,
ventriculous and bent, obtuse, sides unequal, light green, changing
to dark red with indistinct yellow and light red spots; flesh tender,
juicy, aromatic; second for the table; good for cooking.

=Rothe oder grosse Pfalzgrafinbirne. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 538. 1817.
=2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:60. 1856.

Germany, 1797. Fruit medium, conic, entirely covered with dark blush,
densely sprinkled with gray dots and dark speckles; flesh yellow-white,
honey-sweet, semi-melting, aromatic; third for the table, first for
kitchen and market; Sept.

=Rothe Rettigbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:34. 1856.

Altenburg, Ger., 1821. Fruit small, spherical, yellow-green, covered
all over with dirty red, densely dotted and speckled with russet; flesh
whitish-yellow, granular, melting, juicy; first for table and cuisine;
Aug.

=Rothe Winterkappesbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:167. 1856.

German, 1805. Fruit medium, long-turbinate, often spherical, flattened
and sides unequal, green turning to lemon-yellow, firm and shining,
blushed with red, dotted with gray; flesh rather white, coarse-grained,
acidulous; good for the kitchen; Dec. to Feb.

=Rothe Winterkochbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:192. 1856.

Germany, on the Main, 1805. Fruit medium, obtuse-conic, symmetrical
in contour, smooth and shining, light green turning to a beautiful
lemon-yellow, finely dotted with gray, flecked with russet on the side
opposed to the sun; flesh coarse, saccharine, juicy, wanting in aroma;
third for dessert, very good for household use and market; Nov. and Dec.

=Rothe Zucherlachsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:49. 1856.

Nassau, Germany, 1805. Fruit medium, obtuse-long-conic, yellowish light
green, dark red blush, changing to light lemon-yellow with carmine
cheek, mottled and flecked with brown-russet; flesh semi-melting,
granular, gritty near core, very sweet, vinous and acidulous; second
for the table, very good for kitchen and market; Aug.

=Rother Winterhasenkopf. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:147. 1856.

Nassau, Ger., 1806. Fruit large, irregular in form, sides unequal,
crooked, yellowish pale green turning yellow, with dark blush, very
prominent brown dots; flesh breaking, sweet, acidulous, vinous; third
for table, good for household use; considered by Messrs. Simon-Louis to
be analogous to the Catillac; Jan. to Mar.

=Rothgraue Kirchmessbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:109. 1856.

Hesse, Ger., 1804. Fruit medium to rather large, conic, slightly
bossed, sides unequal; skin rough and covered with brownish-gray
russet, often faintly blushed; flesh yellowish-green, coarse-grained,
sweet, acidulous and musky; second for dessert, first for kitchen;
mid-Sept.

=Rougeaude. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:88. 1831.

Fruit medium, pyramidal, fairly regular, skin yellowish on the shaded
side, but about three-fourths of the fruit is of a darker or lighter
shade of red; flesh firm, dry, with some sweetness but insipid and
wanting in flavor; indifferent; Jan.

=Rouget. 1.= Noisette _Man. Comp. Jard._ =2=:537. 1860. =2.= Baltet
_Cult. Fr._ 404, 405. 1908.

The flesh of this small French pear becomes red when cooked and the
confectioners of Paris use large quantities of it obtained from the
neighborhood of Etampes. It is also considered a first class pear for
perry.

=Roulef. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =17=:292, fig. 684. 1894.

Raised from seed by Mr. Mitschurin, Tambow, Russia. Fruit medium,
yellow, firm, vinous; good.

=Rouse Lench. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 165. 1841. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 195. 1920.

Raised by T. A. Knight, and first fruited in 1820. In 1850 it was
placed on the "Rejected Fruits" list by the second Congress of Fruit
Growers at New York. Fruit large, long-oval, uneven, pale yellow-green,
with thin russet; no depression at base of very long woody stem; calyx
open, basin shallow; flesh pale yellow, juicy; fair; Jan. and Feb.

=Rousselet Aelens. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:92, fig. 1856. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 844. 1869.

A Belgian pear of unknown origin. Fruit small to medium, turbinate,
obtuse-pyriform, golden yellow at time of maturity, faintly colored
on the sunny side, patches of russet, and dots of grayish red; flesh
yellowish-white, rather fine, melting; juice abundant, sweet and
possessing a decided perfume of the Rousselets; quality would be first
class if the flesh were less granular; Nov.

=Rousselet d'Anvers. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 58. 1895.

A variety raised by M. Daras de Naghin, Antwerp, Bel. Tree vigorous and
fertile, hardy, resisted the great European frost of 1879-1880. Fruit
medium, globular-ovate, yellowish-green, slightly tinged with dark red;
flesh semi-fine, melting, saccharine and well flavored; first; Oct.

=Rousselet Baud. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:177, fig. 185. 1878.

Gained by Dr. Van Mons and mentioned in his Catalog of 1823. Fruit
small or rather small, ovate, more or less swelled, even in outline;
skin a little thick, at first water-green with many very numerous
and small dots, sometimes much covered with cinnamon-colored russet,
changing to citron-yellow and the russet becoming golden on the side
next the sun; flesh yellow-white, rather fine, dense, buttery, melting;
juice sufficient, richly saccharine and perfumed; Oct. and Nov.

=Rousselet Bivort. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:9, fig. 1856. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 845. 1869.

Raised from a bed of the seeds of Simon Bouvier made in the grounds of
the Society Van Mons at Geest-Saint-Remy, Bel., in 1840. Fruit small,
turbinate; skin smooth, bright green turning to lemon-yellow, shaded
and mottled with russet-fawn especially on the side exposed to the
sun, dotted with brown-black and brown-russet; flesh yellowish-white,
fine, melting, semi-buttery; juice abundant, saccharine and agreeably
perfumed recalling the scent of the Rousselets; good, suitable for
large collections; Oct. to Jan.

=Rousselet Blanc. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:37, fig. 307. 1880.

Raised by Van Mons and cataloged by him in 1823. Fruit rather small,
globular-turbinate, even in contour, bright green, whitish, a few very
small, bright, gray dots, no russet, at maturity it becomes pale yellow
and the side next the sun is blushed extensively with bright blood-red,
a white bloom covering the whole surface of the fruit and numerous
very small dots of golden-yellow appearing on the red; flesh whitish,
rather fine, semi-buttery; juice sufficient, sugary, vinous, with the
agreeable perfume of the Rousselets; first; Aug.

=Rousselet de la Cour. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:589, fig. 1869.

A wilding found on a farm which adjoined M. Leroy's nurseries of La
Cour at Angers, Fr. Fruit below medium, turbinate, regular, acute, one
side usually larger than the other; skin rough and thick, bronzed all
over and covered with gray or white dots; flesh white, fine, breaking,
watery; juice abundant, saccharine, sourish, with an agreeable perfume;
second; end of Sept. and beginning of Oct.

=Rousselet Decoster. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 845. 1869.

Raised by Van Mons. Tree of medium vigor but very weak on quince stock.
Fruit small to medium, globular-ovate, pale yellow, mottled with
golden-russet and tinted with brownish-red; flesh yellowish, buttery,
very saccharine, with the characteristic perfume of the Rousselets;
first; Oct. and Nov.

=Rousselet Dore d'Hiver. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:590, fig. 1869.

Origin unknown, though Leroy, Angers, Fr., possessed it about 1845.
Fruit below medium, variable in form, turbinate, slightly obtuse,
or turbinate and spherical and nearly always larger on one side
than on the other; skin thick and rough, shining, some bright and
golden-russet, some small, brown and green spots; flesh whitish, fine,
semi-melting, juicy, saccharine, vinous, fairly well perfumed; second;
Feb. and Mar.

=Rousselet Hatif. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:148. 1768. =2.=
Downing Fr. Trees Am. 846. 1869.

_Early Rousselet_. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 571. 1884.

The origin of this pear is uncertain though it was probably French,
for in 1600 it was under cultivation at Orleans, Fr., according to Le
Lectier. Fruit small, pyriform, slightly obtuse, sides often unequal;
skin fine, lemon-yellow on the shaded side, and vivid red sprinkled
with gray spots on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish, fine,
semi-breaking and crisp; juice well perfumed, saccharine, abundant and
aromatic; second; mid-July.

=Rousselet de Janvier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:594, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 845. 1869.

Gained by Alexandre Bivort, director of the nurseries of the Society
Van Mons at Geest-Saint-Remy, Bel., in 1848. Fruit medium, generally
regular-ovate; skin slightly rough, lemon-yellow in the shade, washed
with red-brown on the other cheek; flesh yellowish; very fine,
melting; juice sufficient and fairly saccharine, vinous and richly
perfumed; second; Dec. and Jan.

=Rousselet Jaune d'Ete.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:23, fig. 108. 1878.
_Gelbe Sommerrusselet._ =2.= Christ _Handb._ 546. 1817.

French, 1801. Fruit small; skin rough, almost entirely covered with
brilliant red, densely covered with small gray dots, scentless; flesh
granular, melting, saccharine, sweet; second for table, first for
household; Sept.

=Rousselet de Jodoigne.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:69, fig. 419. 1880.

Described in 1876 as a "recent" gain of M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel.
Fruit small globular-turbinate, obtuse at apex; skin rather firm,
bright and vivid green, sprinkled with numerous very small dots of
gray-green, russeted around the calyx and lower part of the fruit;
flesh white, tinted with green, semi-fine, semi-buttery; juice
abundant, saccharine, acidulous, having the characteristic Rousselet
perfume.

=Rousselet de Jonghe.= =1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 639. 1884.

Fruit small, obovate, curved, uneven and irregular in its outline; skin
smooth, of a uniform lemon; flesh yellow, fine-grained, firm, melting
and juicy, with a very rich, sugary flavor; its delicious flavor
compensates for its small size; Nov. and Dec.

=Rousselet de Meestre.= =1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 639. 1884.

Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform or pyramidal; skin smooth and shining,
golden yellow, thickly dotted all over with large brown-russet
freckles; flesh semi-buttery, firm, fairly juicy, and well flavored; of
indifferent quality.

=Rousselet Panache.= =1.= _Guide Prat._ 80. 1876. A variegated variety
of French origin and new about 1825. Fruit small, short-ovate,
greenish-yellow, with light and dark streakings; first for dessert and
household; end of Sept.

=Rousselet de Pomponne.= =1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:67, fig. 418. 1880.

Obtained by MM. Pradel, nurserymen at Montauban, Fr. Fruit small,
globular-ovate or nearly globular, even in outline, pale green at
first, sprinkled with numerous large, regularly spaced dots of gray
circled with darker green, changing at maturity to pale yellow and
washed on the side opposed to the sun with bright rosy-red on which
the dots are blood-red; flesh white, semi-breaking; juice sufficient,
saccharine, with little flavor; second; mid-Aug.

=Rousselet Precoce.= =1.= _Mag. Hort._ =18=:151. 1852. 2. Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =6=:91, fig. 430. 1880.

This is the variety known in Germany as _Fruehe Geishirtlebirne_
and must be distinguished from the _Rousselet hatif_ or _Poire de
Chypre_ of Duhamel. It was classed in 1851 by Mr. Cabot, President of
the Massachusetts Horticultural Society, among the new or recently
introduced fruits. Fruit rather small, pyriform, regular in contour,
vivid green slightly touched with yellow, sprinkled with very numerous,
very small, gray dots, changing at maturity to lemon-yellow, preserving
sometimes a tone of green, the side next the sun being washed with
blood-red spots having yellow centers; flesh whitish, fine, tender,
semi-buttery, juicy, saccharine, and scented with the perfume of the
Rousselets; good; mid-July.

=Rousselet de Rheims. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:147, Pl. XI.
1768. =2.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 196. 1920.

This pear is of very ancient and uncertain origin. Many authors have
endeavored to trace it back to the days of the Romans. But Pliny and
the other Latin horticulturists did not give descriptions of their
fruits sufficiently technical to enable us to make identification of
their varieties with ours certain. It is, however, clear that the
Rousselet de Rheims has existed, particularly around the city of Reims,
Fr., for some centuries. Fruit small, turbinate, regular in form,
rarely very obtuse, bright green or yellow-green, sprinkled with large
and small gray-russet dots and extensively shaded with reddish-brown
on the side opposed to the sun; flesh white, fine or semi-fine, almost
melting, not very juicy, rich in sugar, acidulous, refreshing, highly
perfumed; one of the best early pears for dessert, very good for
candying; Sept.

=Rousselet de Rheims Panache. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:597, fig.
1869. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 639. 1884.

A variety similar in all respects to the preceding, of which it is a
bud sport, except that the leaves and fruit are striped with yellow and
green. Its propagation antedates 1830.

=Rousselet Royal. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1876.

On trial with Messrs. Simon-Louis, Metz, Lorraine, in 1876. Fruit
medium; first; Sept.

=Rousselet Saint Nicolas. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 13, fig. 103.
1866-73.

Obtained by M. Bivort. Fruit small, turbinate-ventriculous, gray-green
tinted with yellow, sprinkled with large brown or green dots, numerous
and evenly distributed, changing at maturity to pale yellow, the
side exposed to the sun being washed with brown-red on which are
blackish-red dots; flesh yellowish, very fine, melting, rather gritty
at the center, full of sweet juice, saccharine, agreeably perfumed;
good; Oct.

=Rousselet Saint-Quentin. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:53, fig. 507. 1881.

_De Quentin_. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 635. 1884.

Gained by M. Van Dooren, a former director of the middle school at
Namur, Bel. Fruit small or medium on a pruned tree, globular-ovate or
globular-conic, symmetrical in its contour, somber green sprinkled with
large, widely spaced gray dots, changing to yellow, and well colored
with brownish-red on the side next the sun; flesh white, slightly
greenish, fine, buttery; juice sufficient, saccharine, having the
characteristic perfume of the Rousselets; first; Sept. and Oct.

=Rousselet Saint Vincent. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =16= 296. 1850. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:598, fig. 1869.

The origin of this pear is uncertain. It seems probable to Leroy
that it was raised by Van Mons. In this country it was placed on the
Rejected List by the second Congress of Fruit Growers at New York
in 1850. Fruit above medium, globular-ovate, irregular in outline
especially at the summit, bright yellow, dotted with russet; flesh
white, fine, juicy, saccharine, acidulous, of a delicate flavor though
not recalling in the least that of the Rousselets; first; Oct.

=Rousselet de Stuttgardt. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 639. 1884.

_Des Chevriers de Stuttgardt_. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =1=:558, fig.
1867.

_Stuttgarter Geisshirtel_. 3. Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 289. 1881.

It is said that this was a wilding found by a shepherd in the
neighborhood of Stuttgart, Ger., before 1779. Fruit below medium,
pyriform, fine, tender, at first dark water-green sprinkled with very
numerous large dots of a darker shade, changing to yellow-green,
tinged on the side next the sun with brownish-red on which the dots
become yellow; the surface is covered with a characteristic sort of
grayish-white bloom which passes to a rosy-violet on the bright parts;
flesh greenish, not very fine but tender, buttery, sufficiently juicy,
aromatic; first; Aug.

=Rousselet Thaon. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:73, fig. 229. 1879.

The Bulletin of the Van Mons Society appears to indicate that
Rousselet Thaon was a gain of M. Bivort. Fruit small, short-turbinate,
symmetrical in outline; skin thick, firm, bright green dotted with
darker green changing to pale yellow, the side next the sun being more
golden and washed with brown-red on fruits well exposed; flesh white,
coarse, semi-buttery; juice moderate in amount but saccharine and
perfumed with musk; second; Sept. and Oct.

=Rousselet Theuss. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:37, fig. 17. 1866-73.

In his abridged descriptive Catalog published at Louvain in 1823 Van
Mons stated that the Rousselet Theuss was raised by him. Fruit small
or nearly medium, ovate-turbinate; skin rather thick and firm, at
first bright water-green, sprinkled with gray-green dots turning pale
yellow and encrimsoned on the side next the sun, sometimes very vividly
on well-exposed fruits; flesh white, slightly yellow under the skin,
semi-fine, melting, full of saccharine juice, acidulous, well perfumed
with the characteristic Rousselet scent; owing to its excellence and
beauty this pear deserves a place in the fruit garden as well as in the
large orchard; Aug.

=Rousselet Vanderwecken. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:41, fig. 1855.

Raised by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Tree pyramidal, of good vigor,
very productive. Fruit small, turbinate to ovoid, yellow; stem short,
curved, rather thick; calyx large for the size of the fruit, open;
flesh white, fine, melting, very juicy, very sweet, musky, strongly
aromatic; first; Nov.

=Rousseline. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:153, Pl. XV. 1768. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 847. 1869.

Merlet, the French pomologist, writing in 1675 appears to have been the
first to describe this pear and he said it was well named Rousseline
being so similar to Rousselet in the buttery character of its flesh
and its extraordinarily musky flavor. Fruit below medium, pyriform
inclining to obovate, swollen in the middle and narrowing obtusely
toward the calyx and more acutely toward the stalk, dull green
dotted with brown scales and partly covered with large russet stains
intermingled with gray mottlings; flesh white, fine, semi-melting,
some grit around the center; juice rarely abundant, highly saccharine,
vinous and musky; second; Nov. and Dec.

=Rousselon. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:601, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 847. 1869.

This variety was gained by Major Esperen of Mechlin, Bel.; it fruited
for the first time in 1846. Fruit medium and above, ovate, much
swelled in its lower part and contracted near its summit; skin very
shining, yellow-ochre, dotted with gray-russet, stained with the same
at either extremity and carmined on the cheek touched by the sun; flesh
yellow-white, semi-fine, semi-breaking, granular around the core; juice
rather deficient, saccharine, sweet, more or less perfumed, rather
delicate; second; Feb. to Apr.

=Roux Carcas. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 55. 1865. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:602, fig. 1869.

This pear bears the name of a nurseryman at Carcassone, Aude, Fr., who
raised it in 1863. Fruit below medium or small, globular, flattened at
both poles and often slightly bossed, yellow-green dotted with small
gray points, slightly marbled with russet; flesh whitish, coarse,
semi-melting, gritty at center; juice abundant, musky, and saccharine,
possessing a rather astringent after-taste; second; end of Aug.

=Rove. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 83. 1895.

A perry pear which originated in the neighborhood of Metz, Lorraine,
and is in much request there. Fruit rather large, orange-yellow, well
colored with red; flesh breaking, juicy, saccharine, of an agreeable
flavor; of first quality for perry and for cooking and also rather good
to eat; end of winter and spring.

=Rowling. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

"The Rowling peare is a good peare, but hard, and not good before it
bee a little rowled or bruised, to make it eate the more mellow."

=Royal. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 847. 1869.

Raised from seed by Thomas R. Peck, Waterloo, N. Y. Fruit medium,
globular-pyriform, yellow largely covered with thin crimson on the
side next the sun, sprinkled with brown and russet dots; flesh white,
melting, juicy, sweet, slightly aromatic; good to very good; Sept.

=Royal d'Hiver. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:191, Pl. XXXV. 1768.
=2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 640. 1884.

The origin of the Royal d'Hiver is uncertain. In 1704 Le Gentil,
director of the orchard at the Chartreux Convent of Paris, said that it
was a new pear and had been brought from Constantinople for the King
(Louis XIV). The Turkish origin of the pear, however, was probably
based on not much more than hearsay. Fruit large, turbinate-obtuse,
bossed; skin fine, dull lemon-yellow, washed with orange-red on the
side next the sun, dotted and marbled with fawn; flesh yellow-white,
fine, melting or semi-melting, juicy, saccharine, sweet and having a
pleasant, musky flavor; good; Nov. to Jan.

=Royale Vendee. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:607, fig. 1869.

Count Eugene of Nouhes obtained this variety from seed at la
Cacaudiere, in the commune of Pouzauges, Vendee, Fr., in 1860. Fruit
medium, globular-ovate, bossed; skin rough, dark yellowish-green,
lightly marbled with gray and bright fawn; flesh citrine, fine, very
melting and juicy, with a saccharine, sprightly flavor and delicate
perfume; very good; Jan. to Mar.

=Ruhschiebler. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 96, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit small to medium, globular-turbinate,
yellow-green, with large and small russet dots; flesh coarse, juicy,
with a strong acid taste; good for transportation; end of Sept. and
Oct.

=Rummelter Birne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:193. 1856. =2.=
Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 98, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown extensively in Austria and Germany. Fruit medium,
turbinate-oblate, light green, heavily sprinkled with gray dots,
turning orange-yellow, with russet on the exposed side; flesh white,
very coarse, subacid; end of Sept. to Nov.

=Runde gelbe Honigbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:162. 1856.

Saxony, 1804. Fruit medium, turbinate-oblate, light green turning
white and straw color with a vivid light blush, fine light brown dots;
flesh yellow-white, coarse-grained, gritty near center, astringent,
honey-sweet; very good for household use and perry; end of Sept. for
three or four weeks.

=Runde Sommerpomeranzenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:150.
1856.

Trieste, Austria, 1805. Fruit small, globular-ovate, flattened,
sides unequal, yellowish light green turning to light lemon-yellow
tinged with green and often slightly blushed with dull red; flesh
semi-melting, aromatic; first for dessert, household and market;
beginning of Sept. for fourteen days.

=Russbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:173. 1856.

Thuringia, Ger., 1803. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate, variable in
form; skin rough, almost entirely covered with cinnamon-russet, often
with light brown blush; flesh whitish, coarse-grained, saccharine,
breaking, juicy; third for the table, first for household; Nov. and Dec.

=Russelet Petit. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 132, Pl. LXIV. 1729.

Fruit small, pyramidal, irregular; stem set on one side obliquely; late
Aug.

=Russet Bartlett.=

About 1893 Robert McHinds, Clarksville, N. Y., planted 700 Bartlett
pear trees. When these trees came into bearing, one was found to
produce russet-colored fruits, whence the name Russet Bartlett. The
tree is an exact counterpart of Bartlett in manner of growth and the
fruit differs from Bartlett only in the russet skin. It is, therefore,
not improbable that the variety is a bud sport of Bartlett.

=Russet Catherine. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

"The Russet Catherine is a very good middle sized peare."

=Rylsk. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =27=:292. 1894.

Russian. Fruit medium yellow; flesh breaking, sweet; very late.

=S. T. Wright. 1.= _Garden_ =66=:299, fig. 1904.

This English pear raised by Messrs. Veitch, was introduced in
1904 at the Royal Horticultural Society's fruit show in London.
It is the product of Beurre Bachelier and Bartlett. Fruit medium,
oblate-pyriform, rather swelled; skin rich golden; of good flavor; Oct.

=Sabine. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:610, fig. 1869.

The parent tree of this variety was acquired by Van Mons from a garden
at Schaerbeek, Bel., and ripened its fruit first in 1817. Fruit medium,
sometimes irregular-conic, sometimes ovate-pyriform and often rather
deformed in contour; skin rather rough, bright green, dotted uniformly
with dark gray changing to lemon-yellow, washed with thin yet vivid
crimson; flesh white tinted with yellow, fine, melting, rather gritty
around the core, full of sweet juice and delicately perfumed; first;
Dec. and Jan.

=Sabine d'Ete. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 348. 1831.

Raised in 1819 by M. Stoffels of Mechlin, Bel. Fruit pyramidal,
broadest at the base and tapering to a round, blunt point at the stalk;
skin smooth and even, yellow on the shaded side, and of a fine scarlet,
minutely dotted when exposed to the sun; flesh white, melting, juicy,
highly perfumed; Aug.

=Sacandaga. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 849. 1869.

The parent tree was found on the farm of William Van Vranken,
Edinburgh, N. Y. Fruit small, nearly globular, pale greenish-yellow,
shaded with brownish-crimson, and netted and dotted with russet; flesh
white, juicy, melting, sweet, rich, slightly perfumed; good to very
good; Sept.

=Saechsische Glockenbirne. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 130. 1825.

Saxony. First published in 1816. Fruit medium, spherical, light
citron-yellow turning golden yellow, blushed; flesh firm,
coarse-grained, sweet and musky; third for dessert, good for kitchen
purposes; Oct.

=Saechsische Lange Gruene Winterbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 274. 1889.

_Longue Verte d'Hiver_. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:137, fig. 549. 1881.

A pear of German origin and cultivated especially in Thuringia and
Saxony. Fruit medium or nearly medium, conic-pyriform, water-green,
sown with dots of a darker green, passing to greenish-white or
yellowish-white at maturity; flesh white, rather fine, semi-melting,
full of sweet, saccharine juice but without any appreciable perfume;
good; autumn and early winter.

=Safran. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:611, fig. 1869.

An old French pear known in the seventeenth century as the _Saffran
d'Hyver_. Fruit medium and sometimes less, variable in form, usually
ovate, very globular and irregular or slightly long-conic; skin rather
rough, saffron-yellow, shaded with gray, dotted, veined and marked with
brown-russet; flesh yellowish, semi-melting, and semi-fine, granular;
juice sufficient, saccharine, acidulous, with a perfume resembling that
of fennel rather than of musk; third; Oct. to Jan.

=Saint Andre. 1.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =1=:79, fig. 1851. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:613, fig. 1869.

The origin of this pear is unascertainable but it was introduced to
this country by R. Manning, Salem, Mass., who imported cions of it from
Messrs. Baumann, nurserymen, Bollwiller, Fr. (Bollweiler, Alsace), in
1834 or 1835. Fruit medium or below, ovate, rather symmetrical, bossed
and sometimes a little ventriculated in its lower half; skin fine
and smooth, yellow-green, dotted and streaked with gray, very rarely
colored on the cheek next the sun; flesh greenish-white, fine and most
melting, extremely juicy, sweet, saccharine, slightly vinous, delicate
and highly perfumed; first; Oct.

=Saint Andrew. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 131. 1729.

Described in 1729 as one of the best pears in England. Fruit large,
oblong, very obtuse, greatest diameter two-thirds down toward the base,
diminished only slightly toward the stem; Sept.

=Saint Aubin sur Riga. 1.= McIntosh _Bk. Gard._ =2=:461. 1855.

"A New Jersey pear of much excellence either as a wall or standard."
Fruit large; flesh melting, tender, of rich flavor; excellent; Jan. and
Feb.

=Saint-Augustin. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:230, Pl. LVIII, fig.
3. 1768. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:614, fig. 1869.

An old French pear published in 1650 by Menage. Fruit below medium,
pyriform-ovate, rather regular in form, slightly obtuse, dirty yellow,
dotted with gray, stained with fawn around both poles and sometimes
slightly clouded with brown-red on the side next the sun; flesh white,
semi-fine, breaking; juice rather wanting, sweet, saccharine, slightly
musky and pleasant; second; Feb. to Apr.

=Saint Denis. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 849. 1869.

Fruit small, turbinate and uneven in its outline, pale yellow, with a
crimson cheek and thickly dotted with crimson dots; flesh semi-melting,
very juicy and sweet, with a fine aroma; good; Aug. and Sept.

=Saint Dorothee. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =14=:110. 1848. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 849. 1869.

A variety received in this country from France and fruited here for the
first time in 1847. Fruit large, fusiform or spindle-shaped, bright
lemon-yellow; flesh fine, buttery, with a saccharine, sprightly and
highly perfumed flavor; good; Oct. and Nov.

=Saint Francois. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:616, fig. 1869.

Until 1675 when Merlet described it this variety was little known
and he then called it _de Grillon_ or _Bonne-Amet_ but in 1690 on
re-printing and completing his work he spoke of it as the Saint
Francois. Fruit above medium and sometimes very large, long-conic,
slightly obtuse and bossed, one side more swelled than the other,
dull greenish-yellow, finely dotted with brown, widely stained with
fawn around the stem and more or less flecked with the same and
slightly carmined on the side of the sun; flesh white, extremely fine,
semi-breaking, rarely gritty; juice scanty and wanting in sugar, musky,
delicate in flavor; third for eating raw, first for cooking; mid-Nov.
to end of Jan.

=Saint Gallus Weinbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:194. 1856.

Germany, on the Rhine, Wuerttemberg and Baden. First published in 1830.
Fruit small, apple-shaped, often flat-turbinate, medium swelled,
uneven; skin very firm, green, almost entirely covered with a dark,
dirty red blush, scarcely dotted at all; good for household use and
perry; Jan. to Mar.

=Saint George. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:617, fig. 1869.

The Saint George was described by Diel, Stuttgart, Ger., in 1812, as
a French pear originated on the Moselle. Fruit above medium and often
larger, very long and always variable, often of Calebasse form, obtuse
and contorted, sometimes ovate and regular in outline; skin thin,
rough, greenish, much stained with gray around the calyx and covered
with large brown dots and scaly patches of russet; flesh white, fine,
melting, juice abundant, saccharine, acid and vinous, pleasantly
perfumed; first; mid-Sept.

=Saint Germain. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:225, Pl. LII. 1768.
=2.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 196. 1920.

Merlet, the French pomologist, wrote in 1680 that this pear originated
from a wilding on the banks of the Fare, a little river in the parish
of Saint Germain d'Aree. Fruit medium or large, long-pyriform, slightly
swelled, often irregular in contour; skin rather thick and rough,
greenish-yellow, dotted with russet, slightly golden on the cheek
exposed to the sun; flesh whitish, fine, very melting, very juicy, rich
in sugar with an agreeable, perfumed flavor; very good, but is gritty
and worthless if grown on cold, moist soil; Nov. to Mar.

=Saint Germain Gris. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:623, fig. 1869.

Found by M. Prevost, long president of the Horticultural Society
of Seine-Inferieure, Fr., in the ancient garden of the Friars of
Saint-Ouen, at Rouen, about the year 1804. Fruit medium to large,
long-ovate, irregular in its upper part and often bossed and elevated
more on one side of the stalk than on the other, grayish-green dotted
with brown; flesh yellowish, semi-fine, melting, saccharine, juicy,
slightly acidulous, with a deliciously scented flavor; first; mid-Dec.
and Jan.

=Saint Germain Panache. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:625. 1869.

This variegated variety of Saint Germain is of French origin; the date
of its publication is about 1819. Fruit simply a variegated form of
the Saint Germain, covered with rather large bands of bright yellow
sometimes extending from stem to calyx.

=Saint Germain de Pepins. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 850. 1869.

Foreign. Origin unknown. Fruit medium, nearly globular or obovate,
slightly pyriform, pale yellow, lightly shaded or mottled with crimson
in the sun, netted and patched with russet and thickly sprinkled with
russet dots; flesh yellowish, coarse and gritty, with a hard core;
good; Feb.

=Saint Germain Puvis. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:625, fig. 1869.

M. Pariset, Curciat-Dongalon, Fr., obtained this variety in 1842. Fruit
above medium, long-conic, obtuse, irregular, much bossed, grass-green,
clouded with olive-yellow, sprinkled with small gray dots; flesh
whitish, semi-fine, watery and melting, almost free from granulations;
juice rather deficient, saccharine, acidulous, agreeable; second; end
of Sept. and Oct.

=Saint Germain du Tilloy. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:626, fig. 1869.

The origin of this pear is unknown though Leroy thought that its name
indicated origin in the Department of the Nord where it formerly
existed in important nurseries and where are two towns bearing the name
Tilloy. Fruit medium and above, long-conic or cylindrical-conic, very
obtuse, rather variable, golden-yellow, clouded with olive-yellow,
covered with gray dots and speckles, always rather squamose, more or
less washed with cinnamon-russet on the side next the sun; flesh white,
semi-fine and semi-melting, gritty at center; juice abundant, sugary,
acidulous, aromatic; first; mid-Oct. to end of Nov.

=Saint Germain Van Mons. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:628, fig. 1869.

_Van Mons Hermannsbirne_. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:60. 1856.

The parent tree of this variety was a seedling raised by Van Mons at
Brussels which fruited for the first time in 1819. Fruit rather above
medium or medium, obovate-pyriform, one side habitually more swelled
than the other, yellow-ochre, sprinkled with numerous gray and green
dots; flesh yellowish, semi-fine and semi-melting, very granular at the
core; juice rarely abundant, sugary, acidulous, rather savory; second;
Oct.

=Saint Ghislain. 1.= Hovey _Fr. Am._ =2=:45, fig. 1851. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:629, fig. 1869.

This pear was raised at the village of Jammapes, Hainaut, Bel., by
M. Dorlain and was propagated by Van Mons and others. Fruit medium;
form irregular, globular gourd-shaped and swelled in its lower part
or elongated gourd-shaped and sometimes regular-turbinate, always,
however, diminishing acutely to the stalk; skin rather thick and rough,
grass-green, covered all over with large gray dots and shaded with dull
red on the side exposed to the sun; flesh white, fine or semi-fine,
melting or semi-melting, watery; juice very saccharine, vinous, with a
delicious perfume and an after-taste of musk; first; end of Aug.

=Saint Herblain d'Hiver. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:147, fig. 74. 1872.

The Saint Herblain d'Hiver was propagated by M. Bruneau, a nurseryman,
Nantes, Fr., where it was raised, cultivated and much appreciated.
Fruit medium, conic-ovate, usually symmetrical in outline; skin rather
thick and firm, at first bright green sprinkled with brown dots very
regularly spaced and prominent, changing to citron-yellow with the
side next the sun a little golden; flesh white, semi-fine, dense,
semi-breaking, full of sweet juice, saccharine, refreshing, more tender
when eaten at its extreme maturity; a good winter, cooking pear; end of
winter.

=Saint Lezin. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:632, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 642. 1884.

First among French pomologists to mention it was Claude Saint-Etienne,
in 1670. Fruit large to very large, pyriform but variable, green
clouded with pale yellow, dotted with small gray specks; flesh white,
semi-fine, semi-breaking; juice plentiful, but deficient in sugar and
without perfume; second for dessert, but good for stewing; Sept. and
Oct.

=Saint Louis. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:634, fig. 1869.

Found in the ancient fruit garden of the Horticultural Society of
Angers, Fr., and without any record of origin. Fruit medium or below,
globular-ovate, somewhat bossed, yellow-ochre all over, sprinkled with
dots and very small specks of fawn, more or less carmined on the face
turned to the sun; flesh white, rather coarse, semi-melting; juice
abundant, rather saccharine, sweetish, without any appreciable perfume;
third; latter part of Aug.

=Saint Luc. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:29, fig. 495. 1881.

Origin unknown. Fruit rather small, ovate-pyriform, symmetrical in
contour, having its largest diameter somewhat below the center; skin
rather thick though tender, at first pale water-green, with dots of
green-gray, changing at maturity to pale golden-yellow, tinged with
very light red on the cheek opposed to the sun; flesh whitish, fine,
buttery; juice fairly abundant, very saccharine and slightly perfumed;
good; Aug.

=Saint Luke. 1.= _Garden_ =66=:305. 1904.

Introduced by Rivers, Sawbridgeworth, Eng., about 1900. At the Royal
Horticultural Society's show of hardy fruits at Westminister in 1904
it was regarded as a valuable introduction, able to compete with the
best, owing to its rich mellow flavor and melting flesh, and perfect
shape and finish. Fruit rough, russety, deep cinnamon-brown with green
patches; flesh melting, juicy, rich, sweet; Oct.

=Saint Menin. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =22=:231, fig. 16. 1856. =2.= Mas _Le
Verger_ =2=:187, fig. 92. 1866-73.

_Omer-Pacha_. 1. _Mag. Hort._ =21=:87. 1855. =4.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:478, fig. 1869.

Received in America from Leroy about 1855 under the name _Omer-Pacha_.
It was known, however, as early as 1846 in this country under the name
of _Saint Menin_. Fruit rather large, obovate-obtuse, pale yellow,
slightly brown in the sun, netted and patched with russet, and thickly
dotted with conspicuous russet dots; flesh whitish, fine, melting;
juice abundant, saccharine, vinous, with a delicate aroma; first; Sept.

=St. Michel Archange. 1.= _Pom. France_ =1=:No. 41, Pl. 41. 1863. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 324. 1866.

A French pear originated in the neighborhood of Nantes in the middle of
the last century. Fruit medium or rather large, turbinate but irregular
in form, sometimes obovate, sometimes long-pyriform; skin fine, smooth,
greenish-yellow, much dotted with gray-russet, washed with orange-red
on the side next the sun; flesh yellow-white, fine, melting, very
juicy, tender, agreeably perfumed; very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Saint Patrick. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1866.

Raised from seed by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., and fruited in
1863. Fruit, diameter 2-1/2 inches, short-pyriform, green, with dots
and some blush; keeps well, and ripens perfectly, with a pleasant
flavor; Feb. 15.

=Saint Pere. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:638, fig. 1869.

_Poire de Saint Pere_. =2.= _Guide Prat_. 82, 253. 1895.

The origin of Saint Pere is ancient and indeterminate. Without
accepting the doubtful synonyms of _Bugiada d'Hiver des Italiens_ and
_Brute-Bonne de Rome_ which have been applied to it, we may judge
from its name, _Holy Father_, that it came from Italy. Fruit above
medium and often larger, sometimes conic-pyriform and sometimes
ovate-pyriform, but irregular in outline, yellow, much mottled with
gray-russet, sprinkled with very many and rather large brown dots;
flesh white, coarse, watery, semi-breaking, juicy, wanting in sugar,
often acrid, without perfume; first for cooking purposes; Feb. to Apr.

=St. Swithin. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ =35=:149, fig. 20. 1878. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 196. 1920.

Raised by Rivers, Sawbridgeworth Nurseries, Eng., from seed of
Calebasse Tougard. Fruit below medium, obovate or pyriform; skin
smooth, grass-green, thickly dotted and mottled with russet and
sometimes with a faint blush on the side next the sun; flesh
yellowish-white, with a greenish tinge, tender, juicy and sweet, with a
fine, brisk flavor; good, superior to Doyenne d'Ete; July and Aug.

=Saint Vincent de Paul. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:641, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 851. 1869.

M. Flon-Grolleau, a nurseryman, Angers, Fr., obtained this pear which
was first tasted when ripe in mid-January, 1853. Fruit above medium,
regular-obtuse-turbinate, meadow-green, sprinkled with yellow dots and
russet, washed with fawn around the stem and on the cheek exposed to
the sun; flesh whitish, fine, breaking and gritty, juicy, having little
sugar, rather astringent and without perfume; third for dessert, second
for cooking; Oct.

=Sainte Anne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 99. 1895.

Obtained by M. Joanon at Saint-Cyr near Lyons, Fr. Fruit medium, oval,
rounded at either end, greenish-yellow, washed with rose on the side
next the sun; flesh white, rather fine, buttery, very juicy, melting,
saccharine; matures after Beurre Giffard, about the beginning of Aug.

=Sainte Therese. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:642, fig. 1869.

Raised by Andre Leroy, Angers, Fr. It first fruited in 1863. Fruit
medium and often larger, ovate, irregular and rather long, always
larger on one side than on the other, water-green, dotted and mottled
with russet and stained with patches of fawn; flesh white, fine,
melting; juice very abundant, very saccharine, perfumed and possessing
an agreeably acid flavor; latter half of Oct.

=Salisbury. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 541. 1857.

A native of western New York. Fruit depressed-pyriform; skin rough,
somewhat covered with russet and thickly sprinkled with russet dots;
flesh coarse; of only moderate quality; Oct.

=Salviati. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:137, Pl. IX. 1768. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 643. 1884.

Merlet, French pomologist, described this pear in _L'Abrege des
bon fruits_ in 1675. Fruit below medium to medium; form variable
from obtuse-turbinate to slightly long ovate-turbinate; skin thin,
wax-yellow, dotted with greenish spots, sometimes much stained with
scaly russet and sometimes tinted with reddish-brown on the side
touched by the sun; flesh whitish, coarse, semi-melting, gritty at the
center; juice scanty, rather saccharine, sweet, but with a strong and
disagreeable odor of musk; third; Sept.

=Salzburger von Adlitz. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:14. 1856.

A pear much esteemed in Bavaria, Wuerttemberg, and Upper Austria.
Fruit nearly medium, short-conic, even in outline, greenish-yellow,
handsomely blushed, densely dotted with fine points; skin without
scent; flesh mild, tender, melting; first for dessert, especially good
for household and market; beginning of Sept.

=Sam Brown. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 2nd App. 134, fig. 1872.

Originated with Samuel Brown, Junior, Walnut Hills, Md. Exhibited
at Philadelphia in 1869. Fruit full medium size or under, globular,
obtuse-pyriform, a little uneven, pale yellow partly covered with thin
russet, resembling Brown Beurre somewhat in appearance and very much
in flavor, sometimes rather brownish in the sun; flesh white, a little
coarse, melting, juicy, vinous and rich; very good, nearly best; Sept.

=Samenlose. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 382. 1885.

A Russian pear from the province of Vilna, which seems to be a near
relative of the Bessemianka, but differs in expression of tree. Fruit
above medium, of Bergamot type and good in quality.

=Sanguine d'Italie. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:647, fig. 1869.

Imported into France about the beginning of the last century. Fruit
medium, turbinate and regular, rather obtuse, grass-green, dotted with
gray on the shaded side and with yellow-red on the sun-exposed side;
flesh breaking, gritty, coarse, dull yellow, veined with red especially
about the core where the yellow almost entirely disappears under the
blood-red; juice never abundant, saccharine, sweet, without much
perfume; third; Aug. and Sept.

=Sanguinole. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 851. 1869. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 197. 1920.

_Sanguine de France_. 3. Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:645, fig. 1869.

This old pear is of consequence only on account of the color of its
flesh. According to Claude Mollet, 1810, it was imported to France
from Switzerland. It was known in Germany in 1500. Fruit below medium
or small, variable in form, turbinate-obtuse, or globular, bossed;
skin rather thick and rough, green dotted with gray and red, sprinkled
with streaks and patches of russet, and sometimes slightly carmined
on the face exposed to the sun; flesh transparent, red, semi-fine,
semi-breaking, juicy, saccharine, acidulous, more or less musky,
agreeable; second, sometimes third, the flesh decomposing rapidly; Aug.
and Sept.

=Sanguinole de Belgique. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 852. 1869.

_Belgische Blutbirne_. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:67. 1856.

Raised by M. Berckmans, a Belgian nurseryman who came to the United
States but also maintained the original establishment, where this
seedling was produced in 1851. It is of interest only on account of its
rose-tinted flesh. Fruit medium, long-ovate, vivid yellow, blushed and
dotted with red, with some brown-russet; flesh yellowish-white, tinted
with red, semi-melting, saccharine and highly aromatic; second for the
table; Oct. and early Nov.

=Sans-Pareille du Nord. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:648, fig. 1869.

_Unvergleichliche_. =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 291. 1889.

A French variety described first in 1847. Its origin is unknown. Fruit
large and sometimes very large, very long, cylindrical and contorted,
often slightly constricted in the middle like Calebasse; skin thin,
lemon-yellow, sprinkled with large gray dots, some fine patches of
fawn, more or less tinted with vivid rose on the face opposed to
the sun; flesh very white, semi-breaking and semi-fine; juice never
abundant, sweetish, rather saccharine, wanting in perfume, but yet
having a slight characteristic flavor; third for dessert, first for
compotes; Nov. to Jan.

=Sans Peau. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:150, Pl. XIII. 1768. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 644. 1884.

_Skinless_. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 856. 1869.

Of ancient and uncertain origin; the first certain French description
was written by La Quintinye in 1690. Fruit below medium or small,
ovate, more or less long but always regular; skin exceedingly thin,
and slightly rough to the touch, yellow-white, sprinkled with dots of
darker green and often washed with pale rose on the sun-exposed side
on which the dots are gray; flesh yellowish, coarse, melting, watery;
juice sufficient, saccharine, acidulous, feebly perfumed; second; Aug.

=Santa Anna. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68. 1895.

Originated in Santa Anna, California. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform,
yellow-russeted; flesh tough, highly perfumed; first; season late.

=Santa Claus. 1.= _Garden_ =67=:17, 35. 1905. =2.= Bunyard _Handb.
Hardy Fr._ 197. 1920.

Colonel Brymer, Dorchester, Eng., introduced this pear to the notice
of the Royal Horticultural Society in 1905 explaining that the parent
tree had come originally from Belgium some thirty years previously.
Fruit medium, conical, slightly pyriform, fairly even, slightly rough,
dull brown-red, practically covered with russet; stem long, slender;
calyx partially open, in an even basin; flesh pale yellowish, melting,
deliciously flavored; Dec.

=Santa Rosa. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 68. 1895.

Originated in California. Fruit large, pyriform; flesh buttery, vinous;
mid-season.

=Sapieganka. 1.= _Mont. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 56, fig. 1881-2. =2.= Cal.
Com. Hort. _Pear Grow. Cal._ =7=:No. 5, 179. 1914.

_Bergamotte Sapieganka_. =3.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 83. 1882.

Originated in northern Poland and introduced into this country in
1879. There is a suspicion that it may be the Bergamotte d'Ete renamed
after a Polish nobleman. It has been found tender in Manitoba and the
Northwest, but perfectly hardy at Ottawa and in Muskoka. Fruit medium,
oblate, often somewhat flattened, brownish-yellow, with brownish-red in
the sun, with numerous small dots; flesh white, coarse, somewhat firm
and juicy; poor quality both for dessert and cooking, third for market;
Aug.

=Sarah. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 37. 1867.

Raised by Thaddeus Clapp of Dorchester, Mass. It was exhibited at the
Massachusetts Horticultural Society's rooms in 1867. Fruit medium
size, globular-obovate-pyriform, greenish-yellow, partially netted
and patched with russet, and thickly sprinkled with brown dots; flesh
white, fine, juicy, melting, sweet, rich, aromatic; very good; Oct.

=Sarrasin. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:249. 1768. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 644. 1884.

Duhamel du Monceau was the first writer to mention this pear, the
origin of which is unknown. Fruit medium, turbinate, more or less
obtuse and elongated, dull yellow, slightly greenish, dotted all over
with bright russet, seldom mottled but amply washed with rose on the
cheek exposed to the sun; flesh white, semi-fine and semi-breaking;
juice abundant, saccharine, acidulous, having a taste of anis; second
as a fruit to eat raw, first for compotes; Duhamel terms it the longest
keeping of all pears; Mar. to June.

=Sary-Birne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:56. 1856.

Published in Germany in 1851. Also known as _Sary Armud_ and the
_Turkish Musk Summer Pear_. Fruit small, ventriculous-conic, often
somewhat bossed, greenish-yellow turning yellow, seldom blushed, dotted
with fine russet points; flesh very sweet, semi-melting, granular,
without any particular aroma; second for table, good for kitchen and
market; Aug.

=Saeuerliche Margarethenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:165.
1856.

_Marguerite-Acidule._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:43, fig. 22. 1872.

Obtained by Diel in the neighborhood of Nassau, Ger. Fruit small,
usually globular-turbinate and sometimes ovate-pyriform, yellowish
light green changing to pale light yellow, often blushed with
brownish-red on the side of the sun, on which are numerous dots; flesh
granular, white, semi-melting; juice sufficient, moderately sweet,
refreshing; third; end of July.

=Schellesbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:172. 1856.
Wuerttemberg, Ger. First published in 1830. Fruit medium, turbinate,
rather bossed and unequal-sided; skin testaceous, light green turning
to yellow-green, light blood-red marblings, sprinkled with dark,
grayish-green, round dots; third for the table; good for perry;
beginning of Oct.

=Schmalblaettrige Schneebirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:199.
1856.

Germany, 1809. Fruit grows in bunches, small, spherical; skin thick,
yellow-green, dotted and speckled with brown; flesh coarse; third; Dec.
and Jan.

=Schmotzbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 136, fig. 1913.

A perry pear known under many names in different parts of Austria.
Fruit below medium, globular-ovate, often turbinate, smooth,
yellow when ripe, thickly dotted with russet; flesh yellow-white,
coarse-grained, very juicy, subacid; Oct.

=Schnackenburger Winterbirne. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort_. 338. 1881.

Published in Germany. Fruit rather large, flattened, globular-yellow
washed with brownish-red; flesh breaking; a cooking pear; winter.

=Schoeberlbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 100, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium, Bergamot-form to short-turbinate,
light green turning to greenish-yellow, dotted with russet; flesh very
white, rather coarse, very juicy, subacid; mid-Oct. to Dec.

=Schoene Muellerin. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:173. 1856.

Nassau, Ger., published in 1805. Fruit very small, turbinate, or
blunt-conic, grass-green turning to yellow-green, often with dark red
blush and having brown dots changing to green, light brown-russet
markings; flesh fine-grained, with sweet, cinnamon flavor, breaking
and juicy; third for dessert, very good for household; end of Sept. to
beginning of Oct. for five to six weeks.

=Schoenebeck Tafelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:50. 1856.

Germany, on the Rhine, 1816. Fruit small, conic; skin polished,
greenish-yellow turning to lemon-yellow, blushed with red, heavily
dotted with green; flesh marrowy, acid, vinous; second for the table,
good for household and market; beginning of Sept. for two weeks.

=Schoenerts Omsewitzer Schmalzbirne. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 108.
1825.

_Fondante de Schoenert_. =2.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:223, fig. 110. 1866-73.

According to Diel this pear was raised at the village of Omsewitz,
near Dresden, by a farmer named Schoenert. Fruit hardly medium,
long-conic-pyriform, its greatest diameter being below its center;
skin rather thick and firm, pale green changing to very pale yellow,
without any blush, sprinkled with small gray-green dots; flesh white,
fine, rather firm yet melting, full of saccharine juice, acidulous,
refreshing, and delicately perfumed; first for household; Sept.

=Schoenlin Stuttgarter spaete Winterbutterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:133. 1856.

Raised from seed at Wuerttemberg, Ger., and first published in 1825.
Fruit large, oblong, slightly bossed, light green turning lemon-yellow,
red dots, marked with russet, thick-skinned; flesh white, buttery,
melting, juicy, aromatic and excellent in flavor; first for dessert,
household and market; Feb. to Apr.

=Schuman. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 852. 1869.

A native of Bucks County, Pa. Fruit medium, globular-obovate, pale
yellow, tinted with red on the cheek next the sun; flesh coarse, pasty;
poor; Sept.

=Schwarze Birne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:170. 1856.

Saxony. First published in 1804. Fruit medium, globular-turbinate,
grass-green turning yellowish, almost entirely covered with dark
russet, often blushed with dirty brown red on the side next the sun;
flesh yellowish-white, firm, breaking, aromatic, sweet and vinous;
first for household purposes; Jan. to Apr.

=Schweizer Wasserbirne. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 338. 1881. =2.=
Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 206, fig. 1913.

_Weingifterin_. =3.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:162. 1856.

Used in Austria and Switzerland for the making of perry. Fruit rather
large, very globular, somewhat flattened at both poles; skin fairly
rough, green-yellow, tinged with dull washed-out red, numerous dots and
flecks of russet over the whole fruit; late Sept. to mid-Oct. for four
weeks.

=Sdegnata. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:653, fig. 1869.

Major Esperen, the Belgian pomologist, raised this pear from seed, but
at what date appears to be unknown. Fruit long-ovate, irregular and
bossed; skin rather rough, greenish-yellow, dotted with russet and
changing to meadow-green on the side exposed to the sun, marbled with
gray-russet; flesh white, fine or semi-fine, juicy, dense although
very melting, rather granular at the core; juice extremely abundant,
saccharine, acidulous, with a characteristic flavor, deliciously
perfumed; first; Aug.

=Seal. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 852. 1869.

Originated in Pennsylvania. Fruit medium or below, globular, pale
yellow, lightly shaded with crimson in the sun and thickly sprinkled
with green and russet dots; flesh white, coarse, moderately juicy,
melting, slightly astringent; good; end of Aug.

=Sebastien. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:181, fig. 573. 1881.

Raised by M. Pariset, Ain, Fr., in 1852, and first published in 1867.
Fruit medium, cylindrical-ovate, even in its outline; skin rather thin
but firm, at first intensely green, sprinkled with brown dots, large
and prominent, changing to a brighter green at maturity with russet
coloring on the side next the sun; flesh white, slightly tinted with
green, especially under the skin, very fine, entirely melting, full of
sweet juice, saccharine, with an agreeable perfume; first; Dec.

=Sebastopol. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:655, fig. 1869. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 852. 1869.

M. Minot, Jodoigne, Bel., obtained Sebastopol, which ripened for the
first time in 1858. Fruit below medium, ovate-turbinate, symmetrical,
green tinted with dull yellow, dotted with brown and mottled with
russet; flesh white, rather coarse, semi-melting and watery, having
some grit around the core, juice abundant, saccharine, acidulous,
rarely much perfumed; second; mid-Aug.

=Seckel Seedling No. 1. 1.= _Iowa Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 131. 1915.

Mentioned in a report of the Supervising Committee of the Iowa
Horticultural Society as a valuable seedling raised by Charles G.
Patten. "The fruit is larger than the old Seckel, of excellent quality,
and the tree is vigorous, hardy and free from blight."

=Secretaire Mareschal. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 281. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 99. 1895.

Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr.; published in 1886. Fruit medium,
resembling Beurre Clairgeau; flesh very fine, juicy, perfumed; Nov. and
Dec.

=Secretaire Rodin. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 281. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 99. 1895. Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. It was first
published in 1881. Fruit medium to large recalling in appearance the
Duchesse d'Angouleme; flesh yellow, vinous, of an agreeable perfume and
distinctive flavor; Nov. and Dec.

=Seigneur Daras. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 99. 1895.

Tree very fertile, not very vigorous and best cultivated on wild
stock. Fruit medium, of the form of the Doyenne; flesh fine, juicy,
saccharine, perfumed; Oct.

=Seigneur d'Ete. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard._ 348. 1831.

An old Flemish pear sent to England by M. Stoffels of Mechlin and
exhibited by the Horticultural Society of London in 1819. Fruit above
medium, obtuse-oval; skin fine orange, with bright scarlet on the sunny
side, sprinkled with small brown spots and partially marked with larger
ones of the same color; flesh melting, with an extremely small core,
and a rich, highly flavored juice; beginning and middle of Sept.

=Selleck. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 854. 1869.

The origin of Selleck is unknown. Some thirty years ago the oldest
known bearing tree of the variety was standing on the grounds of
Columbus Selleck, Sudbury, Vermont, and was then still healthy and very
productive. Fruit large, obovate-obtuse-pyriform, surface uneven; skin
a fine yellow, with a crimson cheek and thickly sprinkled with russet
dots; flesh white, a little coarse, juicy, melting, sweet, aromatic;
good to very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Semis d'Echasserie. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:188, fig. 580. 1881.

Obtained by M. Pariset, Ain, Fr., from a seed bed made in 1840. It
was first published in 1862. Fruit below medium, globular-ovate,
symmetrical in contour; skin rather thick and rough to the touch,
yellow-green passing to bright yellow at maturity, tinged with
earthy-red on fruits well exposed to the sun; flesh a little coarse,
semi-breaking, rather full of saccharine juice, slightly gritty about
the core, insufficiently perfumed; second; Dec. and Jan.

=Semis Leon Leclerc. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:173, fig. 279. 1879.

Sent out by M. Bivort from Belgium about the year 1859. Fruit small
or nearly medium on a well-pruned tree, ovate, often ventriculous,
symmetrical in its contour; skin thin, smooth, green sprinkled with
dots of darker green, changing at maturity to whitish-yellow, rather
deeper on the side next the sun, sometimes washed with light red on
which the dots are grayish or yellow; flesh white, semi-fine, melting,
full of saccharine juice and pleasantly perfumed; good for its season;
beginning of Aug.

=Senateur Prefet. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Published in France by M. Boisbunel. Tree vigorous and very fertile.
Fruit medium or large, oval-pyriform; flesh white, fine, melting,
juicy, saccharine, vinous; first; March to May.

=Senateur Vaisse. 1.= _Pom. France_ =4=:No. 169, Pl. 169. 1867.

M. Lagrange, a nurseryman of Lyons, Fr., grew this pear from seed in
1861. Tree pyramidal, rather vigorous, productive. Fruit rather large,
obovate, pale yellow, with a rosy tint on the sunny side; flesh crisp,
juicy, very sweet, slightly gritty; good; Sept.

=Seneca. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1895.

A wildling found by James Payne and nurtured by A. C. Clark, both of
Tyre, N. Y., and reported as about twelve years old in 1896. Similar
to Bartlett but of higher quality, better color, and later season.
Fruit large, obovate-pyriform, light yellow, with blushed cheek, green
mottling and black dots on shady side; flesh white, vinous, sprightly;
very good; Oct. and Nov.

=Senfbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:183. 1856.

Hanover. First published in 1852. Fruit medium, ventriculous and conic,
often somewhat turbinate, unattractive green turning yellowish, often
darkly blushed, spotted; flesh rather coarse, fairly juicy, sweet;
first for household use; Oct. and Nov. for six weeks.

=Seringe. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 1045. 1866.

M. Nerard, a nurseryman at Lyons, Fr., obtained Seringe, which was
published first in 1864. Fruit medium, oval, inclining to obovate, a
little depressed at the ends; skin citron or pale yellow, smooth, with
some russet specks; flesh white, very melting and sugary; Aug.

=Serrurier. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 543. 1857. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:660. 1869.

Van Mons obtained this variety from seed at Louvain, Bel., about 1825.
Fruit large; form rather inconstant, passing from irregular ovate,
swelled and much bossed, to ovate more or less globular, and mammillate
at the summit; skin thick, olive-yellow, closely dotted with gray,
stained with fawn around the calyx and touched with some brown-russet
and occasionally vermilioned on the side exposed to the sun; flesh
whitish, melting or semi-melting, juicy, vinous and saccharine,
possessing a tartish flavor and a particularly pleasant aroma; first;
Oct. and Nov.

=Seutin. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 854. 1869.

_Poire Seutin_. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:143, fig. 360. 1880.

According to Bivort the pear Seutin was obtained by M. Bouvier,
Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium, ovate-pyriform, more or less long,
sometimes symmetrical, sometimes rather angular in its contour; skin
thick, firm, at first bright green sprinkled with dots of green-gray,
changing to lemon-yellow tinged with golden-russet on the side next the
sun; flesh whitish, rather fine, gritty at the center, semi-buttery,
fairly juicy, sweet, and delicately perfumed; winter.

=Sha Lea. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 303. 1879. =2.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._
=332=:485. 1913.

_Chinese Sand_. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 851. 1869.

A Chinese sand pear imported from China by Wm. R. Prince, Flushing, N.
Y. about 1820. Fruit medium, globular-pyriform, dull yellow, covered
with a rough, sandy-like russet; flesh firm, moderately juicy; cooks
well and acquires a fine flavor; Sept.

=Shawmut. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =25=:209, fig. 14. 1859.

Originated with Francis Dana, Roxbury, Mass. Fruit large,
obtuse-pyriform, regular; skin fair, nearly smooth, dull yellow at
maturity, dotted with large, round, russet specks, most numerous on the
sunny side; flesh yellowish, coarse, melting, very juicy, rich, vinous,
sprightly, with a pleasant musky perfume; Oct.

=Shenandoah. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass. It fruited first
in 1862. Fruit "Skin yellow; flesh fine-grained and sweet, keeps well,
and is a good market pear; pyriform."

=Sheppard. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 855. 1869.

Raised by James Sheppard, Dorchester, Mass. Fruit large,
obovate-pyriform; skin rough, yellow, sometimes with a brownish-red
cheek, slightly sprinkled with russet dots and with some patches of
russet; flesh whitish, coarse and granular, buttery, melting, juicy,
vinous, perfumed; good to very good; end of Sept. and first of Oct.

=Sheridan. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass. "Fruited in
1864. Short diam. 3 inches; long diam. 3-1/2 inches; good grain, juicy,
rather vinous in flavor; color dark green; ripens soundly. Large
bearer, and good market pear. Turbinate."

=Shindel. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1897.

This pear has been locally grown about Emigsville, Pa., since the early
part of the last century, and up to 1897 was reported never to have
been affected with blight. Fruit medium, globular-obovate; skin rather
smooth, lemon-yellow, with thin golden-russet patches and veining;
flesh whitish, rather fine, granular, moderately juicy, mild, sugary,
moderately rich; good; Aug. and Sept.

=Shobden Court. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 646. 1884.

Raised by T. A. Knight, President of the Horticultural Society of
London. Fruit below medium, oblate, symmetrical in form, deep rich
yellow, blushed with red on the side next the sun, sprinkled all over
with rough, russety dots; flesh white, coarse-grained, juicy, briskly
acid and sweet, not highly flavored; second; Jan. and Feb.

=Shurtleff. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

A seedling raised by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass. "Fruited in
1863. Short diam. 2-1/2 inches; long diam. 3 inches; flesh rather dry,
and firm; skin yellow with red cheek; keeps soundly without extra care
until May. A most prolific bearer. Short pyriform."

=Sieboldii. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 115. 1876. =2.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._
=332=:485. 1913.

Japan. Sieboldii is a variety distinct from _Madame von Siebold_ and
was described by Messrs. Simon-Louis of Metz, Lorraine, as follows:
"Medium to large pyriform with elongated tendency, angled and
irregular; ... color slightly red on sunny side, grayish in shade;
flesh white, breaking, sweet, perfumed; cannot be eaten raw with
pleasure."

=Sievenicher Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 208, fig. 1913.

A perry pear grown in Austria and Germany. Fruit medium to fairly
large, globular, short, diminishing somewhat acutely to the stalk;
yellow-green, blushed with brown; flesh coarse, subacid and dry; end of
Sept. and beginning of Oct.

=Sikaya. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:485. 1913.

An Oriental variety. Fruit medium to small, oblate, symmetrical, buff,
russeted; skin tough, almost covered with large russet dots; flesh
yellowish-white, coarse, poor, insipid, subacid, melting, gritty; late.

=Simon Bouvier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:666, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 646. 1884.

_Souvenir de Simon Bouvier_. 3. _Guide Prat._ 108, 305. 1876.

Raised by Simon Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium, symmetrical,
ovate, always swelled toward the base, green shaded with dull yellow,
dotted and stained with russet; flesh whitish, fine, juicy and
melting, almost free from granulations; juice extremely abundant and
saccharine, very acidulous, highly perfumed, having an after taste of
musky-anis which adds to its delicacy; first; Sept.

=Sinai'sche Buschelbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:198. 1856.

Mount Sinai, Persia, 1815. Fruit very small, globular, flattened,
greenish, blushed, very finely dotted; flesh hard, coarse-grained,
juiceless, sour, but sweet when ripe; third; winter.

=Sinclair. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:74. 1856. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 646. 1884.

Raised by Van Mons. Fruit large and handsome, long-turbinate, very
wide at the base and tapering abruptly by deep concave curves to a
narrow point near the stalk, even and symmetrical in shape, smooth,
fine, clear lemon-yellow, with a faint blush of red next the sun; flesh
fine-grained, buttery, melting, very juicy and sweet, with a rich,
vinous flavor and a slight musky perfume; very good for dessert and
also for household and market purposes; Sept. and Oct.

=Sirningers Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 210, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium to large, long-conic; skin firm,
green turning yellowish-russet; flesh greenish-white, very firm, rather
acid flavor; Oct.

=Slavonische Wasserbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:183. 1856.

Originated at Siebenbuergen, Ger. First published in 1851. Fruit below
medium, ventriculous-conic, green turning greenish-yellow, with
light brown wash on the sunny side; flesh coarse, saccharine, firm,
very juicy and sweet; third for the table, first for household use;
beginning of Sept.

=Slutsk. 1.= Ragan _Nom. Pear, B. P. I. Bul._ =126=:231. 1908.

Originated in Minsk, Russia, and received in this country about 1890.
Fruit large, symmetrical, roundish-obtuse-pyriform, yellow, largely
overspread with bright red and thickly sprinkled with brown dots; stem
long, slender, in a deep cavity; calyx open; flesh moderately juicy,
somewhat astringent, not sugary; good; Oct.

=Smet Fils Unique. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 106. 1876.

Fruit large, Doyenne in form; flesh fine, melting, juicy; first; end of
autumn.

=Smith. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:485, fig. 1913.

An oriental variety or hybrid, very similar to Le Conte but blooms
later. Fruit medium to large, oval, truncate at basin end; skin
yellowish-green, smooth, with patches of russet; flesh white, firm,
insipid, dry, mealy; poor; Oct.

=Smith Beauty. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:485. 1913.

An oriental hybrid, similar to Le Conte, with no blush, shorter than
Dewey. Variety name has been listed as _Smith's Winter Beauty_.

=Smith Duchess. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 101. 1883.

An American hybrid of the Chinese Sand Pear.

=Snow. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 149. 1873.

Originated with Suel Foster, Muscatine, Ia. Reported in 1873 as "better
than Vicar except for size and keeping. Its flesh is very white;
valuable for cooking."

=Soeur Gregoire. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:667, fig. 1869.

Xavier Gregoire, the well-known Belgian seedsman, Jodoigne, Brabant,
obtained this variety. It bore its first fruit in 1858. Fruit large, in
form variable from irregular long gourd-shaped to long-cylindrical,
usually rather bossed; skin thick and rough, yellow-ochre, dotted and
stained with gray-russet and shaded with dark red on the cheek next
the sun; flesh yellowish, semi-fine, melting, granular at the core;
juice rarely abundant but very aromatic, saccharine and with a delicate
flavor; first when sufficiently juicy, otherwise second; Nov. and Dec.

=Soldat Bouvier. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:37, fig. 211. 1879.

Raised by Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit nearly medium,
globular-conic, regular in outline; skin rather firm, at first a
dark green, sprinkled with dots of a darker shade, brightening to
yellowish at maturity and extensively colored with blood-red on the
cheek next the sun; flesh whitish, rather fine, buttery, melting; juice
sufficient, saccharine and delicately perfumed; good to first; Sept.

=Soldat Laboureur. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =3=:31, fig. 1855. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 198. 1920.

Soldat Laboureur was obtained from a seed bed made about 1820 by
Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel. Fruit medium to large, ovate-pyriform or
turbinate, bossed; skin smooth, rather thick, bright green passing
to golden-yellow when perfectly ripe, dotted and shaded with fawn;
flesh yellowish-white, semi-fine, melting; juice abundant, saccharine,
perfumed, and, on land suiting it, very vinous; very good, highest
quality; Oct. and Nov.

=Sommer-Russelet. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:46. 1856.

Thuringia, 1807. Fruit medium, pyriform, light yellow, blushed all
over; flesh breaking, juicy, with a flavor of cinnamon; second for
table, first for household and market; beginning of Aug.

=Sommer-Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:53. 1856.

Thuringia, Ger. Published in 1798. Fruit medium, long-pyriform,
obtuse, yellowish-green turning a lighter tint at maturity, with dark
blush on the side of the sun and yellow dots which turn green; flesh
yellowish-white, breaking, saccharine; second for dessert and good for
household and market purposes; Aug.

=Sommeralantbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:14. 1856.

_Poire d'Aunee d'Ete_. =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =5=:77, fig. 327. 1880.

Upper Hesse, Prussia; first published in 1802. Fruit medium,
long-conic; skin fine, light green turning yellowish, with dark red
blush and very fine dots; wanting in juice, buttery, mild and tender,
aromatic; first for table, household and market; Aug. and Sept.

=Sommerkoenigin. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:109. 1856.

Nassau, Ger.; published in 1804. Fruit above medium, obtuse-conic,
inclined to one side at the top, yellowish-green turning to light
yellow, with a pale blush, greenish dots and flecked with russet; flesh
white, juicy, buttery, melting and full of flavor; Sept.

=Sommerwachsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:50. 1856.

Nassau, Ger.; published in 1805. Fruit medium, pyriform, symmetrical;
skin smooth, straw-white turning to a waxy light yellow, with often
a faint blush, light green dots turning red, without scent; flesh
semi-melting, very juicy and saccharine; third for table, good for
household purposes; first of Sept.

=Sophie de l'Ukraine. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 647. 1884.

Fruits rather large, obovate, even and regular, in shape rather
resembling White Doyenne; pale yellow, covered with minute dots on the
shaded side and with a tinge of warm orange on the side opposed to the
sun; flesh neither melting nor juicy, only sweet; an inferior pear;
soon becomes soft; Nov.

=Sotschnaja. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 61. 1880.

A northern European variety reported by J. L. Budd as imported by him
and on trial at the Iowa State College. Shows marked traces of the
Chinese forms of the pear in shape, serration, thickness and size of
leaf. The wood is gritty and thorn-like and unites very imperfectly
with the apple.

=Soueraigne. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

"The Soueraigne peare, that which I have seene and taste, and so termed
unto me, was a small brownish yellow peare, but of a most dainty taste;
but some doe take a kind of Bon Chretien, called the _Elizabeth_ peare,
to be the Soueraigne; how truly let others judge."

=Soutmann. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:130. 1856.

Holland, 1821. Fruit medium, globular-oblong, light green turning to
yellowish-green, without any blush, small brown dots; flesh white,
buttery, melting, juicy, and with a sweet aromatic flavor of cinnamon;
very good dessert fruit; Dec.

=Souvenir de l'Abbe Lefebvre. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1895.

Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Tree of moderate vigor, fertile and
adapts itself to all forms of growth. Fruit medium in size; flesh very
fine, perfumed and excellent; Nov. and Dec.

=Souvenir de du Breuil Pere. 1.= Pom. France =4=:No. 159, Pl. 159. 1867.

_Poire du Breuil Pere_. =2.= _Rev. Hort._ 202. 1889.

Obtained from a bed of seeds of Louise Bonne de Jersey made by
A. du Breuil, Rouen, Fr., in 1840. Fruit medium or rather large,
sub-spherical, more often inclined by the oblique truncation of its
wide top; skin very fine, yellow at maturity, much mottled and dotted
with bright russet all over, the russet becoming purple on the side
next the sun; flesh white, melting, very juicy, saccharine, pleasantly
perfumed and sprightly; excellent; Nov. to Jan.

=Souvenir Deschamps. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 182. 1891. =2.= _Gard. Chron._
3rd Ser. =9=:57. 1891.

Described in 1891 as a newly introduced seedling raised in the State
School of Horticulture, Ghent, Bel. Fruit large, elongated, like
Calebasse in form, sometimes spindle-form and straight, slightly
constricted about the middle, greenish-yellow, marked with brown spots;
flesh yellowish, delicate, melting, juicy, good; Sept. and Oct.

=Souvenir Desire Gilain. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 108. 1876.

Stated in a Bulletin of the Society Van Mons to have been a gain of
M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Fruit medium, ovate-pyriform, symmetrical
in outline, having its greatest diameter well below the centre; skin
rather firm, pale green, sown with dots of darker green, turning pale
yellow when ripe, rather golden on the side next the sun and touched
with a tinge of red; flesh white, fine, breaking, juicy, saccharine,
vinous, with a flavor difficult to describe; Aug.

=Souvenir d'Esperen de Berckmans. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =3=:151, fig.
172. 1878.

Obtained by M. Berckmans at his establishment in this country and
should not be confounded with the Souvenir d'Esperen raised by M.
Bivort. Fruit medium or rather large, conic-pyriform, often a little
irregular in contour; skin fine, thin, water-green, sprinkled with
large brown dots, both numerous and prominent and patches of russet,
changing to lemon-yellow at maturity, the russet becoming golden; flesh
white, a little tinted with yellow, rather fine, buttery, melting;
juice sufficient in amount and highly saccharine and perfumed; good;
Oct.

=Souvenir Favre. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =8=:65, fig. 1860. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 2nd App. 134. 1872.

Originated by M. Favre, Chalons, Fr., from seed of Glou Morceau planted
in 1850. Fruit medium to below, conic-pyriform, pale yellow, dotted
with many brown and green dots; stem short, rather stout, in a slight
cavity; calyx open; basin small, uneven, slightly russeted; flesh
whitish, slightly coarse, half-melting, juicy, sweet, aromatic; good to
very good; Oct.

=Souvenir de Gaete. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:671, fig. 1869.

M. Ruille de Beauchamp obtained the Souvenir de Gaete from seed of
the Beurre de l'Assomption. It received the recommendation of the
pomological committee of the Horticultural Society of Paris. Fruit
above medium and sometimes large, irregular-turbinate or ovate,
mammillate at the top and ventriculated at the middle, bright yellow,
finely dotted and streaked with fawn and extensively washed with tender
rose on the cheek opposed to the sun; flesh white, very fine, melting
and free from granulations; juice very abundant, saccharine, refreshing
and vinous with a characteristic perfume and flavor; first; Oct.

=Souvenir de Julia. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 60. 1895.

Sent out by M. Daras de Naghin of Antwerp, Bel. Tree vigorous and
fertile. Fruit medium, globular, whitish-yellow, blushed with rose;
flesh fine, semi-melting, saccharine, juicy; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Souvenir de Leroux-Durand. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 285. 1889. =2.=
_Guide Prat._ 100. 1895.

Published in Germany in 1879. Tree vigorous and fertile. Fruit large or
very large, oblong, bright yellow, stained with golden-russet; flesh
very melting, vinous, highly saccharine and very agreeably perfumed;
first; Oct.

=Souvenir de Lydie. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 58. 1895.

A Belgian variety disseminated by Daras de Naghin of Antwerp. Fruit
rather large, Doyenne in form, greenish-yellow; flesh semi-fine,
melting, highly saccharine; first; Oct.

=Souvenir de Madame Charles. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 285. 1889. =2.=
_Guide Prat._ 100. 1895.

Raised by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr., from seed of Serrurier. Tree
vigorous, fertile and suitable for all forms of cultivation. Fruit
medium to large, having the form of the Passe Colmar, gray; flesh very
fine, melting, saccharine and perfumed; Dec. and Jan.

=Souvenir de la Reine des Belges. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:673, fig.
1869. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 857. 1869.

Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., obtained this pear in 1855. Fruit
above medium, turbinate, rather obtuse, ventriculous and symmetrical
in its lower part and much contorted and bossed in its upper, pale
yellow, dotted with gray, mottled with russet, especially over the side
exposed to the sun; flesh yellowish, rather coarse, melting, juicy,
gritty at the core; juice abundant, saccharine, slightly acidulous,
with a delicate flavor and aroma; first and often second when the fruit
is devoid of perfume; Oct.

=Souvenir de Renault Pere. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 397, fig. 126. 1893.

M. Renault, Bulgneville, Vosges, Fr., observed that the lower branches
of an Easter Beurre produced foliage variegated with white while
the remainder were of a beautiful green. Grafts from the variegated
branches in due course perpetuated the variegation and produced a
fruit similar to that of Easter Beurre but with the skin striped
longitudinally from pole to pole, the variegation being more or less
distinct according to the season and the vigor of the tree. Fruit
large, obovate; skin hard to the touch, green turning to a golden
yellow at maturity, variegated; flesh very white, fine, rather melting,
fairly juicy, highly saccharine, rather gritty around the center; a
good dessert pear; Jan. to Mar.

=Souvenir de Sannier pere. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1895.

Obtained by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Tree moderately vigorous. Fruit
medium, dark yellow, tinted with rose; first; Oct.

=Souvenir de Simon Bouvier. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:674, fig. 1869.

Obtained by Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., and first reported in
1846. Fruit below medium, turbinate, even in outline, rather swelled
in all the lower part and somewhat obtuse at the summit; color pale
yellow, dotted with gray and green, stained with brown-fawn and
vermilioned on the cheek opposed to the sun; flesh white, juicy,
semi-fine and semi-melting; juice very abundant, vinous, saccharine and
strongly musky; second; Oct.

=Souvenir du Venerable de la Salle. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 236. 1886.

Said to have been originated by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Tree of good
vigor, medium productive. Fruit medium, resembling Bon-Chretien d'Hiver
in form; flesh fine, melting, sweet; of first quality; Oct. and Nov.

=Souveraine de Printemps. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 544. 1857.

Of foreign origin. Fruit medium, oblate, obscurely pyriform, angular,
yellow, sprinkled with russet; flesh white, melting, coarse, granular,
juicy, somewhat astringent, with a brisk vinous flavor; Mar.

=Spae. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:676, fig. 1869.

Obtained by M. Spae, Ghent, Bel., and was propagated in 1861. Fruit
above medium, long-turbinate, obtuse, rather contorted at the base
and always having one side larger than the other, dull yellow, shaded
with bright green, dotted, with more or less brown-russet on the cheek
next the sun; flesh semi-fine or semi-breaking, white, juicy, sweet,
saccharine, rather deficient in perfume but delicate; second; Oct.

=Spaete Rotbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 54, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit medium to large, pyriform, dull green
changing to greenish-yellow with widely spread dark blush, thickly
speckled with whitish dots; flesh white, fine, aromatic; Nov. and Dec.

=Spaete Sommerbirne ohne Schale. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:38.
1856.

Holland, 1806. Fruit very small, conic but variable, even sides; skin
tender, greenish-yellow turning lemon-yellow, densely sprinkled with
dark green dots; flesh very juicy, coarse, melting; second for dessert,
first for household; mid-Aug.

=Spaete Todemannsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:146. 1856.

Nassau, Ger., 1806. Fruit large, shallow-bossed, sides unequal,
pyriform, light green turning to light lemon-yellow, often blushed,
dotted, often speckled with russet and russeted on the side next the
sun; flesh breaking, wanting in juice; third for dessert, very good for
household; Dec. and Jan.

=Spaete Wasserbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:194. 1856.

Wuerttemberg, Ger., 1830. Fruit medium, turbinate, rather obtuse, light
green turning dirty pale yellow, dull red blush, large gray dots; flesh
firm, very juicy, tasteless; good for household purposes and perry;
Sept.

=Spaetes Graumaenchen. 1.= Oberdieck _Obst-Sort._ 291. 1881.

Bohemia. Fruit small, obtuse-pyriform, green changing at maturity to
yellowish-green, very much russeted; flesh fine-grained, semi-melting,
aromatic, cinnamon savor, sugary; good table fruit; Oct. to Jan.

=Speckbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 138, fig. 1913.

An Austrian perry pear. Fruit large, turbinate; skin smooth, light
leaf-green turning to dull greenish-yellow at maturity, dotted
with russet; flesh yellowish-white, very juicy, subacid, rather
coarse-grained; Oct. to Dec.

=Speedwell. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1866.

A seedling raised and fruited in 1863 by Dr. S. A. Shurtleff,
Brookline, Mass. Fruit, "Short diam. 2-1/4 inches, long diam. 3 inches;
color green; flesh melting, juicy, with rich flavor; ripens soundly
Sept. 1; quality fine; obovate."

=Spillingsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:150. 1856.

Germany, 1806. Fruit small, globular-turbinate, even in contour,
pale green changing to light lemon-yellow, more golden on the side
of the sun, with light green dots; flesh snow-white, breaking and
coarse-grained, vinous, acidulous and saccharine; second for dessert,
first for household; Aug.

=Spindelfoermige Honigbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:143.
1856.

Grown in the middle Rhine country, Germany. Fruit medium, long-conic,
regular, greenish-yellow, entirely covered with cinnamon-russet; flesh
breaking and coarse, often semi-melting, saccharine and musky; very
good for household use; Sept.

=Spindelfoermige Rehbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:132. 1856.

Westphalia, 1828. Fruit large, oblong, shallow-bossed; skin rough,
light cinnamon-russet all over, dotted with whitish-gray; flesh
granular, aromatic, with sweet wine flavor; first for table and
household use; Sept. and Oct.

=Spinka. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:89, fig. 429. 1880.

Origin uncertain, though Oberdieck thought it came originally from
Bohemia. Fruit nearly medium, ovate, more or less shortened; skin
thick and very firm, pale water-green, taking a white tint long before
maturity, sprinkled with brown dots, changing to pale yellow and the
side next the sun more or less warmly golden; flesh yellow-tinted,
fine, semi-buttery; juice sufficient, saccharine and agreeably
perfumed; fairly good; Sept.

=Spreeuw. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:676. 1869. A rather worthless
pear raised by Van Mons at Brussels which gave its first fruit in
1815. Fruit small, globular-ovate, green turning yellow, dotted with
yellowish-red and blushed; flesh greenish-white, rather gritty,
saccharine; in Germany is reckoned as second for dessert and first for
household purposes; in France it appears to possess little merit; Oct.
and Nov.

=Star of Bethlehem. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =24=:334, fig. 1869.

Originated at Bethlehem, Pa., and described in 1869 as a new variety.
Tree resembles a persimmon tree with a low and spreading habit;
branches never upright, very enduring and able to bear heavy weights;
very productive and regular in bearing. Fruit very large, similar in
form to the Beurre d'Anjou, obovate-pyriform-obtuse, regular; skin
smooth, deep yellow, slightly russeted, with a handsome red cheek on
the side exposed to the sun; flesh yellowish-white, somewhat coarse,
buttery, melting, fine, sweet, rich and excellent flavor; highly spoken
of at the time; Sept.

=Steinbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 56, fig. 1913.

A perry pear found in Austria and Switzerland. Fruit medium,
globular-pyriform, greenish changing to yellowish-green when ripe, on
the sun-exposed side washed with dull red, speckled with russet spots;
flesh granular, firm; good for transportation; Nov. and Dec.

=Steinmitz Catharine. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 858. 1869.

Originated in Pennsylvania. Fruit small to medium, oblong-pyriform,
greenish, with a tinge of brown in the sun; flesh white, moderately
juicy, semi-melting, vinous; good; Sept.

=Stevens Genesee. 1.= Cole _Am. Fr. Bk._ 157. 1849.

Originated on the farm of M. F. Stevens, Lima, N. Y. Fruit large,
globular-obovate, yellow; flesh white, tender, rather buttery, of a
rich, excellent, aromatic flavor; good to very good; Sept. and Oct. but
in some districts as early as Aug.

=Sterling. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:443, 444, fig. 36. 1847.

Raised by a Mr. Sterling in the neighborhood of Buffalo, N. Y.,
from seed brought from Connecticut about 1828. Fruit medium, almost
spherical, slightly oval, yellow, with occasionally a few small patches
of russet and on the sun-exposed cheek a mottled crimson blush; flesh
rather coarse, juicy, melting, with a saccharine, brisk flavor; very
good; Sept.

=Stone. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =9=:24, fig. 1843.

Grew in the garden of a Mr. Stone, Cincinnati, O., and named in his
honor. Fruit large, broad-pyriform, sides uneven, globular toward
lower end and gradually diminishing toward the stem; bright yellow at
maturity with a bright red cheek next the sun, beautifully intermixed
with yellow streaks and specks; flesh white, somewhat buttery, rather
melting, slightly astringent; Aug.

=Stout. 1.= _U. S. D. A. Pom. Rpt._ 39. 1895.

Originated at Monrovia, Ind., about 1840. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform,
green changing to yellow; flesh buttery, melting, juicy, subacid; very
good; mid-season.

=Strassburger Sommerbergamotte. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:40.
1856.

Thuringia, 1766. Fruit medium, turbinate, medium ventriculous,
greenish-yellow turning yellowish-white at maturity, with rather
grayish spots; flesh semi-melting, very white, sweet, acid, aromatic;
first for household use and market; Aug.

=Stribling. 1.= _S. C. Sta. Rpt._ 16. 1914.

A seedling believed to be of French origin brought to notice in 1912
by J. C. Stribling, Pendleton, S. C. Considered likely to prove one of
the most valuable pears for the South because blight resistant. Fruit
large, cordate, sides unequal, base rounded, apex flattened, light
yellow, almost entirely covered with light russet; skin smooth, thin,
tough, sprinkled with numerous light russet dots, indistinct, large at
base, smaller and more numerous at apex; flesh coarse-grained, very
juicy, slightly subacid, peculiar pineapple flavor with after nutty
effect, rich, distinctive aroma; fair quality; Oct. and Nov.

=Stuemplerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:190. 1856.

Supposed to have originated on the shores of Lake Constance between
Germany and Switzerland. It was first published in 1805. Fruit
small, oval, green changing to light yellow, almost covered with
cinnamon-russet; flesh yellowish, dry, becoming mealy, without much
flavor; good for kitchen use; Aug.

=Sturges.=

Originated with Mrs. Mary S. Sturges, Baker, Ore., about 1905. Fruit
medium to large, obtuse-obovate-pyriform; stem short, thick, set in a
very shallow, narrow, russeted cavity; calyx small, partly open, set in
a shallow but broad basin; color dull green, considerably mottled with
patches and flecks of russet; dots small, conspicuous; flesh yellowish,
slightly granular, tender, juicy, good; Sept.

=Styer. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =8=:31, 32, fig. 1853.

Originated about 1837 with Charles Styer, White Plain township,
Montgomery County, Pa. Fruit medium, globular, green changing to
yellow, with many russet dots and markings; flesh yellowish-white,
somewhat gritty at the core, buttery, melting; exceedingly rich and
perfumed; good; Sept.

=Styrian. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ =5=:267, fig. 1863.

_Beurre Keele Hall._ =2.= _Guide Prat._ 87. 1895.

Received in England by the Horticultural Society from M. Bosc of Paris
about 1824. Fruit large, long-obovate or pyriform, fairly even and
regular in outline; skin even and shining, of a clear lemon-yellow,
with a bright vermilion cheek next the sun, appearing as if varnished;
flesh yellowish, very fine-grained, tender, buttery, melting and
extremely juicy, sweet, brisk and having a fine flavor of vanilla; a
first-rate and delicious dessert fruit; Oct.

=Sucre-Vert. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:189. Pl. XXXIV. 1768.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:677, fig. 1869. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 649.
1884.

Said to have come from Barmont, a chateau situated on the border of
Burgundy. It was well known in Paris in 1670. Fruit medium or below,
globular-turbinate; skin shining, intense green, dotted with numerous
gray and green dots, a little whitened on the shaded side, yellowish
when ripe; flesh yellowish-white, buttery, melting, semi-fine, some
grit about the center; juice plentiful, sugary, slightly perfumed;
excellent but variable; Oct.

=Sucree de Hoyerswerda. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 582. 1857.

_Sucre-Vert d'Hoyerswerda_. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:679, fig. 1869.

According to Diel this variety was a new pear in the first years of the
last century found in the village of Hoyerswerda, Saxony. Fruit always
below medium, turbinate-obtuse or globular-ovate, rather irregular;
skin a little thick, bright yellow shaded with dull yellow, sprinkled
all over with gray-russet dots on the shaded side and greenish-brown
dots on the sun-exposed side on which it is also much encrimsoned;
flesh greenish-white, semi-fine, breaking, watery, granular around the
pips; juice sufficient, highly saccharine, acidulous, with an agreeable
musky perfume; second; Aug.

=Sucree de Montlucon. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 48, 294. 1895. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 198. 1920.

Found in a hedge at Montlucon, Fr., about 1812, by M. Rochet. Fruit
medium, oval-conic, uneven, lemon-yellow; stem medium long, rather
short and woody; calyx large, closed, in a narrow, shallow basin;
flesh palest yellow, transparent, extremely juicy, well flavored, very
delicious; Oct.

=Sucree Blanche. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:191, fig. 96. 1872.

Obtained by M. Boisbunel, a nurseryman at Rouen, Fr. It was first
published in 1856. Fruit rather large, long-pyriform or sometimes
somewhat gourd-shaped; skin rather thick and firm, at first very bright
green covered with a light white bloom on which are very small and
faint dots, brightening still more at maturity but even in coloring
all over the fruit; flesh white, semi-fine, melting; juice sufficient,
saccharine, pleasant; good but not rich enough to be first class; Aug.
or a little earlier.

=Sucree du Comice. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:680, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 861. 1869.

Raised by the old Horticultural Society of Angers, Fr., and first
fruited in 1855. Fruit above medium, more or less obtuse, turbinate,
irregular, much swelled in its lower half; color golden yellow,
entirely sprinkled with reddish dots and generally rayed with fawn
around the calyx; flesh white, semi-fine and semi-melting, watery, very
granular around the core; second; Sept. and Oct.

=Sucree Van Mons. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:683, fig. 1869.

_Bruessler Zuckerbirne_. =2.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 114. 1825.

A seedling raised by Van Mons. Fruit medium to large, ovate, irregular,
sometimes nearly spherical; skin thick, very bright green, mottled with
pale yellow, sprinkled with numerous large, grayish spots, turning a
fine lemon-yellow at maturity and rather golden on the side next the
sun; flesh white, semi-fine, semi-buttery and melting, saccharine,
vinous, slightly perfumed; quality variable, due perhaps to differences
of soil and climate; second to third; Oct. and Nov.

=Sucree de Zurich. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:684, fig. 1869.

_Zuericher Zuckerbirne_. =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 303. 1889.

Of doubtful origin but we may fairly assume it was Switzerland and
probably Zurich. Fruit small, turbinate, slightly obtuse or ovate
and even in contour, bright greenish-yellow, dotted uniformly with
gray-russet; flesh whitish, fine, melting, juicy, very saccharine,
acidulous, with a slight and agreeable scent of cinnamon; second; Sept.

=Suet Lea. 1.= _Cornell Sta. Bul._ =332=:486. 1913.

An oriental hybrid. Fruit medium to small, apple-shaped to oblong,
regular in contour; light yellow, with large, rough, russet dots; flesh
greenish-white, deficient in juice, hard and gritty, breaking; poor;
late.

=Suffolk Thorn. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 816. 1841. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._
649. 1884.

_Wilding aus Suffolk._ =3.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 298. 1889.

Raised by Andrew Arcedeckene, Clavering Hall, Suffolk, Eng., from
seed of Gansel Bergamot. Fruited first about 1841. Fruit medium,
globular-turbinate, pale lemon-yellow, covered with numerous small dots
and irregular patches of pale ashy-gray russet which are most numerous
on the side next the sun; flesh yellowish-white, exceedingly melting,
buttery and juicy, with a rich, sugary juice, exactly similar in flavor
to Gansel Bergamot; first; Oct.

=Sugar Top. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =3=:49. 1837.

Said to be a native fruit and is called also July or Harvest Pear.
Fruit globular, top-shaped, skin smooth, yellow; flesh juicy, breaking,
sweet, with but little flavor; July.

=Suelibirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 288. 1889. =2.= Loeschnig
_Mostbirnen_ 172, fig. 1913.

A perry pear found in Austria and Germany. Fruit small,
globular-pyriform, greenish-yellow, flecked and dotted with russet all
over the fruit, frequently somewhat tinted with a brownish blush; flesh
yellowish-white, coarse-grained, very acid; Oct.

=Sullivan. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:57. 1842.

A seedling sent to this country by Van Mons and named by Manning.
Fruit medium, pyriform, smooth green skin, with russet specks; flesh
greenish-white, fine-grained, tender, very juicy, pleasant but not
highly flavored; second; Sept.

=Summer Beurre d'Arenberg. 1.= _Jour. Hort._ =13=:315. 1867. =2.=
Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 199. 1920.

Raised by Rivers of Sawbridgeworth, Eng., about 1860 and produced its
first fruit in 1863. Fruit rather small, turbinate, even and smooth in
outline; skin clear and very thin; flesh very fine throughout, scarcely
any core, no trace of grit, melting, yellowish, buttery, tender, very
juicy, with a sweet, rich and distinctive flavor; excellent; Sept.

=Summer Hasting. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

"The Summer Hasting is a little greene peare, of an indifferent good
rellish."

=Summer Popperin. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

"Both of them are very good dry firme peares somewhat spotted, and
brownish on the outside."

=Summer Portugal. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 651. 1884.

Fruit quite small, pyriform, bright grass-green, with a brownish blush
on the side next the sun and dotted all over with dark green dots, at
maturity becoming clear yellow, with a red cheek; flesh yellowish,
tender, breaking, very juicy, sweet and pleasantly flavored; Aug.

=Summer Saint Germain. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 347. 1845.

_Saint Germain d'Ete._ =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:622, fig. 1869.

Of French origin. Imported to France from Belgium or Holland by
Louis Noisette previous to 1830. It is better known in this country
and in England as the _Summer Saint Germain_. Fruit below medium,
obovate-pyriform, generally irregular, bright greenish-yellow, dotted
with russet on the shaded side and extensively washed with vivid rose
on the other cheek where it is sprinkled with gray points; flesh
white, fine, soft, semi-melting, slightly gritty at the center; juice
sufficient, saccharine, often rather astringent but always full of
flavor; second and sometimes third; Sept. and Oct.

=Summer Virgalieu. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 864. 1869.

_Virgalieu d'ete._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:5, fig. 3. 1872.

Origin unknown. Tree moderately vigorous, productive. Fruit roundish,
pyriform, yellow, slightly netted and patched with russet, thickly
sprinkled with russet dots; stem rather long, set in a small cavity;
calyx open; segments recurved; basin shallow, uneven; flesh yellowish,
juicy, melting, slightly vinous; good; Aug.

=Superfondanta. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 153. 1841.

Received by Simon-Louis Bros., Metz, Lorraine, from Italy. Fruit
medium, obovate, smooth, pale yellow, marked with a few dots and
sometimes marked with russet; flesh white, buttery, melting, very good;
Oct.

=Supreme Coloma. 1.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 49, fig. 121. 1866-73.

_Kopertscher._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 796. 1869.

Count Coloma, Mechlin, Bel., made seed beds in 1786. From these beds
came the Supreme Coloma, a fruit of exquisite flavor. Fruit above
medium, ovate, shortened, obtuse; skin delicate, olive-yellow, always
mottled with greenish-russet and thickly covered with brown dots; flesh
whitish, fine, melting, nearly free from grit, very full of saccharine
juice, acidulous, with a special perfume of much delicacy; first; Oct.

=Surpasse Crassane. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:687, fig. 1869. =2.=
Hogg _Fruit Man._ 652. 1884.

A seedling of Van Mons obtained about 1820 in his nursery at Louvain,
Bel. Fruit medium, globular or globular-turbinate, flattened at the
base, mammillate at the summit; skin dark olive-yellow, much covered
with russet and tinted with dark red on the cheek touched by the sun;
flesh whitish, fine, melting, juicy, granular around the center; juice
abundant, very saccharine, highly perfumed, with an agreeable tartish
taste; first; Oct. to Dec.

=Surpasse Meuris. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:688, fig. 1869. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 653. 1884.

The Surpasse Meuris was gained by Van Mons at Brussels before 1818.
Fruit large, pyriform or turbinate-obtuse, always ventriculated toward
the base and generally rather bossed; skin rough, olive-yellow dotted
with gray, mottled with fawn and often colored with brown-red on the
side next the sun; flesh white, tinged with yellow, semi-fine and
semi-melting; juice extremely abundant, very saccharine, tartish and
savory; first, sometimes second when the juice is slightly perfumed;
Sept.

=Surpasse St. Germain. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 198. 1833.

A seedling of Van Mons imported in 1819. Fruit rather large and oblong,
rounded at the base and tapering toward the stalk, irregular in
outline, green and brown; winter.

=Surpasse Virgalieu. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 416, fig. 189. 1845.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:868, fig. 1869.

The origin of this variety is unknown. Andrew Parmentier introduced it
from his nursery at Brooklyn under this name about 1800. Fruit rather
large, obovate; skin smooth, pale lemon-yellow with a very few minute
dots and rarely a little faint red on the sunny side; flesh white,
exceedingly fine-grained and buttery, abounding with delicious highly
flavored, aromatic juice, differing from that of the Doyenne; first;
Oct.

=Surprise. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 41. 1916.

Surprise is a valuable blight-resistant variety belonging to Pyrus
communis and promises to make a blight-resistant stock on which to
top-work commercial varieties.

=Suesse Margarethenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:53. 1856.

Germany; first published in 1833. Fruit medium, pyriform, light yellow,
often, blushed with light red and thickly dotted; flesh semi-melting,
granular, sweet, agreeably cinnamon-flavored; second for dessert, good
for household and market; Aug.

=Suesse Sommerlahnbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:52. 1856.

German; published in 1805. Fruit fairly large, variable in form, ovate,
often conic and ventriculous-pyriform, sides rather unequal, dull
greenish-yellow turning to a fine citron-yellow, without any blush but
russeted on the side next the sun, indistinct dots; flesh not juicy,
saccharine, with flavor of black currant; second for dessert, very good
for kitchen use and market; Aug.

=Suwanee. 1.= Griffing Bros. _Cat._ 13, fig. 1909.

Originated in southern Georgia and introduced by Griffing Brothers
Company in 1909. Fruit large, oblong, tapering towards both ends,
blunt; skin tough, dark golden-russet over a yellow ground, with a
slight tinge of red; flesh white, crisp, tender; good.

=Suzanne. 1.= Mas. _Pom. Gen._ =3=:129, fig. 161. 1878.

Received by Oberdieck from Van Mons without a name. Fruit rather small,
ovate, short and ventriculous, symmetrical in contour with its greatest
diameter about the center; skin delicate, bright green, sprinkled with
extremely numerous small brown spots, changing to pale yellow, golden
on the side next the sun or sometimes touched with red; flesh white,
tinted with yellow, very fine, buttery, melting, sufficiently juicy,
saccharine and delicately perfumed; good; Sept.

=Suzette de Bavay. 1.= _Pom. France_ =2=:No. 80, Pl. 80. 1863. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 865. 1869.

Major Esperen of Mechlin, Bel., obtained this long-season pear. It
fruited first in 1843. Fruit small or medium, globular, generally
mammillate at the top; skin rough, pale yellow, dotted with
greenish-brown and speckled with russet and reddish stains; flesh
white, semi-fine, melting or semi-melting, juicy, almost free from
grit; juice abundant, saccharine, acidulous, more or less perfumed with
anis; Jan. to Apr.

=Swan Egg. 1.= Langley _Pomona_ 132, Pl. LXIV. 1729.

An English variety recommended by Lindley as suitable in the Highlands
of Scotland. Fruit medium, globular-ovate; skin smooth, yellowish-green
on the shaded side and clear brownish-red on the cheek exposed to the
sun and covered with pale brown-russet; flesh yellowish-white, tender,
very juicy, with a sweet and piquant flavor and musky aroma; good; Oct.

=Sweater. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

"The Sweater is somewhat like the Windsor, for colour and bigeness but
nothing neare of so good a taste."

=Sylvie de Malzine. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1895.

Sent out by Daras de Naghin, Anvers, Bel. Tree vigorous and fertile.
Fruit medium, globular; flesh rather fine, melting, recalling the
Beurre d'Angleterre by its flavor; Nov. and Dec.

=Taglioretti. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:73, fig. 517. 1881.

Tree bell-shaped, pyramidal; leaves bluish-green and dull,
characteristically folded; stipules remarkably short. Fruit medium in
size, ovoid, short, broad, resembling the Bergamotte d'Ete and the
Vallee Franche; skin rather firm, bright lemon-yellow to golden; dots
conspicuous; calyx medium, open; basin narrow, rather deep; flesh
white, medium fine, medium breaking, juicy; good; Aug.

=Takasaki. 1.= _Ga. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 49, 54. 1892.

Exhibited by P. J. Berckmans at the Georgia State Horticultural Society
Meeting in 1892. Said to be a Japanese pear.

=Talmadge. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =25=:125. 1870.

_Northford Seckel_ =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 123. 1881.

Originated in the garden of Levi Talmadge at Northford, Conn., as a
chance seedling of Seckel. Tree hardy and vigorous, with spreading
head, very symmetrical, attaining double the size of the Seckel, very
productive. Fruit larger and more uniform than Seckel, almost identical
in form, with the same russet ground, slightly less ruddy coloring;
flesh white, juicy, melting; inferior to Seckel; ripens with Seckel.

=Tardive d'Ellezelles. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Probably originated in Belgium. Fruit large, grayish-green, pleasantly
aromatic; heat resistant; Apr. and May.

=Tardive Garin. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Tree very vigorous and very productive. Fruit large, roundish,
grayish-yellow; flesh medium, melting, juicy, sweet; May and June.

=Tardive de Mons. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 331. 1866. =2.= _Ibid._ 654.
1884.

Fruit medium in size, oblong-obovate, even and regularly formed; skin
uniformly yellow, orange tinge next the sun; dots large and russet;
calyx large, open; stem rather slender, obliquely inserted without
depression; flesh white, tender, buttery, melting, very juicy, rich,
sugary; rated as an "excellent pear;" Nov.

=Tardive de Montauban. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 107. 1876.

Tree very productive. Fruit medium to small, rather long, reddish on
the sunny side; flesh fine, yellow, sweet, medium melting; first; very
late.

=Tardive de Solesne. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 100. 1895.

Tree vigorous and very productive. Fruit large to very large; flesh
breaking, very sweet; first; Jan. and Feb.

=Tatnall Harvest. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:424. 1853.

The Pennsylvania Horticultural Society rated specimens of this variety
submitted to it by Thomas Hancock, Burlington, N. J., as "scarcely
good."

=Tavernier de Boulogne. 1.= Field _Pear Cult._ 283. 1858. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:696, fig. 1869.

Found in 1836 by M. Tavernier in a woods near Trelaze, Fr. Tree
scraggly, productive, a good orchard tree. Fruit medium to above,
longish-conic, greenish-yellow; flesh white, firm; of first quality for
cooking; late spring and early summer.

=Taylor. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 112. 1852. =2.= _U. S. D. A. Pat.
Off. Rpt._ 282. 1853.

Mr. Merriweather, Charlottesville, Va., is credited with having
originated this pear, although it may have come from France about
1780. Tree vigorous, young wood olive; productive; fruit medium,
roundish-oblate; skin light green, mottled with dark green; stalk
rather long, fleshy at its termination in a very slight depression;
calyx very small, set in a wide, superficial basin; flesh fine in
texture, buttery; flavor vinous, with a delicate vanilla aroma; very
good; Nov. to Feb.

=Taynton Squash. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 654. 1884.

_Squash._ =2.= Thacher _Am. Orch._ 191. 1822.

An old pear which originated in Gloucestershire, Eng., previous to the
year 1805 and which is widely known as a remarkably fine perry pear
much grown in Herefordshire. It is early, tender of flesh, and "if it
drops ripe from the tree it bursts from the fall, whence probably the
name." Fruit medium to below, turbinate, dull greenish-yellow on the
shaded side and dull brownish-red next the sun, covered with rough,
russet dots; calyx open; stem slender; flesh white, with a brisk, sweet
flavor.

=Tea. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =16=:154. 1850. =2.= _Ibid._ =20=:466, fig. 22.
1854.

Mrs. Ezra Merchant, Milford, Conn., found seed from which this pear was
raised in a pound of tea which she purchased, hence the name. Similar
to White Doyenne, if not identical with it. Tree vigorous, with bright
yellow wood and deep green foliage. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyramidal,
with often a suture on one side, yellowish-green becoming blushed in
the sun; stem short, stout, fleshy at the base; calyx open; flesh
whitish, melting, juicy, vinous; very good to best; Sept.

=Templiers. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:697, fig. 1869.

The place of origin is uncertain but the time is at least prior to
1838. Fruit large, short-turbinate, dull yellow, spotted with ashy
gray; of first quality for cooking, beginning of Sept.

=Tepka. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 24, fig. 1913.

A perry pear common to lower Styria, Carniola, and the maritime regions
of Austria. Fruit Bergamot-shape, pale green becoming yellowish-green;
calyx large, open, star-shape; stem brown, medium short, often bent;
flesh juicy, sprightly; rots at the core and keeps poorly in storage;
Sept.

=Test. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

Reported by Luther Burbank, Santa Rosa, Cal., as "A large pear, being
four inches long by two and one-half across. In form much like Bartlett
and in quality more like Le Conte, but far better and far more prolific
than either. Ripens four weeks later than Le Conte. When canned is firm
and white and fully equal to or better than Bartlett."

=Tettenhall. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 733. 1841.

"This pear, supposed only to flourish in the parish of Tettenhall,
near Wolverhampton, though a very profuse bearer, has fruit almost
worthless; but as a forest tree it is remarkable for its beauty, far
surpassing in size, shape and masses of deep green foliage any other
Pear-tree I ever saw."

=Teutsche Augustbirne. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 563. 1817. =2.= Dochnahl
_Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:51. 1856.

Reported from the regions of Thuringia, Hesse, and Wuerttemberg about
1799. Fruit medium in size, oblong-oval, bright yellow, dotted,
thick-skinned; calyx star-shape; stem fleshy; flesh breaking, sweet;
fair, a good commercial variety; Aug.

=Texas. 1.= Ragan _Fr. Recom. by Am. Pom. Soc., B. P. I. Bul._
=151=:41. 1909.

This is a whitish-yellow, medium-large, pyriform pear of good quality,
at one time considered promising along the Gulf Coast; said to have
originated in Texas.

=The Dean. 1.= J. Van Lindley _Cat._ 34. 1899.

"A very large pear that has been bearing regularly near Oak Ridge,
Guilford County, N. C., for more than 40 years. In appearance it
resembles both Bartlett and Duchesse [d'Angouleme], and is as large as
Duchesse and better in quality. Ripens between Bartlett and Duchesse,
making a very valuable pear and of good quality."

=Theilersbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:195. 1856. =2.=
Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 174, fig. 1913.

A perry pear said to have appeared in Switzerland about 1848 as a
wilding. Tree spreading, large, vigorous, strong, productive. Fruit
small, ovate, yellowish-green becoming yellow, dotted strongly with
russet; calyx open; stem medium long; flesh dull white, juicy, piquant,
without aroma.

=Theodor Koerner. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:126. 1856.

A seedling raised by Van Mons of Belgium about 1851. Tree rather
vigorous, an early and good bearer. Fruit medium to above, conic,
greenish-yellow; calyx star-shaped; segments long; flesh melting,
juicy, vinous; first; Sept.

=Theodore. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:16. 1856.

According to Dochnahl this pear may have originated in Belgium about
1833. Fruit medium large, 2 inches wide and 2-1/2 inches long, smooth,
bright yellow, sunny side washed with red; dots numerous; sweet,
vinous; last of Aug.

=Theodore Van Mons. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 164, 234. 1854. =2.= _Ann.
Pom. Belge_ =4=:29, fig. 1856.

Originated by Van Mons in 1827. Tree vigorous, pyramidal, productive.
Fruit medium to above, obovate-pyriform to oblong-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, russeted; dots gray-green, numerous; stem curved,
about an inch long; cavity slight; calyx open; flesh yellowish-white,
rather coarse, juicy, melting, vinous; good to very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Theodore Williams. 1.= Stark Bros. _Year Book_ =5=:40. 1914.

A seedling of Kieffer raised by Theodore Williams, and introduced by
Stark Brothers Nurseries & Orchard Company about 1914. Tree hardy, is
reported to have stood a temperature of 40 degrees below zero without
injury. Fruit medium, yellowish-green, sweet, juicy.

=Theophile Lacroix. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 290. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 50. 1895.

Tree productive and of good vigor. Fruit large to very large, pyriform,
similar to the type of Beurre Diel, deep yellow, plentifully spotted
and marbled with cinnamon-red; flesh yellowish, fine, juicy, with an
aroma suggestive of orange, a little gritty about the core; first; Dec.
and Jan.

=Therese. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Fruit rather large, Bergamot-shape, yellowish-green; flesh very
melting, delicately aromatic; first; Oct.

=Therese Appert. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:699, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 2d App. 136, fig. 1872.

First fruited in 1861 from seed of Beurre Clairgeau by Andre Leroy,
Angers, Fr. Tree vigorous, productive. Fruit medium, oblong, turbinate,
yellowish-orange, washed with vermilion; stem short, a trifle inclined;
cavity small; calyx open; basin shallow; flesh whitish-yellow, very
juicy, very sweet, aromatic; very good; Sept.

=Theveriner Butterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:125. 1856.

Said to have originated in France about 1852. Fruit medium large,
turbinate, bright green becoming greenish-yellow, somewhat clouded and
striped with red, covered with russet; calyx star-shaped; stem thick,
one inch long; seeds mostly abortive; flesh yellowish, sweet, vinous;
Oct.

=Thibaut Butterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:126. 1856.

According to Dochnahl this is a seedling from Van Mons which originated
in Belgium in 1851. Fruit medium large, turbinate, irregular and
ill-shapen, bright green becoming yellowish-green, with gray dots, and
spotted with russet; skin thin; calyx small, erect; stem slender, 2
inches long, fleshy at the base; core and seeds small; sweet, aromatic;
very good; Oct.

=Thick Stalked Pear. 1.= Mawe-Abercrombie _Univ. Gard. Bot._ 1778.

Mentioned in the reference cited as a minor variety of winter pear
having a very large, roundish fruit.

=Thimothee. 1.= _Mas Pom. Gen._ =7=:181, fig. 574. 1881.

This variety was raised from seed by M. Pariset, a seedsman of Ain,
Fr., about 1852. Tree rather vigorous, upright, symmetrical. Fruit
medium, roundish-pyriform, regular, greenish becoming pale yellow;
calyx almost closed; stem very short, rather stout; flesh whitish, very
fine, very melting, subacid, refreshing; good; Nov. and Dec.

=Thompson= (Eng.). 1. _Mag. Hort._ =8=:64. 1842. =2.= _Pom. France_
4:156, Pl. 156. 1867.

Said to be a seedling of Van Mons originated about 1819. R. Manning,
Salem, Mass., received cions in 1841. Tree vigorous, productive; fruit
medium, obovate, lemon-yellow, russeted around the stem; stem short;
almost no cavity; calyx medium, open, slightly depressed in a small
basin; segments often united; flesh whitish-yellow, buttery, juicy;
flavor rich, sugary, aromatic; seeds large, long; Oct.

=Thompson= (N. H.). 1. Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 198. 1833. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=3=:51. 1837.

Originated on the farm of Judge Thompson, Portsmouth, N. H. Fruit
medium to below, turbinate, quite russeted; "esteemed for its
extraordinary productiveness and long keeping" by those in the vicinity
of its origin but regarded by R. Manning, Salem, Mass., as "unfit for
cultivation."

=Thooris. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =6=:27, fig. 1858. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 868. 1869.

This Belgian pear fruited for the first time in 1854 in the garden
of the Society Van Mons. Fruit medium to below, round ovoid to oval,
or Bergamot-shape; skin yellow, shaded and striped with grayish-red.
Alexander Bivort gives, "flesh yellowish-white, half fine, melting;
juice abundant, sugary, and with an agreeable perfume ... of first
quality," whereas Downing says, "flesh white, coarse, dry, sweet, and
poor ... unworthy of cultivation." Sept.

=Thuerlinckx. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 553. 1857.

_Beurre Thuerlinckx_. =2.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 529. 1884.

This pear was found in 1848 upon an estate purchased by M. Thuerlinckx,
Mechlin, Bel. It is said to be a very large, coarse, showy pear of
long-obovate shape, with a somewhat tender and juicy flesh but without
any aroma, and very soon becoming mealy; Oct. to Dec.

=Thurston Red. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 655. 1884.

Hogg says, "a new Herefordshire perry pear of some repute." Fruit
small, turbinate, even in outline, greenish-yellow, with a thin red
cheek and a large patch of thin, pale-brown russet, especially around
the calyx; calyx small and open; stem an inch and a quarter long,
slender; cavity none; flesh yellow.

=Tiffin. 1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._ 289. 1893.

Originated with Henry Loose, Tiffin, O. Fruit described as large,
broad-ovate, smooth, greenish-yellow; dots numerous, brown; stem
medium long, slender, curved, inserted with no depression; basin wide,
russeted; calyx small, open; skin thin; core large; seeds large, plump,
brown; flesh white, buttery, subacid; good; Oct.

=Tigree de Janvier. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:141, fig. 71. 1872.

Raised by L. J. Berckmans from seed produced by Major Esperen and
obtained by the former after the latter's death. Tree vigorous, rather
slender. Fruit small to below medium, ovoid-pyriform, yellowish; stem
long; flesh yellow, medium fine, melting, very juicy, vinous; not of
the most beautiful appearance yet of the highest flavor; Dec. and Jan.

=Tillington. 1.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =4=:521. 1822. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 868. 1869.

Exhibited by Thomas Andrew Knight before the London Horticultural
Society in 1820 as "a Seedling Pear raised from a seed of the Autumn
Bergamot impregnated with the pollen of the Jargonelle." Tree hardy,
productive. Fruit medium, short-pyriform, greenish-yellow, with light
brown russet dots; stalk short; calyx open; flesh yellowish, tender,
buttery, melting, not juicy, vinous, aromatic; good; Oct.

=Timpling. 1.= Buckman _Fruit Var. in Ex. Orch._ 6. 1901.

Included in the list of varieties in the experimental orchard of
Benjamin Buckman, Farmingdale, Ill. Mr. Buckman reports that it was
from Ludwig Hencke, Collinsville, and that he received it in 1893. Mr.
Hencke brought the Timpling with him from Germany. According to Mr.
Buckman the tree is rather free from blight, moderately productive, and
still in good shape at the age of 27 years. Fruit medium; good quality
and color.

=Tindall Swan Egg. 1.= _Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc._ =6=:396. 1826.

Specimens of a new variety of Swan Egg pear were sent to the meeting of
the London Horticultural Society in 1824 by George and William Tindall,
Beverley, Yorkshire, Eng. "It is larger and browner than the Common
Swan's Egg, and equal to it in flavor. It keeps well till the end of
January, and sometimes later."

=Tollbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 214, fig. 1913.

A very productive perry pear of Europe with fruit notable because
of its beautiful color. Tree vigorous, upright. Fruit medium,
round-obovate, very uniform; skin tough, smooth, glossy, green changing
to yellow, side next the sun blushed with bright carmine and dotted
heavily with brown-russet dots, russeted at top and bottom; calyx
small, open; stem medium long, slender; flesh almost white, juicy,
tart; mid-Oct. to Dec.

=Tolstoy. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

Originated by N. E. Hansen, Brookings, S. D., from Clapp Favorite x
Pyrus ovoidea, and introduced by him in 1919.

=Tom Strange. 1.= Buckman _Fruit Var. in Ex. Orch._ 6. 1901.

This variety is found in the experimental orchard at Farmingdale,
Ill., of Benjamin Buckman, who writes: "The 'Tom Strange' pear is a
small local variety received from a person of that name, not worthy of
disseminating under a name and had better be dropped."

=Tonkovietka. 1.= _Mont. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 53. 1882.

_Limbertwig_. =2.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 321. 1885.

_Thintwig_. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 59. 1887.

One of the Russian pears imported by Prof. J. L. Budd from Dr. Regel,
Petrograd, Russia, about 1879 and known by the Iowa Agricultural
College under the numbers 513 and 14 m. Chas. Gibb, Abbottsford, Can.,
says this is the hardiest pear tree which bears edible fruit of which
he knows. The name means slender stalk. Tree hardy, fine, productive.
Fruit medium, conical, yellow, with red on the sunny side; flesh
porous; ripens beginning of Aug. and keeps until Sept.; commendable for
commercial orchards.

=Tonneau. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:237, Pl. LVIII, fig. 5.
1768. _2._ Hogg _Fruit Man._ 656. 1884.

_Fassbirne_. =3.= Christ _Handb._ 564. 1817.

This large cooking pear has been confused by Leroy and others with
_Uvedale St. Germain_, but Hogg and Mas agree that the two are quite
distinct. The French word _tonneau_ and the German word _fass_ are
both translated "cask," a term which describes the shape of this pear
very well. Tree vigorous; shoots upright; leaves pubescent, light
green, young leaves yellowish-green. Fruit very large, oblong-ovate or
cask-shaped; skin clear yellow; calyx large, open; basin deep, wide;
stalk an inch long, straight, woody; cavity deep, irregular; flesh very
white, rather dry; flavor brisk; more an ornament than a dessert fruit;
Nov. to Feb.

=Toronto Belle. 1.= _Ont. Fr. Gr. Assoc. Rpt._ 82. 1882.

"We tested the fruit late in December and found it in grand condition;
in quality it is equal to Beurre Bosc, and almost identical in form and
color. The tree is a slow grower but a heavy and regular bearer. It is
without doubt the finest winter pear we know of, opening, as it does, a
new era in the quality of winter pears."

=Totten Seedling. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =14=:109. 1848. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 868. 1869.

Raised by Col. Totten, New Haven, Conn. Tree vigorous. Fruit small to
medium, roundish-pyriform to obovate, pale yellow, slightly tinged with
red in the sun; stalk long; calyx open; flesh white, sweet, perfumed;
Sept. and Oct.

=Tournay d'Hiver. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 111. 1876.

Tree vigorous and productive, upright. Fruit large to very large,
broadly turbinate; flesh buttery, melting, fine, vinous; first; Jan.
and Feb.

=Tout-il-faut. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:107, fig. 54. 1872.

One of Van Mons' seedlings. The pear does not possess all the qualities
that the name indicates. Tree hardy, productive, of medium vigor, early
bearing. Fruit medium, regular, conic-pyriform, yellowish-green mostly
covered by a brilliant crimson, very beautiful; flesh white, tender,
sweet, rather juicy, agreeably aromatic; mid-Aug.

=Traeublesbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:194. 1856. =2.=
Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 140, fig. 68. 1913.

This perry pear, named Traeublesbirne because of the racemose or
bunch-like manner in which the fruit develops, is said to have
had its origin in Wuerttemberg about 1830. Tree rather vigorous,
broad-pyramidal, scantily foliaged, thrifty, early bearing, productive.
Fruit long-pyriform to oval, somewhat blunt at the base, greenish,
russeted at both base and apex; dots fine; calyx open; stem long; flesh
white, juicy; good; Oct.

=Tressorier Lesacher. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 290. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 101. 1895.

Tree of moderate vigor, very fertile. Fruit medium, resembling White
Doyenne; flesh very fine; of highest quality; Oct.

=Trinkebirne. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 518, 562. 1817. =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:14. 1856.

Originated in Saxony, Ger., about 1802. Twigs thick and long, heavily
dotted; buds small; leaves round. Fruit medium, large, conical,
yellowish, somewhat blushed, very juicy; good; last of Sept.

=Triomphe de Jodoigne. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =14=:112. 1848. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:706, fig. 1869. =3.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 200.
1920.

Raised by Simon Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel., in 1830. Fruit large,
oval-pyriform, tapering markedly toward stem, uneven, green becoming
lemon-yellow; calyx small, open, in a small, uneven basin; stem rather
long, stout, woody, fleshy at insertion; flesh whitish, coarse, juicy,
half-melting, sweet; good to very good; Oct.

=Triomphe de Louvain. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 154. 1841. =2.= Leroy
_Dict. Pom._ =2=:880, fig. 1889.

Originated by Van Mons about 1820. Fruit medium, roundish-oblate,
rather rough, greenish-yellow, mostly covered with dull russet, many
brown russet dots; stem rather short, stout; calyx large, open; flesh
whitish, coarse, not juicy, sweet; good; Sept.

=Triomphe de Touraine. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 104. 1895.

From the name, one infers that this variety originated near Touraine,
Fr. Tree vigorous, very productive. Fruit large to very large, green,
reddish on the side next the sun, clear yellow at maturity; flesh firm,
fine, juicy, sweet, similar in taste to Duchesse d'Angouleme but of
better quality; Nov.

=Triomphe de Tournai. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ =20=:760, fig. 139. 1883. =2.=
_Rev. Hort._ 512, fig. 1905.

M. Daras de Naghin, Tournai, Bel., originated this fruit from seed
produced in 1868. The Pomological Committee of Tournai after testing it
in 1882 and 1883 unanimously awarded its raiser a bronze medal. Tree
vigorous and productive, pyramidal, upright. Fruit medium, turbinate to
long-pyriform, symmetrical, uniformly green becoming yellow, faintly
pitted; stem short, stout; calyx medium, open; basin shallow; flesh
white, melting, juicy, sweet; good to very good; Jan. and Feb.

=Triomphe de Vienne. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =11=:261. 1888. =2.= _Soc. Nat.
Hort. France Pom._ 446, fig. 1904.

_Triumph_. =3.= _Can. Hort._ =25=:442, fig. 1902.

Raised in 1864 by M. Jean Colland, Vienne, Fr., and first distributed
in 1874, this pear has been the recipient of several awards of merit.
Tree vigorous, heavy-cropper, pyramidal. Fruit large, obovate-pyriform,
rather irregular, greenish-yellow, with russet patches, often blushed
with red; calyx open; core small; seeds usually imperfect; flesh white,
melting, juicy; flavor rich, sweet, spicy; very good; Sept. and early
Oct.

=Trompetenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_. =2=:140. 1856.

_Poire Trompette._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:97, fig. 49. 1872.

Diel obtained this variety at Schaumburg, Westphalia, but it appears to
have originated at Nassau, Prussia. Published in 1805. Fruit medium,
pyriform-conic, often irregular in form and uneven on the surface; skin
rather thick and firm, light green changing to light yellow, covered
with numerous small, round, brown spots and on the side next the sun
blushed with wine-red; flesh whitish, semi-melting, granular; juice
sufficient in quantity, very vinous but a little too astringent; third
for dessert, first for household; Oct.

=Troppauer Goldgelbe Sommermuskatellerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:41. 1856.

_Troppauer Muskateller._ =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 291. 1889.

Said to have originated about 1851 in Troppau, Silesia, Austria. Fruit
medium large, roundish, regular, bright yellow, frequently strongly
russeted, flecked and dotted with brown; stem thin, medium long; flesh
coarse, very sweet and somewhat musky; Aug.

=Truchsess. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:20. 1856.

Dochnahl credits this pear with having originated from seed in Dietz on
the Lahn River, Ger., about 1826. Tree large and very fruitful; twigs
long, glabrous; lenticels long; leaves ovate, entire. Fruit produced
in clusters, medium large, roundish-ovate, bright green becoming
yellowish, frequently russeted, strongly dotted; Nov.

=Truckhill Bergamot. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =11=:327. 1845. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 869. 1869.

Probably of English origin. Fruit medium or above, roundish-oblate,
yellow with crimson and fawn in the sun, sprinkled with gray and green
dots; stalk rather short; cavity deep; calyx open; basin deep, abrupt,
uneven; flesh half-melting, somewhat coarse and gritty, moderately
juicy; good; Sept. and Oct.

=Tsar. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =17=:293. 1894.

This is a Russian variety and may be synonymous with _Czar_ and
_Tsarskaya_. It has been grown successfully in the Russian Province of
Tambow, 53 deg. north latitude. Tree very firm and wonderfully productive,
pyramidal. Fruit moderate in size, conical, yellow, red on the sunny
side; flesh soft, mellow, agreeable; flavor mild; Aug. and Sept.

=Tudor. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 157. 1867.

Said to be a seedling of Fulton and to resemble it very closely. Fruit
peculiarly shaped, russeted; stem short; flesh melting, juicy; first;
Sept. and Oct.

=Turban. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:121, fig. 61. 1872.

A beautiful early pear the origin of which is unknown. Tree vigorous,
dependably productive, hardy, late in coming into bearing. Fruit medium
in size, spherical-turbinate, green becoming pale yellow, covered
with brown around base and apex; dots very large, dark green; calyx
small; stem characteristically very short and very thick; flesh white,
streaked with yellow, very fine, melting, juicy, sweet, aromatic; Aug.

=Tuerkische mueskirte Sommerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:19.
1856.

The origin of this pear is ascribed to the Orient about the year 1832.
Tree vigorous and productive; twigs glabrous; buds long and pointed.
Fruit medium large, bulging, blunt, roundish, solid yellowish-green,
sprinkled with russet; dots fine and bright-brown; calyx usually
closed; stem woody, medium long; seeds numerous; flesh buttery; quality
of the best; Sept.

=Turnep. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

"The Turnep pear is a hard winter peare, not so good to eat rawe, as it
is to bake."

=Twice flowering Pear-tree. 1.= Mawe-Abercrombie _Univ. Gard. Bot._
1778.

"It often produces blossom twice a year, the first in the spring, and
the second in autumn, so is preserved in many gardens as a curiosity."
Classified as an autumn pear.

=Tyler. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 5. 1843. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 869. 1869.

Probably one of Gov. Edwards' seedlings which originated at New
Haven, Conn., about 1840. Tree moderately vigorous; young wood
reddish-yellow-brown. Fruit below medium, roundish-pyriform, yellow,
netted and patched and dotted with russet; stem long, slender, in a
moderate cavity, surrounded by russet; calyx open; basin shallow and
uneven; flesh white, coarse, granular, buttery, melting, juicy, brisk,
vinous; fair to good; Oct.

=Ulatis. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

A seedling of Bartlett originated by R. E. Burton, Vacaville, Cal., and
introduced in 1916. Fruit medium, pyriform, yellow; flesh white, fine,
sweet; good; Sept.

=Unterlaibacher Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 142, fig. 69. 1913.

This perry pear is a native of Carniola and probably gets its name from
the city of Laibach in that region. Tree of moderate growth, upright,
tall, with strong wood, a late and alternate bearer, long-lived.
Fruit round, large, greenish-yellow, russeted about the calyx end,
finely dotted; calyx open, wide; basin shallow; stem short, thick,
brownish-yellow, set at an angle; flesh yellowish-green, granular; Oct.

=Upper Crust. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =4=:276. 1849. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 870. 1869.

A seedling introduced by Col. Wm. Sumner, Pomaria, S. C., in 1849. Tree
pyramidal, with "switchey" limbs and gray bark. Fruit below medium,
roundish, green, covered with distinct, irregular, russet patches;
stalk rather short, stout; cavity broad, shallow; calyx large, open;
flesh granular, not juicy, rots at core; poor; Aug.

=Ursula. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:7. 1856. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 872. 1869.

Said to have originated in Belgium about 1826. Tree vigorous and very
productive; twigs green, thickly dotted; buds small, long; leaves
ovoid. Fruit below medium to above, oblong-acute-pyriform, yellowish
mostly covered with golden-russet; stem long, curved; calyx open; basin
shallow; flesh white, juicy, melting; good to very good; late Aug.

=Uwchlan. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =6=:35, fig. 3. 1856. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:714, fig. 1869.

Originated on the premises of Widow Dowlin, near the Brandywine, in
Uwchlan Township, Pa. It fruited first in 1851. Tree of good growth,
productive, pyramidal. Fruit below medium, roundish, inclining to
obovate, pale whitish-yellow, shaded, mottled and dotted with crimson,
and thickly covered with conspicuous brown dots; stem curved, inclined;
cavity shallow, sometimes lipped; calyx partially closed; basin abrupt,
large, deep; flesh white, very juicy, very sweet, melting, aromatic;
good to very good; Sept.

=Valentine. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 872. 1869.

Said to have originated on Long Island. Fruit above medium,
oblong-acute-pyriform, pale yellowish-green, tinge of red in the sun;
flesh white, juicy, melting, sweet, pleasant; good; Aug.

=Vallee Franche. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:74. 1768. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 658. 1884.

_Poire de Vallee._ =3.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:113, fig. 55. 1866-73.

A pear of ancient and unknown origin. It was grown in France in the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries. Tree very large, exceedingly
vigorous, very hardy, a regular bearer. Fruit medium or below, obovate
or obtuse-pyriform, smooth, shining yellowish-green, sprinkled with
small russet dots; flesh white, breaking, medium fine, very juicy,
sweet, slightly musky; well reported from the Old World but as
"unworthy of cultivation" from the New; last of Aug.

=Valley. 1.= Brookshaw _Hort. Reposit._ =2=:185, Pl. XCVII, fig. 2.
1823.

Possibly of English origin. Fruit oval or lemon-shape, yellow, strewn
with fine dots; skin thick; flesh soft, buttery; flavor very pleasant;
mid-Aug.

=Van Assche. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 55. 1852. =2.= _Horticulturist_
=3=:60, fig., front. 1853.

_Van Assene._ =3.= _Mag. Hort._ =8=:58. 1842. =4.= _Ibid._ =13=:60,
fig. 4. 1847.

M. Bouvier, Jodoigne, Bel., originated this pear about 1828. M. Manning
received cions of the variety from Van Mons in 1835 under the name _Van
Assene_, and this has led to incorrect statements in America that Van
Assche is a seedling of Van Mons and should be called _Van Assene_.
Tree productive, vigorous, erect, an early bearer. Fruit rather
large, roundish-obovate-pyriform, pale yellow, covered with rather
large russet specks; stem long, slender, curved; cavity medium deep;
calyx closed; basin abrupt, deep flesh white, juicy, melting, sweet,
pleasant; good to very good; Sept.

=Van Buren. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 5. 1843. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 873. 1869.

A cooking pear raised from seed by Governor Edwards of New Haven, Conn.
Fruit medium, roundish-oblate, yellow, with a rich orange-red blush
next the sun, regularly dotted with conspicuous brownish specks; flesh
white, crisp, sweet; Oct.

=Van Deventer. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 873. 1869.

Originated in New Jersey. Tree very vigorous, very productive, an early
bearer. Fruit rather small, oblong-ovate-pyriform, greenish-yellow,
shaded with brownish-red in the sun, with many gray and green dots;
stem inclined, inserted by a lip and sometimes rings; calyx partially
closed; basin shallow; flesh whitish, juicy, tender, half-melting,
sweet, pleasant, good; mid-Aug.

=Van Marum. 1.= _Pom. France_ =3=:No. 125, Pl. 125. 1865. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 873. 1869.

_Calebasse Grosse_. =3.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 541. 1884.

Originated by Van Mons in 1823. Tree vigorous, productive. Fruit very
large, sometimes measuring six inches long, oblong-pyriform, yellow;
stem rather long, slender; cavity flattened; calyx large; basin
shallow, regular; flesh white, apt to rot at the core, half-melting,
not especially juicy, sweet, aromatic; fair to good; Oct.

=Van Mons fruehe Pomeranzenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:159. 1856.

Originated by Van Mons about 1852. Fruit broadly turbinate, light green
becoming yellow, thickly dotted, specked with russet; stem thick, one
inch long; flesh half-melting; second-rate in quality; Aug.

=Van Mons Sommer Schmalzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:142.
1856.

Originated by Van Mons of Belgium about 1852, from seed. Tree vigorous
and productive. Fruit medium large, 2 inches wide, 3-1/2 inches high,
with protuberances, light green becoming greenish-yellow, without red,
spotted with russet; calyx open, star-shaped; stem curved, medium long;
flesh fine, moderately melting; last of Aug.

=Van Mons spaete Wirthschaftbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:187. 1856.

Said to be a seedling of Van Mons originated about 1854. Twigs long,
red; leaves small. Fruit oval, 2-3/4 inches wide, 3-1/2 inches high,
with the bulge in the middle, green becoming yellowish-green; dots
black; calyx almost closed; segments erect; stem woody, 1 inch long;
flesh breaking, sweet; last of Nov.

=Van Mons suesse Haushaltsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:182.
1856.

Said to have been originated by Van Mons about 1852. Fruit
conic-pyriform, 2-1/2 inches wide, 3 inches tall, bright green becoming
lemon-yellow, sometimes striped with red, more or less flecked with
russet; dots not conspicuous; basin shallow; stem thick, 3/4 inch long,
inclined; flesh yellowish-white, fine, smooth, sweet; Sept. and Oct.

=Van Tertolen Herbst Zuckerbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_
=2=:89. 1856.

_Sucre de Tertolen_. =2.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 1, 129, fig. 63. 1868.

_Tertolen Herbst Zuckerbirne_. =3.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 289. 1889.

Of Dutch origin. Tree light green; petioles long and very slender;
leaves curved and sharply acuminate. Fruit nearly medium,
globular-turbinate; skin rather thick, green, with large brown spots;
flesh white, granular, buttery, rather gritty around the core,
acidulous, perfumed; first; Nov.

=Van de Weyer Bates. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =18=:417. 1852. =2.= Mas _Pom.
Gen._ =5=:71, fig. 324. 1880.

Said to have been originated by Van Mons about 1823. Tree vigorous,
large, rather tall, an early and good bearer. Fruit below medium;
roundish-obovate, pale yellow, covered with small brown dots and a
few brown veins; stem short, rather stout; calyx large, open; flesh
yellowish, buttery, juicy, rich, sugary, pleasantly aromatic; a fine
late pear; Mar. to May.

=Vanderveer. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:156. 1831.

Originated from seed of White Doyenne with Dr. Adrian Vanderveer of
Long Island, and was named after the originator by William Prince.
Tree vigorous, very productive. Fruit medium, yellow, with a tinge of
russet; flesh melting, buttery; Sept.

=Varuna. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 44. 1866.

A seedling fruited by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., in 1862.
Tree productive. Fruit turbinate, 3-1/2 inches wide, 4 inches long,
greenish-yellow; core small; flesh white, juicy, slightly acid; Sept.

=Vauquelin. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =14=:112. 1848. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:723, fig. 889. 1869.

_Saint-Germain Vauquelin_. 3. _Pom. France_ 2:No. 65, Pl. 65. 1864.

Raised by M. Vauquelin, Rouen, Fr., from seed sown about 1816. Tree
vigorous, pyramidal. Fruit medium to above, obovate-pyriform to
oblong-obovate-pyriform, undulating in outline, yellow, brownish next
the sun, with patches and traces of russet and russet dots; stem
inserted without depression; calyx large, open; flesh white, very
juicy, brisk; good; Dec. and Jan.

=Venusbrust. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:178. 1856.

Said to have originated in Thuringia about 1796. Tree upright, leafy,
very productive; leaves large, truncate. Fruit roundish-turbinate,
rather large, beautiful bright yellow, usually red next the sun, dotted
with fine brown dots, russeted at both ends; calyx segments short;
flesh coarse-grained, granular, aromatic, sweet; Dec. to Apr.

=Vergoldete oder wahre graue Dechantsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr.
Obstkunde_ =2=:92. 1856.

Said to have originated in Austria about 1836. Tree an early bearer.
Fruit small to above, roundish-turbinate, greenish-gray becoming
golden, russeted and dotted with gray, very agreeable; Nov.

=Verguldete Herbstbergamotte. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 551. 1817.

A German variety. Fruit large, Bergamot-form; skin rough, yellow-brown
and gray, golden-yellow when ripe; flesh tender, breaking and somewhat
musky; end of Sept.

=Verlaine d'Ete. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =7=:29, fig. 1859.

_Verlain._ =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 874. 1869.

First reported in 1823 as a seedling of Van Mons. The name _Verlaine
d'Ete_ has been applied to two other varieties, Flemish Beauty and
_Bergamotte Heems_. The pear here described is distinct from the
former but resembles the latter somewhat closely. Tree vigorous,
productive, carrying its branches horizontal. Fruit medium, oblong,
obovate-pyriform, pale yellow-orange in the sun, with patches and dots
of brownish-red; stalk slender, inserted in a small cavity; calyx with
short, stiff segments; flesh white, half-fine, melting, juicy, sweet,
vinous; Sept.

=Vermillion d'en Haut. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:726, fig. 1869. =2.=
Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 874. 1869.

Originated by M. Boisbunel, Rouen, Fr., and first reported in 1858.
Tree moderately vigorous, productive, pyramidal. Fruit medium,
turbinate-pyriform, olive-yellow, shaded with red in the sun; stem
short, stout, inserted without depression; calyx large, open; flesh
fine, melting, juicy, sweet; Sept.

=Vermont. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 874. 1869.

Supposed to be a seedling which is said to have been taken from Vermont
to Oswego, N. Y., where it fruited. Tree upright. Fruit medium or
below, obovate-pyriform, pale whitish-yellow, slight red in the sun,
traced, netted and dotted with russet; stalk slender; cavity deep;
calyx with erect segments; flesh whitish, juicy, melting, sweet,
pleasant; good to very good; Oct.

=Vernusson. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:727, fig. 1869.

In 1694 this variety was mentioned as having been named after the place
Vernusson in Anjou, near Angers, Fr. Fruit medium in size, turbinate,
pale yellow, shaded with rose on the side next the sun, covered at the
base and apex with brown; calyx medium, open; flesh white, very fine,
melting, juicy, sweet, aromatic; of first quality; Dec. to middle of
Feb.

=Verte-longue panachee. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:195, Pl.
XXXVII. 1768. =2.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =1=:65, fig. 1853.

_Long Green Panache_. =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 804. 1869.

A striped variety of Long Green of Autumn, differing from the original
in having the wood and fruit striped with green and yellow bands, and
in having the leaves occasionally striped with yellow.

=Verte-Longue de la Sarthe. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:732, fig. 1869.

_Grosse Verte-Longue Precoce de la Sarthe_. 2. Mas _Pom. Gen._ 5:79,
fig. 1880.

A variety well known and esteemed for many years in the country around
Mans in France. Fruit nearly medium, globular-conic, obtuse, bright
green, speckled with grayish dots, often rather russeted toward the
poles; at maturity the green changes to greenish-yellow; flesh whitish,
fine, very melting, full of sugary juice, vinous and relieved with a
refreshing savor; good; end of July.

=Verulam. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 805, fig. 1855. =2.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy
Fr._ 202. 1920.

A very old pear the origin of which is uncertain. Tree hardy, forming
a round, spreading head, productive. Fruit rather large, almost oval,
rough, entirely covered with yellowish-brown russet appearing almost
black; stem woody; calyx open; flesh crisp, coarse-grained, assuming a
fine red when cooked; seldom better than cooking quality; Jan. to Mar.

=Vezouziere. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 88. 1856. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._
=2=:734, fig. 1869.

_Bergamotte von Vezouziere._ =3.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 177. 1889.

From information gathered by Andre Leroy from M. Hutin, manager of the
nurseries of M. Leon Leclerc of Laval, it would seem that this variety
was found by Leon Leclerc in a field near the Chateau de la Vezouziere,
Mayenne, Fr. Tree vigorous, productive. Fruit medium to below,
roundish-turbinate, yellowish, sprinkled with minute gray and green
dots; stalk long, curved, inserted in a broad, shallow cavity; calyx
open, persistent, in a wide, uneven basin; flesh very juicy, melting,
sweet; agreeable; good to very good; Sept.

=Vicar Junior. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 92. 1872.

Hon. M. P. Wilder notes: "A seedling of my own from the Vicar of
Winkfield. Large, long, ovate-pyriform, color dull yellow, with a
few traces of russet, and a brownish, red cheek; in shape and color
resembling Louise Bonne de Jersey more than its parent. Flesh melting,
very juicy and tender, flavor acidulous and rich. 'Very good.' Season
the whole month of October."

=Vice-President Coppiers. 1.= _Gard. Chron._ 3rd Ser. =37=:69. 1905.

A chance seedling raised by M. Coppiers of France. Fruit medium,
regular-pyriform, brown, assuming an orange tint at maturity; stem
moderately long; calyx slightly depressed; flesh delicate, with a
slight almond flavor; Sept. and Oct.

=Vice-President Decaye. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 294. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 101. 1895.

Tree of medium vigor, very productive. Fruit medium in size; flesh very
fine, highly flavored, sweet; Sept. and Oct.

=Vice-President Delbee. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 294. 1889. =2.= _Guide
Prat._ 64. 1895.

Originated by M. Sannier, Rouen, Fr. Tree productive, of good vigor.
Fruit medium to large, resembling Passe Crassane, borne in clusters;
flesh fine, melting, of a peculiar flavor; through the winter.

=Vice-President Delehoye. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =1=:53, fig. 27. 1872.

Originated by M. Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. Tree of good vigor, an early
bearer. Fruit medium, oval to oblong-turbinate, clear bright yellow;
flesh melting, juicy, delicately aromatic; first; Oct. and Nov.

=Victor. 1.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 235. 1886.

_Miller Victor._ =2.= _Mo. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 235. 1886.

W. P. Stark of Missouri, one of the introducers of this variety, states
that he received it from Judge S. Miller, who said that it originated
in Chester County, Pa., about 1856. Tree said to be little affected
by blight. Fruit large, pyriform, smooth, greenish-yellow, slightly
blushed; dots numerous, small; flavor subacid to sweet; Sept.

=Victoria de Williams. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 112. 1876.

Of English origin. Tree hardy. Fruit large, turbinate, lemon-yellow,
with patches of brownish-red; stem fleshy; flesh fine, very tender,
melting, buttery, very juicy, richly flavored, finely perfumed; first;
Oct.

=Victorina. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 59, 60. 1887. =2.= _Ia. Hort. Soc.
Rpt._ 170. 1894.

A Russian sort received from Russia by the Iowa Station in 1879 and
again in 1882. It is described as a hardy tree free from blight or sun
scald and is given two stars for productiveness and quality by Dr.
Fischer of Voronesh, a German pomologist. In this country it is said to
be of no commercial importance.

=Vigne. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:242, Pl. LVIII, fig. 2. 1768.
=2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:736, fig. 1869.

_Vine Pear._ =3.= Mawe-Abercrombie _Univ. Gard. Bot._ 1778.

_Lady._ =4.= Prince _Pom. Man._ 1:59. 1831.

_Demoiselle._ =5.= Mas _Le Verger_ =3=:Pt. 2, 145, fig. 169. 1866-73.

Said to have originated in France, possibly near Anjou, prior to
1675. Tree large, vigorous, scraggly, very productive. Fruit small,
turbinate, rough, dull red, covered with gray specks; calyx large,
open; stem long, slender; flesh yellowish, slightly granular, juicy,
well perfumed; Oct.

=Villain XIV. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:40. 1856.

Said to have originated in Belgium in 1825. Tree an early and heavy
bearer. Fruit medium in size, variable, oblong-turbinate, unequal,
greenish-yellow, strewn with fine russet dots; calyx small, open; stem
thick, medium in length; flesh melting, gritty near the core, sweetly
perfumed; Sept.

=Villene de Saint-Florent. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:739, fig. 1869.

It is said that this variety, which was known prior to 1846, may have
been originated near and named after the village of Saint-Florent near
Saumur, Fr. Tree of medium productiveness. Fruit large, variable in
shape from ovoid to globular, unequal, green dotted with reddish-gray;
flesh breaking; a cooking pear; Oct.

=Vin de Anglais. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:740, fig. 899. 1869.

An old pear of uncertain origin. Tree vigorous, very productive. Fruit
small, turbinate, greenish-yellow, largely washed with bright red;
flesh juicy, very sweet, high in quality; Aug.

=Vineuse. 1.= _Pom. France_ =4=:No. 148, Pl. 148. 1859.

_Vineuse Esperen._ =2.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =7=:89, fig. 1859.

Raised by Major Esperen, Mechlin, Bel., and introduced about 1840. Tree
vigorous, productive. Fruit medium, pyriform, pale yellowish-green,
patched and netted with russet, dotted with many small, brown and green
dots; calyx large, open; stem short, fleshy; flesh yellowish-white,
half-fine, melting, very juicy, vinous, delicately perfumed; good; Oct.

=Vingt-cinquieme Anniversaire de Leopold I^{er}. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_
=7=:17, fig. 1859. =2.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:742, fig. 901. 1869.

_Twenty-fifth Anniversaire de Leopold I._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
869. 1869.

_Souvenir de Leopold I^{er}._ =4.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =7=:171, fig. 566.
1881.

Obtained by Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel., in 1855. Fruit medium,
spherical; skin fine, thin, soft, very pale green sprinkled with small,
faint grayish dots, few in number and unequally spaced, changing to
jonquil-yellow; flesh very white, fine, semi-melting, only fairly
juicy, but saccharine, with a flavor of sweet wine; first; Oct.

=Virginale du Mecklembourg. 1.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =4=:43, fig. 214. 1879.

Originated, probably in Mecklenburg, previous to 1864. Tree pyramidal,
vigorous, moderately productive. Fruit medium, regularly conic to
conic-pyriform, bright yellow, sown with gray dots; calyx large, open;
stem rather long, continuous with the base of the fruit; flesh white,
half-fine, breaking, rather abundant in a rich sugary juice, agreeably
high-flavored; Aug.

=Virginie Baltet. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 546. 1903. =2.= _Ibid._ 92, fig.
1905.

Raised, and introduced in 1904, by Charles Baltet, Troyes, Fr. Tree
vigorous, pyramidal, very productive. Fruit large to very large,
club-shaped, oblique at the base, yellowish, blushed with red; stem
short; flesh melting, juicy, sugary, delicately perfumed; very good;
Nov. and Dec.

=Virgouleuse. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:224, Pl. LI. 1768. =2.=
Brookshaw _Hort. Reposit._ =1=:Pl. XLIX, fig. 1. 1823. =3.= Hogg _Fruit
Man._ 661. 1884.

This variety originated at the village of Virgoulee, near Limoges, of
which the Marquis Chambrette was the baron, and by whom it was first
introduced about 1650. From this circumstance it has often been called
_Chambrette_, after the marquis. The tree is strong and vigorous but
is a late and indifferent bearer and is apt to drop its fruit before
ripe. It is said that the fruit is very susceptible to absorbing
odors and flavors and must be stored near materials which will
improve rather than impair the flavor. In Europe it is regarded as an
excellent dessert pear, but in this country it has not met with great
success. Fruit medium to large, pyriform, rounded towards the eye and
tapering thickly towards the stalk; skin smooth, delicate, lively green
becoming a beautiful pale lemon-yellow, sprinkled with numerous gray
and red dots; calyx small, open, set in a small shallow basin; stem
an inch long, fleshy at the base, attached with no depression; flesh
yellowish-white, delicate, buttery, melting, very juicy, with a sugary
and perfumed flavor; Nov. to Jan.

=Vital. 1.= _Rev. Hort._ 271, 425, figs. 110, 111. 1891.

_Beurre Vital._ =2.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 185. 1889.

Found near Pontoise, Fr., prior to 1890 by M. Vital. Tree vigorous,
productive, an annual bearer. Fruit 3-1/4 in. long, 3 in. broad,
resembling White Doyenne, unequal, sloping towards both top and bottom
but more towards the stem end; skin beautiful golden-yellow in color;
stem short; flesh whitish, melting, slightly granular, sweet, agreeably
perfumed; sometimes keeping as late as May.

=Vitrier. 1.= Duhamel _Trait. Arb. Fr._ =2=:139, Pl. XLIV, fig. 4.
1768. =2.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =1=:106. 1831.

Valerius Cordus, a botanist, who died in 1544, mentions a _Pyrum
Vitreum_ common in Saxony, and it may be, then, that Vitrier is of this
origin. Fruit large, oval, deep red speckled with brown points on the
sunny side and light green dotted with deeper green on the shady side;
stem moderately large, an inch long; flesh white but not very delicate,
agreeable; Nov. and Dec.

=Volkmarserbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:13. 1856. =2.=
Lauche _Deut. Pom._ =II=:No. 96. Pl. 96. 1883.

_Volkmarsen._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:750, fig. 1869.

It is thought that this pear may have originated near the town of
Volkmarsen, Ger., prior to 1795. Tree large, vigorous, hardy, very
productive. Fruit small, oval, yellow, almost entirely covered with
brown, sprinkled with numerous dots of a brighter color; calyx open;
flesh half-melting, juicy, piquant, sweetish; Sept.

=Von Zugler. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 877. 1869.

Said by Downing in 1869 to be a new Belgian variety. Tree slender,
productive. Fruit medium, roundish-acute-pyriform, yellow, nearly
covered with cinnamon-russet; stem rather short, inclined in a slight
depression by a fleshy lip; calyx small, open; segments short, erect;
basin small; flesh white, juicy, melting, sweet, slightly aromatic;
very good; Sept.

=Voscovoya. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 320, 323. 1885. =2.= _Am. Pom.
Soc. Rpt._ 60, 61. 1887.

_Waxy_. 3. _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 323. 1885.

A Russian variety introduced by the Iowa Agricultural College from P.
J. Tretjakoff, Orel, Russia, about 1883, and said to be "an extra fine
pear." Professor Budd thought it identical with _Vosovoya_ or _Waxen_.

=Vosschanka. 1.= _Can. Hort._ =17=:291. 1894.

A variety grown by M. Mitschurin, one of the most celebrated Russian
horticulturists, in the Russian Province of Tambow, 53 north latitude.
Fruit medium, yellow; "flavor excellent, ripens in the month of August,
and keeps till October."

=Wade. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

Grown by I. C. Wade, Cornelia, Ga. Fruit rather large, roundish,
short-pyriform, irregular, yellow; dots raised, russet, very prominent;
stem short, very stout, fleshy, inserted in a round, very small,
shallow, abrupt, russeted cavity; calyx small, closed, in shallow,
abrupt basin; flesh white with yellow fibers, moderately juicy, tender,
rather coarse, nearly sweet; good; mid-season.

=Wadleigh. 1.= Cole _Am. Fr. Book_ 154. 1849.

Originated in New Hampshire. Tree rather hardy, moderately vigorous.
Fruit medium, almost globular, yellow, slightly netted and patched with
russet; stem short, stout, inserted in a slight cavity, sometimes by a
fold or lip; basin slight; calyx with small short lobes; flesh white,
fine, a little gritty, juicy, melting, pleasant; good; Sept.

=Wahre Canning. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:56. 1856.

Said by Dochnahl to have originated in England about 1842. Tree
vigorous and very productive. Fruit medium large, obovate, bright green
becoming greenish-yellow, often blushed with bright brown, sparsely
dotted; stem thin, 1-3/4 inches long; flesh non-aromatic, not juicy,
sweet, becoming mealy; Aug. and Sept.

=Wahre Faustbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:3. 1856.

According to Dochnahl this pear originated in Germany about 1801. Tree
very large and productive. Fruit very large, pyriform, regular, even
yellow, flecked and dotted with russet; calyx large, deep set; stem an
inch long; Oct.

=Wahre Schneebirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:199. 1856

Probably a wild pear of Austria, first mentioned in 1810. Fruit round,
green becoming yellow, somewhat blushed on the sunny side; dots
yellowish; stem thick, flesh very sour becoming sweeter; Dec.

=Wallis Kieffer. 1.= Stark Bros. _Year Book_ =5=:40. 1914.

The introducers of this pear, Stark Brothers Nurseries and Orchards
Company, received it from Henry Wallis of St. Louis County, Missouri.
It is reported as a strong-growing tree, blight resistant, and a heavy
bearer, fruit of better quality than Kieffer and two weeks earlier.

=Warner. 1.= _Ind. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 123. 1885.

Originated in Indiana in 1832. Tree said to be blight-resistant. Fruit
medium, symmetrical, light yellow; flesh buttery, melting, mild; fair
to good; last of Aug. and first of Sept.

=Washington. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 187. 1832. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=10=:296, fig. 1844.

_Robertson_. =3.= _N. E. Farmer_ =7=:259. 1830.

Discovered in a thorn hedge at Naaman's Creek, Del., about 1801, by
General Robertson or Robinson, the owner of the land, and said to
have been named by him in honor of his friend and commander, George
Washington. Tree vigorous, not large, an abundant bearer. Fruit
medium, obovate, ending very obtusely at the stem, regular, smooth,
clear yellow with a sprinkling of reddish dots on the sunny side;
stem an inch and a half long, inserted in a slight depression; calyx
small, partly closed, set in a shallow basin; flesh white, very juicy,
melting, sweet, agreeable; very good; Sept.

=Waterloo. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 663. 1884.

Fruit medium, turbinate, broad at the apex, pale green becoming
brownish-red, with a few streaks of brighter red next the sun, thickly
covered with gray russety dots; stem rather short, inserted in a small
round cavity; calyx open, in a deep, wide, even basin; flesh yellowish,
crisp, juicy, sugary, perfumed; second-rate; Sept.

=Watson. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =10=:212. 1844. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
878. 1869.

Originated in Plymouth, Mass., on the farm of William Watson prior
to 1843. Tree productive. Fruit below medium to above, roundish to
obtusely obovate, yellowish, covered mostly with russet; flesh whitish,
coarse, moderately juicy, sweet; of low quality; early Sept.

=Webster. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 878. 1869.

Said to have originated at Hudson, N. Y. Tree a moderate grower,
productive. Fruit medium, globular-obtuse-pyriform, yellow with traces
and nettings of russet and many brown dots; stem long, slender,
inclined, set in a small russeted cavity; calyx open, segments long,
reflexed; flesh white, juicy, melting, sweet, slightly aromatic; good
to very good; Nov.

=Weeping Willow. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 37. 1867.

A seedling by Asahel Foot "called Weeping Willow, from the remarkably
pendulous habit of the tree, but the fruit is of third quality."

=Weidenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:189. 1856.

Said to have originated in Germany about 1807. Fruit medium large,
pyriform, uneven, bright green becoming golden yellow, often blushed
with red and strongly dotted with gray, flecked with dark spots;
calyx large, open; stem crooked, an inch and a half long; flesh firm,
fine-grained, sweet, aromatic; Sept.

=Weidenblaettrige Herbstbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:15.
1856.

Said to have originated in Wuerttemberg, Ger., about 1830. Tree
of medium size. Fruit in clusters, medium large, pyriform, pale
greenish-yellow, becoming somewhat striped with red or marked by
reddish dots; Sept.

=Weihmier Sugar. 1.= _Hopedale Nurs. Cat._ 18. 1912.

It is said by the Hopedale Nursery Company, introducer of this variety,
that it is not a new pear but an unknown old one renamed. Tree thrifty,
blights somewhat. Fruit medium to large and regarded by some as of
"highest possible flavor."

=Weiler'sche Mostbirn. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 107. 1876. =2.= Loeschnig
_Mostbirnen_ 178, fig. 1913.

A native of Austria and valued highly for perry. Tree vigorous, an
early and heavy bearer. Fruit small, globular, greenish-yellow, dotted,
russet at the apex; stem medium in length, somewhat curved and set in
a slight depression; calyx open; flesh yellowish-white, firm, with a
sweet, aromatic flavor; Oct. and Nov.

=Weisse Fuchsbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 180, fig. 1913.

A perry pear probably of Austrian origin. Tree rather vigorous,
pyramidal, becoming more spreading. Fruit medium, usually turbinate,
light yellowish-green, covered with numerous fine dots, flaked with
russet around stem and calyx; calyx small, open; stem long, same color
as the fruit and continuous with it; flesh white, rather fine-grained,
juicy, sweet; Oct.

=Weisse Hangelbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 70, fig. 1913.

A perry pear probably of Austrian origin. Tree vigorous, broadly
pyramidal, large, a late but regular and heavy bearer. Fruit small,
round, greenish-yellow, covered with numerous fine, brown-russet dots
and small russet splotches; calyx small, open; stem short, inserted
without depression; flesh pure white, granular, very juicy, slightly
acid; Oct.

=Weisse Kochbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 102, fig. 1913.

A perry pear of unknown origin. Tree pyramidal, not a dependable
bearer. Fruit medium to above, globular, light-yellow, covered with
numerous russet dots; calyx open, set in a narrow, abrupt basin;
stem medium, brown; flesh pure white, slightly granular, very juicy,
pleasantly sweet; Oct.

=Weisse Pelzbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 144, fig. 1913.

A perry pear of Austria. Tree moderately vigorous, compact, an early
and regular bearer. Fruit medium, variable, turbinate, greenish-yellow
to yellowish-white, heavily dotted and splotched with russet,
especially about stem and calyx, often marked with scab spots; calyx
open; stem medium, strong, set with little or no depression; flesh
yellowish-white, slightly granular, juicy, sweetish, sometimes slightly
bitter; Sept. and Oct.

=Welbeck Bergamot. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 89. 1845. =2.= Hogg
_Fruit Man._ 663. 1884.

_Bergamotte Welbeck_. 3. Mas _Pom. Gen._ 5:87, fig. 332. 1880.

Fruit above medium, roundish, uneven in outline, bossed about the
stalk, smooth, shining, lemon-yellow, thickly sprinkled with large
russet specks, blushed with light crimson on side next the sun; calyx
small, open, set in a shallow depression; stem medium, inserted in an
uneven cavity; flesh white, rather coarse-grained, half-melting, very
juicy, sugary, without flavor; inferior; Oct. and Nov.

=Wellington. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 43. 1864. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 879. 1869.

This, with other seedlings, was imported from France about 1854
by A. Wellington, Braintree, Mass. It was exhibited before the
Massachusetts Horticultural Society in 1864. It may be that there
is a second Wellington pear, or even a third, for in 1852 there was
exhibited before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society "Wellington,
(two varieties)." A description of a Wellington pear is given in the
_Magazine of Horticulture_ of the following year, while in 1854 the
American Pomological Society included a variety of similar name in
its list of rejected fruits. At all events, the pear herein described
is the one now known as Wellington. Fruit large, similar in shape to
Beurre d'Anjou, but longer, yellow, clouded with green; calyx small,
open, with short, stiff, slightly incurved lobes, basin shallow; stem
very short, set in a slight cavity; flesh yellowish-white, somewhat
coarse, juicy, melting, sweet, with a peculiar "confectionery" flavor
or aroma; Nov.

=Welsche Bratbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:2. 1856. =2.=
Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 26; fig. 1913.

A perry pear of first rank which is said to have originated in
Wuerttemberg about 1823. Tree a very late yet regular and productive
bearer. Fruit medium, roundish-oval to turbinate, whitish, splotched
with yellowish-green, covered with numerous fine russet dots; calyx
large, open, star-shaped; stem medium, rather stout, set in a small
cavity as though stuck into the fruit; flesh greenish-white, granular,
slightly firm, juicy, sweet; last of Sept. and Oct.

=Weltz. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 52. 1871.

A seedling introduced by Leo Weltz, Wilmington, Ohio. Fruit large,
oblong-obovate-pyriform, good for cooking only.

=Wendell. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =16=:460. 1850. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
879. 1869.

The name given, in honor of H. Wendell, Albany, N. Y., to one of Van
Mons' seedlings which fruited in the Pomological Garden at Salem
previous to 1850. Tree moderately vigorous, upright, productive. Fruit
rather small to medium, roundish-pyriform, yellow, having a somewhat
russety skin, tinged with red on the sunny side, sprinkled with
dots; calyx small, partially open; stem short, stout; flesh whitish,
fine-grained, juicy, melting, buttery, sweet, pleasant; good; Sept.

=Wesner. 1.= _N. J. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 32. 1886.

A pear from W. D. Wesner, Prairiesville, Ark., which is said to be a
very productive early variety and one that may be valuable for shipping.

=Westcott. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:515. 1847. =2.= _Mag. Hort._ =17=:261,
fig. 30. 1851.

_Trescott._ 3. _Horticulturist_ 2:241, 287. 1847.

The Westcott, or _Wescott_, and the _Trescott_ are the same. Through a
typographical error in the description of Westcott, later corrected,
the name _Trescott_ first appeared. Westcott originated on the farm of
Niles Westcott in Cranston, R. I., previous to 1847. Tree vigorous, an
early bearer, productive. Fruit medium, roundish-obovate, occasionally
slightly flattened laterally, greenish-yellow becoming a light
orange-yellow, covered with numerous minute russet dots and with many
conspicuous specks of the same color; calyx medium, open, set in a
shallow basin; stem very long, rather slender, curved, inserted by a
fleshy nob in a shallow cavity; flesh whitish, rather coarse, melting,
juicy, sweet, agreeable; good; last of Sept. and early Oct.

=Westphaelische Melonenbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:116.
1856.

First reported from Westphalia and Thuringia, Ger., about 1803. Tree
very productive. Fruit oblong-obovate, pale green becoming pale
yellow; dots grayish; skin thick; calyx open; stem rather short; flesh
yellowish, deliciously melon-flavored; Jan. and Feb.

=Westrumb. 1.= Liebel _Syst. Anleit._ 132. 1825. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:754, fig. 1869.

Raised by Van Mons about 1825. Tree very productive. Fruit medium,
turbinate, greenish-yellow, overcast with bronze and netted with gray;
heavily dotted; stem very short, thick, continuous with the fruit;
flesh very juicy, of a very savory perfume; of highest quality; Sept.

=Wetmore. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 879. 1869.

Raised by E. B. Wetmore, Westmoreland, N. Y. Tree upright, vigorous.
Fruit small, roundish-oval, pale yellow, with nettings and patches of
russet, and thickly sprinkled with russet dots; stem long, slender, set
in a small cavity, sometimes by a lip; calyx open; lobes short, erect;
basin shallow, slightly corrugated; flesh white, juicy, melting, sweet,
aromatic; good to very good; Oct.

=Wharton Early. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 560. 1857.

_Precoce de Wharton._ =2.= _Guide Prat._ 113. 1876.

Origin unknown. Fruit medium, oblong-acute-pyriform, pale yellow, with
traces of russet, and thickly sprinkled with russet dots; stem long,
curved, rather slender, set in a slight cavity, sometimes by a lip;
calyx open in a small basin; flesh whitish, juicy, melting, sweet,
slightly musky; good to very good; Aug.

=Wheeler. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =24=:505, fig. 21. 1858. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 880. 1869.

About 1836 a maiden lady of Greenwich, R. I., planted the core of a
Gardener pear, from which sprang a tree, fruit of which was brought
to the attention of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society by Dr.
Wheeler of Greenwich in 1851. The Society named the pear in honor of
Dr. Wheeler. Tree vigorous, upright. Fruit medium, roundish-obovate,
pale yellowish-green, mottled with greenish patches and dotted with
numerous gray and green dots; stem medium, set in a small contracted
cavity; calyx open, set in an uneven, abrupt basin; flesh white, juicy,
melting, sweet, pleasant; good; Aug.

=Whieldon. 1.= _U. S. D. A. Rpt._ 127, fig., Pl. XI. 1863.

_McLellan._ =2.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 151. 1862.

Originated in the garden of Wm. W. Whieldon, Concord, Mass., and
first brought to notice about 1862. Tree moderately vigorous,
upright-spreading, a profuse bearer. Fruit medium or above,
obtuse-obovate, yellowish-green, tinged with red in the sun, dotted
and netted with russet, stem long, slender, slightly inclined, set in
a shallow cavity; calyx open, set in a medium sized, uneven basin;
segments recurved; flesh whitish, a little gritty near the core, juicy,
melting, buttery, sweet, pleasant, slightly aromatic; good to very
good; Sept.

=White Genneting. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 593. 1629.

"The White Genneting is a reasonable good peare, yet not equall to the
other."

=White Longland. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 664. 1884.

Said to be a good stewing pear, cooking to a splendid red color,
but coarse and rough in flavor; also used for perry. Fruit medium,
turbinate, even, regular, yellowish-green, pale red next the sun,
thickly sprinkled with large russet dots, with lines of russet and a
patch round the stalk; calyx open, set in a shallow basin; stem rather
short, straight, inserted in a narrow, shallow cavity; flesh yellowish,
firm, coarse-grained, with a brisk, sweet juice.

=White Seedling. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =19=:522. 1853. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 881. 1869.

_Semis de White._ =3.= _Guide Prat._ 75, 292. 1895.

A native of New Haven, Conn., exhibited in 1853. Tree vigorous,
very productive. Fruit medium, roundish-obovate to oblong-obovate,
greenish-yellow, sometimes with a brownish-blush in the sun,
considerably netted and patched with russet, sprinkled with many russet
dots; stem long, inclined, set in a shallow cavity, often by a fleshy
lip; calyx open, with short, erect lobes, set in a small, uneven basin;
flesh yellowish, juicy, melting; sweet, aromatic; good to very good;
Oct. to Feb.

=White Squash. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 664. 1884.

A Herefordshire, Eng., perry pear. Fruit medium, roundish-turbinate,
even and regular in outline, yellowish-green, strewn with small russety
dots, with here and there a patch of russet, but always russety round
the stalk and the calyx; calyx open, set in a saucer-like basin; stem
medium, inserted without depression and with a fleshy swelling on one
side; flesh coarse, crisp, very juicy, harshly astringent.

=White Star. 1.= _Spring Hill Nurs. Cat._ 10, fig. 1921.

Tree reported as hardy, productive and fruit as of the size of
Bartlett, keeping until May and June, and good for dessert.

=Whitfield. 1.= _Cultivator_ 66. 1839. =2.= _Mag. Hort._ =16=:296. 1850.

Placed on the list of Rejected Fruits by the second Congress of Fruit
Growers in 1850. Tree a good bearer. Fruit medium, oblong-obovate,
yellowish-brown, buttery, very good; Oct. and Nov.

=Wiest. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =18=:492. 1852. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
882. 1869.

Reported from Pennsylvania in 1852. Tree vigorous, an early bearer,
inclined to be alternate. Fruit medium or below, roundish-obovate,
green, shaded with dull red and sprinkled with green and gray dots;
stem rather stout, medium in length; calyx small, closed; lobes
connivent; flesh whitish-green, juicy, melting, subacid; good; Sept.

=Wilbur. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ 10:211. 1844. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._
882. 1869.

_Early Wilbur._ =3.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 4. 1843.

The original tree, which was found growing wild in a piece of mowing
land on the farm of D. Wilbur, Jr., in Somerset, Mass., was said in
1844 to be 66 years old. Shoots slender, light olive-brown. Fruit below
medium, roundish-obovate, dull green, becoming pale yellow, slightly
netted and patched with russet, and thickly sprinkled with russet dots;
stem small, set in a small cavity; calyx open; segments long; basin
small; flesh yellowish, juicy, melting, slightly astringent; good; Sept.

=Wilde Filzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:1. 1856.

A wild pear reported from Belgium about 1800. Fruit small, roundish,
greenish, becoming yellowish, dotted with gray; stem long; flesh acid,
becoming sweetish; poor; fall and winter. May be used for dwarfing.

=Wilde Herrnbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:188. 1856.

Reported from Germany about 1804. Tree very large. Fruit medium, broad,
bright green becoming yellowish-green, often somewhat blushed on the
sunny side, often flecked and patched with russet; dots light gray;
stem rather long, inserted by a fleshy protuberance; flesh white,
slightly musky, sweet; fair and below; Sept.

=Wilde Holzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:196. 1856.

Reported as wild and widely disseminated as early as 1641; its
seedlings are said sometimes to be used for stocks. Tree very large and
productive. Fruit small, round, green, dotted with light russet; seeds
numerous, dark brown; flesh very acid; Oct.

=Wilder Sugar. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 135. 1920.

Reported by Orange County Nursery Company, Anaheim, Cal., as "Medium
large, greenish yellow shaded brown, excellent quality. Vigorous and
productive. August."

=Wilding von Einsiedel. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:2. 1856.
=2.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 182, fig. 1913.

This perry pear, which has also been recommended as a street tree,
was reported from Wuerttemberg about 1832. Tree very vigorous,
pyramidal, not leafy, very productive. Fruit bluntly conic pyriform,
small, greenish-yellow, brownish on side next the sun; covered with
characteristic brown to reddish-brown dots, russeted about stem and
calyx; calyx half open; stem short, thick; flesh juicy, firm, acid; Oct.

=Wilding von Gronau. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:96. 1856.

Reported from Hesse, Ger., about 1844. Fruit small, blunt,
broad-conic-pyriform, yellow, blushed on the sunny side, flecked and
dotted with gray, russeted about base and apex; calyx closed; stem
short; flesh sweet-scented, sweet; end of Sept.

=Wilford. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

"A good and fair pear."

=Wilkinson. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 187. 1832. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=20=:470, fig. 25. 1854.

This pear, one of the oldest American kinds, was introduced by the
exhibition of specimens before the Massachusetts Horticultural Society,
in October, 1829, and given the name "Wilkinson," in compliment to the
owner of the farm on which the tree originated and was then growing,
Mr. Jeremiah Wilkinson, Cumberland, R. I., brother of the noted Jemima
Wilkinson. Tree thrifty, hardy, a regular bearer; shoots long, upright,
stout, olive-yellow, with oblong white specks. Fruit medium, ovoid,
obtuse at both ends, smooth, glossy, yellow dotted with brown points;
stem rather long, rather stout, inserted obliquely in a rather wide and
deep cavity; calyx medium, open, set in a shallow basin; flesh very
white, juicy, melting, sweet, rich, with a slight perfume; good; Oct.
to Dec.

=Wilkinson Winter. 1.= _Ill. Hort Soc. Rpt._ 113. 1876. =2.= _Ibid._
83. 1880.

A variety raised near Peoria, Ill., from seed planted by A.
Wilkinson, and first reported before the Illinois State Horticultural
Society about 1876. Tree said to be hardy, vigorous, productive,
blight-resistant. Fruit said to be large, golden; very good; season
until spring.

=Willermoz. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:86, 461. 1854. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom._ =2=:756, fig. 1869.

Fruited with M. Bivort, Jodoigne, Bel., in 1848. Tree an extremely
good grower, forming a fine pyramidal growth, with young shoots dark,
dull, olive-brown, very productive. Fruit large, obtuse-pyriform,
greenish-yellow, tinged with red, with nettings and some large patches
of russet and with many small russet dots; stem medium, rather stout,
inclined, set in a small cavity; calyx open or partially closed, set
in an abrupt basin; flesh whitish, buttery, juicy, melting, coarse at
core, slightly vinous; good to very good; Nov. to Jan.

=William. 1.= _Cultivator_ 175, fig. 8. 1845. =2.= _Mag. Hort._
=11=:252. 1845.

_William Edwards._ =3.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 420. 1845.

This seedling pear is said to be a "species of Virgoulouse," and was
raised by Governor H. W. Edwards of New Haven, Conn., previous to 1845.
Tree very productive. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform, terminating rather
abruptly at the stalk, yellow, becoming profusely dotted with red and
russet points or dots on the sunny side; flesh yellowish-white, sweet,
buttery, not juicy or melting enough for dessert purposes but good for
baking; Sept.

=William Prince. 1.= Mag. Hort. =17=:472. 1851. =2.= Downing _Fr. Trees
Am._ 883. 1869.

Other than that this variety was reported from the United States
about 1848, nothing of its origin is known. Tree vigorous, upright,
productive. Fruit medium, roundish-pyriform, greenish-yellow, shaded
with crimson in the sun, covered with many brown dots; stem medium to
below; calyx open, set in a shallow basin; flesh white, juicy, melting,
sweet; good to very good; Sept. and Oct.

=Williams Double Bearing. 1.= Prince _Pom. Man._ =2=:215. 1832.

Raised from a seed of the Saint Germain, in the garden of Mrs.
Williams, Salem, Mass. Tree said to bear two crops, the fruit of the
first of the size herein mentioned and ripening in early October, that
of the second much smaller and ripening from two to four weeks later.
Fruit large, resembles its parent but greater in diameter; flesh of
fine quality, melting, but not highly flavored.

=Williams Early. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =3=:51. 1837. =2.= _Ibid._ =14=:344,
fig. 37. 1848.

Originated with Aaron Davis Williams on his farm in Roxbury, Mass.,
probably about 1830. Tree a moderate grower, young shoots brownish red.
Fruit medium to below, roundish-pyriform, ending obtusely at the stem,
yellow, covered with bright crimson and thickly sprinkled with scarlet
dots on the sunny side; stem rather long, stout, slightly fleshy at
the base, inserted without any cavity; calyx open, slightly sunken in
a furrowed basin; flesh yellowish-white, a little coarse-grained at
first, becoming juicy, half buttery, with a slight musky flavor; good;
middle of Sept.

=Williams d'Hiver. 1.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:760, figs. 1869. =2.=
_Am. Jour. Hort._ =9=:219, fig. 1871.

_Williams Winter_. =3.= _Can. Exp. Farms Rpt._ 380. 1902.

Raised by M. Leroy, Angers, Fr., and first fruited in 1862. Tree
vigorous, productive. Fruit blunt-pyriform, variable in shape, somewhat
bossed, yellow, finely dotted and veined with yellow in basin, with
lightish gray about stalk and on face next the sun; stem short, strong,
thick, set rather obliquely and often to one side of the axis; calyx
medium, half-closed, slightly sunken; flesh white, very fine, very
melting, very juicy, sugary, acidulated, with a fine, fresh perfume,
Dec. to Feb.

=Williams panachee. 1.= _Guide Prat._ 80, 312. 1876.

From the name, it is to be supposed that this is merely a striped-leaf
variety of Bartlett.

=Williamson. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =6=:494. 1851. =2.= Downing _Fr.
Trees Am._ 883. 1869.

This seedling sprang up in a piece of woodland belonging to Nicholas
Williamson on the south side of Long Island. Tree hardy, vigorous, a
good bearer. Fruit medium, roundish-obovate to roundish-oblate, obtuse
at stem, greenish-yellow, sprinkled with russet dots and considerably
russeted at both ends; stem short, stout, set in a medium sized cavity;
calyx open, often wanting, set in a deep, rather narrow basin; flesh
yellowish-white, rather coarse, half-melting, juicy, sugary, vinous;
good to slightly above; Oct.

=Wilmington. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 90. 1856. =2.= _Horticulturist_
=12=:111, fig. 1857.

This is a seedling of Passe Colmar, raised in 1847 by Dr. Brinckle of
Philadelphia, and first fruited in 1855. Tree a moderate grower, late
bearer; young wood dull yellowish-brown. Fruit medium, obtuse-pyriform
to roundish-ovate, greenish-yellow, netted and patched with russet,
thickly sprinkled with russet dots; stem long, curved, inserted
obliquely in a small cavity, often by a lip; calyx medium, open, set
in a wide, moderately deep basin; flesh whitish green, juicy, buttery,
melting, sweet, pleasant, slightly aromatic; good to very good; Sept.

=Windsor. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592, fig. 10. 1629. =2.= Bunyard
_Handb. Hardy Fr._ 204. 1920.

_Madame._ =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ 2:369, fig. 1869.

_Summer Bell._ =4.= Thomas _Am. Fruit Cult._ 571. 1885.

According to Leroy this variety originated in Holland, and was
published in 1771 under the name _Hallemine Bonne_ by Knoop. In French
gardens it received the name _Madame_. In England, Windsor is often
called _Cuisse Madame_. A "Windsor," which appears to be identical with
the Windsor of Knoop, is described by English writers as early as 1629.
Hogg quotes an English writer as saying, "It was raised from seed of
the _Cuisse Madame_, by a person of the name of Williamson ..." before
1750. Moreover, it is mentioned in 1592 as being cultivated about
Naples, and 1563 in England. What the origin is appears undeterminable.
Tree one of the strongest growers, upright, tall, a regular and
abundant bearer; shoots remarkably stout, perfectly upright, dark
brown. Fruit large, pyriform or bell-shaped, very smooth, greenish
becoming pale yellow; stem long, fairly stout, inserted without
depression; calyx open, set on level with prominent ribs around; flesh
white, tender, buttery, rather coarse-grained, slightly acid, somewhat
astringent; rots at the core; Aug.

=Winship. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =10=:212. 1844. =2.= _Ibid._ =13=:485, fig.
41. 1847.

Originated in the nurseries of the Messrs. Winship, Brighton, Mass.,
about 1832. Tree vigorous, an early and productive bearer; young
wood yellowish-reddish-brown. Fruit medium, oblong-acute-pyriform,
greenish-yellow with traces and patches of russet; stem long, rather
slender, inserted with no cavity; calyx large, closed, set in a small,
corrugated basin; flesh white, rather coarse, not juicy, not melting;
poor to fair; Aug.

=Winslow. 1.= _Mass. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 45. 1866.

A seedling pear fruited by S. A. Shurtleff, Brookline, Mass., in 1865,
and described by him as, "Diam. 2-1/2 inches; color, brown russet;
flesh, sweet, juicy, buttery and high flavored; ripens well. Oct. 21.
Roundish."

=Winter. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 60. 1887. =2.= _Ia. Sta. Bul._
=3=:74. 1888.

_Osimaya_. =3.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 60. 1887.

Received by the Iowa Agricultural College in 1879 from R. Shroeder,
Moscow, Russia. The tree is said to be hardy and free from blight and
the fruit to be large than Bessemianka, quite as good in quality, and
in season in central Russia the last days of September.

=Winter Jonah. 1.= _N. J. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 214. 1889. =2.= _Can. Exp.
Farms Rpt._ 422. 1903.

Tree a medium grower. Fruit medium, roundish, pale yellow with a faint
blush on the sunny side, a few small, dark greenish-yellow spots,
and many small, gray dots; stem medium, short, set in a very slight
depression; calyx large, open, set in a narrow and shallow basin;
winter.

=Winter Pear. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =20=:75. 1854.

Sent to the Fruit Committee of the Pennsylvania Horticultural Society
in 1854 by Charles Kessler, Reading, Pa. Fruit medium, roundish,
yellow, scarcely "good" in quality.

=Winter Popperin. 1.= Parkinson _Par. Ter._ 592. 1629.

One of two "very good dry firme peares, somewhat spotted, and brownish
on the outside."

=Winter Rousselet. 1.= Mawe-Abercrombie _Univ. Gard. Bot._ 1778.

_Rousselet d'Hiver_. =3.= Leroy _Dict. Pom._ =2=:593, fig. 1869.

An ancient French pear of unknown origin, though it was described
by Claude Saint-Etienne in 1670 and by Duhamel in the eighteenth
century. Fruit small, turbinate, more or less obtuse, usually somewhat
contracted toward the top, and often depressed on one side and
mammillate on the other, yellow-green dotted with gray russet and
blushed with reddish-brown on the face exposed to the sun; flesh white,
semi-breaking, watery, rather granular, juice abundant, saccharine,
rarely having much aroma and sometimes acid; second; Feb. and Mar.

=Winter Seckel. 1.= Downing _Fr. Trees Am._ 562. 1857.

Said to have originated near Fredericksburg, Va., and to have been
introduced by H. R. Roby. Fruit small, obovate, yellow, with a brownish
cheek in sun, patched and netted with russet, and covered with many
large and brown dots; stem slender; calyx large, open; flesh white, a
little coarse at core, juicy, half-melting.

=Winter Sweet Sugar. 1.= Brookshaw _Hort. Reposit._ =2=:151, Pl. 81.
1823.

Tree productive. Fruit turbinate, greenish, juicy, sweet, not very
richly flavored; will keep till March.

=Winter Williams. 1.= _Garden_ =67=:18. 1905.

A cross between Bartlett and Glou Morceau shown before the Royal
Horticultural Society in 1905 by Messrs. James Veitch & Sons, England.
Fruit said to resemble Glou Morceau in shape; skin yellow; flavor like
Bartlett; later than Bartlett.

=Winterbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:70. 1856.

Reported from northern Germany about 1773. Fruit medium, turbinate,
smooth, bright green, dotted with gray; stem long; flesh yellowish,
half breaking, sweetish; Dec. to Apr.

=Winterliebesbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 301. 1889.

_Poire d'Amour d'Hiver._ =2.= Mas _Pom. Gen._ =6=:15, fig. 392. 1880.

This pear is of German origin and bears also the name of _Kirschbirnen_
or _Church Pear_. Fruit small or nearly medium, conic or
globular-conic, sometimes short and sometimes long; skin thick, firm,
rough, water-green with numerous and conspicuous brown dots; changing
to pale yellow covered over a large area of the side next the sun with
a vivid currant red on the central part and more brown on the borders;
flesh white, coarse, breaking, a little gritty around the core, juice
sufficient in quantity and sweet, vinous and musky; good for kitchen
purposes and keeps a long time; Oct. and Nov.

=Winterrobine. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 500. 1817. =2.= Dochnahl Fuehr_.
Obstkunde_ =2=:111. 1856.

Thuringia, Ger., 1799. Fruit fairly large, ventriculous-conic, obtuse;
apex inclined, sides unequal, green turning yellow-green, often
somewhat blushed, dotted with dark green, speckled with russet; flesh
gritty near the center, whitish-yellow, sweet, musky, buttery, melting,
aromatic; first for all purposes; Jan. to Mar.

=Witte Princesse. 1.= Knoop _Pomologie_ 96, 139, fig. 1771.

An old pear, probably of French origin. Tree vigorous, productive.
Fruit medium to above, oblong-pyriform, drawn to a point at the stem;
whitish-yellow or whitish-green, dotted with pale brown dots and
occasionally patched here and there with brown; stem medium to above in
length; flesh mellow, gritty, agreeably but not highly flavored; Aug.
and Sept.

=Wolfsbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:2. 1856. =2.= Loeschnig
_Mostbirnen_ 104, fig. 1913.

A perry pear common to Wuerttemberg from an early date. Tree medium
vigorous, large, roundish, a late but good bearer. Fruit medium,
roundish, yellow, covered with russet dots, devoid of red; calyx
large, open; stem very long, set obliquely without depression; flesh
yellowish-white, firm, acid; Oct.

=Woodbridge Seckel. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 121. 1860. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 885. 1869.

In 1860 a Mr. Woodbridge, Detroit, Mich., exhibited a seedling known as
No. 2 before the Fruit Committee of the American Pomological Society.
This seedling was subsequently named Woodbridge Seckel. Tree moderately
vigorous. Fruit small, pyriform, pale yellow, shaded and marbled with
crimson in the sun, thickly sprinkled with brown and crimson dots; stem
long, slender; calyx open; flesh yellowish, juicy, melting, sweet,
vinous; very good, but rapidly decays at the core; Sept.

=Woodstock. 1.= _Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt._ 201. 1856. =2.= Elliott _Fr. Book_
416. 1859.

Said to have originated at Woodstock, Vt., and first reported about
1856. Tree a moderate grower, very productive; young wood olive-brown.
Fruit medium to below, roundish-obtuse to obovate-pyriform, pale
yellow, netted and patched, and thickly sprinkled with russet dots;
stem long, rather slender, inserted in a small cavity, often by a lip;
calyx large, open, placed in a rather deep, abrupt basin; lobes long,
slender, persistent; flesh white, juicy, melting, sweet, pleasant,
slightly musky; good to very good; Sept.

=Worden Meadow. 1.= _Cultivator_ N. S. =2=:340. 1845.

Schuyler Worden, who originated the Worden grape, stated in 1845 that
he had raised this pear in Oswego, N. Y., from grafts given him by
an old countryman. Tree vigorous, productive. Fruit medium to large,
shape variable and surface uneven; skin yellow at maturity; flesh
fine-grained, melting, juicy, sweet, with a musky flavor; ripens about
the middle of Sept.

=Woerlesbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:194. 1856.

A perry pear reported from Wuerttemberg about 1830. Tree not vigorous,
large, long-lived, very productive. Fruit small, oval or pyriform,
solid bright green, turning lemon-yellow, numerously dotted with gray,
somewhat flecked with russet; calyx in a slight depression; flesh
juicy, acid, bitter.

=Wormsley Grange. 1.= Kenrick _Am. Orch._ 187. 1832.

This is a variety which is said to have been sent to the Hon. John
Lowell by Mr. Knight with the remarks that it requires to be gathered
before it is quite ripe and that it is a variety of first-rate
excellence in Herefordshire, Eng. In 1842 it was listed as having been
removed from the gardens of the London Horticultural Society because of
inferior merit.

=Wurzer. 1.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit_. 114. 1825.

_Wurzer d'Automne._ =2.= _Mag. Hort_. =16=:296. 1850. =2.= _Am. Pom.
Soc. Rpt._ 240. 1854.

Reported from Belgium about 1821. Tree vigorous, leafy, thorny. Fruit
rather large, pyriform, solid green, becoming covered with russet,
heavily dotted with reddish-brown; calyx small, set in a shallow basin;
stem medium long, fleshy, set in a rather deep cavity; flesh pithy,
sweet, vinous; Nov.

=Yat. 1.= Lindley _Guide Orch. Gard_. 351. 1831. =2.= Leroy _Dict.
Pom_. =2=:762, fig. 1869.

_Gute Graue._ =3.= Liegel _Syst. Anleit._ 124. 1825.

_Beurre Gris d'Ete de Hollande._ =4.= Mas _Le Verger_ =2=:85, fig. 41.
1866-73.

_Beurre Gris d'Ete._ =5.= _Guide Prat._ 70, 245. 1876.

This pear is said to have been brought to England from Holland about
1770 by Thomas Harvey. It is not to be confused with the Grise-Bonne.
Tree large, vigorous, hardy, very productive. Fruit variable, small
to above medium, obovate-pyriform to oblong-turbinate, green, thickly
covered with russet, sprinkled with numerous gray specks, sometimes
colored brownish-red when exposed to the sun; calyx small, open, set in
a shallow basin; stem rather long, slender, obliquely inserted without
depression and often by a fleshy protuberance; flesh white, tender,
melting, juicy with a rich, sugary and highly perfumed flavor; rated
as of little value by Downing, of first quality by Mas, as highly
estimable by the Germans, and as an excellent early pear by Hogg; Aug.
and Sept.

=Yellow Huff-cap. 1.= Hogg _Fruit Man._ 669. 1884.

A Herefordshire perry pear. Fruit quite small, obovate or turbinate,
entirely covered with rough brown russet, and with only portions of the
ground color showing through in specks; calyx small, open, with short
horny segments, set even with the surface; stem rather long, inserted
without depression; flesh yellowish, with a greenish tinge.

=Youngken Winter Seckel.=

According to correspondence this pear was raised from seed of Seckel by
David Youngken, Richlandtown, Pa., about 1868. The tree is reported as
being upright and prolific, and the fruit as keeping through the winter.

=Zache. 1.= _Mich. Sta. Bul._ =177=:39. 1899. =2.= _Ibid._ =187=:75.
1901.

A Chinese sand pear, of value only as a novelty, grown at the South
Haven Substation of the Michigan Agricultural Experiment Station in
1894. Tree a fine, strong grower with large, thick, glossy leaves.
Fruit roundish oblate, resembling an apple in appearance, orange with
many light yellowish dots and specks; flesh coarse, crisp; poor; winter.

=Zapfenbirn. 1.= Christ _Handb._ 559. 1817.

Tree large, very productive. Fruit long-acute-pyriform, yellow, finely
dotted; flesh breaking, not juicy, musky; used for drying and for
cooking; early winter.

=Zarskaja. 1.= _Ia. Hort. Soc. Rpt._ 61. 1880.

Reported by J. L. Budd to be a Russian variety which has gritty
thorn-like wood and which therefore does not unite well when grafted
upon apple stock.

=Zenon. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 302. 1884. =2.= _Guide Prat._ 62. 1895.

Of European origin, first reported in 1884. Tree moderately vigorous,
producing excellent fruit upon quince stock. Fruit medium, of the form
of White Doyenne; flesh very fine, juicy, sweet, agreeable, slightly
aromatic, granular near the core; first; end of autumn.

=Zephirin Gregoire. 1.= _Horticulturist_ =9=:78, fig. 1854. =2.= _Ann.
Pom. Belge_ =3=:79, fig. 1855. =3.= Bunyard _Handb. Hardy Fr._ 205.
1920.

M. Gregoire, pomologist, Jodoigne, Bel., raised this variety supposedly
from seeds of Passe Colmar about 1831. Tree pyramidal, vigorous,
very productive, succeeds best upon pear stock; young wood smooth,
light olive-yellow-brown. Fruit medium to above, roundish-obovate,
pale greenish-yellow, becoming uniform pale waxen-yellow, covered
with patches of russet and many green and gray dots, often reddish
in the sun; stem medium in length, fleshy, very fleshy at insertion,
set obliquely without depression; calyx small, open, set in a slight
depression; lobes long; flesh yellowish-white, buttery, melting, juicy,
rich, sugary, vinous, highly aromatic; good to very good; Nov. to Feb.

=Zephirin Louis. 1.= _Ann. Pom. Belge_ =4=:95, fig. 1856. =2.= Downing
_Fr. Trees Am._ 886. 1869.

This pear was raised by M. Xavier Gregoire, Jodoigne, Bel. It was first
reported in 1849. Tree a moderately healthy grower, rather scraggly,
moderately productive. Fruit medium or below, roundish, slightly
obovate, greenish-yellow, rusty-red becoming bright vermilion in
the sun, thickly sprinkled with large dark brown-russet patches and
dots; stem very short, inserted in a small round cavity; calyx small,
open, set in a deep basin; flesh yellowish-white, tinged with green,
coarse-grained, crisp, rather half melting, juicy, sweet, slightly
aromatic; good; Dec. and Jan.

=Zieregger Mostbirne. 1.= Loeschnig _Mostbirnen_ 146, fig. 1913.

A perry pear which is said to have sprung from seed in Styria. Tree
medium, roundish, a rather late and rather light bearer. Fruit
roundish-oblate, medium in size, similar to Rummelter Birne but
smaller, greenish-yellow, finely dotted, russeted; stem short, thick,
brown; calyx half open to open, with erect lobes; flesh granular,
whitish-green, not especially juicy, rich in sugar; Oct.

=Zimmtfarbige Schmalzbirne. 1.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:58. 1856.

Middle Germany; first published in 1826. Fruit rather large, pyramidal,
often obtuse, slightly ribbed; skin rough, entirely covered with light
cinnamon russet, without dots; flesh granular and pulpy, sweet; third
for dessert, very good for household use; Oct.

=Zink Pfalzgrafenbirne. 1.= Mathieu _Nom. Pom._ 302. 1889.

_Weisse Pfalzgrafenbirne._ =2.= Dochnahl _Fuehr. Obstkunde_ =2=:49. 1856.

Reported from Germany about 1766. Tree a late but productive bearer.
Fruit medium, bulging pyriform, irregular, greenish-yellow, becoming
lemon yellow, often blushed, dotted with yellow, later dotted with
brown and green; stem thick, fleshy, rather long; calyx open; lobes
long; flesh sweet, perfumed; fair; early Sept.

=Zoar Beauty. 1.= _Mag. Hort._ =13=:110. 1847. =2.= Elliott _Fr. Book_
347, fig. 1854.

_Belle de Zoar._ 3. _Guide Prat._ 112, 234. 1876.

Originated at Zoar, Ohio. Tree vigorous, an early and abundant bearer;
shoots dark brown. Fruit medium or below, acute-pyriform, light yellow,
thickly dotted with minute green dots, beautiful crimson or carmine
in the sun with deep red dots; stem long, curved, slender, fleshy at
insertion, often by a ring or lip, in a small cavity; calyx large for
size of fruit, open; lobes erect or recurved; flesh white, granular,
half breaking, moderately juicy, sweet, aromatic; good; early Aug.

=Zoe. 1.= _Ont. Fr. Gr. Assoc. Rpt._ 72. 1883. =2.= _Guide Prat._ 101.
1895.

A foreign sort, probably French. Tree very vigorous, thrifty. Fruit
very large, oblong, deep green; flesh tender, melting, sweet; Dec. and
Jan.




         BIBLIOGRAPHY AND REFERENCES, WITH ABBREVIATIONS USED


The list of books which follows contains all American pomological works
in which the pear is discussed at any length. Only such European books
are listed, however, as were found useful in writing _The Pears of New
York_. Only periodicals are listed to which references are made in the
text of the book. The reports and bulletins of experiment stations and
horticultural societies are not included since the abbreviations used
for such publications will be recognized by all. The date of copyright
has been preferred to that of publication, though sometimes it has been
necessary to use the latter, as when there were several editions from
the same copyright.


Aepfel u. Birnen

 Aepfel und Birnen. Die wichtigsten deutschen Kernobstsorten.
 Herausgegeben im engen Anschlusse an die "Statistik der deutschen
 Kernobstsorten" von R. Goethe, H. Degenkolb und R. Mertens und
 unter der Leitung der Obstund Weinbau-Abteilung der Deutschen
 Landwirtschafts-Gesellschaft. (_Illustrirt._) Berlin: 1894.

Am. Gard

 American Gardening. An Illustrated Journal of Horticulture and
 Gardener's Chronicle. New York: 1892-1904. Copyright, 1903. (Before
 its union with Popular Gardening in 1892, the publication was known as
 The American Garden. Both Popular Gardening and The American Garden
 resulted from the union or absorption of several other horticultural
 periodicals.)

Am. Gard. Mag.

 The American Gardener's Magazine, and Register of Useful Discoveries
 and Improvements in Horticulture and Rural Affairs. See Mag. Hort.

Am. Hort. An.

 American Horticultural Annual. A Year-book of Horticultural Progress
 for the Professional and Amateur Gardener, Fruit-grower, and Florist.
 (_Illustrated._) New York: 1867. Copyright, 1867. New edition. New
 York: 1870. Copyright, 1869.

Am. Jour. Hort.

 The American Journal of Horticulture and Florist's Companion.
 (_Illustrated._) Volumes 1-5. Boston: 1867-1869. Copyrights,
 1867-1869. Continued as Tilton's Journal of Horticulture and Floral
 Magazine. (_Illustrated._) Volumes 6-9. Boston: 1869-71. Copyrights,
 1869-1871.

Am. Pom. Soc. Rpt.

 Proceedings of the American Pomological Society. Issued usually
 biennially from 1850 to date. First published as the Proceedings of
 the National Convention of Fruit Growers in 1848.

Ann. Hort.

 Annal of Horticulture and yearbook of information on practical
 gardening. 5 Volumes. London: 1846-1850.

Ann. Pom. Belge

 Annales de Pomologie Belge et Etrangere; publiees par la Commission
 royale de Pomologie Instituee par S. M. le Roi des Belges.
 (_Illustre._) Huit Tomes. Bruxelles: 1853-1860.


Bailey, Ann. Hort.

 Annals of Horticulture in North America for the Years 1889-1893. A
 Witness of Passing Events and a Record of Progress. By L. H. Bailey.
 New York: 1890-1894. Copyrights, 1889, 1891-1894.

Baltet, Cult. Fr.

 Traite de la Culture Fruitiere Commerciale et Bourgeoise. Par Charles
 Baltet. (_Illustre._) Quatrieme Edition. Paris: 1908.

Barry, Fr. Garden

 The Fruit Garden. By P. Barry. (_Illustrated._) New York: 1852.
 Copyright, 1851. Revised Edition, 1896. Copyright, 1883.

Black, Cult. Peach & Pear

 The Cultivation of the Peach and the Pear, on the Delaware And
 Chesapeake Peninsula; with a Chapter on Quince Culture and the
 Culture of Some of the Nut-Bearing Trees. By John S. Black, M. D.
 (_Illustrated._) Wilmington: 1886. Copyright, 1886.

Bradley, Gard.

 New Improvements of Planting and Gardening, both Philosophical and
 Practical. In three parts. By Richard Bradley. (_Illustrated._)
 Seventh Edition with Appendix. London: 1739.

Bridgeman, Gard. Ass't.

 The Young Gardener's Assistant, in three parts. By Thomas Bridgeman.
 New Edition, with an Appendix. New York: 1857. Copyright, 1847.

Brookshaw, Hort. Reposit.

 The Horticultural Repository, containing Delineations of the best
 Varieties of the Different Species of English Fruits. By George
 Brookshaw. (_Illustrated._) In Two Volumes. London: 1823.

Brookshaw, Pom. Brit.

 Pomona Britannica, or A Collection of the Most Esteemed Fruits at
 present Cultivated In Great Britain; selected principally from the
 Royal Gardens At Hampton Court, and the remainder from The Most
 Celebrated Gardens Round London; Accurately Drawn and Colored from
 Nature, with Full Descriptions of their Various Qualities, Seasons,
 &c. By George Brookshaw. Volumes I and II. London: 1817. Vol. II. The
 Pear.

Budd-Hansen, Am. Hort. Man.

 American Horticultural Manual. By J. L. Budd, assisted by N. E.
 Hansen. (_Illustrated._) In Two Volumes. Volume 2, New York and
 London: 1903. Copyright, 1903.

Bunyard, Handb. Hardy Fr.

 A Handbook of Hardy Fruits more commonly grown in Great Britain.
 Apples and Pears. By Edward A. Bunyard. London: 1920.

Bunyard-Thomas, Fr. Gard.

 The Fruit Garden. By George Bunyard and Owen Thomas. (_Illustrated._)
 London and New York: 1904.


Can. Hort.

 The Canadian Horticulturist. (_Illustrated._) Toronto and Peterboro:
 1878 to date.

Cat. Cong. Pom. France

 Societe Pomologique de France Catalogue Descriptif des Fruits Adoptes
 par le Congres Pomologique. Lyon: 1887. Ibid.: 1906.

Cecil, Hist. Gard. Eng.

 A History Of Gardening In England. By the Hon. Mrs. Evelyn Cecil.
 Third and enlarged edition. (_Illustrated._) New York: 1910.

Christ, Handb.

 Handbuch ueber die Obstbaumzucht und Obstlehre. Von J. L. Christ.
 Vierte, sehr verbesserte und vermehrte Auflage. Frankfurt: 1817.

Cole, Am. Fr. Book

 The American Fruit Book; containing directions for Raising,
 Propagating, and Managing Fruit Trees, Shrubs and Plants; with a
 description of the Best Varieties of Fruit, including New and Valuable
 Kinds. By S. W. Cole. (_Illustrated._) Boston: 1849. Copyright, 1849.

Country Gent.

 The Country Gentleman. Albany: 1853-1865. The Cultivator & Country
 Gentleman. Albany: 1866-1897. The Country Gentleman. Albany and
 Philadelphia: 1898 to date.

Coxe, Cult. Fr. Trees

 A View of the Cultivation of Fruit Trees, and the Management of
 Orchards and Cider; with accurate descriptions of the most estimable
 varieties of Native and Foreign Apples, Pears, Peaches, Plums and
 Cherries, cultivated in the middle states of America. By William Coxe.
 (_Illustrated._) Philadelphia: 1817. Copyright, 1817.

Cultivator

 The Cultivator. Albany: 1834-1865. In 1866 united with The Country
 Gentleman.

Cult. & Count. Gent.

 The Cultivator & Country Gentleman. See Country Gent.


De Candolle, Or. Cult. Plants

 Origin of Cultivated Plants. By Alphonse de Candolle. Geneva
 [Switzerland]: 1882. New York: 1885.

Decaisne & Naudin, Man. Amat. Jard

 Manuel de L'Amateur Des Jardins Traite General D'Horticulture. Par Jh.
 Decaisne et CH. Naudin. (_Illustre._) Quatre Tomes. Paris. Vol. 4.
 Pears.

Deut. Obstsorten

 Deutschland's Obstsorten bearbeitet von Mueller-Diemitz,
 Grau-Koerbelitz, Bissmann-Gotha unter Mitwirkung hervorragender
 Fachmaenner. Sechs Baende; Hefte 1-18. Stuttgart: 1905-10.

Dochnahl, Fuehr. Obstkunde

 Der sichere Fuehrer in der Obstkunde auf botanisch-pomologischen Wege
 oder Systematische Breschreibung aller Obstsorten. Von F. J. Dochnahl.
 Vier Baende. Nuernberg: 1855-60. Vol. 2, 1856. Pears.

Downing, Fr. Trees Am.

 The Fruits and Fruit Trees of America: or the culture, propagation,
 and management, in the garden and orchard, of fruit trees
 generally; with Descriptions Of All The Finest Varieties Of Fruit,
 Native and Foreign, Cultivated In This Country. By A. J. Downing.
 (_Illustrated._) New York & London: 1845. Copyright, 1845. Second
 edition, same text, with colored plates, 1847. First revision, by
 Charles Downing. New York: 1857. Copyright, 1857. Second revision
 by Charles Downing. New York: 1869. First appendix, 1872. Second
 appendix, 1876. Third appendix, 1881.

Downing, Selected Fr.

 Selected Fruits: from Downing's Fruits And Fruit-Trees of America.
 With Some New Varieties: including Their Culture, Propagation,
 and Management in the Garden and Orchard. By Charles Downing.
 (_Illustrated._) New York: 1872. Copyright, 1871.

Duhamel, Trait. Arb. Fr.

 Traite Des Arbes Fruitiers; Contenant Leur Figure, Leur Description,
 Leur Culture, &c. Par M. Duhamel Du Monceau. (_Illustre._) Tomes I
 et II. Paris: 1768. Edition publie en 1872, en trois tomes. Nouvelle
 Edition en six tomes, 1807-1835.


Elliott, Fr. Book

 Elliott's Fruit Book; or, the American Fruit-Grower's Guide in Orchard
 and Garden. By F. R. Elliott. (_Illustrated._) New York: 1858.
 Copyright, 1854. Revised edition, 1859.


Field, Pear Cult.

 Pear Culture. A Manual for the Propagation, Planting, Cultivation, and
 Management of The Pear Tree. By Thos. W. Field. (_Illustrated._) New
 York: 1859. Copyright, 1858.

Flor. & Pom.

 The Florist And Pomologist: A Pictorial Monthly Magazine of Flowers,
 Fruits, and General Horticulture. Conducted at first by Robert
 Hogg and John Spencer, later by Thomas Moore and William Paul.
 (_Illustrated._) London: 1862-1884.

Forsyth, Treat. Fr. Trees.

 A Treatise on the Culture and Management of Fruit Trees. By William
 Forsyth. London: 1802. Same with an Introduction and Notes, by William
 Corbett. Albany: 1803. Seventh edition [English] London: 1824.


Gard. Chron.

 The Gardener's Chronicle. (_Illustrated._) London: 1841 to date.

Gard. & For.

 Garden And Forest. A Journal of Horticulture, Landscape Art and
 Forestry. Conducted by Charles S. Sargent. (_Illustrated._) Volumes
 I-X. New York: 1888-1897. Copyrights, 1888-1897.

Gard. Mon.

 The Gardener's Monthly and Horticultural Advertiser. Edited by Thomas
 Meehan. (_Illustrated._) Philadelphia: 1859-1887.

Garden

 The Garden. (_Illustrated._) London: 1872 to date.

Gaucher, Pom. Prak. Obst.

 Pomologie des Praktischen Obstbaumzuechters. Von N. Gaucher.
 (_Illustrirt._) Stuttgart: 1894.

Gen. Farmer

 The Genesee Farmer. Edited by Luther Tucker, Rochester: 1831-1839.
 Then consolidated with the Cultivator. Another periodical of the same
 name was published in Rochester from 1845 to 1865. Also New Genesee
 Farmer and Monthly Genesee Farmer.

Gerarde, Herball

 The Herball or Generall Historie of Plantes. By John Gerarde. Enlarged
 and amended by Thomas Johnson. London: 1633. Reprinted without
 alteration, 1636.

Guide Prat.

 Guide Pratique de L'Amateur De Fruits. Description Et Culture Des
 Varietes De Fruits classees par series de merite Composant Les
 Collections Pomologiques De L'Etablissement Horticole des Freres
 Simon-Louis. A Plantieres-Les-Metz (Lorraine Annexee) Suivi D'Une
 Table Generale Alphabetique de Tous Les Synonymes Connus, Francais et
 Etrangers, appartenent a chaque variete. Par O. Thomas. Nancy: 1876.
 Deuxieme Edition. Paris et Nancy: 1895.


Hoffy, N. Am. Pom.

 Hoffy's North American Pomologist, containing numerous Finely Colored
 Drawings, accompanied by letter press descriptions, &c., of Fruits
 of American Origin. Edited by William D. Brinckle. Book No. 1.
 Philadelphia: 1860. Copyright, 1860.

Hoffy, Orch. Com.

 The Orchardist's Companion. Alfred Hoffy, Editor and Publisher. A
 quarterly journal. Vol. I, 1841-2; Vol. II, 1842-3. Philadelphia.

Hogg, Fruit Man.

 The Fruit Manual: A Guide to the Fruits and Fruit Trees of Great
 Britain. By Robert Hogg. First edition, London: 1860. Second edition,
 1861. Third edition, 1866. Fourth edition, 1873. Fifth edition, 1884.

Hort. Reg. (Am.)

 Horticultural Register and Gardener's Magazine. Edited by T. G.
 Fessenden and J. E. Teschemacher. Volume I. Boston: 1835.

Hort. Reg. (Eng.)

 The Horticultural Register and General Magazine. By Joseph Paxton and
 Joseph Harrison. Vol. I. London: 1833.

Horticulturist

 The Horticulturist and Journal of Rural Art and Rural Taste. Founded
 and first edited by A. J. Downing. (_Illustrated._) Volumes 1 to 30.
 Albany, Philadelphia and New York: 1846-1875.

Hovey, Fr. Am.

 The Fruits of America, containing Richly Colored Figures, and full
 Descriptions of all the choicest Varieties cultivated in the United
 States. By C. M. Hovey. Volume I. Boston and New York: 1852. Volume
 II. Boston: 1856. Copyright, 1851.


Jour. Hort.

 The Journal of Horticulture: Began as The Cottage Gardener; or
 Amateur's and Cottager's Guide to out-door gardening and spade
 cultivation. 25 Volumes. London: 1849-1861. Continued as The Journal
 of Horticulture, Cottage Gardener, and Country Gentleman. A Journal of
 Horticulture, Rural and Domestic Economy, Botany and Natural History.
 New Series. 38 Volumes. London: 1861-1880. Continued as The Journal
 of Horticulture, Cottage Gardener, and Home Farmer. A Chronicle of
 Country Pursuits and Country Life, including Poultry, Pigeon, and
 Bee-keeping. Third Series. 59 Volumes. London: 1880-1909.

Jour. Roy. Hort. Soc.

 The Journal of the Royal Horticultural Society. London: 1846 to date.
 Vols. 1-9, 1846-55, bear the title of The Journal of the Horticultural
 Society of London.


Kenrick, Am. Orch.

 The New American Orchardist. By William Kenrick. Boston: 1833.
 Copyright, 1832. Second edition. Boston: 1835. Copyright, 1835.
 Seventh edition, enlarged and improved, with a supplement. Boston:
 1845. Copyright, 1841.

Knoop, Fructologie

 Part I. Pomologie, ou Description des meilleures sortes de Pommes et
 de Poires. Part II. Fructologie, ou Description des Arbres Fruitiers.
 Par Jean Herman Knoop. (_Illustre._) Amsterdam: 1771.

Koch, Deut. Obst.

 Die Deutschen Obstgehoelze. Vorlesungen gehalten zu Berlin im
 Winterhalbjahr 1875-76. Von Karl Koch. Stuttgart: 1876.

Kraft, Pom. Aust.

 Pomona austriaca, Abhandlung von den obstbaeumen worinn ihre gestalt,
 erziehung und pflege angezeigt und beschrieben wird. Von Johann Kraft.
 Zwei Theile. Vienna: 1792.


Langley, Pomona

 Pomona, or the Fruit Garden Illustrated. By Batty Langley. London:
 1729.

Lauche, Deut. Pom.

 Deutsche Pomologie. Chromolithographische Abbildung, Beschreibung
 und Kulturanweisung der empfehlenswerthesten Sorten Aepfel, Birnen,
 Kirschen, Pflaumen, Aprikosen, Pfirsche und Weintrauben. Nach den
 Ermittelungen des Deutschen Pomologen-Vereins herausgegeben von W.
 Lauche. (_Illustrirt._) Baende I-VII. Berlin: 1882-3. Vol. II. Pears.

Le Bon Jard.

 Le Bon Jardinier. 126^e Edition Almanach Horticole, 1882 et 129^e
 Edition, 1884. Paris.

Leroy, Dict. Pom.

 Dictionnaire de Pomologie. Par Andre Leroy. (_Illustre._) Six Tomes.
 Paris: 1867-1879. Vols. 1 & 2. Pears.

Liegel, Syst. Anleit.

 Systematische Anleitung zur Kenntniss der vorzueglichsten Sorten des
 Kern-, Stein-, Schalen- und Beerenobster. Von Georg Liegel. Passau:
 1825.

Lindley, Guide Orch. Gard.

 A Guide to the Orchard And Kitchen Garden; or, an account of the
 most valuable fruit and vegetables cultivated In Great Britain: with
 Kalendars of the Work Required in the Orchard and Kitchen Garden
 during every month in the year. By George Lindley. Edited by John
 Lindley. London: 1831.

Lindley, Pom. Brit.

 Pomologia Britannica; or, Figures and Descriptions of the most
 important Varieties of Fruit cultivated in Great Britain. By John
 Lindley. Three Volumes. London: 1841. Vol. 2. Pears.

Lond. Hort. Soc. Cat.

 A Catalogue of the Fruits Cultivated in the Garden of the
 Horticultural Society of London. London: 1826. Second edition, 1831.
 Third edition, 1842. A supplement was published in 1853.

Loudon, Enc. Gard.

 An Encyclopedia Of Gardening. By J. C. Loudon. (_Illustrated._) New
 edition. London: 1834.

Lucas, Handb. Obst.

 Vollstaendiges Handbuch der Obstkultur. Von Ed. Lucas. (_Illustrirt._)
 Stuttgart: First edition, 1880; second edition, 1886; third edition,
 1893. Third edition edited by Fr. Lucas, 1894.


McIntosh, Bk. Gard.

 The Book of the Garden. By Charles McIntosh. (_Illustrated._) Two
 Volumes. London: 1853-5.

McMahon, Am. Gard. Cal.

 The American Gardener's Calendar. By Bernard McMahon. Philadelphia:
 1806.

Mag. Hort.

 The Magazine of Horticulture. Boston: 1837-1868. First published as
 The American Gardener's Magazine, 1835-6. Edited by C. M. Hovey with
 P. B. Hovey, Jr., associate editor during 1835-6.

Manning, Book of Fruits

 Book of Fruits. By Robert Manning. (_Illustrated._) Salem: 1838.
 Copyright, 1838.

Mas, Le Verger

 Le Verger ou Histoire, Culture Et Description avec planches coloriees
 Des Varietes De Fruits Les Plus Generalement Connues. Par M. Mas. Huit
 Tomes. Paris: 1866-73. Vols. 1-3. Pears.

Mas, Pom. Gen.

 Pomologie Generale. Par M. Mas. (_Illustre._) Douze Tomes. Paris:
 1872-83. Vols. 1 & 3-7. Pears.

Mathieu, Nom. Pom.

 Nomenclator Pomologicus. Von Carl Mathieu. Berlin: 1889.

Mawe-Abercrombie, Com. Gard.

 The Complete Gardener. By Thomas Mawe and John Abercrombie. London:
 1829.

Miller, Gard. Dict.

 The Gardener's Dictionary. By Philip Miller. Sixth edition. London:
 1752. Revised edition. By Thomas Martyn. London: 1807.


Nat. Nur.

 The National Nurseryman. Published by The National Nurseryman
 Publishing Co. (_Illustrated._) Rochester: 1893 to date.

Noisette, Man. Comp. Jard.

 Manuel Complet du Jardinier; Maraicher, Pepinieriste, Botaniste,
 Fleuriste et Paysagiste. Par M. Louis Noisette. Quatre Tomes. Paris:
 1860. Vol. 2. Pears.


Oberdieck, Obst-Sort.

 Deutschlands beste Obst-Sorten. Von F. G. C. Oberdieck. Leipzig: 1881.


Parkinson, Par. Ter.

 Paradisi in Sole. Paradisus Terrestris. By John Parkinson.
 (_Illustrated._) London: 1629.

Phillips, Com. Orch.

 The Companion for the Orchard. An Historical And Botanical Account of
 Fruits Known In Great Britain. By Henry Phillips. New Edition. London:
 1831.

Pom. France

 Pomologie De La France ou Histoire Et Description de tous Les Fruits
 Cultives En France Et Admis Par Le Congres Pomologique. (_Illustre._)
 Tomes I-VIII. Lyon: 1863-1873. Vols. 1-4. Pears.

Pom. Mag.

 The Pomological Magazine; or, Figures And Descriptions of the Most
 Important Varieties Of Fruit cultivated in Great Britain. Three
 Volumes. London: 1828-30. This work has also been published under the
 title Pomona Brittanica.

Popular Gard.

 Popular Gardening. An Illustrated periodical devoted to Horticulture
 in all its branches. Volume I. Buffalo: 1886. Continued as Popular
 Gardening and Fruit Growing. Volumes II-IV. Buffalo: 1887-1891.
 Consolidated with The American Garden and continued as American
 Gardening. New York: 1892-1904.

Prince, Cat. Fr. Trees

 Catalogue of Fruit And Ornamental Trees & Plants, Bulbous Flower
 Roots, Green-House Plants, &c. &c. Cultivated at the Linnaean Botanic
 Garden, William Prince, Prop. Twenty-second edition. New York: 1823.

Prince, Pom. Man.

 The Pomological Manual: or, A Treatise on Fruits. By William Robert
 Prince, aided by William Prince. Second Edition. Part I. New York:
 1832. Copyright, 1831. Part II. New York: 1832. Copyright, 1832.

Prince, Treat. Hort.

 A Short Treatise on Horticulture. By William Prince. New York: 1828.
 Copyright, 1828.

Prince, Treat. Trees & Plants

 A Treatise on Fruit and Ornamental Trees And Plants, cultivated at
 the Linnaean Botanic Garden, Flushing, Long Island, near New-York. By
 William Prince. New York: 1820.


Ragan, Nom. Pear. B. P. I. Bul.

 Nomenclature of the Pear; A Catalogue-Index of the Known Varieties
 Referred to in American Publications from 1804 to 1907. Complied by W.
 H. Ragan. Issued as U. S. Dept. Agr. Bur. Pl. Ind. Bul. 126: 1908.

Rea, Flora

 Flora: Seu, De Florum Cultura; or A Complete Florilege. By John Rea. 3
 Books. London: 1676. Book 3. Pears.

Rev. Hort.

 Revue Horticole. Journal D'Horticulture Pratique (_Illustre._) Paris:
 1829 to date.

Rural N. Y.

 The Rural New-Yorker. A Journal for the Suburban and Country Home.
 (_Illustrated._) Rochester and New York: 1850 to date.


Soc. Nat. Hort. France Pom.

 Societe Nationale D'Horticulture De France. Section Pomologique. Les
 Meilleurs Fruits au debut du XX^e siecle. (_Illustre._) Paris: 1904.


Thacher, Am. Orch.

 The American Orchardist. By James Thacher. Boston: 1822. Copyright,
 1822.

Thomas, Am. Fruit Cult.

 The American Fruit Culturist. By John J. Thomas. (_Illustrated._)
 First Edition. Geneva and Auburn, N. Y.: 1846. Copyright, 1846.
 Revised Edition. Auburn, N. Y.: 1851. Copyright, 1849. Revised
 Edition. New York: 1869. Copyright, 1867. Revised Edition. New York:
 1885. Copyright, 1875-1885. Twentieth Edition, Revised and Enlarged.
 New York: 1897. Copyright, 1897; Twenty-first Edition, Revised and
 Enlarged. New York: 1911. Copyright, 1903.

Thompson, Gard. Ass't.

 The Gardener's Assistant; Practical and Scientific. By Robert
 Thompson. (_Illustrated._) Two Volumes. London: 1859. Same, revised by
 William Watson. Six Volumes. London: 1901.

Tilton, Jour. Hort.

 Tilton's Journal of Horticulture and Floral Magazine. See Am. Jour.
 Hort.

Trans. Lond. Hort. Soc.

 Transactions of the Horticultural Society of London. Volume I. London:
 1815. Volume II. London: 1817. Volume III. London: 1820. Volume IV.
 London: 1822. Volume V. London: 1824. Volume VI. London: 1826.


U. S. D. A. Rpt.

 Reports of the United States Department of Agriculture: 1862-1894.

U. S. D. A. Yearbook

 Yearbook of the United States Department of Agriculture: 1894 to date.

U. S. Pat. Off. Rpt.

 Reports of the Agricultural section of the United States Patent
 Office: 1837 to 1861.


Wickson, Cal. Fruits

 The California Fruits and How To Grow Them. By Edward J. Wickson.
 (_Illustrated._) Second Edition. San Francisco: 1891. Copyright, 1889.
 Fourth Edition. Los Angeles: 1909. Copyright, 1908. Seventh Edition.
 San Francisco: 1914. Copyright, 1914.

Willich, Dom. Enc.

 Domestic Encyclopedia or a Dictionary of Facts. By A. F. M. Willich.
 First American edition with additions by James Mease. In five volumes.
 Volume 4. Philadelphia: 1803.

Wilson, Nat. W. China

 A Naturalist In Western China with Vasculum, Camera, and Gun. Being
 some account of Eleven Years' Travel, Exploration, and Observation in
 the More Remote Parts of the Flowery Kingdom. By Ernest Henry Wilson.
 Two Volumes. New York: 1913.




                                 INDEX


  _A Gobert_ (syn. of Angobert), 248

  A. J. Cook, 236

  Aarer Pfundbirne, 236

  Abbe Fetel, 236

  Abbe Perez, 236

  Abbott, 236

  Abbott, Mrs. T., orig. of Abbott, 236

  Abdon Birne, 236

  Abele de St. Denis, 236

  Abercromby, 236

  Achalzig, 237

  Achan, 237

  Acidaline, 237

  Acme, 237

  Adams, 237

  Adams, Dr. H., orig. of Adams, 237

  _Adanson Apothekerbirne_(syn. of Aglae Adanson), 239

  Adelaide de Reves, 237

  _Adele_ (syn. of Adele de Saint-Denis), 237

  Adele Lancelot, 237

  Adele de Saint-Denis, 237

  Admirable, 238

  _Admiral Cecile_ (syn. of Amiral Cecile), 245

  Admiral Farragut, 238

  Admiral Foote, 238

  Adolphe Cachet, 238

  Adolphe Fouquet, 238

  Adolphine Richard, 238

  Aehrenthal, 238

  _Agathe de Lescours_ (syn. of Agathe de Lescourt), 238

  Agathe de Lescourt, 238

  Aglae Adanson, 239

  Aglae Gregoire, 239

  Agnes 239

  Agricola, 239

  Agua de Valence, 250

  Ah-Mon-Dieu, 239

  Aigue, 239

  Aiken, 239

  Aime Ogereau, 240

  Aimee Adam, 240

  Akatsupo, 240

  Alamo, 240

  Albertine, 240

  Alcinoeus, pear in garden of, 4

  Alexander, 240

  Alexander Lucas, 240

  Alexandre Bivort, 240

  Alexandre Chomer, 241

  Alexandre de la Herche, 241

  Alexandre Lambre, 241

  Alexandre de Russie, 241

  Alexandrina, 241

  Alexandrine Douillard, 241

  _Alexandrine Helie_ (syn. of Belle Julie), 265

  Alexandrine Mas, 241

  Alexiens Bros., orig. of Pius X, 500

  Alfred de Madre, 242

  Alice Payne, 242

  Allerton, 242

  Alliance franco-russe, 242

  Alouette, 242

  Alpha, 242

  Alphonse Allegatiere, 242

  Alphonse Karr, 242

  Amadotte, 243

  Amande Double, 243

  Amandine, 243

  Ambrette, 243

  Ambrette d'Ete, 243

  _Ambrette d'Hiver_ (syn. of Ambrette), 243

  Ambrosia, 244

  Amedee Leclerc, 244

  Amelanchier, relationship of, to pear, 57

  Amelie Leclerc, 244

  America, 244

  America, arrival of pear in, 40;
    climate of, uncongenial to pears, 38;
    importation of European pear varieties into, 52;
    pear in, 37

  American pear culture, influence of Oriental pears on, 55

  American pear districts, 38

  Amie Verdier, 244

  Amiral, 244

  Amiral Cecile, 245

  Amire Joannet, 245

  Amlisberger Mostbirne, 245

  _Amoselle panachee_ (syn. of Bergamote de Hollande Panachee), 269

  Amour, 245

  Amstettner Mostbirne, 245

  Ananas, 245

  Ananas de Courtrai, 245

  _Ananas de Courtray_ (syn. of Ananas de Courtrai), 245

  Ananas d'Ete, 246

  _Andenken an den Congress_ (syn. of Souvenir du Congres), 218

  Andouille, 246

  Andre Desportes, 122

  Andrew Murray, 246

  Andrews, 246

  Ange, 246

  Angel, 246

  Angeline, 246

  Angelique de Bordeaux, 247

  Angelique Cuvier, 247

  Angelique Leclerc, 247

  Angelique de Rome, 247

  Angers, Horticultural Society of, orig. of Cassante du Comice, 329;
    Colmar d'Automne Nouveau, 342;
    Dhommee, 359;
    Gros Lucas, 404;
    Sucree du Comice, 555

  _Angleterre_ (syn. of Beurre d'Angleterre), 284

  Angleterre d'Hiver, 247

  Angleterre Nain, 247

  Angobert, 248

  Angoisse, 248

  Angora, 248

  Angoucha, 248

  _Angouleme_ (syn. of Duchesse d'Angouleme), 154

  _Anjou_ (syn. of Beurre d'Anjou), 127

  _Anna Audisson_ (syn. Anna Audusson), 249

  Anna Audusson, 249

  Anna Nelis, 249

  Anne de Bretagne, 249

  _Anne of Brittany_ (syn. of Anne de Bretagne), 249

  Ansault, 123

  Anthoine, Dieudonne, orig. of Dieudonne Anthoine, 359

  Anthony Thacher, 249

  Antoine, 249

  Antoine Delfosse, 249

  Antoinette, 249

  Anversoise, 250

  Apfelblaettrige Azerolbirne, 250

  Apothekerbirne, 250

  Apple, 250

  Apple Pear, 250

  Apples, relationship to pears, 58

  Appoline, 250

  Aqueuse d'Esclavonie, 250

  Aqueuse de Meiningen, 251

  Arabella, 251

  Arbre Courbe, 251

  Arcedeckene, Andrew, orig. of Suffolk Thorn, 556

  Archduke of Austria, 251

  Archiduc Charles, 251

  Archiduc d'Ete, 251

  Archiduc Jean d'Autriche, 251

  Archiduchesse d'Autriche, 251

  Arendt Dechantsbirne, 252

  Argent, 252

  Argusbirne, 252

  Arkansas, 252

  _Arkansas Mammoth_ (syn. of Arkansas), 252

  Arlequin Musque, 252

  Arlingham Squash, 252

  Armand Prevost, 253

  Armenie, 253

  Arnold, 253

  Arnold & Frazier, orig. of Arnold, 253

  Arthur Bivort, 253

  Arthur Chevreau, 253

  Arundell, 253

  Aspasie Aucourt, 253

  _Aspidiotus perniciosus_ on pear, 117

  Aston Town, 254

  Audibert, 254

  Audusson, Alexis, orig. of Lucie Audusson, 453

  Audusson, Anne-Pierre, orig. of Beurre Audusson, 284

  Augier, 254

  Augustbirne, 254

  Auguste de Boulogne, 254

  Auguste Droche, 254

  Auguste Jurie, 254

  Auguste von Krause, 254

  Auguste Miguard, 255

  Auguste Royer, 255

  Augustine, 255

  Augustine Lelieur, 255

  Augustus Dana, 255

  Aurate, 255

  Auray, 255

  Autocrat, 256

  Autumn Bergamot, parent of Gansel Bergamot, 391

  Autumn Bergamot (English), 256

  Autumn Colmar, 256

  Autumn Josephine, 256

  Autumn Nelis, 256

  Avocat Allard, 257

  Avocat Nelis, 257

  Avocat Tonnelier, 257

  Ayer, 257

  Ayer, O. H., orig. of Ayer, 257; Douglas, 150

  Aylton Red, 257

  Azerole, 257


  _B. S. Fox_ (syn. of Fox), 168

  Bachelier, Louis-Francois, orig. of Beurre Bachelier, 285

  _Bacillus amylovorous,_ cause of pear blight, 112

  Backhouse, James, orig. of Beurre Backhouse, 285

  _Bacterium tumefaciens_, cause of crown-gall on pears, 116

  Baguet, 257

  Bailly, orig. of Beurre Bailly, 285

  Bakholda, 258

  Baking, 258

  Baldschmiedler, 258

  Balduinsteiner Kinderbirne, 258

  Ballet, orig. of Madame Ballet, 456

  Balosse, 258

  Balsambirne, 258

  Baltet, Charles, introd. of Roosevelt, 213;
    orig. of Virginie Baltet, 573

  Baltet, Ernest, orig. of Beurre d'Avril, 285;
    Comte Lelieur, 346;
    Madame Lye-Baltet, 458

  Baltet Bros., orig. of Beurre Baltet Pere, 286;
    Charles Ernest, 334;
    Docteur Joubert, 361;
    Guyot, 174;
    Ministre Viger, 473;
    Professeur Opoix, 514

  _Baltet Senior_ (syn. of Beurre Baltet Pere), 286

  Bankerbine, 258

  Bankhead, Capt., orig. of Jewel, 430

  Banks, 258

  Baptiste Valette, 258

  _Bar Seckel_ (syn. of Barseck) 260

  Barbancinet, 258

  Barbe Nelis, 259

  Barker, 259

  Barland, 259

  Barnadiston, 259

  Baron Deman de Lennick, 259

  _Baron d'hiver_ (syn. of Baronsbirne), 260

  Baron Leroy, 259

  Baron Trauttenberg, 259

  Baron Treyve, 259

  Baronne de Mello, 260

  Baronsbirne, 260

  Barry, 260

  Barry, Patrick, biography of, 203

  Barry, William Crawford, biography of, 204

  Barseck, 260

  Barthelemy du Mortier, 260

  Barthere, discov. of Duchesse d'Hiver, 372

  Bartlett, 124

  Bartlett, Enoch, dissem. of Bartlett, 125

  Bartlett, parent of Barseck, 260;
    Big Productive, 309;
    Dempsey, 357;
    Eva Baltet, 379;
    Favorite Morel, 381;
    Felix Sahut, 381;
    Le Lecher, 444;
    Lucy Duke, 194;
    Lyerle, 454;
    Professeur Barral, 514;
    S. T. Wright, 533;
    Ulatis, 567;
    Winter Williams, 584

  Bartlett and Kieffer leading commercial pears, 84

  Bartram, 260

  Bartram, Ann, orig. of Bartram, 260

  Bartram, John, orig. of Petre, 497

  Bartranne, 260

  Baseler Sommer-Muskatellerbirne, 261

  Basiner, 261

  _Bassin_ (syn. of Jargonelle (French)), 178

  Baudry, 261

  Baumann Brothers, orig. of Beurre Bollwiller, 288

  Beacon, 261

  Beadnell, 261

  Beadnell, John, orig. of Beadnell, 261

  Beau de la Cour, 261

  Beau Present d'Artois, 261

  Beauchamp, orig. of Beurre de l'Assomption, 284;
    Beurre Beauchamp, 286;
    Souvenir de Gaete, 550

  Beaufort, 262

  Beauvalot, 262

  Beernaert, Reynaert, discov. of Fondante de Cuerne, 384

  Beier Meissner Eierbirne, 262

  _Belgische Blutbirne_ (syn. of Sanguinole de Belgique), 540

  _Belgische Pomeranzenbirne_ (syn. of Fondante des Pres), 385

  _Belgische Zapfenbirne_ (syn. of Long Green), 449

  Belgium, pear in, 16

  Belle Angevine, 262; parent of Bon-Chretien Vermont, 315

  _Belle Angevine_ (syn. of Pound), 208

  _Belle apres Noel_ (syn. of Fondante de Noel), 164

  Belle des Arbres, 262

  _Belle Audibert_ (syn. of Audibert), 254

  Belle de Beaufort, 262

  Belle Bessa, 262

  Belle de Bolbec, 263

  Belle et Bonne de Hee, 263

  Belle et Bonne de la Pierre, 263

  Belle de Brissac, 263

  Belle de Bruxelles sans Pepins, 263

  Belle de Craonnais, 263

  Belle de la Croix Morel, 263

  Belle de Decembre, 264

  _Belle Epine Dumas_ (syn. of Epine du Mas), 377

  _Belle de Esquermes_ (syn. of Fontenay), 165

  Belle de Feron, 264

  Belle du Figuier, 264

  _Belle de Flanders_ (syn. of Flemish Beauty), 163

  Belle-Fleurusienne, 264

  _Belle de Flushing_ (syn. of Harvard), 412

  Belle Fondante, 264

  Belle de Forets, 264

  Belle de Guasco, 264

  Belle Guerandaise, 264

  Belle Hugevine, 265

  Belle Isle d'Angers, 265

  Belle d'Ixelles, 265

  _Belle de Jarnac_ (syn. of Nouvelle Fulvie), 483

  Belle de Juillet, 265

  Belle Julie, 265

  Belle de Kain, 265

  Belle de Lorient, 265

  Belle Lucrative, 125;
    parent of P. Barry, 203;
    President Clark, 509

  Belle de Malines, 265

  Belle de Martigny, 265

  Belle-Moulinoise, 265

  _Belle de Noel_ (syn. of Fondante de Noel), 164

  Belle de Noisette, 266

  _Belle de l'Orient_ (syn. of Belle de Lorient), 265

  Belle Picarde, 266

  Belle Rouennaise, 266

  _Belle de Septembre_ (syn. of Grosse September Birne), 406

  Belle de Stresa, 266

  Belle Sucree, 266

  Belle de Thouars, 266

  Belle Williams, 267

  _Belle de Zoar_ (syn. of Zoar Beauty), 588

  Bellissime d'Automne, 267

  _Bellissime d'Ete_ (syn. of Jargonelle (French)), 178

  Bellissime d'Hiver, 267

  Belmont, 267

  Beman, 267

  Benadine, 267

  Benoist, Auguste, orig. of Duchesse de Brissac, 372;
    Marie Benoist, 463;
    prop, of Beurre Benoist, 287

  Benoist, Jean-Henri, orig. of Belle de Brissac, 263

  Benoist Nouveau, 267

  Benoit Caroli, 268

  Bensell, 268

  Bensell, orig. of Bensell, 268

  Benvie, 268

  Bequesne, 268

  Berckmans, Louis, orig. of varieties, 240, 308, 373, 389, 540, 549, 563

  Bergamot de Chantilly, 268

  Bergamot Louvain, 268

  Bergamot Seckel, 268

  Bergamot Winter, 268

  Bergamote Arsene Sannier, 268

  Bergamote d'Automne Panachee, 269

  Bergamote Balicq, 269

  Bergamote Boussiere, 269

  _Bergamote du Bugey_ (syn. of Bergamotte Bugi), 270

  Bergamote Esperen, parent of Directeur Varenne, 360

  _Bergamote Gansel_ (syn. of Gansel Bergamot), 391

  Bergamote Hamdens, 269

  _Bergamote d'Hildesheim_ (syn. of Hildesheimer Bergamotte), 418

  Bergamote de Hollande Panachee, 269

  _Bergamote Lucrative_ (syn. of Belle Lucrative), 126

  _Bergamote de Paques_ (syn. of Easter Bergamot), 374

  _Bergamote de la Pentecote_ (syn. of Easter Beurre), 159

  Bergamote Philippot, 269

  Bergamote Rose, 269

  Bergamotte d'Anvers, 269

  Bergamotte d'Automne, 270

  _Bergamotte Ballicq_ (syn. of Bergamote Balicq), 269

  Bergamotte Bouvant, 270

  Bergamotte Bufo, 270

  Bergamotte Bugi, 270

  Bergamotte de Coloma, 270

  Bergamotte de la Cour, 271

  _Bergamotte Crassane_ (syn. of Crassane), 350

  _Bergamotte Crassane d'Hiver_ (syn. of Beurre Bruneau), 289

  Bergamotte de Darmstadt, 271

  Bergamotte de Donauer, 271

  Bergamotte Double, 271

  Bergamotte Dussart, 271

  _Bergamotte Eliza Mathews_ (syn, of Groom Prince Royal), 403

  Bergamotte Esperen, 271;
    parent of Beurre Henri Courcelle, 297;
    Bergamotte la Gantoise, 272;
    President Barabe, 508

  Bergamotte d'Esperen, parent of Frau Louise Goethe, 389

  _Bergamotte d'Esperen_ (syn. of Bergamotte Esperen), 271

  Bergamotte Esperen Souvenir de Plantieres, 271

  Bergamotte d'Ete, 271

  _Bergamotte d'ete de Kraft_ (syn. of Kraft Sommer Bergamotte), 438

  Bergamotte d'ete de Lubeck, 272

  Bergamotte Fertile, 272

  Bergamotte Fortunee, parent of Le Lecher, 444

  _Bergamotte Fortunee_ (syn. of Fortunee), 387

  Bergamotte la Gantoise, 272

  Bergamotte Heimbourg, 272

  Bergamotte Herault, 272

  Bergamotte Hertrich, 272

  Bergamotte-d'Hiver de Furstenzell, 273

  Bergamotte d'Hollande, 273

  Bergamotte Jars, 273

  Bergamotte de Jodoigne, 273

  Bergamotte Klinkhardt, 273

  Bergamotte Laffay, 273

  Bergamotte Leseble, 273

  Bergamotte Liabaud, 274

  Bergamotte Mico, 274

  Bergamotte de Millepieds, 274

  Bergamotte Nicolle, 274

  Bergamotte Oeuf de Cygne, 274

  Bergamotte d'Oisan, 274

  Bergamotte de Parthenay, 274

  Bergamotte Picquot, 275

  Bergamotte Ploskui, 275

  Bergamotte Poiteau, 275

  Bergamotte Pomme, 275

  Bergamotte du Quercy, 275

  Bergamotte Reinette, 275

  _Bergamotte de Roe_ (syn. of Roe Bergamot), 522

  Bergamotte de Rouen, 276

  Bergamotte Rouge, 275

  Bergamotte Rouge de Mayer, 276

  Bergamotte Sageret, 276

  Bergamotte Sanguine, 276

  Bergamotte Sannier, 276

  _Bergamotte Sapieganka_ (syn. of Sapieganka), 541

  Bergamotte Silvange, 276

  Bergamotte de Souchait, 276

  Bergamotte de Soulers, 277

  Bergamotte de Stryker, 277

  _Bergamotte Suisse_ (syn. of Bergamote d'Automne Panachee), 269

  Bergamotte Suisse Rond, 277

  Bergamotte Tardive Collette, 277

  _Bergamotte Tardive de Gansel_ (syn. of Gansel Late Bergamot), 391

  Bergamotte Thuerlinckx, 277

  Bergamotte de Tournai, 277

  Bergamotte de Tournay, 278

  _Bergamotte von Vezouziere_ (syn. of Vezouziere), 571

  Bergamotte Volltragende, 278

  _Bergamotte Welbeck_ (syn. of Welbeck Bergamot), 577

  Bergbirne, 278

  Bergen, 278

  Bergen, Cornelius, orig. of Island, 425

  Berlaimont, 278

  Bernard, 278

  Berriays, 278

  Bertrand Guinoisseau, 278

  Berzelius, 279

  Besi de Caen, 279

  Besi de Caffoy, 279

  Besi-Careme, 279

  _Besi de Chaumontel_ (syn. of Chaumontel), 335

  Besi Dubost, 279

  _Besi de l'Echasserie_ (syn. of Echasserie), 374

  Besi Esperen, 279

  _Besi Garnier_ (syn. of Garnier), 392

  Besi Goubault, 279

  Besi de Grieser de Boehmenkirsch, 279

  Besi d'Hery, 280

  _Besi Incomparable_ (syn. of Besi Sans Pareil), 281

  Besi Liboutton, 280

  Besi de Mai, 280

  Besi de Moncondroiceu, 280

  Besi de Montigny, 280

  Besi de la Motte, 280

  Besi de Naghin, 281

  Besi de la Pierre, 281

  Besi de Quessoy, 281

  Besi de Saint-Waast, 281

  Besi Sans Pareil, 281

  _Besi Sanspareil_ (syn. of Besi Sans Pareil), 281

  Besi Tardif, 281

  Besi de Van Mons, 282

  Besi des Veterans, 282

  Besi de Vindre, 282

  Besi de Wutzum, 282

  Bessard-Duparc, orig. of Madame Duparc, 457

  Bessemianka, 282

  Best Favorite, 282

  Bettina, 282

  Betzelsbirne, 283

  Betzy, 283

  Beurre Ad. Papeleu, 283

  Beurre Adam, 283

  Beurre d'Adenaw, 283

  Beurre Alexandre Lucas, 283

  _Beurre Alexandre Lucas_ (syn. of Alexander Lucas), 240

  Beurre Allard, 283

  Beurre Amande, 283

  Beurre d'Amanlis, 283

  Beurre Ananas, 284

  Beurre d'Angleterre, 284

  Beurre d'Anjou, 127;
    parent of Huggard, 421;
    place in commercial pear culture, 84

  Beurre Antoine, 284

  Beurre Antoinette, 284

  _Beurre d'Apremont_ (syn. of Beurre Bosc), 130

  Beurre Aqualine, 284

  Beurre d'Arenberg, 129;
    confusion of, with Glou Morceau, 129

  _Beurre d'Arenberg_ (syn. of Glou Morceau), 172

  Beurre de l'Assomption, 284;
    parent of Souvenir de Gaete, 550

  Beurre Audusson, 284

  Beurre des Augustins, 285

  Beurre Auneniere, 285

  Beurre d'Automne de Donauer, 285

  Beurre d'Avoine, 285

  Beurre d'Avril, 285

  Beurre Bachelier, 285;
    parent of S. T. Wright, 533

  Beurre Backhouse, 285

  Beurre Bailly, 285

  Beurre Baltet Pere, 286

  Beurre Baud, 286

  Beurre Beauchamp, 286

  Beurre Beaulieu, 286

  _Beurre Beaumont_ (syn. of Beurre de Mortefontaine), 301

  Beurre Beek, 286

  Beurre des Beguines, 286

  Beurre Bennert, 286

  Beurre Benoist, 287

  Beurre Berckmans, 287

  Beurre de Biseau, 287

  Beurre Blanc Dore, 287

  Beurre Blanc de Nantes, 287

  Beurre Boisbunel, 287

  Beurre Bollwiller, 288

  Beurre de Bordeaux, 288

  Beurre Bosc, 130;
    parent of Harris, 412;
    place of, in commercial pear culture, 84

  Beurre Bourbon, 288

  Beurre de Breme, 288

  Beurre Bretonneau, 288

  Beurre de Brigne, 288

  Beurre Bronze, 288

  Beurre de Brou, 288

  Beurre Brougham, 289

  Beurre Bruneau, 289

  Beurre de Bruxelles, 289

  Beurre Burnicq, 289

  Beurre du Bus, 289

  Beurre Bymont, 289

  Beurre de Caen, 289

  Beurre Capiaumont, 289

  Beurre Caty, 290

  Beurre Caune, 290

  Beurre du Cercle Pratique de Rouen, 290

  Beurre du Champ Corbin, 290

  Beurre Charron, 290

  Beurre Chatenay, 290

  Beurre Chaudy, 290

  Beurre Christ, 290

  Beurre Citron, 290

  Beurre Clairgeau, 132;
    parent of Cardinal Georges d'Ambroise, 328;
    Huggard, 421;
    Louis Vilmorin, 451;
    Therese Appert, 562;
    place of, in commercial pear culture, 84

  Beurre Clotaire, 290

  Beurre de Coit, 291

  Beurre Colmar, 291

  Beurre Coloma, 291

  Beurre du Comte Marcolini, 291

  Beurre de Conitz, 291

  Beurre Copretz, 291

  _Beurre Curtet_ (syn. of Lamy), 184

  Beurre Dalbret, 291

  Beurre Daras, 291

  Beurre Daviss, 291

  Beurre Defays, 292

  Beurre Degalait, 292

  Beurre Delannoy, 292

  Beurre Delbecq, 292

  Beurre Delicat, 292

  Beurre Derouineau, 292

  Beurre Diel, 133;
    parent of Jeanne d'Arc, 429;
    Pierre Corneille, 499

  Beurre Dilly, 292

  Beurre Docteur Pariset, 292

  _Beurre Dore de Bilboa_ (syn. of Golden Beurre of Bilboa), 398

  Beurre Doux, 292

  Beurre van Driessche, 293

  Beurre Driessen, 293

  Beurre Dubuisson, 293

  Beurre Duhaume, 293

  Beurre Dumont, 293

  Beurre Dumortier, 293

  Beurre Dupont, 293

  Beurre Duquesne, 293

  Beurre Durand, 293

  Beurre Duval, 294

  _Beurre Duvivier_ (syn. of General Duvivier), 395

  Beurre d'Ellezelles, 294

  _Beurre d'Enghien_ (syn. of Beurre Colmar), 291

  Beurre Epine, 294

  _Beurre Epine_ (syn. of Colmar Epine), 343

  Beurre d'Esperen, 294

  Beurre d'Esquelmes, 294

  Beurre Eugene Furst, 294

  Beurre Fauve de Printemps, 294

  Beurre Favre, 294

  Beurre Fenzl, 294

  Beurre de Fevrier, 294

  Beurre Fideline, 295

  Beurre Flon, 295

  Beurre Fouqueray, 295

  Beurre Gambier, 295

  Beurre Gaujard, 295

  Beurre van Geert, 295

  Beurre Gendron, 295

  Beurre de Germiny, 295

  Beurre de Ghelin, 296

  Beurre Giffard, 134;
    parent of August Jurie, 254;
    Fin Juillet, 382

  Beurre Gilles, 296

  Beurre Goubault, 296;
    parent of Fertility, 381

  Beurre Graue Herbst, 296

  Beurre Gretry, 296

  Beurre Gris, 296;
    parent of Cabot, 323

  Beurre-Gris d'Enghien, 296

  _Beurre Gris d'Ete_ (syn. of Yat), 586

  _Beurre Gris d'Ete de Hollande_ (syn. of Yat), 586

  _Beurre Gris d'Hiver Nouveau_ (syn. of Beurre de Lucon), 300

  Beurre de Grumkon, 296

  Beurre Grumkower, 296

  _Beurre Haffner_ (syn. of Haffner Butterbirne), 410

  Beurre Hamecher, 297

  Beurre d'Hardenpont, parent of Directeur Tisserand, 360

  _Beurre d'Hardenpont_ (syn. of Glou Morceau), 172

  Beurre d'Hardenpont d'Automne, 297

  Beurre Hardy, 135

  Beurre Hennau, 297

  Beurre Henri Courcelle, 297;
    parent of Cardinal Georges d'Ambroise, 328;
    Pierre Curie, 499

  Beurre Hillereau, 297

  Beurre d'Hiver, 297

  Beurre d'hiver de Dittrich, 297

  Beurre d'Hiver de Kestner, 297

  Beurre de Hochheim, 297

  Beurre Hudellet, 297

  Beurre Jalais, 298

  Beurre Jean Van Geert, 298

  Beurre de Jonghe, 136

  _Beurre Keele Hall_ (syn. of Styrian), 554

  Beurre Kennes, 298

  Beurre Kenrick, 298

  Beurre Knight, 298

  Beurre Knox, 298

  Beurre de Koninck, 298

  Beurre Kossuth, 299

  Beurre de Lade, 299

  Beurre Lagasse, 299

  Beurre Lamoyeau, 299

  Beurre Langelier, 299

  Beurre de Lederbogen, 299

  Beurre Lefevre, 299

  Beurre de Lenzen, 299

  Beurre Liebart, 299

  Beurre de Lindauer, 300

  Beurre Loisel, 300

  Beurre de Longree, 300

  Beurre de Lucon, 300;
    parent of Casimir, 329

  Beurre Luizet, 300

  Beurre de Mans, 300

  Beurre Mauxion, 300

  Beurre Menand, 300

  _Beurre de Merode_ (syn. of Doyenne Boussock), 152

  Beurre Millet, 300

  Beurre Moire, 300

  Beurre Mondelle, 301

  Beurre de Mons, 301

  Beurre de Montgeron, 301

  Beurre Morisot, 301

  Beurre de Mortefontaine, 301

  Beurre de Mortillet, 301

  Beurre Motte, 302

  Beurre des Mouchouses, 302

  Beurre de Naghin, 302

  Beurre de Nantes, 302

  Beurre de Nesselrode, 302

  Beurre Obozinski, 302

  Beurre Oudinot, 302

  Beurre de Paimpol, 302

  Beurre de Palandt, 303

  Beurre Pauline, 303

  Beurre Pauline Delzent, 303

  Beurre Payen, 303

  Beurre Perran, 303

  _Beurre Perrault_ (syn. of Duchesse de Bordeaux), 371

  Beurre Philippe Delfosse, 303

  Beurre Pointille de Roux, 303

  Beurre de Popuelles, 303

  Beurre Preble, 303

  Beurre Precoce, 304

  Beurre Pringalle, 304

  Beurre de Quenast, 304

  Beurre de Ramegnies, 304

  Beurre de Rance, 304

  Beurre Reine, 304

  Beurre Richelieu, 304

  _Beurre Robert_ (syn. of Doyenne du Comice), 153

  Beurre Roland, 304

  Beurre Romain, 304

  Beurre Rome Gaujard, 305

  Beurre Rose, 305

  Beurre Rouge d'Automne, 305

  _Beurre Rouppe_ (syn. of Easter Beurre), 159

  Beurre Royal de Turin, 305

  Beurre de Saint-Amand, 305

  Beurre de Saint Arnaud, 305

  Beurre Saint-Aubert, 305

  Beurre Saint-Francois, 305

  Beurre Saint-Marc, 305

  _Beurre de Saint-Nicolas_ (syn. of Duchesse d'Orleans), 156

  Beurre Samoyeau, 305

  Beurre Scheidweiller, 306

  Beurre Seutin, 306

  Beurre de Silly, 306

  Beurre Six, 306

  Beurre Soulange, 306

  Beurre Spence, 306

  Beurre Stappaerts, 306

  Beurre Steins, 306

  Beurre Sterckmans, 306

  Beurre de Stuttgardt, 307

  Beurre Sucre, 307

  Beurre Superfin, 137;
    parent of Comte de Lambertye, 346

  Beurre Thoury, 307

  _Beurre Thuerlinckx_ (syn. of Thuerlinckx), 563

  Beurre Triguer, 307

  Beurre de Ulm, 307

  Beurre Vanille, 307

  Beurre Varenne de Fenille, 307

  Beurre Vauban, 307

  Beurre Vert d'Ete, 307

  Beurre Vert Tardif, 308

  _Beurre Vert de Tournai_ (syn. of Bergamotte de Tournai), 277

  _Beurre Vital_ (syn. of Vital), 574

  Beurre Wamberchies, 308

  Beurre de Wetteren, 308

  Beurre Winter, 308

  Beurre Witzhumb, 308

  Beurre Woronson, 308

  Beurre Zotman, 308

  Beyer Martinsbirne, 308

  Beymont, 308

  Bezi Blanc, 309

  Bezi de Naples, 309

  _Bezi Vaet_ (syn. of Besi de Saint-Waast), 281

  _Bezy de Caissoy_ (syn. of Besi de Quessoy), 281

  Bidwell, General, orig. of Kennedy, 434

  Bied-Charreton, 309

  Bierbaumer Mostbirne, 309

  Big Productive, 309

  Bijou, 309

  Bill Campbell, 309

  Binsce, 309

  _Birn von Fontenay_ (syn. of Fontenay), 166

  Birne von Turschud, 309

  Biseau d'Hauteville, A. de, orig. of Beurre de Biseau, 287

  Biseau d'Hauteville, Chevalier de, orig. of President Watier, 511

  Bishop Thumb, 309

  Bivort, Alexandre, orig. of varieties, 237, 241, 264, 269, 284, 287,
      303, 326, 340, 355, 431, 464, 465, 475, 490, 511, 520, 523, 528,
      530, 531, 544, 581;
    work as pear breeder, 19

  Bivort Zuckerbirne, 309

  Black Hawk, 310

  Black Huffcap, 310

  Black mold of pear, 117

  _Black Pear of Worcester_ (syn. of Black Worcester), 310

  Black Sorrel, 310

  Black Worcester, 310

  Blackeney Red, 310

  Blanchet, Claude, orig. of Claude Blanchet, 340;
    La France, 440

  Blanquet Anastere, 310

  Blanquet Long, 311

  Blanquet a Longue Queue, 311

  Blanquet Precoce, 311

  Blanquet de Saintonge, 311

  Blanquette de Toulouse, 311

  Bleeker Meadow, 311

  Blessed, 311

  Blickling, 311

  Blight, pear, control of, 113;
    notes on, 111

  Blight resistance of _Pyrus ovoidea_, 81;
    _Pyrus ussuriensis_,78

  Blight resistant pear varieties, 112

  Block, 311

  Block, A., orig. of Acme, 237;
    Block, 311

  Blodget, 312

  Blodget, David, orig. of Blodget, 312

  Bloodgood, 138

  Bloodgood, James, introd. of Bloodgood, 139

  _Bloodgood's Sommerbirne_ (syn. of Bloodgood), 138

  Blooming season of pear varieties, 88

  Blooming time of pears, notes on, 87

  Blumenbirne, 312

  Blutbirne, 312

  Bocksbirne, 312

  Boediker Dechantsbirne, 312

  Bogenaekerin, 312

  Boehmische fruehe Jakobsbirne, 312

  Boieldien, 312

  Boisbunel, orig. of varieties, 200, 243, 245, 266, 275, 278, 287, 290,
      295, 324, 344, 347, 349, 361, 366, 370, 395, 427, 440, 451, 452,
      462, 469, 470, 471, 472, 491, 493, 505, 509, 510, 512, 544, 555,
      570

  Boisselot, orig. of Fortunee Boisselot, 387;
    President de la Bastie, 509;
    Professeur Barral, 514

  Bolarmud, 312

  Bollweiler, orig. of Bollweiler Butterbirne, 312

  Bollweiler Butterbirne, 312

  Bologna, 312

  Bonamy, orig. of Paul Bonamy, 492

  _Bon-Chretien d'Auch_ (syn. of Bon-Chretien d'Hiver), 314

  Bon-Chretien d'Auch (Calvel), 312

  Bon-Chretien d'Automne, 313

  Bon-Chretien Bonnamour, 313

  _Bon-Chretien de Bruxelles_ (syn. of Bon-Chretien Fondant), 313

  Bon-Chretien d'Espagne, 313

  Bon-Chretien d'ete, 313

  Bon-Chretien Fondant, 313

  _Bon-Chretien Fred Baudry_ (syn. of Baudry), 261

  Bon-Chretien Frederic Baudry, 313

  Bon-Chretien d'Hiver, 314

  Bon-Chretien d'Hiver Panache, 314

  Bon-Chretien Mathieu Joseph Lamarche, 314

  _Bon-Chretien de Nikita_ (syn. of Nikitaer Gruene
    Herbst-Apothekerbirne), 482

  Bon-Chretien Prevost, 314

  _Bon-Chretien de Rance_ (syn. of Beurre de Rance), 304

  Bon-Chretien du Rhin d'Automne, 314

  Bon-Chretien Ricchiero, 314

  Bon-Chretien Vermont, 315

  Bon-Chretien de Vernois, 315

  _Bon-Chretien de Vernois_ (syn. of Flemish Bon-Chretien), 382

  _Bon-Chretien Williams'_ (syn. of Bartlett), 124

  Bon Gustave, 315

  Bon Parent, 315

  Bon-Roi-Rene, 315

  Bon Vicaire, 315

  Bonne d'Anjou, 315

  Bonne-Antonine, 315

  Bonne de Beugny, 316

  Bonne Carmelite, 316

  Bonne de la Chapelle, 316

  Bonne Charlotte, 316

  _Bonne-Ente_ (syn. of White Doyenne), 228

  Bonne d'Ezee, 316

  Bonne de Jalais, 316

  Bonne-Jeanne, 316

  _Bonne Louise d'Avranches_ (syn. of Louise Bonne de Jersey), 193

  Bonne de Malines, parent of Leger, 444

  _Bonne de Malines_ (syn. of Winter Nelis), 232

  Bonne Sophia, 316

  _Bonne de Soulers_ (syn. of Bergamotte de Soulers), 277

  Bonne Therese, 317

  Bonne des Zoes, 317

  Bonnefond, orig. of Madame Bonnefond, 456

  Bonnefoy, orig. of Doyenne Nerard, 368;
    Madame Elisa Dumas, 457

  Bonners, 317

  Bonneserre de Saint-Denis, 317

  Bonnet, orig. of Beurre Hardy, 136;
    Lesbre, 447

  Bonnet Zuckerbirne, 317

  _Bordeaux_ (syn. of Duchesse de Bordeaux), 371

  Bordine Musk, 317

  Borers on pear, 120

  Bosc, introd. of Styrian, 554

  _Bosc_ (syn. of Beurre Bosc), 130

  _Bosc's Butterbirne_ (syn. of Beurre Bosc), 130

  _Bosc's Flaschenbirne_ (syn. of Beurre Bosc), 130

  _Boston_ (syn. of Pinneo), 499

  Botany, structural, of pear, 58

  Bouchamp, 317

  Boucqueau, Albert, orig. of Fondante Albert, 383

  Boucquia, 317

  Bouet, Henri, orig. of Henri Bouet, 415

  Bourdon de Roi, 317

  _Boussock_ (syn. of Doyenne Boussock), 152

  Boutoc, 317

  _Bouvert Musque_ (syn. of Parfum d'Hiver), 490

  Bouvier, Simon, orig. of varieties, 184, 240, 241, 315, 318, 328, 343,
      355, 356, 378, 416, 426, 446, 545, 546, 565, 568;
    work as pear breeder, 19

  Bouvier d'Automne, 318

  Bouvier Bourgmestre, 318

  Bouviers Herbstbirne, 318

  Bouzin, Norbert, orig. of Doyenne de Ramegnies, 369

  Bowdoin, 318

  Bowne Winter Russet, 318

  Boyken June, 318

  Braconot, 318

  Brandes, 318

  Brandywine, 140

  Braunrote Speckbirne, 318

  Braunrothe Fruehlingsbirne, 319

  Braunrothe Sommerrusselet, 319

  Brederode, 319

  Breeding pears, Van Mons' theory of, 18

  Bremer Butterbirne, 319

  Brewer, 319

  Brewster, 319

  Brialmont, 319

  Brielsche Pomeranzenbirne, 319

  Briffaut, 319

  Briffaut, orig. of President Payen, 510

  Brinckle, Dr. W. D., orig. of Catherine Gardette, 330;
    Edward Seedling St. Germain, 375;
    President Felton, 509;
    Wilmington, 582

  Brindamour, 320

  Bringewood, 320

  British Queen, 320

  _Brockworth Park_ (syn. of Bonne d'Ezee), 316

  Broncirte Winterbirne, 320

  Bronx, 320

  Bronzee Boisselot, 320

  Bronzee d'Enghien, 320

  Brookline, 320

  Broom Park, 320

  Brough Bergamot, 320

  Brown, Samuel, orig. of Sam Brown, 539

  _Brown Beurre_ (syn. of Beurre Gris), 296

  Brown-Blotch of pear, 116

  Bruant, introd. of Figueira, 382;
    orig. of Commandant Belaieff, 345

  Bruce, A. L., orig. of Alamo, 240

  _Bruderbirne_ (syn. of Pound), 208

  Brugmans, 321

  Brumbirne, 321

  Brune Mineme, 321

  Brunet, 321

  Bruesseler Herbstbergamotte, 321

  _Bruessler Zuckerbirne_ (syn. of Sucree Van Mons), 555

  Brute Bonne, 321

  Bryan, Edwards, 321

  Bryant, mention of fruits in California by, 54;
    orig. of Cedarmere, 331

  Brymer, Col., introd. of Santa Claus, 540

  Buchanan, 321

  Buchanan, Isaac, orig. of Buchanan, 321

  Buckman, Benjamin, orig. of Timpling, 563

  Bud-moth on pear, 120

  Budd, J. L., introd. of Russian pears, 56;
    orig. of Gibb, 396

  Buffalo, 321

  _Buffam_ (syn. of Buffum), 141

  Buffum, 141

  _Bugiarda_ (syn. of Bon-Chretien Fondant), 313;
    (Epine d'Ete), 377

  Buneau, Jules, orig. of Marie Jallais, 464

  Bunte Mannabirne, 321

  Buntebirne, 321

  Burbank, Luther, orig. of Test, 560

  Burchardt, Judge, orig. of Malvoisie de Landsberg, 461

  Burchardt Butterbirne, 322

  Buree Winter, 322

  Burgoyne, 322

  Burkett, 322

  Burlingame, 322

  Burlingame, Mrs., orig. of Burlingame, 322

  Burnett, 322

  Burnett, Joel, orig. of Burnett, 322

  Burton, R. E., orig. of Ulatis, 567

  Butt Pear, 322

  Butterartige Bergamotte, 322

  _Butterbirne von Saint-Nicolas_ (syn. of Duchesse d'Orleans), 156

  Buettner Sachsische Ritterbirne, 322


  Cabot, 323

  Cabot, J. S., orig. of Cabot, 323

  Cadeau, 323

  Cadet de Vaux, 323

  Caen de France, 323

  Caesar, 323

  _Caillot_ (syn. of Naquette), 480

  Caillot Rosat (English), 323

  Caillot Rosat (French), 323

  Calbasbirn, 324

  Calebasse, 324

  _Calebasse Abbe Fetel_ (syn. of Abbe Fetel), 236

  Calebasse d'Anvers, 324

  Calebasse de Bavay, 324

  Calebasse Boisbunel, 324

  Calebasse Bosc, 324

  Calebasse Delvigne, 325

  Calebasse d'Ete, 325

  Calebasse Fondante, 325

  _Calebasse Grosse_ (syn. of Van Marum), 569

  Calebasse d'Hiver, 325

  Calebasse Kickx, 325

  Calebasse Leroy, 325

  Calebasse Oberdieck, 325

  Calebasse d'Octobre, 326

  _Calebasse princesse Marianne_ (syn. of Princesse Marianne), 513

  Calebasse Rose, 326

  Calebasse Tougard, 326

  Calebasse Verte, 326

  Calhoun, 326

  California, first commercial pear orchard in, 54

  Caliorosa, 326

  _Caliroa cerasi_ on pear, 119

  Calixte Mignot, 326

  _Calliot_ (syn, of Caillot Rosat (French)), 324

  Calvillebirne, 326

  Calvin, 326

  Camak, 326

  Camak, J., orig. of Camak, 326

  Cambaceres, 327

  Camerling, 327

  Camille de Rohan, 327

  _Camperveen_ (syn. of Kamper-Venus), 433

  Canandaigua, 327;
    parent of Ontario, 202

  _Canners Japan_ (syn. of Japan Golden Russet), 428

  Canning, 327

  Canning pears, 109

  Canourgues, 327

  Cantelope, 327

  Canton, 327

  Capeinick, orig. of Duchesse de Brabant, 372

  Capiaumont, orig. of Beurre Capiaumont, 289

  Capsheaf, 328

  Capucine Van Mons, 328

  Carasi, 328

  Carcas, orig. of Roux Carcas, 532

  Cardinal Georges d'Ambroise, 328

  _Cardinale_ (syn. of Amiral), 244

  Carleton, 328

  Carmel, 328

  Carminbirne, 328

  Caroline Hogg, 328

  _Carpocapsa pomonella_ on pear, 118

  Carriere, 329

  Cartheurserbirne, 329

  Case, William, orig. of Mary (Case), 467

  Casimir, 329

  Cassante du Comice, 329

  Cassante de Mars, 329

  Cassel, 329

  Cassel Nurs. Co., introd. of Cassel, 329

  Casser, orig. of Columbia, 344

  _Casserule_ (syn. of Poire de Casserole), 502

  Cassolette, 329

  Cassolette (Knoop), 329

  Castelain, Florimond, orig. of Castelline, 330

  Castelline, 330

  Catch crops for pear orchards, 102

  Caterpillars on pear, 120

  Catherine Gardette, 330

  Catherine Lambre, 330

  Catherine Royal, 330

  Catillac, 330

  Catinka, 330

  Cato, mention of pear by, 7

  Cauwenberghe, Lievin Van, orig. of Henriette Van Cauwenberghe, 416

  Cavaignac, 330

  Cavelier de la Salle, 331

  Cecil, Mrs. Evelyn, mention of pears by, 31

  Cedarmere, 331

  Cels Butterbirne, 331

  Century, 331

  _Cephalothecium roseum_, cause of pink-rot of pear, 117

  Cerise Brune, 331

  Cerise Double, 331

  Cerruttis Durstloesche, 331

  Certeau, 331

  Certeau d'Automne, 331

  Certeau d'Ete, 331

  Certeau d'Hiver, 332

  Cesile, 332

  Chaenomeles, relationship of, to pear, 57

  Chaigneau, 332

  Chair-a-Dame, 332

  _Chalk_ (syn. of Crawford), 350

  _Chambers_ (syn. of Early Harvest), 158

  Chambrette, Marquis, introd. of Virgouleuse, 573

  Chamness, 332

  Chamness, orig. of Chamness, 332

  Champ Riche d'Italie, 332

  Champagner Bratbirne, 333

  Chancelier de Hollande, 333

  Chancellor, 333

  Chancellor, orig. of Chancellor, 333

  Chantry, 333

  Chaploux, 333

  Chapman, 333

  Chaptal, 333

  Charlemagne, promotion of pear culture by, 12

  Charles Bivort, 333

  Charles Cognee, 334

  Charles Ernest, 334

  Charles Frederickx, 334

  Charles de Guelin, 334

  Charles Smet, 334

  Charles van Hooghten, 334

  Charles Van Mons, 334

  Charli Basiner, 334

  Charlotte de Brouwer, 334

  Charlotte de Roucourt, 335

  Charnock, 335

  Charon, orig. of Beurre Charon, 290

  Chat Brule, 335

  Chatenay, Pierre, orig, of Beurre Chatenay, 290

  Chattanooga, 335

  Chaudfontaine, 335

  Chaudy, orig. of Madame Chaudy, 456

  Chaumontel, 335;
    parent of Chaumontel Gras, 335

  Chaumontel Gras, 335

  Chaumontel Swan Egg, 336

  Chaumontelle d'ete, 336

  Chelmsford, 336

  Cher a Dames (Knoop), 336

  Cherroise, 336

  Chesill, 336

  Chesneau, discov. of Fondante de la Roche, 385

  Chevreau, Arthur, orig. of Arthur Chevreau, 253

  Chilton, 336

  China, 336

  Chinese Pear. (See _Pyrus serotina_)

  _Chinese Sand_ (syn. of Sha Lea), 545

  Chio, 337

  Choak-pear, 337

  Choisnard, 337

  Cholwell, 337

  Christmas, 337

  Christmas Beurre, 337

  Church, 337

  Churchill, Mrs., orig. of Alexander, 240

  Chypre, 337

  Cincincis, 338

  Cincincis Seedling, 338

  Cinquantieme anniversaire, 338

  Cire, 338

  Cite Gomand, 338

  Citrina, 338

  Citron, 338

  _Citron des Carmes_ (syn. of Madeleine), 195

  Citron d'Hyver, 339

  Citron de Saint Paul, 339

  Citron de Sierentz, 339

  Citronnee, 339

  Clairgeau, Pierre, orig. of Beurre Clairgeau, 132

  _Clairgeau_ (syn. of Beurre Clairgeau), 132

  _Clairgeau's Butterbirne_ (syn. of Beurre Clairgeau), 132

  Clap, 339

  Clap, William, orig. of Clap, 339

  Clapp, F. & L., orig. of Newhall, 481;
    Nicholas, 481

  Clapp, Lemuel, orig. of Dorset, 149;
    Frederick Clapp, 169;
    Harris (Massachusetts), 412

  Clapp, Thaddeus, orig. of Clapp Favorite, 143;
    Sarah, 541

  Clapp Favorite, 142;
    parent of Tolstoy, 564;
    place of, in commercial pear culture, 84

  _Clapp No. 22_ (syn. of Frederick Clapp), 169

  _Clapp's Favourite_ (syn. of Clapp Favorite), 142

  _Clapp's Liebling_ (syn. of Clapp Favorite), 142

  Clara, 339

  Clara Durieux, 339

  Claretenbirne, 339

  Clark, 339

  Clarksville, 340

  Claude Blanchet, 340

  Claude Mollet, 340

  Clay, 340

  Clean culture versus sod for pear orchards, 102

  Clemence de Lavours, 340

  Clemence van Rumbeck, 340

  Clement Bivort, 340

  Clementine, 340

  Climate adapted to pear culture, 85

  Climate of America uncongenial to pears, 38

  Clinton, 340

  _Clion_ (syn. of Vicar of Winkfield), 227

  Cloche de Wittenberg, 340

  Clot, orig. of Beurre Clotaire, 290

  Cludius, orig. of Hildesheimer Spaete Sommerbirne, 418

  Codling moth on pear, 118

  _Coeur-de-Boeuf_ (syn. of Ochsenherz), 484

  Coit, Colonel, orig. of Beurre de Coit, 291;
    Coit Beurre, 340

  Coit Beurre, 340

  Cold resistant pears, 86

  Cold storage of pears, 109

  Cole, 341

  Cole Winter, 341

  Colland, Jean, orig. of Triomphe de Vienne, 566

  Collins, 341

  Colmar, 341

  Colmar d'Alost, 341

  Colmar d'Arenberg, 341

  Colmar Artoisenet, 341

  Colmar d'Automne Nouveau, 342

  Colmar Bretagne, 342

  Colmar Charni, 342

  Colmar Daras, 342

  Colmar Delahaut, 342

  Colmar Demeester, 342

  Colmar Dewez, 342

  Colmar Epine, 342

  Colmar d'Ete, 343

  Colmar Flotow, 343

  Colmar-Hirondelles, 343

  _Colmar des Invalides_ (syn. of Colmar Van Mons), 344

  Colmar de Jonghe, 343

  Colmar de Mars, 343

  Colmar du Mortier, 343

  Colmar Navez, 343

  Colmar Neill, 344

  Colmar Sirand, 344

  Colmar Van Mons, 344

  Colmart, 344

  Coloma, Count de, orig. of Beurre Coloma, 291;
    Coloma Carmeliterbirne, 344;
    Reine des Poires, 519;
    Supreme Coloma, 557

  Coloma Carmeliterbirne, 344

  _Coloma's Herbst Butterbirne_ (syn. of Urbaniste), 224

  Colonel Wilder, 143

  Colorado Seedless, 344

  Coloree de Juillet, 344

  Columbia, 144

  _Columbia_ (syn. of Barseck), 260

  _Comet_ (syn. of Lawson), 186

  _Cometbirne_ (syn. of Lawson), 186

  _Comice_ (syn. of Doyenne du Comice), 153

  Comice Horticole, originator of Doyenne du Comice, 154

  Commandant Belaieff, 345

  Commercial varieties of pears, 84;
    in New York, 101

  Commissaire Delmotte, 345

  Commodore, 345

  Compotbirne, 345

  Compote d'Ete, 345

  Comprette, 345

  Comstock, 345

  Comte Canal de Malabaila, 345

  Comte de Chambord, 345

  Comte d'Egmont, 346

  Comte de Flandres, 346

  Comte de Lambertye, 346

  _Comte de Lamy_ (syn. of Lamy), 184

  Comte Lelieur, 346

  Comte de Meladore, 346

  Comte de Morny, 346

  Comte de Paris, 346

  Comtesse d'Alost, 346

  Comtesse de Chambord, 346

  Comtesse Clara Frijs, 347

  Comtesse de Grailly, 347

  Comtesse de Paris, 347

  Condorcet, 347

  Conference, 347

  Congres de Gand, 347

  Congres Pomologique, 347

  Conkleton, 348

  Conklin, 348

  Connecticut, 348

  Conseiller de Hollande, 348

  Conseiller Ranwez, 348

  Constant, Thomas, orig. of Sudduth, 220

  Constant Claes, 348

  Constitutional characters of pear-trees, 59

  Cooke, 348

  Cooke, Elijah, orig. of Beurre Preble, 303

  Coolidge, D. W., introd. of Winter Bartlett, 231

  Copia, 348

  Coppiers, orig. of Vice-President Coppiers, 572

  Cordus, discussion of pears by, 20

  Cornelie Daras, 348

  Cornemuse, 348

  Cornewell, 349

  Cost of growing pears, 110

  Coter, 349

  Coule-Soif de Cerutti, 349

  Courte-queue d'Automne, 349

  Courte-queue d'Hiver, 349

  Cousin Blanc, 349

  Couteau, 349

  Coxe, experimental orchards of, 52;
    first American pomology by, 52

  Craig, 349

  Craig Favourite, 350

  Crassane, 350; parent of Boieldien, 312;
    Lydie Thierard, 454

  Crassane Libotton, 350

  Crassane du Mortier, 350

  Crawford, 350

  Crawford, N. W., orig. of Carmel, 328

  Crede kegelfoermige Zuckerbirne, 350

  Crede Sommerrusselet, 350

  Crescenzi, discussion of pear by, 11

  Crisco, 351

  Crisco, Robert, orig. of Crisco, 351

  [vC]rnivka, 351

  Crocker, 351

  Croft Castle, 351

  Crosby, J. W., orig. of Redfield, 518

  Cross, 351

  Cross, orig. of Cross, 351

  Crouch, 351

  Crow, 351

  Crown-gall on pear, 116

  Cuissard and Barret, orig. of Madame Cuissard, 456

  Cuisse Madame, parent of Windsor, 583

  _Cuisse Madame_ (syn. of Jargonelle (French)), 178

  Cullem, 351

  Culture, pear, notes on, 83

  Cumberland, 351

  _Cure_ (syn. of Vicar of Winkfield), 227

  Cure d'Oleghem, 352

  _Curtet's Butterbirne_ (syn. of Lamy), 184

  Cushing, 352

  Cushing, Col. Washington, orig. of Cushing, 352

  Cydonia, relationship of, to pear, 57

  Czernowes, 352


  D'Amboise, 352

  _D'Ane_ (syn. of Langbirne), 441

  _D'Aout Allemande_ (syn. of Deutsche Augustbirne), 358

  D'Arad, 352

  D'Auch, 352

  D'Oeuf, 352

  Daimyo, 353

  Dallas, 353

  Dame, 353

  Dame-verte, 353

  Dana, Francis, orig. of varieties, 146, 238, 244, 255, 380, 388, 396,
      455, 466, 509, 545

  Dana Hovey, 146; parent of Luola, 454

  _Dana's Hovey_ (syn. of Dana Hovey), 146

  _Dana's No. 16_ (syn. of Dana Hovey), 146

  _Danas Hovey_ (syn. of Dana Hovey), 146

  Daras de Naghin, orig. of varieties, 242, 250, 260, 268, 269, 296, 324,
335, 342, 347, 348, 392, 396, 418, 424, 429, 444, 446, 458, 459, 463, 464,
492, 493, 517, 527, 550, 559, 565

  Darimont, 353

  Darlington, 353

  Dathis, 353

  Dauvesse, orig. of Esther Comte, 378

  David, 353

  David d'Angers, 353

  Davis, 354

  Davis, orig. of Davis, 354;
    Gold Nugget, 399

  _De Bavay_ (syn. of Autumn Colmar), 256

  De Cerciaux, 354

  De Chasseur, 354

  De Croixmare, 354

  De Duvergnies, 354

  De la Farge, A., orig. of Belle et Bonne de la Pierre, 263;
    Besi de la Pierre, 281;
    Citron de Saint Paul, 339

  De Fer, 354

  De Fosse, 354

  De Jonghe, J., introd. of varieties, 450;
    orig. of varieties, 261, 280, 292, 334, 343, 348, 370, 447, 522;
    work of, as pear breeder, 19

  _De Jonghe's Butterbirne_ (syn. of Beurre de Jonghe), 136

  De Lamartine, 355

  De Longueval, orig. of Louise Bonne de Jersey, 193

  De Louvain, 355

  De Nelis, work of, as pear breeder, 19

  De Pretre, 355

  _De Quentin_ (syn. of Rousselet Saint-Quentin), 530

  De Rachinquin, 355

  De Serres, discussion of the pear by, 14

  _De Tongres_ (syn. of Durandeau), 373

  Dearborn, 147

  Dearborn, Gen. H. A. S., biography of, 147;
    orig. of Dearborn, 147

  _Dearborn's Seedling_ (syn. of Dearborn), 147

  _Dechantsbirne von Alencon_ (syn. of Doyenne d'Alencon), 150

  Defays, Francois, orig. of Beurre Defays, 292;
    Doyenne Defays, 366

  Degaud, Isidore, orig. of Delices de Froyennes, 356

  Dehove, Francois, orig. of Rondelet, 523

  Delannoy, Alexandre, orig. of Beurre Delannoy, 292

  Delcange, 355

  _Delices d'Angers_ (syn. of Fondante du Panisel), 385

  Delices de la Cacaudiere, 355

  Delices de Charles, 355

  Delices de Chaumont, 356

  Delices Everard, 356

  Delices de Froyennes, 356

  Delices d'Hardenpont, 356

  _Delices d'Hardenpont d'Angers_ (syn. of Fondante du Panisel), 385

  Delices d'Hiver, 356

  Delices de Huy, 356

  Delices de Jodoigne, 356

  Delices de Ligaudieres, 356

  Delices de Lovenjoul, 356

  Delices de la Meuse, 357

  Delices de Naghin, 357

  Delices de Saint-Medard, 357

  Delices de Tirlemont, 357

  Delicieuse de Grammont, 357

  Delicieuse de Swijan, 357

  Delisse, 357

  Delpierre, 357

  Delporte Bourgmestre, 357

  Democrat, 357

  _Demoiselle_ (syn. of Vigne), 572

  Demorest, 357

  Dempsey, 357

  Denis Dauvesse, 358

  Derouineau, orig. of Beurre Derouineau, 292

  Dervaes Bros., orig. of Bergamotte la Gantoise, 272

  Des Chartreux, 358

  _Des Chasseurs_ (syn. of Poire des Chasseurs), 502

  _Des Chevriers de Stuttgardt_ (syn. of Rousselet de Stuttgardt), 531

  Des Deux Soeurs, 358

  Deschamps, Monseigneur, orig. of Beurre d'Arenberg, 129

  Description blank for pear, opposite 68

  Desire Cornelis, 358

  Desportes, Francois, orig. of Doyenne Downing, 366

  Dessauer Weissbirne, 358

  Deutsche Augustbirne, 358

  Deutsche Glasbirne, 358

  Deutsche Kuemmelbirne, 358

  Deutsche Muskateller, 358

  _Deux Fois l'An_ (syn. of Honey), 420

  Deux Tetes, 359

  Devergnies, 359

  Devergnies, orig. of Devergnies, 359

  Dewey, 359

  Dhommee, 359

  _Diamant-peer_ (syn. of Gansel Bergamot), 391

  Dickerman, 359

  Dickinson, orig. of Eureka, 379

  Diego, 359

  _Diel_ (syn. of Beurre Diel), 133

  _Diel's Butterbirne_ (syn. of Beurre Diel), 133

  Dienstbotenbirne, 359

  Dieudonne Anthoine, 359

  _Dikeman_ (syn. of Dickerman), 359

  Diller, 360

  Dilly, V., orig. of Beurre Dilly, 292

  Diman, 360

  Dion, orig. of Belle Guerandaise, 264

  Directeur Alphand, 360

  Directeur Hardy, 360

  Directeur Tisserand, 360

  Directeur Varenne, 360

  Dirkjes Peer, 360

  Diseases of the pear, 110

  Dix, 360

  Dix, Madame, orig. of Dix, 360

  Dixie, 360

  Doat, 361

  Doat, orig. of Doat, 361

  Docteur Andry, 361

  Docteur Benit, 361

  Docteur Bourgeois, 361

  Docteur Bouvier, 361

  Docteur Capron, 361

  Docteur Chaineau, 361

  Docteur Delatosse, 361

  Docteur Gromier, 361

  Docteur Joubert, 361

  _Docteur Jules Guyot_ (syn. of Guyot), 173

  Docteur Koch, 361

  Docteur Lentier, 362

  Docteur Lindley, 362

  Docteur Meniere, 362

  Docteur Nelis, 362

  Docteur P. Bruzon, 362

  Docteur Pariset, 362

  Docteur Pigeaux, 362

  _Docteur Rheder_ (syn. of Reeder), 211

  Docteur Trousseau, 362

  Doctor Bachmann, 362

  Doctor Engelbrecht, 363

  Doctor Hogg Bergamot, 363

  Doctor Hoskins, 363

  Doctor Howe, 363

  Dr. Jules Guyot, 173

  _Doctor Reeder_ (syn. of Reeder), 211

  Doctor Turner, 363

  Dodge, 363

  Dodoens, mention of pear varieties by, 16

  Doktorsbirne, 363

  Donatienne Bureau, 363

  Dones, 363

  Donville, 363

  _Doppelte Philippsbirne_ (syn. of Doyenne Boussock), 152

  Doppelttragende gelbe Muskatellerbirne, 364

  Doerell Herbst Muskateller, 364

  Dorlain, orig. of Saint Ghislain, 536

  Dorothee Nouvelle, 364

  Dorothee Royale Nouvelle, 364

  Dorr, 364

  Dorschbirne, 364

  Dorset, 149

  Dosoris, 364

  Double d'Automne, 364

  _Double Blossom_ (syn. of Double-Fleur), 364

  Double-Fleur, 364

  Double de Guerre, 365

  Double-Plouvier, 365

  Double Rousselet, 365

  Douglas, 150

  Douillard, orig. of Alexandrine Douillard, 241

  Dow, 365

  Downer, Samuel, introd. of Andrews, 246

  Dowler, 365

  Downton, 365

  Doyen Dillen, 365

  _Doyenne_ (syn. of White Doyenne), 228

  Doyenne d'Alencon, 150;
    parent of Bergamotte Tardive Collette, 277;
    Pierre Curie, 499

  Doyenne Bizet, 365

  _Doyenne Blanc_ (syn. of White Doyenne), 228

  Doyenne Blanc Long, 366

  Doyenne Boisnard, 366

  Doyenne Boisselot, 366

  Doyenne de Bordeaux, 366.

  _Doyenne Boussoch_ (syn. of Doyenne Boussock), 152

  Doyenne Boussock, 152;
    parent of Fondante des Emmurees, 384

  _Doyenne Boussock Nouvelle_ (syn. of Doyenne Boussock), 152

  Doyenne Bouyron, 366

  Doyenne du Cercle, 366

  Doyenne a Cinq Pans, 366

  Doyenne du Comice, 153;
    parent of Directeur Tisserand, 360;
    Doyenne Georges Boucher, 367;
    Jeanne d'Arc, 429;
    Pierre Corneille, 499

  Doyenne Defays, 366

  Doyenne Downing, 366

  _Doyenne d'Effay_ (syn. of Doyenne Defays), 366

  Doyenne d'Ete, parent of Eliot Early, 375

  _Doyenne d'Ete_ (syn. of Summer Doyenne), 221

  Doyenne Flon Aine, 367

  Doyenne Fradin, 367

  Doyenne Georges Boucher, 367

  Doyenne Goubault, 367

  _Doyenne Gray_ (syn. of Doyenne Gris), 367

  Doyenne de la Grifferaye, 367

  Doyenne Gris, 367

  _Doyenne Gris_, parent of Avocat Allard, 257

  Doyenne Guillard, 367

  Doyenne des Haies, 367

  _Doyenne d'Hiver_ (syn. of Easter Beurre), 159

  Doyenne Hudellet, 368

  Doyenne Jamin, 368

  _Doyenne de Juillet_ (syn. of Summer Doyenne), 221

  Doyenne de Lorraine, 368

  Doyenne Louis, 368

  _Doyenne de Merode_ (syn. of Doyenne Boussock), 152

  Doyenne de Montjean, 368

  Doyenne Nerard, 368

  Doyenne Nouveau, 368

  Doyenne Perrault, 368

  Doyenne Picard, 368

  Doyenne Rahard, 369

  Doyenne de Ramegnies, 369

  Doyenne Robin, 369

  Doyenne Rose, 369

  Doyenne Saint-Roch, 369

  Doyenne de Saumur, 369

  Doyenne Sentelet, 369

  Doyenne Sieulle, 369

  _Doyenne Sterckmans_ (syn. of Beurre Sterckmans), 306

  Drapiez, 369

  Driessche, orig. of Beurre van Driessche, 293

  _Driessen's Pomeranzenbirne_ (syn. of Beurre Driessen), 293

  Drone, 370

  _Drouard_ (syn. of President Drouard), 210

  Du Breuil, Alphonse, orig. of Du Breuil Pere, 370;
    Souvenir de du Breuil Pere, 549

  Du Breuil Pere, 370

  Du Mirror, 370

  Du Mortier, orig. of Bergamotte de Tournai, 278

  Du Roeulx, 370

  Dubreuil, orig. of Professeur Dubreuil, 514

  Dubrulle, 370

  Dubuisson, Isidore, orig. of Beurre Dubuisson, 293

  Duc Alfred de Croy, 370

  Duc d'Aumale, 370

  Duc de Brabant, 370

  Duc de Morny, 370

  Duc de Nemours, 370

  _Duchess of Angouleme_ (syn. of Duchesse d'Angouleme), 154

  _Duchess Bronze_ (syn. of Duchesse d'Angouleme Bronzee), 371

  _Duchess of Orleans_ (syn. of Duchesse d'Orleans), 156

  Duchesse d'Angouleme, 154;
    parent of Bill Campbell, 309;
    Cassel, 329;
    Dempsey, 357;
    Douglas, 150;
    Duchesse Precoce, 372;
    General Wauchope, 395;
    Henri Bouet, 415;
    place of, in New York pear culture, 85

  Duchesse d'Angouleme Bronzee, 371

  Duchesse d'Angouleme Panachee, 371

  Duchesse Anne, 371

  Duchesse d'Arenberg, 371

  Duchesse de Berry d'Ete, 371

  Duchesse de Bordeaux, 371;
    parent of Doyenne a Cinq Pans, 366

  Duchesse de Brabant, 372

  Duchess de Brabant (De Capeinick), 372

  Duchesse de Brissac, 372

  Duchesse Grousset, 372

  Duchesse Helene d'Orleans, 372

  Duchesse d'Hiver, 372

  Duchesse Hybrid, 372

  Duchesse de Mars, 372

  Duchesse de Mouchy, 372

  Duchesse d'Orleans, 156

  Duchesse Precoce, 372

  Duchovaya, 373

  Dudley, 373

  Dudley, mention of pears by, 45;
    orig. of Dudley, 373

  _Duhamel_ (syn. of Duhamel du Monceau), 157

  Duhamel du Monceau, 157

  _Duhamel's Butterbirne_ (syn. of Duhamel du Monceau), 157

  Duke, Lucy, orig. of Beaufort, 262;
    Lucy Duke, 194

  _Dumas_ (syn. of Epine du Mas), 377

  Dumon-Dumortier, 373

  Dumont, Joseph, orig. of Bergamotte de Tournai, 277;
    Beurre Dumont, 293;
    Beurre d'Esquelmes, 294

  Dundas, 373

  Dunmore, 373

  Dupuy Charles, 373

  Duquesne, Abbe, orig. of Colmar Van Mons, 344;
    Marie Louise, 198

  Durand-Gasselin, orig. of Poire Brune de Gasselin, 501

  Durandeau, 373

  Durandeau, Charles Louis, orig. of Durandeau, 373

  Duree, 374

  Durst-Loesche, 374

  Dussart, orig. of Bergamotte Dussart, 271

  "Dutch Jacob", discoverer of Seckel, 215

  Duval, orig. of Archiduc Charles, 251;
    Beurre Duval, 294

  Dwarfing, best pear varieties for, 95;
    of pears, 94


  Earl, S., orig. of Herkimer, 417

  Early Ely, 374

  Early Green Sugar, 374

  Early Harvest, 158

  _Early Butter of Indiana_ (syn. of Craig), 349

  _Early Rousselet_ (syn. of Rousselet Hatif), 528

  _Early Wilbur_ (syn. of Wilbur), 580

  _Early Wilder_ (syn. of Wilder Early), 230

  Easter Bergamot, 374

  Easter Beurre, 159;
    parent of Directeur Varenne, 360;
    Louis Cappe, 451;
    Souvenir de Renault Pere, 550

  Eastern Belle, 374

  Echasserie, 374

  Eckard, W. C., orig. of Luola, 454

  Economic considerations in pear culture, 94

  Edle Sommerbirne, 375

  Edward Seedling St. Germain, 375

  Edwards, Bryan, orig. of Bryan Edwards, 321

  Edwards, Henry W., biography of, 375;
    orig. of varieties, 326, 327, 338, 340, 353, 375, 388, 416, 567, 568,
      581

  Effie Holt, 375

  Eliot, Judge Charles, orig. of Eliot Early, 375

  Eliot Early, 375

  Elisa d'Heyst, 375

  Elizabeth, 161

  Elizabeth (Edwards), 375

  _Elizabeth de Manning_ (syn. of Elizabeth), 161

  Elizabeth Maury, 376

  Ellis, 376

  Ellis, Annie E., orig. of Ellis, 376

  Ellis (New York), 376

  Ellison, M. P., orig. of Ford, 386

  Ellwanger, George, biography of, 205

  Ellwanger & Barry, introd. into America of Alexander Lucas, 240

  Ely, Silas, orig. of Early Ely, 374

  Emerald, 376

  Emile d'Heyst, 376

  Endicott pear tree, 41

  Enfant Nantais, 376

  Enfant Prodigue, 376

  England, pear in, 29

  English and American pear-growing compared, 37

  _Epargne_ (syn. of Jargonelle), 177

  Epine d'Ete, 377

  Epine d'Ete Rouge, 377

  Epine d'Hiver, 377

  Epine de Jernages, 377

  Epine du Mas, 377

  Epine Royale, 377

  Epine-Royale de Courtray, 378

  _Eriophyes pyri_ on pear, 119

  Ermsinde, 378

  Ernestine Auzolle, 378

  Ernst, A. H., introd. of Prairie du Pond, 506

  Eseme, 378

  Esperen, Major, orig. of varieties, 165, 180, 219, 242, 271, 279, 288,
      289, 315, 325, 329, 330, 334, 338, 362, 365, 375, 376, 384, 400,
      430, 457, 462, 477, 478, 491, 492, 494, 513, 531, 542, 548, 558,
      563, 573;
    work of, as a pear breeder, 19

  _Esperen Waldbirne_ (syn. of Belle de Forets), 264

  _Esperen's Herrenbirne_ (syn. of Belle Lucrative), 126

  Esperine, 378

  Esperione, 378

  Essex, 378

  Essington, W. E., orig. of Autumn Josephine, 256

  Esther Comte, 378

  Estienne, list of pears given by, 13

  Estranguillon, 378

  Esturion, 378

  Eugene Appert, 379

  Eugene Furst, 379

  Eugene Maisin, 379

  Eugene des Nouhes, 379

  Eugene Thirriot, 379

  Euratsfelder Mostbirne, 379

  Eureka, 379

  Europe, eastern and central, pear in, 19

  European pear varieties imported into America, 52

  Eva Baltet, 379

  Everard, Gabriel, orig. of Delices Everard, 356

  Excellente de Moine, 380

  Excelsior, 380

  Eyewood, 380


  _Fabraea maculata_, cause of leaf-blight, 115

  Fall, 380

  Fall Beurre d'Arenburg, 380

  Famenga, 380

  _Farragut_ (syn. of Admiral Farragut), 238

  _Fassbirne_ (syn. of Tonneau), 564

  Faurite, 380

  Fauvanelle, 380

  _Favorite de Clapp_ (syn. of Clapp Favorite), 142

  Favorite Joanon, 380

  Favorite Morel, 381

  Favre, orig. of Madame Favre, 458;
    Souvenir Favre, 550

  Feast, 381

  Feast, Samuel, orig. of Feast, 381

  Feaster, Aaron, orig. of Bleeker Meadow, 311

  Felix de Liem, 381

  Felix Sahut, 381

  Feraut, orig. of Augier, 254

  Ferdinand Gaillard, 381

  Ferdinand de Lesseps, 381

  Fertility, 381

  Fertility of pear, 99

  Fertilizers for pears, 98

  _Feuille de chene_ (syn. of Naples), 479

  Figue, 381

  Figue d'Alencon, 382

  Figue de Naples, 382

  Figueira, 382

  Fin Juillet, 382

  Fin-Or d'Orleans, 382

  Fin-Or de Septembre, 382

  _Fine Gold of Summer_ (syn. of Fin-Or d'Orleans), 382

  Fitzwater, 382

  Flack, W., orig. of Essex, 378

  Fleming, Mrs. Maria, orig. of Lincoln, 191

  Flemish Beauty, 163;
    parent of Bergamotte Nicolle, 274;
    Doctor Hoskins, 363;
    Eva Baltet, 379;
    Max, 469

  Flemish Bon Chretien, 382

  Flon, orig. of Bertrand Guinoisseau, 278;
    Beurre Flon, 295;
    Doyenne Flon Aine, 367;
    Fortunee superieure, 387;
    Marechal Pelissier, 462

  Flon-Grolleau, orig. of General Bosquet, 394;
    Lieutenant Poidevin, 448;
    Saint Vincent de Paul, 538

  _Florelle_ (syn. of Forelle), 167

  Florent Schouman, 383

  Florida Bartlett, 383

  Florimond Parent, 390

  Flower-buds of pear, characteristics of, 62

  Flowers of pear, characteristics of, 62

  Fluke, 383

  Fluke, N. K., introd. of Fluke, 383

  Fondante Agreable, 383

  Fondante Albert, 383

  Fondante d'Angers, 383

  _Fondante d'Automne_ (syn. of Belle Lucrative), 126

  Fondante de Bihorel, 383

  _Fondante des Bois_ (syn. of Flemish Beauty), 163

  Fondante de Brest, 383

  Fondante de Charleville, 384

  Fondante de Charneau, 384

  Fondante de Cuerne, 384

  Fondante des Emmurees, 384

  Fondante d'Ingendal, 384

  Fondante de Ledeberg, 384

  Fondante de la Maitre-Ecole, 384

  Fondante de Malines, 384

  Fondante de Mars, 384

  Fondante de Moulins-Lille, 385

  Fondante de Nees, 385

  Fondante de Noel, 164

  Fondante du Panisel, 385

  Fondante des Pres, 385

  Fondante de la Roche, 385

  Fondante de Rome ou Sucre Romain, 385

  Fondante de Saint-Amand, 385

  _Fondante de Schoenert_ (syn. of Schoenerts Omsewitzer Schmalzbirne), 542

  Fondante-de-Septembre, 385

  Fondante Sickler, 386

  Fondante de Thines, 386

  Fondante Thirriot, 386

  Fondante Van Mons, 386

  Fondante de Wollmet, 386

  Fontaine de Ghelin, orig. of General Totleben, 395

  Fontarabie, 386

  Fontenay, 165

  Foote, Asahel, orig. of Fall Beurre d'Arenburg, 380;
    Foote Seckel, 386;
    Homestead, 420;
    Hoosic, 420;
    Weeping Willow, 576

  Foote Seckel, 386

  Ford, 386

  Forelle, 167

  _Forellenbirne_ (syn. of Forelle), 167

  Forme de Bergamotte Crassane, 387

  Forme de Curtet, 387

  Forme de Delices, 387

  Fortune, 387

  Fortunee, 387;
    parent of Bergamotte Hertrich, 272;
    Fortunee Boisselot, 387;
    Fortunee superieure, 387;
    Olivier de Serres, 200

  Fortunee Boisselot, 387

  _Fortunee de Printemps_ (syn. of Fortunee), 387

  Fortunee superieure, 387

  Foster, Suel, orig. of Snow, 547

  Fouqueray, orig. of Beurre Fouqueray, 295

  Fourcine, W., orig. of Comtesse de Paris, 347

  Fourcroy, 387

  Fouron, 387

  Fowler, Dr., orig. of Muscadine, 476

  Fox, 168

  Fox, Bernard S., biography of, 168;
    orig. of Colonel Wilder, 144;
    Fox, 168;
    P. Barry, 203

  Franc-Real, 388

  _Franc Real d'Hiver_ (syn. of Franc-Real), 388

  France, pear in, 12;
    rapid increase in pear varieties in, 15

  Frances, 388

  Franchimont, 388

  Franchipanne, 388

  Francis, 388

  Francis Dana, 388

  Francois Hutin, 388

  _Frangipane_ (syn. of Franchipanne), 388

  Frangipane d'Hiver, 388

  Frankenbirne, 389

  Frankfurter Birne, 389

  _Franzoesische Gute Graue Sommerbirne_ (syn. of Grise-Bonne), 403

  _Franzoesische Zapfenbirne_ (syn. of Brute Bonne), 321

  Frau Louise Goethe, 389

  Frederic Leclerc, 389

  Frederic de Wurtemberg, 389

  Frederica Bremer, 389

  Frederick Clapp, 169

  Fremion, 390

  French, connection of the, with history of pear in America, 46

  French pear stocks, notes on, 95

  Frensdorff Rothe Flaschenbirne, 390

  Fruehe Backhausbirne, 390

  Fruehe Schweizer Bergamotte, 390

  Fruit characters of pomes, 63

  Fruit setting of pears, discussion of, 99

  Fuller, 390

  Fullero, 390

  Fulton, 390;
    parent of Tudor, 567

  Fulton, orig. of Fulton, 390

  _Fumago vagans_, cause of black mold of pear, 117

  Fusee d'Automne, 390

  Fusee d'Hiver, 391


  Gabourell Seedling, 391

  Gakovsky, 391

  Gallo, mention of pears by, 12

  Galopin, orig. of Chaudfontaine, 335

  Galston Muirfowl Egg, 391

  Gambier, orig. of Beurre Gambier, 295;
    Fondante d'Ingendal, 384;
    Marie Louise d'Uccle, 464

  Gans, 391

  Gans, Joseph, discoverer of Gans, 391

  Gaensekopf, 391

  Gansel, Lieutenant-General, orig. of Gansel Bergamot, 391

  Gansel Bergamot, 391; parent of Gansel Seckel, 170

  Gansel Late Bergamot, 391;
    parent of Doctor Hogg Bergamot, 363

  Gansel Seckel, 170

  _Gansel-Seckle_ (syn. of Gansel Seckel), 170

  Garber, 171;
    place of, in commercial pear culture, 84

  Garber, J. B., orig. of Garber, 171

  _Garber's Hybrid_ (syn. of Garber), 171

  Garden, pomological, of Robert Manning, 53

  Garden, T. J., introd. of Cole Winter, 341

  _Garden Pear_ (syn. of Poirer de Jardin), 505

  Garnier, 392

  Garnier, orig. of Garnier, 392;
    Maria de Nantes, 463

  Garnons, 392

  Gassenbirne, 392

  Gaston du Puys, 392

  Gaudry, 392

  Gaujard, orig. of Mademoiselle Marguerite Gaujard, 460

  Geant, 392

  Gefleckte Pomeranzenbirne, 392

  Gefleckte Sommerrusselet, 392

  Gefundene, 392

  Geigenschnabel, 392

  Geishirtle, 392

  _Gelbe Fruehbirne_ (syn. of Jaune Hative), 428

  Gelbe fruehe Sommerapothekerbirne, 392

  Gelbe Fuersten-Tafelbirne, 393

  Gelbe Heckenbirne, 393

  Gelbe Holzbirne, 393

  Gelbe Landlbirne, 393

  Gelbe langstielige Alantbirne, 393

  Gelbe Laurentiusbirne, 393

  Gelbe Leutsbirne, 393

  Gelbe Scheibelbirne, 393

  _Gelbe Sommerrusselet_ (syn. of Rousselet Jaune d'Ete), 529

  Gelbe Wasserbirne, 393

  Gelbmostler, 394

  _Gellert's Butterbirne_ (syn. of Beurre Hardy), 135

  Gemeine Kochbirne, 394

  Gemeine Pfundbirne, 394

  Gendron, orig. of Beurre Gendron, 295

  General de Bonchamp, 394

  General Bosquet, 394

  General Canrobert, 394

  General Delage, 394

  General Dutilleul, 394

  General Duvivier, 395

  General Kearney, 395

  General Lamoriciere, 395

  General Sherman, 395

  General Taylor, 395

  General Thouvenin, 395

  General Totleben, 395

  General Wauchope, 395

  Gensbirne, 395

  George Augustus, 396

  Georges Delebecque, 396

  Gerando, 396

  Gerarde, mention of pears by, 32

  Gerardine, 396

  Gerdessen, 396

  Gerdessen, Pastor, orig. of Gerdessen, 396

  _Gergonell_(syn. of Jargonelle), 177

  Gerippte Pomeranzenbirne, 396

  _German Muscat_ (syn. of Deutsche Muskateller), 358

  Germany, pomological literature of, 20

  Gernroeder Pomeranzenbirne, 396

  Gestreiffe Winter-Apothekerbirne, 396

  Ghelin, Fontaine de, orig. of Beurre de Ghelin, 296

  Ghellinck de Walle, 396

  Ghellinck de Walle, orig. of Ghellinck de Walle, 396

  Gibb, 396

  Gibb, introd. of Russian pears by, 56

  Gibey-Lorne, orig. of Monseigneur des Hons, 474

  _Giffard_ (syn. of Beurre Giffard), 134

  _Giffard's Butterbirne_ (syn. of Beurre Giffard), 134

  Gilain, 397

  Gilles o Gilles, 397

  Giram, 397

  Girandoux, orig. of Girardon, 397

  Girardon, 397

  _Girogile_ (syn. of Gilles o Gilles), 397

  Glace d'hiver, 397

  Glastonbury, 397

  Gleck, 398

  Gliva, 398

  Gloire de Cambron, 398

  Glou Morceau, 172;
    confusion with Beurre d'Arenberg, 129;
    parent of Bergamotte de Toumai, 277;
    Beurre Ad. Papeleu, 283;
    Souvenir Favre, 550;
    Winter Williams, 584

  _Glout Morceau_ (syn. of Glou Morceau), 172

  _Gloux Morceau_ (syn. of Glou Morceau), 172

  Gloward, 398

  Gnoico, 398

  Goat-herd, 398

  _Goemans Gelbe Sommerbirne_ (syn. of Passe-Goemans), 491

  Gogal, 398

  Gold Dust, 399

  Gold Nugget, 399

  Goldbirne, 399

  Goldbordirte Holzbirne, 399

  Golden Bell, 399

  Golden Beurre of Bilboa, 398

  Golden June, 399

  Golden Knap, 399

  Golden Queen, 399

  Golden Russet, 399

  _Golden Russet_ (syn. of Japan Golden Russet), 428

  Goldwoerther Lederbirne, 399

  Goennersche Birne, 399

  Goodale, 400

  Goodale, E., orig. of Goodale, 400

  Goodrich, Chauncey, orig. of Paddock, 489

  Gore, Gov., orig. of Heathcot, 413

  Got, 400

  Goubault, Maurice, orig. of varieties, 138, 274, 279, 281, 293, 296,
      304, 310, 367, 465, 471

  Governor Carver, 400

  Grabel, Jacob, orig. of Posey, 506

  Grabenbirne, 400

  Grading of pears, 108

  Graf Moltke, 400

  Grafting pears, 106

  Graham, F. J., orig. of Autumn Nelis, 256

  _Graham Autumn Nelis_ (syn. of Autumn Nelis), 256

  Grand Bretagne, 400

  Grand Isle, 400

  _Grand Monarque_ (syn. of Catallac), 330

  Grand-Soliel, 400

  Grant, 401

  Graslin, 401

  Grasshoff Leckerbissen, 401

  Gratiola, 401

  _Graue Flaschenbirne_ (syn. of Calbasbirn), 324

  Graue Herbstrusselet, 401

  Graue Holzbirne, 401

  Graue Honigbirn, 401

  Graue Pelzbirne, 401

  Graue Speckbirne, 401

  Graue Zuckerbirne, 402

  Grazbirne, 402

  Great Cassolette, 402

  Great Citron of Bohemia, 402

  Great Mammoth, 402

  Greece, ancient, pear in, 3

  Greeks, monographs on husbandry by, 7

  Green, Charles A., introd. into America of President Drouard, 210

  Green Chisel, 402

  Green Mountain Boy, 402

  Green Pear of Yair, 402

  _Green Yair_ (syn. of Green Pear of Yair), 402

  Gregoire, Xavier, orig. of varieties, 238, 239, 249, 255, 257, 259, 273,
      302, 303, 304, 338, 342, 345, 362, 396, 397, 414, 415, 425, 429,
      432, 440, 445, 446, 451, 457, 458, 467, 473, 474, 483, 507, 510,
      511, 512, 514, 529, 531, 547, 548, 549, 550, 551, 572, 573, 587;
    work as pear breeder, 19

  Gregoire Bordillon, 403

  Grey Good-Wife, 403

  Gris, M. le, orig. of Doyenne de la Grifferaye, 367

  Grise-Bonne, 403

  Grolez-Duriez, orig. of Belle-Moulinoise, 265;
    Fondante de Moulins-Lille, 385

  Groom, introd. of Groom Prince Royal, 403

  Groom Prince Royal, 403

  Gros Blanquet Long, 403

  Gros Blanquet Rond, 403

  Gros-Hativeau, 404

  Gros Loijart, 404

  Gros Lucas, 404

  Gros Muscat Rond, 404

  Gros Rousselet, 404

  Gros Rousselet d'Aout, 405

  Gros Trouve, 405

  _Grosse Angleterre de Noisette_ (syn. of Grosse Poire d'Amande), 406

  Grosse Eisbirne, 405

  Grosse Figue, 405

  Grosse gelbe Weinbirne, 405

  Grosse-Herbst-Bergamotte, 405

  Grosse Landlbirne, 405

  Grosse Leutsbirne, 405

  Grosse-Louise, 405

  Grosse Mostputzer, 405

  Grosse Petersbirne, 406

  Grosse Poire d'Amande, 406

  Grosse Poire de Vitrier, 406

  Grosse Queue, 406

  Grosse Rommelter, 406

  Grosse schoene Jungfernbirne, 406

  Grosse September Birne, 406

  Grosse Sommer-Zitronenbirne, 407

  Grosse Sommersirene, 406

  Grosse spaete Weinbirne, 407

  _Grosse Verte-Longue Precoce de la Sarthe_ (syn. of Verte-Longue de la
Sarthe), 571

  Grosser Roland, 407

  Grousset, orig. of Enfant Nantais, 376

  Groveland, 407

  Grubbirne, 407

  Grumkow, 407

  Grunbirne, 407

  Gruene Confesselsbirne, 407

  Gruene fruehe Gewurzbirne, 407

  Gruene fuerstliche Tafelbirne, 407

  Gruene gesegnete Winterbirne, 408

  _Gruene Lange Herbstbirne_ (syn. of Long Green), 449

  Gruene langstielige Winterhirtenbirne, 408

  _Gruene Magdalene_(syn. of Madeleine), 195

  Gruene Pfundbirne, 408

  Gruene Pichelbirne, 408

  Gruene Sommer-Bergamote, 408

  Gruene Sommer-Citronenbirne, 408

  _Gruene Sommer-Magdalene_ (syn. of Madeleine), 195

  Gruene Wiedenbirne, 408

  Gruene Winawitz, 408

  Gruenmostler, 408

  _Guenette_ (syn. of Green Chisel), 402

  Gueniot, orig. of Le Brun, 443

  Gueraud, orig. of Adele de Saint-Denis, 237

  Guillot, orig. of Bon-Chretien Bonnamour, 313

  Gulabi, 409

  Guntershauser Holzbirne, 409

  Gustave Bivort, 409

  Gustave Bourgogne, 409

  Gustin Summer, 409

  _Gute Graue_ (syn. of Yat), 586

  Gute Gruene, 409

  _Gute Louise von Avranches_(syn. of Louise Bonne de Jersey), 193

  Guyot, 173


  Habichtsbirne, 409

  Habit of growth of pear-trees, 59

  Habitat of _Pyrus auricularis_, 73;
    _Pyrus betulaefolia_, 79;
    _Pyrus calleryana_, 80;
    _Pyrus communis_, 70;
    _Pyrus nivalis_, 72;
    _Pyrus serotina_, 75;
    _Pyrus serotina culta_, 76;
    _Pyrus serrulata_, 78;
    _Pyrus ussuriensis_, 77

  Hacon Incomparable, 409;
    parent of Hoosic, 420

  Haddington, 409

  Haffner Bros., orig. of Haffner Butterbirne, 410

  Haffner Butterbirne, 410

  Hagar, 410

  _Hagerman_ (syn. of Hegeman), 414

  Haight, 410

  Hallische gelbe Honigbirne, 410

  Hamburg, 410

  Hamburger Birne, 410

  Hamilton, 410

  Hammelsbirne, 410

  Hamon, 410

  Hampden Bergamot, 410

  Hampton, W. C., orig. of Hampton Bergamot, 411;
    Hampton Cluster, 411

  Hampton Bergamot, 411

  Hampton Cluster, 411

  Hampton Virgalieu, 411

  Hancock, 411

  Hancock, Thomas, orig. of Tatnall Harvest, 559

  Hangelbirne, 411

  Hannover'sche Jakobsbirne, 411

  Hannover'sche Margarethenbirne, 411

  Hanover, 411

  Hansen, N. E., orig. of Pushkin, 515;
    Tolstoy, 564

  Hardenpont, Abbe, efforts in breeding pears by, 16;
    orig. of varieties, 172, 206, 304, 356, 385

  Hardenpont fruehe Colmar, 411

  _Hardenpont's Winter Butterbirne_ (syn. of Glou Morceau), 172

  _Hardy_ (syn. of Beurre Hardy), 135

  Harigelsbirne, 412

  Harnard, 412

  Harnard, John, orig. of Harnard, 412

  Harris (Georgia), 412

  Harris (Massachusetts), 412

  Harrison Large Fall, 412

  Hartberger Mostbirne, 412

  Harte Neapolitanerin, 412

  Hartwiss, M. De, orig. of Beurre Woronson, 308

  Harvard, 412

  Harvest, 412

  Harvesting pears, 106

  Harvey, Eli, owner of original tree of Brandywine, 140

  Hassler, 413

  Hassler, J. E., orig. of A. J. Cook, 236;
    Hassler, 413

  Hastings, J. C., introd. of Frederica Bremer, 389

  Hausemerbirne, 413

  Hautmonte, 413

  Hawaii, 413

  Hawes Winter, 413

  Hawkesbill, 413

  Hays, 413

  Heat resistant pears, 86

  Heathcot, 413

  Hebe, 413

  _Hebron_ (syn. of Pinneo), 499

  Hedwig von der Osten, 413

  _Hedwige d'Osten_ (syn. of Hedwig von der Osten), 413

  Hegeman, 414

  Hegeman, Andrew, orig. of Hegeman, 414

  Heilige Angelika-Birne, 414

  Helene Gregoire, 414

  Helin, Dr., orig. of Beurre Caty, 290

  Hellinckx, orig. of Colmar d'Alost, 341

  Hellmann, orig. of Melon de Hellmann, 470

  Hellmann, Melonenbirn, 414

  Hemminway, 414

  Henkel, 414

  _Henkel d'Automne_ (syn. of Henkel), 414

  Henrard, Denis, orig. of Beurre Fenzl, 294;
    Bon-Chretien de Vernois, 315

  Henri Bivort, 414

  Henri Bouet, 415

  Henri de Bourbon, 415

  Henri Capron, 415

  Henri Decaisne, 415

  Henri Desportes, 415

  Henri Gregoire, 415

  Henri Ledocte, 415

  Henri Quatre, 415

  _Henri Van Mons_ (syn. of Fleur de Neige), 382

  Henrietta, 416

  Henriette, 416

  Henriette Van Cauwenberghe, 416

  Henry, Henry C., orig. of Henry (Illinois), 416

  Henry (Connecticut), 416

  Henry (Illinois), 416

  _Henry the Fourth_ (syn. of Henri Quatre), 415

  Herault, A., orig. of Bergamotte Herault, 272;
    Fin Juillet, 382;
    Joyau de Septembre, 432

  Herbelin, 416

  Herbin, 416

  Herborner Schmalzbirne, 416

  Herbst-Citronenbirne, 417

  Herbst-Kloeppelbirne, 417

  _Herbstbirne ohne Schale_ (syn. of Lansac), 443

  Herbsteierbirne, 417

  Herbstlanger, 417

  _Herbstsylvester_ (syn. of Frederic de Wurtemberg), 389

  Hericart, 417

  Hericart de Thury, 417

  Herkimer, 417

  Herr, A. G., orig. of Herr Late Winter, 417

  Herr Late Winter, 417

  Hert, 417

  Hertrich, orig. of Bergamotte Hertrich, 272

  Hervy, Michel-Christophe, orig. of Chaptal, 333

  _Herzogin von Angouleme_ (syn. of Duchesse d'Angouleme), 154

  Hessenbirne, 418

  Hessle, 418

  Hewes, 418

  Heyer Zuckerbirne, 418

  Hicks, Isaac, orig. of Duree, 374

  Higginson, mention of pears by, 45

  Hilda, 418

  Hildegard, 418

  Hildesheimer Bergamotte, 418

  Hildesheimer spaete Sommerbirne, 418

  Hildesheimer Winterbirn, 418

  Hingham, 419

  Hirschbirne, 419

  Hirsenbirne, 419

  History of pear, long lapse in, 11

  Hitzendorfer Mostbirne, 419

  _Hochfeine Butterbirne_ (syn. of Beurre Superfin), 137

  Hoe Langer Hoe Liever, 419

  Hofsta, 419

  Holland Green, 419

  Hollaendische Butterbirne, 419

  Hollaendische Gewuerzbirne, 419

  Hollaendische Zuckerbirne, 419

  Holmer, 420

  Holt, L. W., orig. of Effie Holt, 375

  _Holzfarbige Butterbirne_ (syn. of Flemish Beauty), 163

  Home ripening of pears, 109

  Homer, mention of pear by, 4

  Homestead, 420

  Honey, 420

  Honey (Russia), 420

  Honey Dew, 420

  Honigbergamotte, 420

  Honnelbirne, 420

  Hood, George, orig. of Lycurgus, 454

  Hoosic, 420

  Hopedale Nurs. Co., introd. of Weihmier Sugar, 576

  Hopfenbirne, 421

  Hosenschenk, 421

  Houdin, orig. of Belle des Arbres, 262

  Houghlin, Joe, orig. of Golden June, 399

  Housatonic, 421

  Houser, 421

  Hovey, 421

  Howard, 421

  Howe, Dr. John P., orig. of Doctor Howe, 363

  Howe, John J., orig. of Housatonic, 421

  Howe Winter, 421

  Howell, 174;
    place in commercial pear culture, 84

  Howell, Thomas, orig. of Howell, 175

  _Howell's Seedling_ (syn. of Howell), 174

  Hubert Gregoire, 421

  Hudellet, Jules, orig. of Doyenne Hudellet, 368

  Huffcap, 421

  Hueffel Bratbirne, 421

  Huggard, 421

  Huguenot, 422

  Huhle de Printemps, 422

  Hull, 422

  Hungerford Oswego, 422

  Hunt Connecticut, 422

  Huntington, 422

  Hurbain d'Hiver, 422

  Hussein Armudi, 422

  Hutcherson, 422

  Huyshe, Rev. John, orig. of "Royal Pears," 423

  _Huyshe Bergamot_ (syn. of Huyshe Prince of Wales), 423

  Huyshe Prince Consort, 423

  Huyshe Prince of Wales, 423

  Huyshe Princess of Wales, 423

  Huyshe Victoria, 423

  Hyacinthe du Puis, 423


  Ickworth, 423

  Ida, 423

  Idaho, 175

  Ilinka, 424

  Imperiale a Feuilles de Chene, 424

  Incommunicable, 424

  Incomparable de Beuraing, 424

  Inconstant, 424

  Indian Queen, 424

  Infortunee, 424

  Ingenieur Wolters, 424

  Ingram, Thomas, orig. of British Queen, 320

  Innominee, 424

  Insects affecting pear, 117

  International, 425

  Iris Gregoire, 425

  _Iron Pear_ (syn. of Black Worcester), 310

  Isabella, 425

  Isabelle de Maleves, 425

  Island, 425

  Italienische Winterbergamotte, 425

  Ives, 425

  Ives, Dr. Eli, orig. of Dow, 365;
    Ives, 425;
    Ives August, 425;
    New Haven, 481

  Ives August, 425

  Ives Bergamotte, 426

  Ives Seedling, 426

  Ives Virgalieu, 426

  Ives Winter, 426

  Ives Yale, 426


  Jablousky, 426

  Jackson, 426

  Jackson, S. S., orig. of Jackson Elizabeth, 426

  Jackson Elizabeth, 426

  Jacqmain, 426

  Jacques Chamaret, 426

  Jacques Mollet, 427

  Jakobsbirne, 427

  Jalais, Jacques, orig. of Beurre du Champ Corbin, 290;
    Beurre Jalais, 298;
    Bonne de Jalais, 316;
    Chaigneau, 332;
    Duchesse Anne, 371

  Jalousie, 427

  _Jalousie de Fontenay_ (syn. of Fontenay), 166

  _Jalousie de Fontenay Vendee_ (syn. of Fontenay), 165

  Jalousie de la Reole, 427

  Jalousie Tardive, 427

  Jalvy, 427

  Jamin & Durand, origs. of Doyenne Jamin, 368

  Jaminette, 427

  Jansemine, 427

  Japan, 428

  Japan Golden Russet, 428

  Japan Wonder, 428

  Japanese Pear. (See _Pyrus serotina_)

  Japanese Sand, 428

  Jargonelle, 177;
   ancient names of, 177

  Jargonelle (French), 178;
    parent of Henri Bouet, 415

  Jargonelle d'Automne, 428

  Jaune Hative, 428

  Jaune de Merveillon, 428

  Jean Baptist, 428

  Jean-Baptiste Bivort, 428

  Jean-Baptiste Dediest, 429

  Jean Cottineau, 429

  Jean Laurent, 429

  Jean Sano, 429

  Jean de Witte, 429

  Jeanne, 429

  Jeanne d'Arc, 429

  Jefferson, 429

  Jersey Gratioli, 430

  Jerusalem, 430

  Jeschil Armudi, 430

  Jewel, 430

  Jewess, 430

  Joanon, orig. of Favorite Joanon, 380;
    Professeur Willermoz, 514;
    Sainte Anne, 538

  John Cotton, 430

  John Griffith, 430

  John Monteith, 430

  John Williams, 430

  Johonnot, 431

  Johonnot, G. S., orig. of Huguenot, 422;
    Johonnot, 431;
    Naumkeag, 480

  Joie du Semeur, 431

  Jolie Lille de Gust, 431

  Joly de Bonneau, 431

  Jonah, 431;
    parent of Howell, 175

  Jones, 431

  Joseph Lebeau, 431

  Joseph Staquet, 431

  Josephine de Binche, 431

  Josephine de Malines, 179;
    parent of Autumn Josephine, 256;
    Georges Delebecque, 396;
    Joie du Semeur, 431

  Josephine de Maubrai, 431

  _Josephine von Mecheln_ (syn. of Josephine de Malines), 179

  Josephsbirne, 432

  Josselyn, mention of pears by, 45

  Joyau de Septembre, 432;
    parent of Fin Juillet, 382

  Judge Andrews, 432

  Jules d'Airoles (Gregoire), 432

  Jules d'Airolles (Leclerc), 432

  _Jules Bivort_ (syn. of Delices de Lovenjoul), 356

  Jules Blaise, 432

  Jules Delloy, 432

  _Juli Dechantsbirne_ (syn. of Summer Doyenne), 221

  Julie Duquet, 432

  Julienne, 432

  Juneberry, relationship of, to pear, 57

  Juvardeil, 432


  Kaestner, 433

  Kalchbirne, 433

  Kalmerbirne, 433

  Kamper-Venus, 433

  Kathelenbirne, 433

  Katy, 433

  _Keiffer_ (syn. of Kieffer), 180

  Keiser, 433

  Kelsey, 434

  Kelsey, William, orig. of Kelsey, 434

  Kennedy, 434

  Kenrick, William, introd. into America of Beurre Bosc, 131;
    Doyenne Boussock, 152

  Kentucky, 434

  Kenyon, 434

  Kermes, 434

  Kessler, Charles, introd. of Reading, 517

  Kieffer, 180;
    parent of Cassel, 329;
    Douglas, 150;
    Eureka, 379;
    Theodore Williams, 561

  Kieffer, Peter, orig. of Kieffer, 181

  Kieffer and Bartlett leading commercial pears, 84

  _Kieffer's Hybrid_ (syn. of Kieffer), 180

  Kilwinning, 434

  King, 434

  _King Catherine_ (syn. of Catherine Royal), 330

  King Edward, 434

  King Seedling, 434

  King Sobieski, 435

  Kingsessing, 182

  Kirtland, 435

  Kirtland, Prof., orig. of Kirtland, 435

  Klein Landlbirne, 435

  Kleine Fuchselbirne, 435

  Kleine gelbe Bratbirne, 435

  Kleine gelbe Hessenbirne, 435

  Kleine gelbe Maukelbirne, 435

  Kleine gelbe Sommer-Zuckerbirne, 435

  Kleine gelbe Sommermuskatellerbirne, 435

  Kleine gruene Backbirne, 435

  Kleine Lange Sommer-Muskatellerbirne, 436

  Kleine Leutsbirne, 436

  _Kleine Petersbirne_ (syn. of Petersbirne), 495

  Kleine Pfalzgrafin, 436

  Kleine Pfundbirne, 436

  Kleine runde Haferbirne, 436

  Kleine schlesische Zimmbirne, 436

  _Kleine Schmalzbirne_ (syn. of Petite Fondante), 497

  Kleine Sommer-Zuckerratenbirne, 436

  Kleine Zwiebelbirne, 437

  _Kleiner Katzenkopf_ (syn. of Petit Catallac, 496)

  Kloppelbirne, 437

  Knabenbirne, 437

  Knausbirne, 437

  Knechtchensbirne, 437

  Knight, 437

  Knight, Thomas Andrew, orig. of varieties, 289, 320, 351, 365, 373, 380,
      423, 462, 473, 474, 484, 494, 524, 527, 546, 563

  Knight, William, orig. of Knight, 437

  _Knight Monarch_ (syn. of Monarch), 474

  Knollbirne, 437

  Knoop, Herman, orig. of Calebasse, 324

  Knoop, Misses, orig. of Des Deux Soeurs, 358

  Knoops Simmtbirne, 437

  Kolmasbirne, 438

  Kolstuck, 438

  Koenig Karl von Wuerttemberg, 438

  Koenigliche Weissbirne, 438

  Koenigsbirne, 438

  Konstanzer Langler, 438

  Koolstock, 438

  Koonce, 183

  _Kopertscher_ (syn. of Supreme Coloma), 557

  _Koestliche Van Mons_ (syn. of De Duvergnies), 354

  Kraft Sommer Bergamotte, 438

  Krauelbirne, 438

  _Kreiselfoermige Blankette_ (syn. of Gros Blanquet Long), 403

  Kreiselfoermige Flegelbirne, 438

  Kriegebirne, 439

  Krivonogof, 439

  Krockhals, 439

  _Kroeten Bergamotte_ (syn. of Bergamotte Bufo), 270

  Krull, 439

  Krull, orig. of Krull, 439

  _Krull Winter_ (syn. of Krull), 439

  Krummgestielte Feigenbirne, 439

  _Krummholzige Schmalzbirne_ (syn. of Arbre Courbe), 251

  Kuhfuss, 439

  _Kuemmelbirne_ (syn. of Besi d'Hery), 280

  Kurskaya, 439


  L'Inconnue Van Mons, 439

  L'Inconstante, 439

  La Bearnaise, 440

  _La Bonne Malinoise_ (syn. of Winter Nelis), 232

  La Cite Gomand, 440

  La France, 440

  _La Grosse Oignonette_ (syn. of Onion), 486

  La Moulinoise, 440

  La Quintinye, 440

  La Savoureuse, 440

  La Solsticiale, 440

  La Vanstalle, 440

  Lachambre, Octave, orig. of Octave Lachambre, 484

  Lacroix, 441

  _Lady_ (syn. of Vigne), 572

  Lady Clapp, 441

  Lafayette, 441

  Lagrange, orig. of Senateur Vaisse, 544

  Laherard, 441

  _Lamartine_ (syn. of De Lamartine), 355

  Lammas, 441

  Laemmerbirne, 441

  Lampe, orig. of Belle de Juillet, 265

  Lamy, 184

  Lancaster, 441

  Lancaster, T. S., orig. of Lancaster, 441

  Landsberger Malvasier, 441

  Langbirne, 441

  Lange gelbe Bischofsbirne, 442

  Lange Gelbe Muscatellerbirne, 442

  _Lange gruene Herbstbirne_ (syn. of Long Green of Autumn), 449

  Lange gruene Winterbirne, 442

  Lange Mundnetzbirne, 442

  Lange Sommer-Bergamotte, 442

  Lange Wasserbirne, 442

  Langelier, Rene, orig. of Beurre Langelier, 299

  Langstieler, 442

  Langstielige Pfaffenbirne, 442

  Langstielige Zuckerbirne, 442

  Lansac, 443

  _Large Blanquet_ (syn. of Gros Blanquet Long), 403

  Large Duchess, 443

  Larissa, 443

  Laure Gilbert, 443

  Laure de Glymes, 443

  Lawrence, 185;
    place of, in New York pear culture, 85

  Lawson, 186

  Lawson, owner of original tree of, 186

  Laxton, orig. of Laxton Bergamot, 443

  Laxton, Bergamot, 443

  Le Breton, 443

  Le Brun, 443

  Le Congo, 444

  Le Conte, 187;
    parent of Big Productive, 309;
    Conkleton, 348

  _Le Cure_ (syn. of Vicar of Winkfield), 227

  Le Lecher, 444

  Le Lectier, 188

  Le Lectier, improvement of pears by, 14

  Leaf-blight of pear, notes on, 115

  Leaf-buds of pear, characteristics of, 61

  Leaf-spot of pear, notes on, 115

  Leaves of pear, characteristics of, 61

  Leclerc, Leon, orig. of varieties, 190, 244, 247, 318, 426, 432, 510

  Leclerc-Thouin, 444

  Lederbirne, 444

  Lederbogen, orig. of Beurre de Lederbogen, 299

  Lee, 444

  Lee Seckel, 444

  Leech, Isaac, owner of original tree of Kingsessing, 182

  Lefevre, orig. of Beurre de Mortefontaine, 301

  Lefevre-Boitelle, orig. of Beurre Pauline Delzent, 303

  Leger, 444

  Lehoferbirne, 444

  _Leipsic Radish_ (syn. of Leipziger Rettigbirn), 444

  Leipziger Rettigbirn, 444

  Lemon (Massachusetts), 445

  Lemon (Russia), 445

  Lenawee, 445

  Leochine de Printemps, 445

  Leon Dejardin, 445

  Leon Gregoire, 445

  Leon Leclerc (Van Mons), 189;
    parent of Rutter, 214

  Leon Leclerc Epineux, 445

  Leon Leclerc de Laval, 446

  Leon Recq, 446

  Leon Rey, 446

  Leonce de Vaubernier, 446

  Leonie, 446

  Leonie Bouvier, 446

  Leonie Pinchart, 446

  Leontine Van Exem, 446

  Leopold I., 446

  Leopold Riche, 447

  Lepine, 447

  _Leptothyrium pomi_, cause of brown-blotch of pear, 116

  Leroy, Andre, discussion of increase in pear varieties by, 15;
    introd. of varieties, 258, 260, 262;
    orig. of varieties, 122, 123, 157, 238, 240, 242, 299, 300, 304, 315,
      325, 349, 354, 362, 372, 379, 381, 403, 415, 421, 447, 450, 451,
      455, 456, 458, 459, 466, 468, 472, 479, 486, 495, 497, 499, 501,
      506, 508, 515, 521, 523, 528, 539, 562, 582

  Lesbre, 447

  Leseble, Narcisse, orig. of Bergamotte Leseble, 273

  Lesuer, A., orig. of Le Lecher, 444;
    Le Lectier, 188

  Levard, 447

  Levester Zuckerbirne, 447

  Lewes, 447

  Lewis, 447

  Lewis, John, orig. of Lewis, 447

  Lexington, 447

  Liabaud, orig. of Alexandre Chomer, 241;
    Bergamotte Liabaud, 274

  Liard, orig. of Napoleon, 479

  Liberale, 448

  Libotton, orig. of Crassane Libotton, 350

  Liegel Honigbirne, 448

  Lieutenant Poidevin, 448

  _Limbertwig_ (syn. of Tonkovietka), 564

  Limon, 448

  Lincoln, 190

  Lincoln Coreless, 192

  Linzer Mostbirne, 448

  _Little Blanquet_ (syn. of Petit-Blanquet), 495

  _Little Muscat_ (syn. of Petit-Muscat), 496

  Livingston, Judge, orig. of Nonpareil, 482

  Livingston Virgalieu, 448

  _Livre_ (syn. of Black Worcester), 310

  Locations and soils for pears, 91

  Locke, 448

  Locke, James, orig. of Locke, 448

  Lodge, 448

  Loire, orig. of Loire-de-Mons, 449

  Loire-de-Mons, 449

  Loisel, orig. of Beurre Loisel, 300

  London Sugar, 449

  Long Green, 449

  Long Green of Autumn, 449

  Long Green of Esperin, 449

  _Long Green Panache_ (syn. of Verte-longue panachee), 571

  Longland, 449

  Longue du Bosquet, 450

  Longue-garde, 450

  Longue-Sucree, 450

  _Longue-Verte_ (syn. of Long Green), 449

  _Longue Verte d'Hiver_ (syn. of Lange Gruene Winterbirne), 442;
    (Saechsische Lange Gruene Winterbirne), 534

  Longueville, 450

  Longworth, 450

  Loose, Henry, orig. of Tiffin, 563

  Lorenzbirne, 450

  Loriol de Barny, 450

  Lothrop, 450

  Loubiat, 450

  Louis Cappe, 451

  Louis Gregoire, 451

  Louis Noisette, 451

  Louis Pasteur, 451

  Louis-Philippe, 451

  Louis Van Houte, 451

  Louis Vilmorin, 451

  _Louise_ (syn. of Louise Bonne de Jersey), 193

  Louise-Bonne, 451

  Louise Bonne d'Avanches Panachee, 452

  Louise Bonne de Jersey, 193;
    parent of Du Breuil Pere, 370;
    Magnate, 460;
    Princess, 512;
    Professeur Dubreuil, 514;
    Souvenir de du Breuil Pere, 549

  _Louise Bonne of Jersey_ (Syn. of Louise Bonne de Jersey), 193

  Louise-Bonne de Printemps, 452;
    parent of Baron Leroy, 259

  Louise Bonne Sannier, 452; parent of Boieldien, 312

  Louise de Boulogne, 452

  Louise Dupont, 452

  Louise d'Orleans, 452

  Louise de Prusse, 452

  Louison, 453

  Lovaux, 453

  Lovell, W. G. L., orig. of Glastonbury, 397

  Lowell, John, introd. into America of Forelle, 167;
    Marie Louise, 198;
    Winter Nelis, 233

  Luebecker Prinzessin Birne, 453

  Lubin, 453

  Lucie Audusson, 453

  Lucien Chaure, 453

  Lucien Leclercq, 453

  Lucne Hative, 454

  _Lucrative_ (syn. of Belle Lucrative), 126

  Lucy Duke, 194

  Lucy Grieve, 454

  Luizet, orig. of Premices d'Ecully, 508

  Luola, 454

  Lutovka, 454

  Lutzbirne, 454

  Luxemburger Mostbirne, 454

  Lycurgus, 454

  Lydie Thierard, 454

  Lyerle, 454

  Lyerle, orig. of Lyerle, 454

  Lyon, 454


  Mace, 455

  Machlaender Mostbirne, 455

  Mackleroy, 455

  Mackleroy, Davis, orig. of Mackleroy, 455

  McLaughlin, 455;
    parent of Goodale, 400

  McLaughlin, Henry, orig. of Eastern Belle, 374;
    Indian Queen, 424

  _McLellan_ (syn. of Whieldon), 579

  Macomber, 455

  Macomber, Benjamin, orig. of Grand Isle, 400;
    Refreshing, 518;
    prop. of Vermont Beauty, 226

  Macomber, J. T., orig. of Macomber, 455

  McVean, 455

  _Madame_ (syn. of Windsor), 583

  _Madame Adelaide de Reves_ (syn. of Adelaide de Reves), 237

  Madame Alfred Conin, 455

  Madame Andre Leroy, 455

  Madame Antoine Lormier, 455

  Madame Appert, 456

  Madame Arsene Sannier, 456

  Madame Ballet, 456

  Madame Baptiste Desportes, 456

  Madame Blanchet, 456

  Madame Bonnefond, 456

  Madame Charles Gilbert, 456

  Madame Chaudy, 456

  Madame Cuissard, 456

  Madame Delmotte, 457

  Madame Ducar, 457

  Madame Duparc, 457

  Madame Durieux, 457

  Madame Elisa, 457

  Madame Elisa Dumas, 457

  Madame Ernest Baltet, 458

  Madame Favre, 458

  Madame Flon, 458

  Madame Gregoire, 458

  _Madame Hemminway_ (syn. of Hemminway), 414

  Madame Henri Desportes, 458

  Madame Loriol de Barny, 458

  Madame Lye-Baltet, 458

  Madame de Madre, 458

  Madame Millet, 459

  Madame Morel, 459

  Madame Planchon, 459

  Madame Du Puis, 459

  Madame de Roucourt, 459

  Madame Stoff, 459

  Madame Torfs, 459

  Madame Treyve, 459

  Madame Vazille, 459

  Madame Verte, 460

  Madame Von Siebold, 460

  Madeleine, 195;
    parent of Eliot Early, 375

  Madeleine d'Angers, 460

  Mademoiselle Blanche Sannier, 460

  Mademoiselle Marguerite Gaujard, 460

  Mademoiselle Solange, 460

  Magherman, 460

  Magnate, 460

  Magnolia, 461

  Maine-et-Loire, Horticultural Society of, orig. of Plantagenet, 500

  Maisonneuve, Francois, orig. of Beurre Favre, 294

  Malassis, Abbe, orig. of Doyenne d'Alencon, 151

  Malconnaitre d'Haspin, 461

  _Malines_ (syn. of Josephine de Malines), 179

  Malus, relationship to pear, 58

  Malvoisie de Landsberg, 461

  Manchester, 461

  Mandelblaettrige Schneebirne, 461

  Manning, 461

  Manning, Robert, biography of, 162;
    introd. into America of varieties, 131, 162;
    orig. of varieties, 264;
    pomological garden of, 53

  _Manning's Elizabeth_ (syn. of Elizabeth), 161

  Mannington, John, orig. of Caroline Hogg, 328;
    Maud Hogg, 468;
    Meresia Nevill, 470

  Mannsbirne, 461

  Mansfield, 461

  Mansuette, 461

  Mansuette Double, 462

  Mapes, Prof., orig. of Quinn, 516

  Marasquine, 462

  March Bergamot, 462

  Marechal de Cour, 462

  Marechal Dillen, 462

  Marechal Pelissier, 462

  Marechal Vaillant, 462

  Margaret, 196

  Margarethenbirne, 463

  _Marguerite-Acidule_ (syn. of Saeuerliche Margarethenbirne), 541

  Marguerite d'Anjou, 463

  Marguerite Chevalier, 463

  Marguerite Marillat, 463

  Maria, 463

  Maria de Nantes, 463

  Maria Stuart, 463

  Marianne de Nancy, 463

  Marie Benoist, 463

  Marie Guisse, 464

  Marie Henriette, 464

  Marie Jallais, 464

  Marie Louise, 197;
    parent of British Queen, 320;
    Marie Louise d'Uccle, 464;
    Pierre Paternotte, 499

  _Marie-Louise Delcourt_ (syn. of Marie Louise), 197

  Marie Louise Nova, 464

  Marie Louise d'Uccle, 464

  Marie Mottin, 464

  Marie Parent, 464

  Marietta, 464

  Mariette de Millepieds, 465

  Marillat, orig. of Marguerite Marillat, 463

  Markbirne, 465

  Marketing pears, 106

  Markets, local, pears for, 101

  Marksbirne, 465

  Marmion, 465

  _Marmorirte Schmalzbirne_ (syn. of Doyenne d'Alencon), 150

  Marquise, 465
  Marquise de Bedman, 465

  Marsaneix, 465

  Marshall, 466

  Marshall, William, orig. of Marshall, 466

  Marshall Wilder, 466

  Martha Ann, 466

  Martin, 466

  Martin-Sec, 466

  Martin-Sire, 466

  Marulis, 467

  Mary (Case), 467

  Mary (Van Mons), 467

  _Mary_ (syn. of Margaret), 196

  Mas, orig. of varieties, 241

  Mascon Colmar, 467

  Masselbacher Mostbirne, 467

  Masuret, 467

  Mather, 467

  Mather, John, orig. of Mather, 467

  Mathilde, 467

  Mathilde Gomand, 467

  Mathilde Recq, 467

  Mathilde de Rochefort, 467

  Matou, 468

  Matthews, 468

  Maud Hogg, 468

  Maude, 468

  Maurice Desportes, 468

  Maurier, discov. of Duchesse d'Orleans, 156

  Maury, Reuben, orig. of Elizabeth Maury, 376

  Mausebirne, 468

  Max, 469

  Mayflower, 468

  Maynard, 468

  Mayr fruehzeitige Butterbirne, 469

  Mecham, 469

  Medaille d'ete, 469

  _Medaille d'Or_ (syn. of Frederic de Wurtemberg), 389

  Medicine, pears used for, 10

  Medlar, relationship of, to pear, 57

  Medofka, 469

  Meissner Grossvatersbirne, 469

  Meissner Hirschbirne, 469

  Meissner langstielige Feigenbirne, 469

  Meissner Liebchensbirne, 469

  Meissner Zwiebelbirne, 469

  Melanie Michelin, 469

  Mellish, 470

  Melon, 470

  Melon de Hellmann, 470

  Menagere Sucree de Van Mons, 470

  Mendenhall, 470

  Merchant, Mrs. Ezra, orig. of Tea, 560

  Meresia Nevill, 470

  Merlet, 470

  Merriam, 470

  Merriweather, orig. of Taylor, 560

  Meruault, 471

  _Merveille d'Hiver_ (syn. of Petit-Oin), 496

  Merveille de Moringen, 471

  Mespilus, relationship of, to the pear, 57

  Messire Jean, 471

  Messire Jean Goubault, 471

  Meuris, discov. of Beurre Diel, 133

  Michaelmas Nelis, 471

  Michaux, 471

  Mignonne d'ete, 471

  Mignonne d'Hiver, 472

  Mikado, 472

  Milan d'hiver, 472

  Milan de Rouen, 472

  Miller, 472

  Miller, Judge S., introd. of Victor, 572

  _Miller Victor_ (syn. of Victor), 572

  Millet, orig. of Jules Blaise, 432

  Millet, Charles, orig. of Madame Millet, 459

  Millot de Nancy, 472

  Milner, 472

  Mima Wilder, 472

  Ministre Bara, 473

  Ministre Pirmez, 473

  Ministre Viger, 473

  Minot, orig. of Sebastopol, 543

  Minot Jean Marie, 473

  Missile d'Hiver, 473

  Mission, 473

  Mitchell Russet, 473

  Mite on pear, 119

  Mitschurin, 473

  Mitschurin, orig. of Roulef, 527;
    Vosschanka, 575

  Moccas, 473

  Mollet, Charles, orig. of Mollet Guernsey Beurre, 473

  Mollet Guernsey Beurre, 473

  Monarch, 474

  Monchallard, 474

  Monchallard, discov. of Monchallard, 474

  Mongolian, 474

  Monseigneur Affre, 474

  Monseigneur des Hons, 474

  Monseigneur Sibour, 474

  Moon, 475

  Moorcroft, 475

  Moore, Jacob, orig. of Barseck, 260

  Moorfowl Egg, 475

  Morel, 475

  Morel, Francois, orig. of Favorite Morel, 381;
    Perrier, 495;
    Professeur Hortoles, 514;
    Morgan, 475;
    Souvenir du Congres, 218

  Morgan, orig. of Morgan, 475

  Morley, 475

  Morosovskaja, 475

  Mortier, M. du, orig. of Beurre Daras, 291

  Mortillet, M. de, orig. of Agricola, 239;
    Bijou, 309;
    Bon-Chretien Ricchiero, 314

  Moskovka, 475

  Mostbirne, 475

  Mount Vernon, 199;
    value of for local market in New York, 101

  Moyamensing, 475

  Mr. Hill's Pear, 473

  Mrs. Seden, 476

  Muddy Brook, 476

  Muir, Hal, orig. of Muir Everbearing, 476

  Muir Everbearing, 476

  _Muirfowl Egg_ (syn. of Moorfowl Egg), 475

  Mulkey, Mrs., orig. of Idaho, 176

  Mueller, orig. of Koenig Karl von Wuerttemberg, 438

  Mungo Park, 476

  Munz Apothekerbirne, 476

  Muscadine, 476

  Muscat Allemand d'Automne, 476

  _Muscat Allemand d'Hiver_ (syn. of Deutsche Muskateller), 358

  Muscat Fleuri d'Ete, 476

  Muscat Robert, 477

  Muscat Royal, 477

  Muscat Royal de Mayer, 477

  Muscat Roye, 477

  Muscatelle, 477

  Musette d'Anjou, 477

  Musette de Nancy, 478

  Muskateller-Bergamotte, 478

  _Mueskierte Pomeranzenbirne_ (syn. of Orange Musquee), 487

  Muskingum, 478

  _Mueskirte Schmeerbirne_ (syn. of Petit-Oin), 496

  Muskirte Wintereirbirne, 478

  Musquee d'Esperen, 478

  Mussette, 478

  Muetzchensbirne, 478

  _Mycosphaerella sentina_, cause of pear leaf-spot, 115


  Naegelgesbirn, 479

  Nain Vert, 479

  Napa, 479

  Naples, 479

  Napoleon, 479;
    parent of Fondante de Moulins-Lille, 385

  _Napoleon I._ (syn. of Napoleon), 479

  Napoleon III., 479

  _Napoleon Butterbirne_ (syn. of Napoleon), 479

  Napoleon Savinien, 479

  Naquette, 480

  Nassau Ehre, 480

  Naudin, 480

  Naumkeag, 480

  Navez Peintre, 480

  Neapolitan, 480

  Nec Plus Meuris, 480;
    parent of General Wauchope, 395

  _Nec plus Meuris_ (syn. of Beurre d'Anjou), 127

  Nectarine, 480

  Negley, 481

  Negley, J. S., orig. of Negley, 481

  Nelis, Jean Charles, orig. of Joseph Lebeau, 431;
    Winter Nelis, 233

  _Nelis d'Hiver_ (syn. of Winter Nelis), 232

  Nerard, orig. of Bergamotte Jars, 273;
    Beurre Antoine, 284;
    Colmar de Mars, 343;
    Hamon, 410;
    Seringe, 545

  Nerbonne, M. de, orig. of Nain Vert, 479

  Neuburg, orig. of Bremer Butterbirne, 319

  New Bridge, 481

  New England, introduction of pear in, 45

  New Haven, 481

  New Meadow, 481

  Newhall, 481

  Newtown, 481

  Nicholas, 481

  Nickerson, 481

  Nicolas Eischen, 481

  Nicolle, orig. of Bergamotte Nicolle, 274

  Niell d'Hiver, 481

  Nikitaer gruene Herbst-Apothekerbirne, 482

  Niles, 482

  Niles, J. M., orig. of Niles, 482

  _Nina_ (syn. of Elizabeth), 161

  Niochi de Parma, 482

  Noir Grain, 482

  Noire d'Alagier, 482

  Noisette, Louis, introd. of Beurre d'Hiver, 297;
    Summer Saint Germain, 556;
    orig. of Bon-Chretien d'Hiver Panache, 314;
    De Rachinquin, 355

  Nonpareil, 482

  Nordhaeuser Winter-Forellenbirne, 482

  Norfolk County, 482

  Normaennische Ciderbirne, 482

  _Northford Seckel_ (syn. of Talmadge), 559

  Notaire Lepin, 483

  Notaire Minot, 483

  Nouhes, orig. of Delices de la Cacaudiere, 355;
    President Parigot, 510;
    Royale Vendee, 532

  Nouveau Doyenne d'Hiver, 483

  Nouveau Poiteau, 483

  Nouvelle Aglae, 483

  Nouvelle Fulvie, 483

  Nussbirne, 483

  Nypse, 484


  _Oak-Leaved Imperial_ (syn. of Imperiale a Feuilles de Chene), 424

  Oakley Park Bergamotte, 484

  Occidental pears, description of species of, 69

  Ochsenherz, 484

  Ockletree, 484

  Ockletree, orig. of Ockletree, 484

  Ockletree pear tree, 49

  Octave Lachambre, 484

  Oesterreichische Muskatellerbirne, 484

  Oeuf de Woltmann, 484

  Ogereau, 484

  Ognon, 485

  _Ognonet_ (syn. of Archiduc d'Ete), 251

  Ognonnet, 485

  Oignon, 485

  Oignonet de Provence, 485

  Oken, 485

  Oldfield, 485

  Olivenbirne, 485

  Oliver, G. W., orig. of Oliver Russet, 485

  Oliver Russet, 485

  Oliver, discov. of President Drouard, 210

  Olivier de Serres, 200;
    parent of Cavelier de la Salle, 331

  _Omer-Pacha_ (syn. of Saint Menin), 537

  One-third, 486

  Oneida, 486

  Onion, 486

  Onondaga, 201

  Ontario, 202

  Orange, 486

  Orange-Bergamot, 486

  _Orange de Briel _(syn. of Brielsche Pomeranzenbirne), 319

  Orange County Nurs. Co., introd. of Wilder Sugar, 580

  Orange d'Hiver, 486

  Orange Mandarine, 486

  Orange Musquee, 487

  Orange pear tree, old, 42

  Orange Rouge, 487

  Orange Tulipee, 487

  Orange de Vienne, 487

  Orchards, pear, care of, 97;
    catch crops for, 102

  Orchards of mixed varieties of pears, 100

  Ordensbirne, 487

  Orel 15, 487

  Oriental pears, descriptions of species of, 74;
    influence of, on American pear culture, 55

  Orpheline Colmar, 488

  _Orpheline d'Enghien_ (syn. of Beurre d'Arenberg), 129

  Osband Summer, 488

  Osborne, 488

  Osborne, John, orig. of Osborne, 488

  _Osimaya_ (syn. of Winter), 583

  Oswego Beurre, 488

  Oswego Incomparable, 488

  Ott, 488

  Ott, Samuel, orig. of Ott, 488

  Owen, 488

  Owen, John, orig. of Owen, 488

  Owener Birne, 489

  Oyster-shell scale on pear, 120

  Ozark, 489


  P. Barry, 203

  Pacific states, introduction of pear-growing in, 53

  Paddock, 489

  Padres, early growers of pears, 54

  Pailleau, 489

  Pain-et-Vin, 489

  Palmischbirne, 489

  Papeleu, Adrien, orig. of Beurre Payen, 303;
    Navez Peintre, 480

  _Paquency_ (syn. of Payenche), 493

  Paradiesbirne, 489

  Pardee, 489

  Pardee, S. D., orig. of Dickerman, 359;
    Pardee, 489

  Parfum d'Aout, 490

  Parfum d'Hiver, 490

  Parfum de Rose, 490

  Parfume, 490

  Parfumee, 490

  Parigot, orig. of Appoline, 250;
    Beurre Bourbon, 288;
    Comptesse de Chambord, 347;
    Doyenne Fradin, 367;
    Eugene des Nouhes, 379

  Pariset, orig. of varieties, 239, 249, 279, 292, 307, 329, 344, 453,
      471, 490, 536, 543, 544, 562

  Parkinson, discussion of pears by, 32

  Parkinson's pears known at present, 36

  Parmentier, Andrew, introd. of Surpasse Virgalieu, 557;
    orig. of Bergamotte de Stryker, 277

  Parrot, 490

  Parry, William, orig. of Cincincis Seedling, 338

  Parsonage, 490

  Passa-tutti, 490

  Passans du Portugal, 491

  Passe Colmar, 205;
    parent of Alexandrine Mas, 241;
    Felix Sahut, 381;
    Wilmington, 582;
    Zephirin Gregoire, 587

  Passe-Colmar des Belges, 491

  Passe Colmar d'ete, 491

  _Passe Colmar Francois_ (syn. of Jean de Witte), 429

  Passe Colmar Musque, 491

  Passe Crassane, 491;
    parent of Prince Napoleon, 512

  Passe-Goemans, 491

  Passe Madeleine, 491

  Passe-Tardive, 492

  Pastor, 492

  Pastorale, 492

  _Pastorenbirne_ (syn. of Vicar of Winkfield), 227

  Pater Noster, 492

  Patemotte, Pierre, orig. of Pierre Patemotte, 499

  Patten, Charles G., orig. of Seckel Seedling No. 1, 543

  Paul Ambre, 492

  Paul Bonamy, 492

  Paul Coppieters, 492

  Paul d'Hoop, 493

  Paul Thielens, 493

  Pauls Birne, 493

  Payen, 493

  Payenche, 493

  Payne, James, discov. of Seneca, 544

  Payton, 493

  Payton, orig. of Payton, 493

  Peach, 494

  Pear, adaptability of the, to soils and locations, 92;
    black mold of the, 117;
    brown-blotch of the, 116;
    codling moth on the, 118;
    crown-gall on the, 116;
    descriptive blank of the, opposite 68;
    fertility of the, 99;
    history of the, 1;
    leaf-blight of the, 115;
    leaf-spots of the, notes on, 115;
    oyster-shell scale on the, 120;
    pink-rot of the, 117;
    San Jose scale on the, 117;
    structural botany of the, 58

  Pear-blight, control of, 113;
    early occurrence of, in America, 51;
    notes on, 111

  -borers, 120

  -breeding, Van Mons' theory of, 18

  -characteristics of the, unchanged since time of Pliny, 9

  -culture, climate adapted to, 85;
    economic considerations important to, 94;
    importance of stocks in, 94;
    notes on, 83;
    statistics of, 83

  -diseases, 110

  -districts in America, minor, 51

  -growing, a comparison of English and American, 37

  -insects, 117

  -mites, 119

  -orchards, care of, 97;
    catch crops for, 102;
    sod versus clean culture for, 102;
    tillage of, 102

  -psylla, 118

  -scab, 114;
    treatment of, 114

  -slug, 119

  -stocks, notes on, 95

  -thrips, 121

  -trees, characters of, 59;
    description of leaf-buds and leaves of, 61;
    description of trunk and branches of, 60;
    flower-buds and flowers of, 62;
    age of, 40;
    setting of, notes on, 101

  -varieties, adaptability of, for dwarfing, 95;
    blight resistant, 112;
    blooming season of, 88;
    ripening season of, 88

  Pears, canning of, 109;
    cold storage of, 109;
    commercial, leading varieties of, 84;
    cost of growing, 110;
    descriptions of species of, 69;
    discussion of the setting of fruit of, 99;
    fertilizers for, 98;
    grading of, 108;
    grafting of, 106;
    hardy, notes on, 86;
    harvesting and marketing of, 106;
    home ripening of, 109;
    local market for, 101;
    methods of planting of, 99;
    mixed varieties of, in orchards, 100;
    occidental, description of species of, 69;
    oriental, description of species of, 74;
    pruning of, 103;
    self-fertile varieties of, 100;
    self-sterile varieties of, 100;
    soils and locations for, 91;
    wild, 1;
    wild, species of, 2

  _Peche_ (syn. of Peach), 494

  Peck, Thomas R., orig. of Royal, 532

  Pei-li, 494

  Pemberton, 494

  Penderson, 494

  Penderson, Samuel, orig. of Penderson, 494

  Pendleton Early York, 494

  Pengethley, 494

  Penn, 494

  Pennsylvania, 494

  Pepin, 495

  Perpetual, 495

  Perrier, 495

  Perry, William, introd. of Lincoln Coreless, 192

  Pertusati, 495

  Pests, damage to American pears by, 38

  Petersbirne, 495

  Petit-Blanquet, 495

  Petit Catillac, 496

  Petit-Chaumontel, 496

  Petit-Hativeau, 496

  Petit-Muscat, 496

  Petit-Oin, 496

  _Petite Bergamotte Jaune d'Ete_ (syn. of Kleine gelbe
      Sommermuskatellerbirne), 435

  Petite Charlotte, 497

  _Petite Comtesse Palatine_ (syn. of Kleine Pfalzgrafin), 436

  Petite Fondante, 497

  Petite Marguerite, 497

  _Petite Muscat Long d'Ete_ (syn. of Kleine Lange
      Sommer-Muskatellerbirne), 436

  _Petite Poire de Pierre_ (syn. of Petersbirne), 495

  Petite Tournaisienne, 497

  Petite Victorine, 497

  Petre, 497;
    first variety to originate in America, 51

  Pfaffenbirne, 497

  Pfingstbirne, 498

  Philiberte, 498

  _Philipp der Gute_ (syn. of Philippe-Le-Bon), 498

  Philippe-Le-Bon, 498

  Philippe Couvreur, 498

  Philippe Goes, 498

  Philippot, 498

  Philippot, orig. of Philippot, 498

  Philopena, 498

  Picciola, 498

  Pickering, or Warden pear tree, 44

  _Pickering_ (syn. of Pound), 208

  Pie IX, 498

  _Pied-de-Vache_ (syn. of Kuhfuss), 439

  Pierre Corneille, 499

  Pierre Curie, 499

  Pierre Mace, 499

  Pierre Paternotte, 499

  Pierre Pepin, 499

  Pierre Tourasse, 499

  Pimpe, 499

  Pink-rot of pear, 117

  Pinneo, 499

  Pitmaston, 207

  Pitmaston, William, orig. of Bergamot Seckel, 268

  _Pitmaston Duchess_ (syn. of Pitmaston), 207

  _Pitmaston Duchesse d'Angouleme_ (syn. of Pitmaston), 207

  Piton, 500

  Piton, discov. of Piton, 500

  Pitson, 500

  _Pius IX_ (syn. of Pie IX), 498

  Pius X, 500

  Plantagenet, 500

  Planting methods for pears, 99

  Plascart, 500

  Platt, 500

  Platte Honigbirne, 500

  Pliny, medicinal qualities ascribed to pears by, 10;
    mention of pear varieties by, 8;
    pear characteristics given by, 9

  Plutarch, discussion of the pear in Greece by, 4

  Pocahontas, 500

  Poeckelbirne, 501

  Poete Beranger, 501

  Poire d'Abbeville, 501

  _Poire d'Amour d'Hiver_ (syn. of Winterliebesbirne), 584

  Poire d'Ange de Meiningen, 501

  _Poire d'Aunee d'Ete_ (syn. of Sommeralantbirne), 548

  Poire d'Avril, 501

  _Poire Baronne Leroy_ (syn. of Baron Leroy), 259

  _Poire du Breuil Pere_ (syn. of Souvenir de du Breuil Pere), 549

  Poire Brune de Gasselin, 501

  _Poire Canelle_ (syn. of Knoops Simmtbirne), 437

  Poire de Casserole, 502

  Poire des Chartriers, 502

  Poire des Chasseurs, 502

  _Poire de Chevalier de Buttner_ (syn. of Buttner Sachsische
    Ritterbirne), 322

  Poire de Coq, 502

  _Poire Dingler_ (syn. of Lamy), 184

  Poire de Graisse, 502

  Poire de gros queue, 502

  _Poire Henri_ (syn. of Henri Bivort), 414

  Poire de Hert, 502

  Poire de Houblon, 502

  Poire de Klevenow, 503

  _Poire de Lard Brune_ (syn. of Braunrote Speckbirne), 318

  _Poire Livre Verte_ (syn. of Gruene Pfundbirne), 408

  _Poire de Miel de Liegel_ (syn. of Liegel Honigbirne), 448

  Poire Noire a Longue Queue, 503

  _Poire des Nonnes_ (syn. of Beurre de Brigne), 288

  _Poire de Paul_ (syn. of Pauls Birne), 493

  Poire du Pauvre, 503

  Poire des Peintres, 503

  Poire de Pendant, 503

  _Poire-Pomme_ (syn. of Apple Pear), 250

  Poire de Preuilly, 503

  Poire de Rateau, 503

  Poire Rigoleau, 504

  Poire du Roeulx, 504

  _Poire de Saint Pere_ (syn. of Saint Pere), 538

  _Poire Seutin_ (syn. of Seutin), 545

  Poire Souvenir d'Hortoles Pere, 504

  Poire Thouin, 504

  Poire de Torpes, 504

  Poire des Trois Freres, 504

  Poire des Trois Jours, 504

  _Poire Trompette_ (syn. of Trompetenbirne), 566

  _Poire des Urbanistes_ (syn. of Urbaniste), 224

  _Poire de Vallee_ (syn. of Vallee Franche), 568

  _Poire de Vitrier_, 504

  Poire du Voyageur, 505

  Poirer de Jardin, 505

  _Poirier sauger_. (See _Pyrus nivalis_)

  Poiteau, 505

  Poiteau, orig. of Bergamotte Poiteau, 275

  _Poiteau_ (_des Francais_) (syn. of Bergamotte Poiteau), 275

  Polish Lemon, 505

  Polk, 505

  Pollan, 505

  Pollvaskaja, 505

  Polnische gruene Krautbirne, 505

  Polnische Seidenbirne, 505

  Pome, definition of, 58;
    fruit characters of, 63

  Pomeranzenbirn von Zabergaeu, 506

  Pomme d'Ete, 506

  Pomological garden of Robert Manning, 53

  Pomology, first American by Coxe, 52

  Pope Quaker, 506

  Pope Scarlet Major, 506

  Portail, 506

  Porter, 506

  Portingall, 506

  Posey, 506

  Pound, 208

  Pradel Bros., orig. of Rousselet de Pomponne, 529

  Prager Schaferbirne, 506

  Prairie du Pond, 506

  _Praesident Drouard_ (syn. of President Drouard), 210

  Pratt, 507

  Pratt Junior, 507

  Pratt Seedling, 507

  Precilly, 507

  Precoce de Celles, 507

  Precoce de Jodoigne, 507

  Precoce de Tivoli, 507

  Precoce de Trevoux, 507

  Precoce Trottier, 507

  _Precoce de Wharton_ (syn. of Wharton Early), 579

  Premature, 508

  Premices d'Ecully, 508

  Premices de Wagelwater, 508

  Premier, 508

  Premier President Metivier, 508

  _Present Royal of Naples_ (syn. of Beau Present d'Artois), 261

  Present de Van Mons, 508

  President, 508

  President Barabe, 508

  President de la Bastie, 509

  President Boncenne, 509

  President Campy, 509

  President Clark, 509

  President Couprie, 509

  President Deboutteville, 509

  President Dr. Ward, 509

  President Drouard, 210

  President d'Estaintot, 509

  President Felton, 509

  President Fortier, 509

  President Heron, 510

  President Mas, 510

  President Muller, 510

  President Olivier, 510

  President d'Osmonville, 510

  President Parigot, 510

  President Payen, 510

  President Pouyer-Quertier, 510

  President Royer, 510

  President le Sant, 511

  President Watier, 511

  Presidente Senente, 511

  _Preul's Colmar_ (syn. of Passe Colmar), 205

  Prevost, 511

  Pricke, 511

  Primating, 511

  Prince, William, introd. of Sha Lea, 545;
    orig. of Prince Harvest, 511;
    Saint-Germain, 512

  Prince Albert, 511

  Prince Harvest, 511

  Prince Imperial, 511

  Prince Imperial de France, 512

  Prince de Joinville, 512

  Prince Napoleon, 512

  Prince d'Orange, 512

  Prince de Printemps, 512

  Prince Saint-Germain, 512

  Prince Seed Virgalieu, 512

  Princess, 512

  Princess Maria, 513

  Princesse Charlotte, 513

  _Princesse de Lubeck_ (syn. of Luebecker Prinzessin Birne), 453

  Princesse Marianne, 513

  Princesse d'Orange, 513

  _Princesse-Royale_ (syn. of Groom Prince Royal,) 403

  Princiere, 513

  Pringalle, Celestin, orig, of Beurre Pringalle, 304

  Priou, 513

  Priou, discov. of Priou, 513

  Professeur Barral, 514

  Professeur Bazin, 514

  Professeur Dubreuil, 514

  Professeur Grosdemange, 514

  Professeur Hennau, 514

  Professeur Hortoles, 514

  Professeur Opoix, 514

  Professeur Willermoz, 514

  Prud'homme, 515

  Pruning pears, 103

  Psylla, pear, 118

  Pudsey, 515

  Puebla, 515

  Pulsifer, 515

  Pulsifer, Dr. John, orig. of Pulsifer, 515

  Pushkin, 515

  Pyrolle, orig. of Jaminette, 427

  Pyrus, characters of, 57

  _Pyrus amygdaliformis_, note on, 73

  _Pyrus auricularis_, habitat of, 73;
    specific description of, 73

  _Pyrus betulaefolia_, habitat of, 79;
    specific description of, 79

  _Pyrus calleryana_, habitat of, 80;
    specific notes on, 80

  _Pyrus communis_, behavior of, as a wild pear, 2;
    habitat of, 70;
    specific description of, 69

  _Pyrus communis cordata_, specific notes on, 72

  _Pyrus communis longipes_, specific notes on, 72

  _Pyrus communis mariana_, specific notes on, 72

  _Pyrus communis pyraster_, specific notes on, 71

  _Pyrus communis sativa_, specific notes on, 72

  _Pyrus elaeagrifolia_, relationship of, to _Pyrus nivalis_, 73

  _Pyrus heterophylla_, note on, 73

  _Pyrus kotschyana_, relationship of, to _Pyrus nivalis_, 73

  _Pyrus lindleyi_, relationship of, to _Pyrus serotina_, 75

  _Pyrus nivalis_, behavior of, as a wild pear, 2;
    habitat of, 2, 72;
    specific description of, 72

  _Pyrus ovoidea_, blight resistance of, 81;
    parent of Tolstoy, 564;
    specific description of, 80

  _Pyrus pashia_, distinction of, from _Pyrus variolosa_, 82

  _Pyrus salicifolia_, note on, 74

  _Pyrus salvifolia_, relationship of, to _Pyrus nivalis_, 73

  _Pyrus serotina_, behavior of, as a wild pear, 2;
    habitat of 3, 75;
    specific description of, 74;
    value of, as a pear stock, 96

  _Pyrus serotina culta_, habitat of, 76;
    specific description of, 75

  _Pyrus serotina stapfiana_, note on, 75

  _Pyrus serrulata_, habitat of, 78;
    specific notes on, 78

  _Pyrus sinensis_, relationship of, to _Pyrus serotina_, 74

  _Pyrus syriaca_, note on, 74

  _Pyrus ussuriensis_, blight resistance of, 78;
    habitat of, 77;
    specific description of, 77

  _Pyrus variolosa_, notes on, 81


  Queen Jargonelle, 515

  Queen Victoria, 515

  Quiletette, 515

  Quince, 515

  Quince, Japanese, relationship of, to the pear, 57

  Quince stocks for pear, 96

  Quinn, 515

  Quintinye, La. (See La Quintinye)


  Raabe, orig. of Honey Dew, 420

  _Radis de Leipsick_ (syn. of Leipziger Rettigbirn), 444

  Ragan, Reuben, discov. of Philopena, 498

  Rahm, Rev. W. L., introd. into England of Vicar of Winkfield, 227

  Rainbirne, 516

  Rallay, 516

  Rameau, 516

  Ramilies, 516

  Rankin, 516

  Rankin, W. H., discov. of Rankin, 516

  Rannaja, 516

  Rapelje, 516

  Rastlerbirne, 516

  Rateau Blanc, 516

  Ravenswood, 517

  _Ravu_ (syn. of Ravut), 517

  Ravut, 517

  Raymond, 517

  Raymond de Montlaur, 517

  Raymould, 517

  Rayner, Mrs., orig. of Hacon Incomparable, 409

  Re Umberto primo, 517

  Read, Walter, orig. of Oswego Beurre, 488

  Reading, 517

  Recq de Pambroye, 517

  _Red Doyenne_ (syn. of Doyenne Gris), 367

  Red Garden, 518

  _Red Muscadel_ (syn. of Jargonelle (French)), 178

  _Red Orange_ (syn. of Orange Rouge), 487

  Red Pear, 518

  Redfield, 518

  Reeder, 211

  Reeder, Dr. Henry, orig. of Reeder, 211

  _Reeder's Seedling_ (syn. of Reeder), 211

  Refreshing, 518

  _Regentin_ (syn. of Passe Colmar), 205

  Regina Margherita, 518

  Regine, 518

  Regnier, 518

  Regnier, Madame, orig. of Regnier, 518

  Reichenaeckerin, 518

  Reine des Belges, 518

  Reine d'Hiver, 519

  Reine des Poires, 519

  Reine des Precoces, 519

  Reine des Tardives, 519

  Reine Victoria, 519

  Reliance, 519

  Remy Chatenay, 519

  Rene Dunan, 519

  Rettigbirne, 519

  Reuterbirne, 520

  Rewell, 520

  Rey, orig. of Leon Rey, 446

  Reymenans, 520

  Reynaert Beernaert, 520

  Rheinische Birne, 520

  Rheinische Herbstapothekerbirne, 520

  Rheinische Paradiesbirne, 520

  Rhenser Schmalzbirne, 520

  Richards, 520

  Richardson, 521

  Riche Depouille, 521

  Ridelle, 521

  Riehl, Edwin H., discov. of Riehl Best, 212

  Riehl Best, 212

  Riocreux, 521

  Ripening of pears in the home, 109

  Ripening season of pear varieties, 88

  Ritson, 521

  Ritson, Mrs. John, orig. of Ritson, 521

  Ritter, 521

  Ritter, Louis, discov. of Ritter, 521

  Rival Dumont, 521

  Rivers, 521

  Rivers, Thomas, orig. of varieties, 308, 345, 347, 363, 381, 417, 460,
502, 512, 537, 538, 556

  Robert, orig. of Belle du Figuier, 264;
    General Canrobert, 394

  Robert & Moreau, orig. of Beurre Fideline, 295;
    Fondante de la Maitre-Ecole, 384

  Robert Hogg, 521

  Robert Treel, 522

  _Robertson_ (syn. of Washington), 575

  Robin, orig. of Doyenne Robin, 369

  Robine, 522

  Robitaillie, orig. of Robitaillie pere, 522

  Robitaillie pere, 522

  Roby, H. R., introd. of Winter Seckel, 584;
    orig. of Cooke, 348

  Rockeneirbirne, 522

  Roe, William, orig. of Roe Bergamot, 522

  Roe Bergamot, 522

  Rogers, 522

  Roggenhoferbirne, 522

  _Roi Charles de Wurtemberg_ (syn. of Koenig Karl von Wuerttemberg), 438

  _Roi d'Ete_ (syn. of Gros Rousselet), 404

  Roi-Guillaume, 522

  Roi de Rome, 523

  Roitelet, 523

  Rokeby, 523

  Roland, orig. of Beurre Roland, 304

  Rollet, orig. of Notaire Lepin, 483

  Rolmaston Duchess, 523

  Rome, ancient, pear in, 7

  Ronde du Bosquet, 523

  Rondelet, 523

  Rongieras, orig. of Beurre des Mouchouses, 302

  Rooks, orig. of Ozark, 489

  Roosevelt, 213

  Ropes, 523

  Ropes, orig. of Ropes, 523

  Rorreger Mostbirne, 523

  Rosabirne, 523

  Rosalie Wolters, 524

  Rosanne, 524

  Rose Doyenne, 524

  Rose Water, 524

  Rosenhofbirne, 524

  Rosenwasserbirne, 524

  Rosinenbirne, 524

  Roslyn, 524

  Ross, 524

  Ross, Charles, orig. of General Wauchope, 395

  Ross, Gideon, orig. of Japan, 428

  Rossney, 524

  Rostiezer, 525

  _Rote Bergamotte_ (syn. of Bergamotte d'Automne), 270

  Rote Hanglbirne, 525

  Rote Holzbirne, 525

  Rote Kochbirne, 525

  Rote Pilchelbirne, 525

  Rote Scheibelbirne, 525

  Rote Winawitz, 525

  Rotfleischige Mostbirne, 525

  Rothbackige Sommerzuckerbirne, 525

  Rothe Confesselsbirne, 526

  Rothe Jakobsbirne, 526

  Rothe langstielige Honigbirne, 526

  Rothe oder grosse Pfalzgrafinbirne, 526

  Rothe Rettigbirne, 526

  Rothe Winterkappesbirne, 526

  Rothe Winterkochbirne, 526

  Rothe Zucherlachsbirne, 526

  _Rother Sommerdorn_ (syn. of Epine d'Ete Rouge), 377

  Rother Winterhasenkopf, 526

  Rothgraue Kirchmessbirne, 527

  Rougeaude, 527

  Rouget, 527

  Roulef, 527

  Rouse Lench, 527

  Rousselet Aelens, 527

  Rousselet d'Anvers, 527

  _Rousselet d'Aout_ (syn. of Gros Rousselet d'Aout), 405

  Rousselet Baud, 527

  Rousselet Bivort, 527

  Rousselet Blanc, 528

  Rousselet de la Cour, 528

  Rousselet Decoster, 528

  Rousselet Dore d'Hiver, 528

  _Rousselet Enfant Prodigue_ (syn. of Enfant Prodigue), 377

  _Rousselet d'ete Brun Rouge_ (syn. of Braunrothe Sommerrusselet), 319

  Rousselet Hatif, 528

  _Rousselet d'Hiver_ (syn. of Winter Rousselet), 584

  Rousselet de Janvier, 528

  Rousselet Jaune d'Ete, 529

  Rousselet de Jodoigne, 529

  Rousselet de Jonghe, 529

  Rousselet de Meestre, 529

  Rousselet Panache, 529

  Rousselet de Pomponne, 529

  Rousselet Precoce, 529

  Rousselet de Reims, parent of Bon Chretien Vermont, 315

  Rousselet de Rheims, 530

  Rousselet de Rheims Panache, 530

  Rousselet Royal, 530

  Rousselet Saint Nicolas, 530

  Rousselet Saint-Quentin, 530

  Rousselet Saint Vincent, 530

  Rousselet de Stuttgardt, 531

  Rousselet Thaon, 531

  Rousselet Theuss, 531

  Rousselet Vanderwecken, 531

  Rousseline, 531

  Rousselon, 531

  Roux Carcas, 532

  Rove, 532

  Rowling, 532

  Royal, 532

  Royal d'Hiver, 532

  Royale Vendee, 532

  Ruhschiebler, 532

  Rummelter Birne, 533

  Runde gelbe Honigbirne, 533

  Runde Sommerpomeranzenbirne, 533

  _Rushmore_ (syn. of Harrison Large Fall), 412

  Russbirne, 533

  Russelet Petit, 533

  Russet Bartlett, 533

  Russet Catherine, 533

  Russian pears, introduction into America, 56

  Rutter, 214

  Rutter, John, orig. of Rutter, 214

  Rylsk, 533


  S. T. Wright, 533

  Sabine, 533

  Sabine d'Ete, 534

  Sacandaga, 534

  Saechsische Glockenbirne, 534

  Saechsische Lange Gruene Winterbirne, 534

  Safran, 534

  Sage-leaved Pear. (See _Pyrus nivalis_)

  Sageret, orig. of Angleterre Nain, 247;
    Beauvalot, 262;
    Bergamotte Sageret, 276;
    Doyenne Rose, 369

  Saint Andre, 534

  Saint Andrew, 534

  Saint Aubin sur Riga, 534

  Saint-Augustin, 535

  Saint Denis, 535

  Saint Dorothee, 535

  Saint Francois, 535

  Saint Gallus Weinbirne, 535

  Saint George, 535

  Saint Germain, 535;
    parent of Marie Guisse, 464;
    Williams Double Bearing, 582

  Saint Germain Gris, 536

  Saint Germain Panache, 536

  Saint Germain de Pepins, 536

  Saint Germain Puvis, 536

  Saint Germain du Tilloy, 536

  Saint Germain Van Mons, 536

  _Saint-Germain Vauquelin_ (syn. of Vauquelin), 570

  Saint Ghislain, 536

  Saint Herblain d'Hiver, 537

  _Saint-Laurent Jaune_ (syn. of Gelbe Laurentiusbirne), 393

  Saint Lezin, 537

  Saint Louis, 537

  Saint Luc, 537

  Saint Luke, 537

  _St. Martial_ (syn. of Angelique de Bordeaux), 247

  Saint Menin, 537

  _Saint-Michael_ (syn. of White Doyenne), 228

  St. Michel Archange, 538

  _Saint-Nicolas_ (syn. of Duchesse d'Orleans), 156

  Saint Patrick, 538

  Saint Pere, 538

  St. Swithin, 538

  Saint Vincent de Paul, 538

  Sainte Anne, 538

  _Sainte Germain d'Ete_ (syn. of Summer Saint Germain), 556

  _Sainte Madelaine_ (syn. of Madeleine), 195

  Sainte Therese, 539

  Salisbury, 539

  Salviati, 539

  Salzburger von Adlitz, 539

  Sam Brown, 539

  Samenlose, 539

  San Jose scale on pear, 117

  Sand Pear. (See _Pyrus serotina_)

  Sand pear, Chinese, parent of Garber, 171;
    Kieffer, 181;
    Le Conte, 187

  _Sanguine de France_ (syn. of Sanguinole), 539

  Sanguine d'Italie, 539

  Sanguinole, 539

  Sanguinole de Belgique, 540

  Sannier, Arsene, orig. of varieties, 241, 276, 283, 297, 315, 360, 361,
      381, 429, 451, 452, 453, 455, 456, 499, 508, 509, 510, 511, 519,
      543, 549, 550, 551, 572

  Sans-Pareille du Nord, 540

  Sans Peau, 540

  Santa Anna, 540

  Santa Claus, 540

  Santa Rosa, 541

  Sapieganka, 541

  Sarah, 541

  Sarrasin, 541

  Sary-Birne, 541

  Saeuerliche Margarethenbirne, 541

  Scab, pear, 114;
    treatment of, 114

  Scale insects on pear, 120

  _Scented_ (syn. of Duchovaya), 573

  Schellesbirne, 541

  Schenk, John, orig. of Hosenschenk, 421

  Schmalblaettrige Schneebirne, 542

  Schmotzbirne, 542

  Schnackenburger Winterbirne, 542

  Schoeberlbirne, 542

  _Schoene Angevine_ (syn. of Pound), 208

  Schoene Muellerin, 542

  _Schoene Zuckerbirne_ (syn. of Belle Sucree), 266

  Schoenebeck Tafelbirne, 542

  Schoenerts Omsewitzer Schmalzbirne, 542

  Schoenlin Stuttgarter spaete Winterbutterbirne, 542

  _Schoenste Sommerbirne_ (syn. of Jargonelle (French)), 178

  Schuman, 542

  Schwarze Birne, 542

  Schweizer Wasserbirne, 543

  Sdegnata, 543

  Seal, 543

  Sebastien, 543

  Sebastopol, 543

  Secher, orig. of Duchesse de Bordeaux, 371

  Seckel, 215;
    parent of Adams, 237;
    Barseck, 260;
    Eureka, 379;
    Feast, 381;
    Gansel Seckel, 170;
    Luola, 454;
    President Clark, 509;
    Worden Seckel, 234;
    Youngken Winter Seckel, 586;
    place of, in commercial pear culture, 84

  Seckel Seedling No. 1, 543

  _Seckle_ (syn. of Seckel), 215

  Secretaire Mareschal, 543

  Secretaire Rodin, 543

  _Seigneur_ (syn. of Belle Lucrative), 126

  Seigneur Daras, 544

  _Seigneur d'Esperen_ (syn. of Belle Lucrative), 126

  Seigneur d'Ete, 544

  Self-fertile and self-sterile pears, 100

  Selleck, 544

  Semis d'Echasserie, 544

  Semis Leon Leclerc, 544

  _Semis de White_ (syn. of White Seedling), 579

  Senateur Prefet, 544

  Senateur Vaisse, 544

  Seneca, 545

  Senfbirne, 545

  Seringe, 545

  Serrurier, 545

  Seutin, 545

  Sha Lea, 545

  Shawmut, 545

  Sheldon, 217;
    place of, in commercial pear culture, 84

  Sheldon, Major, owner of original tree of Sheldon, 217

  Shenandoah, 545

  Sheppard, 546

  Sheppard, James, orig. of Sheppard, 546

  Sheridan, 546

  Shindel, 546

  Shobden Court, 546

  Shroeder, R., introd. of Winter, 583

  Shurtleff, 546

  Shurtleff, Dr. S. A., orig. of varieties, 238, 242, 258, 319, 320, 328,
335, 336, 338, 360, 387, 388, 395, 399, 400, 401, 411, 425, 430, 445, 450,
461, 468, 476, 482, 486, 494, 506, 508, 515, 538, 545, 546, 552, 570, 583

  Sieboldii, 546

  Sieulle, Jean, orig. of Doyenne Sieulle, 369

  Sievenicher Mostbirne, 546

  _Silberaestige Gewuerzbirne_ (syn. of Rameau), 516

  _Silvange_ (syn. of Bergamotte Silvange), 276

  Sikaya, 546

  Simon Bouvier, 546;
    parent of Rousselet Bivort, 527

  Sinai'sche Buschelbirne, 547

  Sinclair, 547

  Sirningers Mostbirne, 547

  Six, orig. of Beurre Six, 306

  Size and habit of pear-trees, 59

  _Skinless_ (syn. of Sans Peau), 540

  Slavonische Wasserbirne, 547

  Slug on pear, 19

  Slutsk, 547

  _Small Blanquet_ (syn. of Petit-Blanquet), 495

  Smet Fils Unique, 547

  Smith, 547

  Smith, J. B., orig. of Haddington, 409;
    Moyamensing, 475;
    Pennsylvania, 494

  Smith, S. F., orig. of seedling pears, 338

  Smith, W. & T., orig. of Ontario, 202

  Smith Beauty, 547

  Smith Duchess, 547

  Snow, 547

  Snow Pear. (See _Pyrus nivalis)_

  Society Van Mons, distrib. of varieties, 264, 320, 500;
    orig. of varieties, 259, 316, 479, 527

  Sod versus clean culture for pear orchards, 102

  Soeur Gregoire, 547

  Soils and locations for pears, 91

  Soldat Bouvier, 548

  Soldat Laboureur, 548;
    parent of President d'Estaintot, 509

  _Solitaire_ (syn. of Mansuette), 461

  Sommeralantbirne, 548

  _Sommerdechantsbirne_(syn. of Summer Doyenne), 221

  Sommerkoenigin, 548

  Sommer-Russelet, 548

  Sommerwachsbirne, 548

  Sommer-Zuckerbirne, 548

  Sophie de l'Ukraine, 548

  Sotschnaja, 549

  Soueraigne, 549

  Soutmann, 549

  _Souvenir_ (syn. of Souvenir du Congres), 218

  Souvenir de l'Abbe Lefebvre, 549

  Souvenir de du Breuil Pere, 549

  Souvenir du Congres, 218

  Souvenir Deschamps, 549

  Souvenir Desire Gilain, 549

  Souvenir d'Esperen, 219

  _Souvenir d'Esperen_ (syn. of Fondante de Noel), 165

  Souvenir d'Esperen de Berckmans, 549

  Souvenir Favre, 550

  Souvenir de Gaete, 550

  Souvenir de Julia, 550

  _Souvenir de Leopold I^{er}_ (syn. of Vingt-cinquieme Anniversaire
      de Leopold I^{er}), 573

  Souvenir de Leroux-Durand, 550

  Souvenir de Lydie, 550

  Souvenir de Madame Charles, 550

  _Souvenir de Madame Treyve_ (syn. of Madame Treyve), 459

  Souvenir de la Reine des Belges, 550

  Souvenir de Renault Pere, 551

  Souvenir de Sannier pere, 551

  Souvenir de Simon Bouvier, 551

  _Souvenir de Simon Bouvier_ (syn. of Simon Bouvier), 546

  Souvenir du Venerable de la Salle, 551

  Souveraine de Printemps, 551

  Spae, 551

  Spae, orig. of Spae, 551

  _Spanish Warden_ (syn. of Bon-Chretien d'Espagne), 313

  _Sparbirne_ (syn. of Jargonelle), 177

  Spaete Rotbirne, 551

  Spaete Sommerbirne ohne Schale, 551

  Spaete Todemannsbirne, 552

  Spaete Wasserbirne, 552

  Spaetes Graumaenchen, 552

  Species of oriental pears, descriptions of, 74

  Species of pears, 57;
    characters of, 57;
    descriptions of, 69

  Speckbirne, 552

  Speedwell, 552

  Spillingsbirne, 552

  Spindelfoermige Honigbirne, 552

  Spindelfoermige Rehbirne, 552

  Spinka, 552

  Spreeuw, 553

  _Squash_ (syn. of Taynton Squash), 560

  Stair, discoverer of Bartlett, 125

  Star of Bethlehem, 553

  Stark, W. P., introd. of Victor, 572

  Stark Bros., introd. of Florida Bartlett, 383

  Statistics of pear culture, 83

  Steinbirne, 553

  Steinmitz Catharine, 553

  Stephens, Prof., discov. of Rapelje, 516

  Sterckmans, orig. of Beurre Sterckmans, 307

  Sterility of pear, 99

  Sterling, 553

  Sterling, orig. of Sterling, 553

  Stevens, M. F., orig. of Stevens Genesee, 553

  Stevens Genesee, 553

  Stocks for pears, importance of, 94;
    notes on, 95

  Stoff, orig. of Madame Stoff, 459

  Stoffels, orig. of Sabine d'Ete, 534

  Stone, 553

  Stone, orig. of Stone, 553

  Stone & Wellington, orig. of Pitson, 500

  Stout, 553

  Strassburger Sommerbergamotte, 553

  Stribling, 554

  Stribling, J. C., introd. of Stribling, 554

  _Striped Bon Chretien_ (syn. of Bon-Chretien d'Hiver Panache), 314

  Structural botany of pear, 58

  Stuemplerbirne, 554

  Sturges, 554

  Sturges, Mrs, Mary S., orig. of Sturges, 554

  _Stuttgarter Geisshirtel_ (syn. of Rousselet de Stuttgardt), 531

  Stuyvesant, pear tree in garden of, 49

  Styer, 554

  Styer, Charles, orig. of Styer, 554

  Styrian, 554

  _Sucre de Tertolen_ (syn. of Van Tertolen Herbst Zuckerbirne), 569

  Sucre-Vert, 554

  _Sucre-Vert d'Hoyerswerda_ (syn. of Sucree de Hoyerswerda), 555

  Sucree Blanche, 555

  Sucree du Comice, 555

  _Sucree d'Heyer_ (syn. of Heyer Zuckerbirne), 418

  Sucree de Hoyerswerda, 555

  Sucree de Montlucon, 555

  Sucree Van Mons, 555

  Sucree de Zurich, 555

  Sudduth, 220

  Sudduth, Titus, dissem. of Sudduth, 220

  Suet Lea, 556

  Suffolk Thorn, 556

  Sugar Top, 556

  Suelibirne, 556

  Sullivan, 556

  _Summer Bell_ (syn. of Windsor), 583

  Summer Beurre d'Arenberg, 556

  _Summer Franc Real_ (syn. of Bergamotte d'Ete), 271

  Summer Hasting, 556

  Summer Popperin, 556

  Summer Portugal, 556

  Summer Saint Germain, 556

  Summer Virgalieu, 557

  Summer, Col. William, introd. of Upper Crust, 567;
    orig. of Hebe, 413

  _Superfin_ (syn. of Beurre Superfin), 137

  Superfondanta, 557

  Superstitions based on pears, 10

  Supreme Coloma, 557

  Surpasse Crassane, 557

  Surpasse Meuris, 557

  Surpasse St, Germain, 557

  Surpasse Virgalieu, 557

  Surprise, 558

  Suesse Margarethenbirne, 558

  Suesse Sommerlahnbirne, 558

  Suwanee, 558

  Suzanne, 558

  Suzette de Bavay, 558

  Swain, James R., orig. of Bronx, 320

  Swan Egg, 558

  _Swan's Orange_ (syn. of Onondaga), 201

  Sweater, 558

  Sylvie de Malzine, 559


  Taglioretti, 559

  Takasaki, 559

  Talmadge, 559

  Talmadge, Levi, orig. of Talmadge, 559

  Tardive d'Ellezelles, 559

  Tardive Garin, 559

  Tardive de Mons, 559

  Tardive de Montauban, 559

  Tardive de Solesne, 559

  _Tardive de Toulouse_ (syn. of Duchesse d'Hiver), 372

  Tatnall Harvest, 559

  Tavernier de Boulogne, 559

  Taylor, 560

  Taynton Squash, 560

  Tea, 560

  Templiers, 560

  Tepka, 560

  _Tertolen Herbst Zuckerbirne_ (syn. of Van Tertolen Herbst
    Zuckerbirne), 569

  Test, 560

  Tettenhall, 560

  Teutsche Augustbirne, 561

  Texas, 561

  Thacher, Anthony, pear tree, 43

  The Dean, 561

  Theilersbirne, 561

  Theodor Koerner, 561

  Theodore, 561

  Theodore Van Mons, 561

  Theodore Williams, 561

  Theophile Lacroix, 561

  Theophrastus, mention of pear by, 5

  Therese, 562

  Therese Appert, 562

  Theveriner Butterbirne, 562

  Thibaut Butterbirne, 562

  Thick Stalked Pear, 562

  Thierard, Jules, orig. of Lydie Thierard, 454

  Thimothee, 562

  _Thintwig_ (syn. of Tonkovietka), 564

  Thirriot, orig. of Fondante Thirriot, 386

  Thirriot Bros., orig. of Eugene Thirriot, 379

  Thompson, Judge, orig. of Thompson, 562

  Thompson (Eng.), 562

  Thompson (N. H.), 562

  Thooris, 562

  _Thorp_ (syn. of White Doyenne), 228

  _Thouin_ (syn. of Winter Nelis), 232

  Thrips on pear, 121

  Throop, Calvin, orig. of Calvin, 326

  Thuerlinckx, 563

  Thurston Red, 563

  _Thury Schmalzbirne_ (syn. of Hericart de Thury), 417

  Tiffin, 563

  Tigree de Janvier, 563

  Tillage of pear orchards, 102

  Tillington, 563

  Timpling, 563

  Tindall, George & William, orig. of Tindall Swan Egg, 563

  Tindall Swan Egg, 563

  Tollbirne, 564

  Tolstoy, 564

  Tom Strange, 564

  Tonkovietka, 564

  Tonneau, 564

  Toronto Belle, 564

  Totten, Col., orig. of Totten Seedling, 564

  Totten Seedling, 564

  _Tougard_ (syn. of Calebasse Tougard), 326

  Tourasse, orig, of Comte de Lambertye, 346;
    Directeur Hardy, 360;
    La Bearnaise, 440;
    Pierre Tourasse, 499;
    Professeur Bazin, 514

  Tournay d'hiver, 565

  Tout-il-faut, 565

  Traeublesbirne, 565

  Tredwell, Thomas, orig. of Platt, 500

  Trees, pear, characters of, 59

  _Trescott_ (syn. of Westcott), 578

  _Tresor_ (syn. of Amour), 245

  Tressorier Lesacher, 565

  Treyve, orig. of Madame Treyve, 459;
    Precoce de Trevoux, 507

  Trinkebirne, 565

  Triomphe de Jodoigne, 565

  Triomphe de Louvain, 565

  Triomphe de Touraine, 565

  Triomphe de Tournai, 565

  Triomphe de Vienne, 566

  _Triumph_ (syn. of Triomphe de Vienne), 566

  _Trockener Martin_ (syn. of Martin-Sec), 466

  Trompetenbirne, 566

  Troppauer Goldgelbe Sommermuskatellerbirne, 566

  _Troppauer Muskateller_ (syn. of Troppauer Goldgelbe
Sommermuskatellerbirne), 566

  Trottier, orig. of Doyenne de Montjean, 368

  _Trois Jours_ (syn. of Poire des Trois Jours), 504

  _Trout Pear_ (syn. of Forelle), 167

  Truchsess, 566

  Truckhill Bergamot, 566

  Tsar, 566

  Tudor, 567

  Turban, 567

  Tuerkische mueskirte Sommerbirne, 567

  Turnep, 567

  Turner, mention of pears by, 32

  Tusser, mention of pears by, 32

  Tussock moth caterpillars on pear, 120

  _Twenty-fifth Anniversaire de Leopold I_ (syn. of Vingt-cinquieme
      Anniversaire de Leopold I^{er}), 573

  Twice flowering Pear-tree, 567

  Tyler, 567

  Tyson, 222;
    value of, for local market in New York, 101

  Tyson, Jonathan, owner of original tree of Tyson, 223


  Ulatis, 567

  _Unbekannte Von Mons_ (syn. of L'Inconnue Van Mons), 439

  _Union_ (syn. of Pound), 208

  Unterlaibacher Mostbirne, 567

  _Unvergleichliche_ (syn. of Sans-Pareille du Nord), 540

  Upper Crust, 567

  Urbaniste, 224; parent of Harris, 412;
    Poire du Pauvre, 503

  _Urbanister Saemling_ (syn. of Urbaniste), 224

  Ursula, 567

  Uvedale, Dr., orig. of Pound, 209

  _Uvedale's St. Germain_ (syn. of Pound), 208

  Uwchlan, 568


  Valentine, 568

  Vallee Franche, 568

  Valley, 568

  Van Assche, 568

  _Van Assene_ (syn. of Van Assche), 568

  Van Buren, 568

  Van Deventer, 568

  Van Dooren, orig. of Rousselet Saint-Quentin, 530

  Van Geert, Jean, orig. of Beurre Jean van Geert 298;
    Beurre Van Geert, 295

  Van Lindley, J., introd. of Alice Payne, 242

  Van Marum, 569

  Van Mons, Dr., discov. of var., 533;
    orig. of varieties, 131, 152, 161, 221, 237, 239, 240, 242, 243, 246,
      251, 252, 253, 254, 255, 260, 265, 269, 272, 273, 278, 279, 282,
      284, 285, 286, 288, 290, 291, 293, 297, 298, 299, 305, 307, 308,
      312, 318, 319, 320, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325, 326, 327, 330, 331,
      333, 334, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 346, 348, 349, 351,
      353, 354, 355, 356, 358, 361, 362, 365, 368, 369, 370, 372, 373,
      377, 378, 379, 381, 383, 385, 386, 387, 390, 392, 394, 405, 409,
      413, 414, 415, 417, 418, 433, 434, 441, 443, 444, 445, 446, 448,
      452, 457, 462, 463, 464, 467, 470, 472, 474, 476, 483, 485, 487,
      488, 489, 491, 492, 493, 498, 502, 505, 508, 511, 512, 513, 515,
      516, 518, 519, 520, 522, 527, 528, 531, 536, 545, 547, 553, 555,
      556, 557, 558, 561, 562, 565, 569, 570, 578;
    prop. of var., 160;
    theory of, in pear breeding, 18;
    work of, in pear breeding, 17

  _Van Mons Butterbirne_ (syn. of Leon Leclerc (Van Mons)), 189

  Van Mons fruehe Pomeranzenbirne, 569

  _Van Mons Hermannsbirne_ (syn. of Saint Germain Van Mons), 536

  Van Mons Sommer Schmalzbirne, 569

  Van Mons spaete Wirthschaftbirne, 569

  Van Mons suesse Haushaltsbirne, 569

  Van Tertolen Herbst Zuckerbirne, 569

  Van Vranken, William, discov. of Sacandaga, 534

  Van de Weyer Bates, 569

  Vancouver, mention of fruits in California by, 54

  Vanderveer, 570

  Vanderveer, Dr. Adrian, orig. of Vanderveer, 570

  Varet, A., orig. of Beurre Vauban, 307

  Varro, fifty monographs of husbandry by Greeks named by, 7;
   forerunner of modern pear management, 7

  Varuna, 570

  Vauquelin, 570

  Vauquelin, orig. of Vauquelin, 570

  Veitch, Messrs., orig. of S. T. Wright, 533

  _Venturia pyrina_, cause of pear scab, 114

  Venusbrust, 570

  _Vereins Dechantsbirne_ (syn. of Doyenne du Comice), 153

  Vergoldete oder wahre graue Dechantsbirne, 570

  Verguldete Herbstbergamotte, 570

  _Verlain_ (syn. of Verlaine d'Ete), 570

  Verlaine d'Ete, 570

  Vermillion d'en Haut, 570

  Vermont, 571

  Vermont Beauty, 225;
    place of, in New York pear culture, 85;
    possibility of, being identical with Forelle, 167

  Vernusson, 571

  _Verschwenderin_ (syn. of Enfant Prodigue), 377

  _Verte-Longue d'Automne_ (syn. of Long Green of Autumn), 449

  Verte-longue panachee, 571

  Verte-Longue de la Sarthe, 571

  Verulam, 571

  _Veterans_ (syn. of Besi des Veterans), 282

  Vezouziere, 571

  _Vicar_ (syn. of Vicar of Winkfield), 226

  Vicar Junior, 571

  Vicar of Winkfield, 226

  Vice-President Coppiers, 572

  Vice-President Decaye, 572

  Vice-President Delbee, 572

  Vice-President Delehoye, 572

  Vice-President Delbee, parent of Cavelier de la Salle, 331

  Victor, 572

  _Victoria_ (syn. of Huyshe Victoria), 423

  _Victoria d'Huyse_ (syn. of Huyshe Victoria), 423

  Victoria de Williams, 572

  Victorina, 572

  Vigne, 572

  Villain XIV, 572

  Villene de Saint-Florent, 573

  Vin de Anglais, 573

  _Vine Pear_ (syn. of Vigne), 572

  Vineuse, 573

  _Vineuse Esperen_ (syn. of Vineuse), 573

  Vingt-cinquieme Anniversaire de Leopold I^{er}, 573

  _Virgalieu_ (syn. of White Doyenne), 228

  _Virgalieu d'ete_ (syn. of Summer Virgalieu), 557

  Virginale du Mecklembourg, 573

  Virginie Baltet, 573

  Virgouleuse, 573

  Vital, 574

  Vital, discov. of Vital, 574

  Vitrier, 574

  _Volkmarsen_ (syn. of Volkmarserbirne), 574

  Volkmarserbirne, 574

  Von Muckenheim, orig. of Argusbirne, 252

  Von Zugler, 574

  Voscovoya, 574

  Vosschanka, 575


  _Wachsbirne_ (syn. of Cire), 338

  Wade, 575

  Wade, I. C., orig. of Wade, 575

  Wadleigh, 575

  Wahre Canning, 575

  Wahre Faustbirne, 575

  Wahre Schneebirne, 575

  Walker, Samuel, owner of original tree of Mount Vernon, 199

  _Walker_ (syn. of Amande Double), 243

  Wallis, Henry, orig. of Wallis Kieffer, 575

  Wallis Kieffer, 575

  _Walnut_ (syn. of Echasserie), 374

  _Waelsche Birne_ (syn. of Jargonelle), 177

  Warden pear tree, 44

  Warner, 575

  _Warwicke_ (syn. of White Doyenne), 228

  Washington, 575

  Waterloo, 576

  Watson, 576

  Watson, William, orig. of Watson, 576

  _Waxy_ (syn. of Voscovoya), 574

  Weber, orig. of Duchesse d'Angouleme Bronzee, 371

  Webster, 576

  Weeping Willow, 576

  Weidenbirne, 576

  Weidenblaettrige Herbstbirne, 576

  Weihmier Sugar, 576

  _Weihnachtsbirne_ (syn. of Fondante de Noel), 164

  Weiler'sche Mostbirn, 576

  _Weingifterin_ (syn. of Schweizer Wasserbirne), 543

  Weisse Fuchsbirne, 576

  Weisse Hangelbirne, 577

  _Weisse Herbst Butterbirne_ (syn. of White Doyenne), 228

  Weisse Kochbirne, 577

  Weisse Pelzbirne, 577

  _Weisse Pfalzgrafenbirne_ (syn. of Zink Pfalzgrafenbirne), 587

  Welbeck Bergamot, 577

  Wellington, 577

  Wellington, A., introd. of Wellington, 577

  Welsche Bratbirne, 577

  Weltz, 578

  Weltz, Leo, introd. of Weltz, 578

  Wendell, 578

  Wesner, 578

  Westcott, 578

  Westphaelische Melonenbirne, 578

  Westrumb, 578

  Wetmore, 578

  Wetmore, E. B., orig. of Wetmore, 578

  Wharton Early, 579

  Wheeler, 579

  Wheeler, Dr., discov. of Wheeler, 579

  Whieldon, 579

  Whieldon, Wm. W., orig. of Whieldon, 579

  _White Beurre_ (syn. of White Doyenne), 228

  White Doyenne, 228;
    parent of Beurre Antoine, 284;
    Christmas Beurre, 337;
    Collins, 341;
    Hewes, 418;
    Homestead, 420;
    Vanderveer, 570

  White Genneting, 579

  White Longland, 579

  White Seedling, 579

  White Squash, 580

  White Star, 580

  Whitfield, 580

  Wiegel, Christopher, orig. of Margaret, 197

  _Wiener Pomeranzenbirne_ (syn. of Orange de Vienne), 487

  Wiest, 580

  Wight, Joseph, orig. of Raymond, 517

  Wilbur, 580

  Wilbur, Jr., D., orig. of Wilbur, 580

  Wilcomb and King, introd. of Lawrence, 185

  Wild Pears. (See Pears, Wild)

  Wilde Filzbirne, 580

  Wilde Herrnbirne, 580

  Wilde Holzbirne, 580

  Wilder, Col. Marshall P., biography of, 128;
    introd. into America of varieties, 127, 472, 571

  _Wilder_ (syn. of Wilder Early), 230

  Wilder Early, 230

  Wilder Sugar, 580

  Wilding von Einsiedel, 581

  Wilding von Gronau, 581

  _Wilding aus Suffolk_ (syn. of Suffolk Thorn), 556

  Wilford, 581

  Wilkinson, 581

  Wilkinson, A., orig. of Wilkinson Winter, 581

  Wilkinson, Jeremiah, orig. of Wilkinson, 581

  Wilkinson Winter, 581

  Willamette Valley, introduction of pear culture in, 54

  Willermoz, 581

  William, 581

  _William Edwards_ (syn. of William), 581

  William Prince, 582

  Williams, orig. of Gansel Late Bergamot, 391;
    Gansel Seckel, 170;
    prop. of Bartlett, 125

  Williams, Aaron Davis, orig. of Williams Early, 582

  Williams, John, orig. of Chaumontel Swan Egg, 336;
    Pitmaston, 207

  Williams, Mrs., orig. of Williams Double Bearing, 582

  Williams, Theodore, orig. of Theodore Williams, 561

  _Williams_ (syn. of Bartlett), 124

  _Williams' Apothekerbirne_ (syn. of Bartlett), 124

  _Williams' Bon Chretien_ (syn. of Bartlett), 124

  _Williams Christbirne_ (syn. of Bartlett), 124

  Williams Double Bearing, 582

  Williams Early, 582

  Williams d'hiver, 582

  Williams panachee, 582

  _Williams Winter_ (syn. of Williams d'hiver), 582

  Williamson, 582

  Williamson, Nicholas, orig. of Williamson, 582

  Willison, W., orig. of Queen Victoria, 515

  Wilmington, 582

  Windsor, 583

  Winship, 583

  Winship, Messrs., orig. of Winship, 583

  Winslow, 583

  Winter, 583

  Winter Bartlett, 231

  _Winter Bell_ (syn. of Pound), 208

  _Winter Bon Chretien_ (syn. of Angoisse), 248

  _Winter Dechantsbirne_ (syn. of Easter Beurre), 159

  Winter Doyenne, parent of Doyenne a Cinq Pans, 366

  _Winter Eisbirne_ (syn. of Glace d'hiver), 397

  Winter Jonah, 583

  _Winter Meuris_ (syn. of Beurre d'Anjou), 127

  Winter Nelis, 232;
    parent of Colmar Sirand, 344;
    Comptesse de Chambord, 347;
    Lycurgus, 454;
    Michaelmas Nelis, 471;
    Reeder, 211;
    place of, in commercial pear culture, 84

  _Winter Oken_ (syn. of Oken), 485

  _Winter Orange_ (syn. of Orange d'Hiver), 486

  Winter Pear, 583

  _Winter Pomeranzenbirne_ (syn. of Orange d'Hiver), 486

  Winter Popperin, 584

  Winter Rousselet, 584

  Winter Seckel, 584

  Winter Sweet Sugar, 584

  _Winter Thorn_ (syn. of Epine d'Hiver), 377

  Winter Williams, 584

  Winterbirne, 584

  Winterliebesbirne, 584

  Winterrobine, 584

  _Winterwunder_ (syn. of Petit-Oin), 496

  Witte Princesse, 585

  Witzthumb, orig. of Jean de Witte, 429

  Wolfsbirne, 585

  Woodberry, William, orig. of Rossney, 524

  Woodbridge, orig. of Woodbridge Seckel, 585

  Woodbridge Seckel, 585

  Woodstock, 585

  Worden, Schuyler, orig. of Worden Meadow, 585

  Worden, Sylvester, orig. of Worden Seckel, 234

  _Worden_ (syn. of Worden Seckel), 234

  Worden Meadow, 585

  Worden Seckel, 234

  Woerlesbirne, 585

  Wormsley Grange, 585

  Wormy pear, cause of, 118

  _Worster_ (syn. of Black Worcester), 310

  _Wredow_ (syn. of Delices de Charles), 355

  Wright, Zaccheus, orig. of Chelmsford, 336

  Wurzer, 586

  _Wurzer d'Automne_ (syn. of Wurzer), 586


  Yat, 586

  Yellow Huff-cap, 586

  York, Mrs. Jeremiah, orig. of Pendleton Early York, 494

  _York-precoce de Pendleton_ (syn. of Pendleton Early York), 494

  Youngken, David, orig. of Youngken Winter Seckel, 586

  Youngken, Josiah, orig. of Red Garden, 518

  Youngken Winter Seckel, 586


  Zache, 586

  Zapfenbirn, 586

  Zarskaja, 587

  Zenon, 587

  Zephirin Gregoire, 587

  Zephirin Louis, 587

  Zieregger Mostbirne, 587

  Zimmtfarbige Schmalzbirne, 587

  Zink Pfalzgrafenbirne, 587

  Zoar Beauty, 588

  Zoe, 588

  _Zuericher Zuckerbirne_ (syn. of Sucree de Zurich), 555

  _Zwibotzenbirne_ (syn. of Deux Tetes), 359




                              FOOTNOTES:


[1] _The Odyssey_, Book VII. Translated by S. H. Butcher and A. Lang.

[2] Pliny _Nat. Hist._ =XV=: 15. From a translation made for the writer
by Professor H. H. Yeames; Hobart College, Geneva, N. Y.

[3] Goderonne: From godron, a sculptural ornament having the shape of
an elongated egg.

[4] Cordus, Valerius _Hist. Pl._ =3=:176-182. 1561.

The writer is indebted to Professor H. H. Yeames, Hobart College,
Geneva, N. Y., for the translation of this chapter from the original
text.

[5] _A Hist. of Gard. in Eng._ 35-37. 1910.

[6] _Mass. Hist. Soc. Collections_ 1st Ser. =1=:118.

[7] _Mass. Records_ =1=:24.

[8] _Mass. Hist. Collections_ 3d Ser. =23=:337.

[9] _Hist. Mass. Hort. Soc._ p. 16. 1829-1878.

[10] _Report of Me. Pom. Soc._ =7=:1873.

[11] Prince, William _Cat._ 1771.

[12] For a brief account of the life and work of John Bartram, see _The
Grapes of New York_, page 97.

[13] For an account of the life and work of Coxe, see _The Peaches of
New York_, page 254.

[14] For an account of the life and work of Budd, see _The Plums of New
York_, page 145.

[15] Rehder, Alfred _Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts & Sci_. =50=:228. 1915.

[16] Wilson, E. H. _Jour. Inter. Gar. Club 598._ 1918.

[17] Galloway, B. T. _Jour. Her._ 11:29. 1920.

[18] Rehder, Alfred _Proc. Amer. Acad. Arts & Sci._ =50=:237. 1915.

[19] Reimer, F. C. _Bull. Com. Hort. Calif._ =5=:167-172. 1916.

[20] Galloway, B. T. _Jour. Her._ =11=:32. 1920.

[21] Reimer, F. C. _Reprint from 1916 annual report of Pacific Coast
Association of Nurserymen_, 7. 1916.

[22] Some very good preliminary work on harvesting and storing pears
has been done by the Oregon Experiment Station, and is reported in
Bulletin 154, June, 1918, from that Station.

[23] For costs and profits in growing apples see Bulletin 376, New York
Agricultural Experiment Station.

[24] Hesler and Whetzel. _Manual of Fruit Diseases_ 330-331. 1917.

[25] Marshall P. Wilder contributed to all fields of American
horticulture as an ardent amateur grower and as a most generous patron.
But it was as a pomologist and especially as a grower of grapes
and pears that he established a permanent place for himself in the
horticulture of the country. He was born in New Hampshire in 1798 and
died in Boston in 1886, having lived in Dorchester, a suburb of Boston,
for upwards of a half century. By vocation a merchant, he was a captain
of industry in his day, yet most of his life, especially after the
prime had been passed, was devoted to the avocation of horticulture. He
was one of the founders of the American Pomological Society and had the
great honor of being its president, excepting a single two-year term,
from the first meeting in 1850 until his death. During the last years
of his presidency, Wilder actively engaged in the reform of pomological
nomenclature which the Society was then carrying on. He was an active
member of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society for fifty-six years
and its president from 1841 to 1848. He was also one of the founders
of the Massachusetts Board of Agriculture, of the Massachusetts
Agricultural Society, of the United States Agricultural Society, and
was a trustee of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Besides
membership and activity in these agricultural organizations, he served
as colonel and commander in a military company and as president of
the New England Historic and Genealogical Society from 1868 until his
death. Wilder was a zealous collector and introducer of flowers. He
specialized in camellias, azaleas, orchids, and roses. A rose bearing
his name is still a garden favorite. Many floral novelties of his
day owe their origin or introduction to Marshall P. Wilder. He was
ever enthusiastic over American grapes and tested all of the many new
varieties introduced about the middle of the last century. But the pear
was even more to his fancy than the grape, and he endeavored to grow
every native variety of any promise whatsoever. All told, he tested
over 1200 varieties, and in 1873 exhibited more than 400 varieties.
He originated several new pears and to him is due the honor of having
introduced the Beurre d'Anjou in 1844. At his death he left the
American Pomological Society $1000 for Wilder medals for new fruits and
$4000 for general purposes. To the Massachusetts Horticultural Society,
he left $1000 to encourage the introduction of new American pears and
grapes. Among many distinguished American pomologists who sought to
improve the pear, Marshall P. Wilder deserves most of any recognition
for his services and a place is therefore accorded him for his likeness
in the frontispiece of _The Pears of New York_ and the book is thereby
dedicated to him.

[26] The name is spelled by many writers Beurre d'Aremberg.

[27] General Henry Alexander Scammell Dearborn, who followed the
vocation of a soldier, statesman, and author, chose as his avocation
horticulture and in several of its fields became eminent. A native of
New England (1783-1851), son of General Henry Dearborn of Revolutionary
fame, he was early educated to the profession of law and pursued
that vocation until the war with Great Britain in 1812. Services in
this war brought him the rank and title of general. After the war he
served as Collector of the Port of Boston, in Congress, and as Mayor
of Roxbury, Massachusetts, which office he held at the time of his
death. But it is as a patron, friend, and lover of horticulture that
the life and work of General Dearborn interest pomologists. He was one
of the charter members in the Massachusetts Horticultural Society and
a prime mover in its organization. He was elected its first president
March 17, 1829. In the history of the Society published in 1880, of
all the famous members of this truly remarkable organization, General
Dearborn's portrait was chosen for the frontispiece. He was early
interested in experimental gardens and rural cemeteries. The plans for
experimental gardens advocated by him were never fully carried out,
but no doubt his enthusiasm for such gardens, with his own garden as a
model, did much to stimulate the planting in America in the early half
of the nineteenth century of the many famous gardens which adorned and
enriched every center of culture along the Atlantic seaboard. He helped
to establish the Mount Auburn and Forest Hills cemeteries, famous
among Boston cemeteries, and the first of rural cemeteries in this
country. His life-long devotion to rural art as exemplified in gardens
and cemeteries knew no bounds. On these subjects and on pomology he
contributed many articles to the agricultural and horticultural papers
of his time. Few men, it can be said, could better concentrate their
thoughts and feelings on paper than he seems to have done. Besides the
many papers from his own pen he published several translated treatises
from the French, chief of which was a monograph on the Camellia in 1838
and another on _Morus multicaulis_ in 1830, the "Mulberry Craze" being
in full swing at this time. General Dearborn was an ardent pear-grower
and helped to test the hundreds of seedlings then being brought from
Belgium and France and grew as well considerable numbers from his own
seed-beds. Of all his seedlings, however, only Dearborn survives.

[28] The fame of Robert Manning as an accurate and discriminating
American pomologist will long endure. Few Americans, one conceives, as
his life is reviewed, have rendered greater service in any field of
the nation's agriculture. The quantity of his work was not remarkably
large, but the quality was superfine. Systematic pomology in particular
owes him much for his painstaking descriptions of fruits, and his
corrections in nomenclature. Born in Salem, Mass., July 18, 1784, he
made the town of his birth famous as a pomological center in America,
where, at the time of his death, October 10, 1842, his garden probably
contained a larger collection of fruits than had ever before been
brought together in America. Manning began collecting fruits in 1823
when he established his "Pomological Garden" at Salem for the purpose
of introducing and testing new varieties of fruits. He attempted to
bring together all of the varieties of fruits that would thrive in
eastern Massachusetts, and when his garden was fullest had about 2000
fruits, of which 1000 kinds were pears, to which fruit he gave most
attention. He had many English, French, and Belgian correspondents from
whom he received the most notable fruits grown in their countries.
He is said to have had a most remarkable memory and could carry in
mind the names, tree-habits, and qualities of any fruit he had ever
seen and could identify it at sight. In whatever group of pomologists
he chanced to be, his identifications and decisions on nomenclature
were accepted as correct. Small wonder, therefore, that the _Book
of Fruits_, published by Manning in 1838, at once took the place of
authority for descriptions of tree-fruits and for such small-fruits,
trees, and shrubs as the author described. It was the first, and is
almost the only, American pomology in which the descriptions were all
made with fruit in hand. The author intended this book to be the first
of a series, but the books to follow never appeared. He was one of
the founders of the Massachusetts Horticultural Society. Pear-growers
are indebted to Manning for the work he did in testing the seedlings
sent out by Van Mons, the famous Belgian breeder, most of whose pears
came to American orchards through the agency of the Salem Pomological
Garden. He also received and introduced valuable pears from the London
Horticultural Society. His achievements mark Manning among the most
notable American pomologists, of whom no other labored as devotedly for
the attainment of better pears.

[29] Bernard S. Fox was a pioneer nurseryman and fruit-grower in
California who gave much time to improving the pear through seedlings.
During his stay of thirty years in the state of his adoption he was
noted for his energy and enterprise in every industry that had to
do with fruit-growing. Fox was an Irishman who came to America in
1848 and began work in the garden and nurseries of Hovey and Company
of Boston. A few years later he emigrated with the gold-seekers to
California where, shortly, he settled at San Jose as a nurseryman and
fruit-grower. Eventually he became possessed of a considerable amount
of land the increasing value of which made him a very wealthy man, and
he took pleasure in being a patron of horticulture as well as a worker
in its several fields. Early in his career at San Jose his interest
was aroused in the production of new pears from seed. He was a most
conscientious selecter and only the best survived in his orchards. He
was at all times extremely anxious not to cumber the list of pears with
worthless varieties. Out of a great number of seedlings, only three
finally received his approval, P. Barry, Fox, and Colonel Wilder. All
have high places in the pear lists of California and the United States,
and do honor to an enthusiastic and painstaking breeder of pears. For
many years before his death in July, 1880, he was the Vice President
of the American Pomological Society for California. Bernard S. Fox
was one of the first fruit-growers to bring fame to California, and
Californians are justly proud of him.

[30] Peter Kieffer, a nurseryman of good reputation in his state,
deserves pomological honors because of his keenness of vision in
selecting for distribution the pear which bears his name. Few men would
have recognized merit in the seedling from which the Kieffer pear
came. Peter Kieffer was born in Alsace in 1812, whence he emigrated to
America in 1834. In Europe he had worked for twelve years in the garden
of the King of France and upon his arrival in America sought employment
as a gardener which he found on the estate of James Gowen at Mt. Airy,
near Philadelphia. In 1853 he started a small nursery at Roxborough,
a short distance from Philadelphia. Much of his stock was imported
from Europe, most of which came from Van Houtte, the famous Belgian
nurseryman. From Van Houtte, Kieffer obtained seeds of the Chinese
Sand pear from which came the Kieffer pear as described in the history
of the variety. As a token of his faith in his new variety, Kieffer
planted an orchard of this pear, some of the trees of which still
live and bear. Peter Kieffer died in 1890, having made an important
contribution to horticulture even though the variety sent out by him is
far from perfect and has been much over-praised and over-planted.

[31] Patrick Barry, one of the founders of the firm of Ellwanger and
Barry, whose Mount Hope Nurseries at Rochester, New York, were long of
national and international reputation, was born in Belfast, Ireland,
in 1816 and died in Rochester, N. Y., in 1890. Besides contributing
to the fame of the nursery company he helped to found, Barry was for
many years one of the leading pomological editors and authors of the
country. New York, especially western New York, is greatly indebted
to George Ellwanger and Patrick Barry for the horticultural services
of their firm. It is not an exaggeration to say that they introduced
fruit-growing in western New York, a region now famous for its fruits.
So, also, the parks and home grounds of the many beautiful cities,
towns, and villages in western New York are adorned and enriched by
ornamental trees, shrubs and vines from the nurseries of Ellwanger and
Barry. Patrick Barry came to America in 1836 and with George Ellwanger
founded the Mount Hope Nurseries in 1840. Here for a half century he
devoted himself to the introduction and distribution of fruit and
out-of-door ornamental plants. In the early life of the nursery company
many importations were made from Europe and at a time when there were
no railroads, telegraph wires, nor ocean steamboats. It was during this
early period that the Mount Hope Nurseries began the importation of
pears and soon built up one of the largest collections in the country
and one which was maintained long after the famous collections farther
east had disappeared. At one time or another over 1000 varieties of
pears were tested on the grounds of this nursery. For a half century,
fruit-growers have studied with pleasure and profit the exhibits of
pears made by Ellwanger and Barry at the State and National exhibitions
of note. From 1844 to 1852, Patrick Barry edited _The Genesee Farmer_,
one of the best agricultural papers of its day and succeeded A. J.
Downing in the editorship of _The Horticulturist_ which he brought to
Rochester in 1855 where it was published until 1887. Barry's _Treatise
on the Fruit-Garden_ appeared in 1851 and at once became one of the
most popular books on pomology. In 1872 the "Treatise" was rewritten
and published as _Barry's Fruit Garden_. Another notable work of which
he was author was _The Catalogue of Fruits of the American Pomological
Society_ which was compiled by him. Patrick Barry was one of the
founders of the Western New York Horticultural Society, for many years
the leading horticultural organization of the continent, and of which
he was president for more than thirty years. Patrick Barry ranks with
Coxe, Kenrick, the Downings, Warder, Eliot, and Thomas as a great
leader in pomology of the time in which he lived.

William Crawford Barry, son of Patrick Barry of the preceding sketch,
was born in Rochester, New York, in 1847. As a boy he attended
parochial schools at Rochester and at Seton Hall, South Orange, New
Jersey. As a young man he studied in Berlin, Heidelberg, and the
University of Louvain in Belgium. Upon returning to America he took
a position in a seed house in New York that he might have practical
knowledge of the seed business to bring to the firm of Ellwanger
and Barry of which he was soon to become a member. After serving an
apprenticeship in the seed business he returned to Rochester to enter
the firm which his father and George Ellwanger had founded. From the
time of entrance in this company he took a prominent part in its
affairs, and for many years before his death, December 12, 1916, he was
president of the corporation. Of his horticultural activities, he may
be said to have been an organizer and promotor--one of the captains in
the industry. For twenty-six years he was president of the Western New
York Horticultural Society, having succeeded his father to this office.
He was the first president of the American Rose Society, and in 1882
was president of the Eastern Nurserymen's Association. For three years
he was president of the Board of Control of the New York Agricultural
Experiment Station. He helped to establish and took a leader's part
in developing the parks of Rochester which have made that city famous
among lovers of landscapes. Highland Park was almost a creation of the
firm of Ellwanger and Barry. In 1888 the firm gave the city twenty
acres of land adjoining the Highland reservoir as the first step in
establishing a park system for Rochester. Mr. Barry was chairman of the
committee of the park board having in charge Highland Park from the
creation of the board until the year before his death when it passed
out of existence. Besides these horticultural activities, Mr. Barry
was either president or an officer in six banks and trust companies in
Rochester. His was a commanding figure in the horticulture of New York.
No one attending the meetings of the Western New York Horticultural
Society during the twenty-six years he was president can forget Mr.
Barry. His knowledge in every division of horticulture, his devotion
to grape and pear culture, his genial manner and pleasant greeting
to all members, and his force and tact as a presiding officer fitted
him so preeminently well for the place that he was unopposed for the
presidency during twenty-six terms following the death of his father
and until his death.

George Ellwanger, one of the founders and thereafter until his death
one of the partners in the Mount Hope Nurseries, Rochester, New
York, was born in Germany in 1816 and died in Rochester, New York,
in 1906. He came to the United States in 1835, having been educated
as a horticulturist in Stuttgart, although possibly the training he
received throughout his youth from his father, a grower of grapes and
fruits, taught him most, for Ellwanger often said that it was from
his father that he acquired his love of horticulture and was by him
persuaded to devote his life to the vocation of nurseryman. Ellwanger
settled in Rochester in 1839, and the next year joined with Patrick
Barry in forming the nursery and seed firm of Ellwanger and Barry,
calling their place of business "Mount Hope Nurseries." Ellwanger was
one of the founders of the American Pomological Society, and of the
Western New York Horticultural Society and throughout his life took an
active interest in both organizations. Mr. Ellwanger had large business
interests in Rochester and western New York and helped most materially
to develop the city and the country about. His chief contributions to
horticulture were made through the Mount Hope Nurseries, the influence
of which is briefly set forth in the sketch of the life of Patrick
Barry.

[32] Henry Waggoman Edwards, at one time Governor of Connecticut,
was a pioneer American pear breeder credited with making the first
systematic attempt to grow new pears in this country. He was a grandson
of the eminent theologian, Jonathan Edwards, was born at New Haven,
Conn., in 1779, graduated at Princeton College in 1797, studied law
at the Litchfield School and almost immediately entered into public
life shortly to become prominent and famous in state and nation. He
served Connecticut with honors as its Governor, and in the nation he
distinguished himself as Representative in the House from Connecticut,
Speaker of the House and as Senator. But it is as a pomologist that his
career is of concern to the reader. Always interested in pomology, and
no doubt especially interested in pears through the spectacular work
of Van Mons, he planted pear seeds in the fall of 1817 with the aim of
obtaining new and superior varieties of this fruit. Great success did
not attend his attempts at pear breeding, but Governor Edwards made a
start in work which Manning, Wilder and a score of others were to carry
forward with more striking results. Out of many seedlings, at least
five were named and were grown for a longer or shorter time by the
pear-growers of a century ago. These are Elizabeth, Calhoun, Dallas,
Henrietta and Citron, all described among the minor varieties of this
text. While hardly to be considered among the foremost pomologists of
the country, Governor Edwards is in the front rank of the lesser men
whose combined work has done so much to give weight and impulse to
American pomology.




Transcriber's Notes:


Words surrounded by _ are italicized.

Words surrounded by = are bold.

In this e-text, [vC] represents a capital letter C with a diacritical
mark caron (v-shaped symbol) above it.

Illustrations were relocated to correspond to their references in the
text.

Obvious printer errors corrected and inconsistent spellings have been
kept, including inconsistent use of hyphen (e.g. "after-flavor" and
"after flavor"), accents (e.g. "Mueskirte" and "Muskirte"),
capitalisation (e.g. "Nec plus Meuris" and "Nec Plus Meuris"), and
proper names (e.g. "Luxemburg" and "Luxembourg").

Index entries that do not match their referenced text corrected (except
where the text is an obvious printer error) and if necessary moved to
the correct position according to alphabetical order, e.g. "Langstielege
Zuckerbirne" corrected to be "Langstielige Zuckerbirne". Index entries
that refer to non-existent text have been deleted.

Page 247, word "it" removed from sentence "...though it it seems...."

Page 284, word "it" removed from sentence "...where it it is...."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Pears of New York, by U. P. Hedrick

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PEARS OF NEW YORK ***

***** This file should be named 46994.txt or 46994.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/6/9/9/46994/

Produced by Steven Giacomelli, Mark C. Orton, The Internet
Archive (TIA) and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team
at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images
produced by Core Historical Literature in Agriculture
(CHLA), Cornell University)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

