Project Gutenberg's Harry F. Marks Catalogue No. 4, 1919, by Harry F. Marks

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Harry F. Marks Catalogue No. 4, 1919
       Choice and Unusual Books

Author: Harry F. Marks

Release Date: October 1, 2014 [EBook #47014]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARRY F. MARKS CATALOGUE NO. 4 ***




Produced by Richard Tonsing, Bill Tozier, logista and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net






                   *       *       *       *       *




                            HARRY F. MARKS

                    [Illustration: CATALOGUE No. 4
                                 1919]

                   *       *       *       *       *

                          CHOICE AND UNUSUAL
                                 BOOKS

                   *       *       *       *       *

                              BOOK-LOVERS
                     WILL FIND LISTED HEREIN MANY
                 DESIRABLE, CURIOUS, AND _OUT-OF-PRINT
                           BOOKS_, INCLUDING
                    _CHOICE EDITIONS_ OF _STANDARD
                    AUTHORS_ IN _HANDSOME BINDINGS_
                        AT _ATTRACTIVE PRICES_.


                   *       *       *       *       *

                            HARRY F. MARKS

                        Established 15 years at

                    110-116 NASSAU STREET, NEW YORK

                          Phone Beekman 3352

                   *       *       *       *       *

                   *       *       *       *       *


Book Love, my friends, is your pass to the greatest, the purest, and
the most perfect pleasure that God has prepared for His creatures. It
lasts when all other pleasures fade. It will support you when all other
recreations are gone. It will last you until your death. It will make
your hours pleasant to you as long as you live.

                                                     _Anthony Trollope._

       *       *       *       *       *

All books are sold as new unless otherwise described in the Catalogue.
Any book found to be imperfect or not agreeing with description may be
returned and money will be refunded.

       *       *       *       *       *

As we have but one copy of most of the books listed, an early order
would be advisable to avoid disappointment.

       *       *       *       *       *

                            HARRY F. MARKS

                         Established 15 years
                                  AT
                         110-116 Nassau Street
                            New York, N. Y.
                          Phone Beekman 3352

       *       *       *       *       *




Choice and Unusual Books

For Sale by

Harry F. Marks, New York


       *       *       *       *       *

1 Addison (Joseph). The works. With Notes by Richard Hurd, D.D.
    A New Edition. Illustrated with fine engravings. Newly and
    handsomely bound in 3/4 maroon calf, full gilt backs, linen
    sides, 6 volumes, London, Henry G. Bohn, 1854. =$21.00=

    Fine clean set in a handsome binding.


2 Ainsworth (William Harrison). Historical Romances.
    Illustrated with numerous exquisite etchings in two states,
    remarque proofs, and portraits on India paper. 20 vols., 8vo.
    New red buckram, Japan vellum labels, entirely uncut. Phila.,
    Barrie & Sons. UNEXPURGATED EDITION. Printed for subscribers
    only.

    Published at $300. =$100.00=

    First State, Library Edition, limited to 1,000 sets only,
    printed entirely on Japanese vellum paper. The handsomest
    edition of Ainsworth's writings issued.


3 Aldus Classics. Consisting of:--The Works of Francis
    Rabelais, translated from the French by Sir Thomas Urquhart and
    Motteux, 2 vols.; The Decameron, or The Ten Days' Entertainment
    of Boccaccio, completely done into English Prose and Verse by
    John Payne, 2 vols.; The Heptameron of the Tales of Margaret,
    Queen of Navarre, translated from the Authentic Text, with
    an essay upon the Heptameron, by George Saintsbury, M.A., 2
    vols.; The Novellino of Masuccio, translated into English
    by W. G. Waters, 2 vols.; The Confessions of Jean Jacques
    Rousseau, completely translated into English, 2 vols.; The
    Tales and Novels of J. De La Fontaine, completely translated
    into English, 2 vols.; Limited Edition de Luxe, large paper,
    wide margins, splendidly printed, exquisitely illustrated with
    photogravures on Japanese vellum. In all 12 volumes, handsome
    3/4 morocco, top edges gilt, uncut. Privately printed for
    Members of the Aldus Society, London, 1903.

    Published at $150.00. =$75.00=


4 Another Copy of the same edition, bound in dark green
    buckram, Japanese vellum labels, gilt tops, uncut edges. 12
    volumes. Privately printed for Members of the Aldus Society.
    London, 1903.

    Published at $75.00. =$45.00=


5 Amatory. Kisses: A Poetical Translation of the Basia of
    Joannes Secundus Nicolaius. With the original Latin, and an
    Essay on his Life and Writings. Finely engraved frontispiece.
    The Second Edition, with additions. Post 8vo., old polished
    calf. London, 1778. =$7.50=

    This translation throughout is confronted with the original
    Latin, the preservation of which, as every Edition of SECUNDUS
    is now become extremely scarce. Very fine copy.


6 Amatory (Aphrodite). Done into English from the French
    of Pierre Louys. Printed from bold type on a high grade
    antique-laid paper, and beautifully bound, with parchment back
    stamped in gold, and Fabriano sides. Gilt top, raw edge and
    tail. Notes and index are in the back of the book. Absolutely
    unexpurgated version. Beautiful frontispiece on Japanese
    vellum, and five head pieces. Decorative initial in the opening
    of each chapter. Privately printed for subscribers only.
    =$15.00=

    Edition limited to 550 numbered copies only.

    The feminine personage who occupies the principal place in
    this romance whose pages you are about to turn, is an antique
    courtesan, but be reassured, she will not convert herself.

    She will be loved neither by a monk, a prophet or a God. In
    actual literature, this is an originality.

    Rather she will be frankly a courtesan, the ardor and also the
    pride of every human being who has vocation and who holds in
    society a freely chosen place; she will have ambition to raise
    herself to the highest point; she will not even imagine a need
    for excuse or mystery in her life.


7 Amatory. Beaux Art Classics. The most noted love stories
    in French and English literature. Edited by Anatole France,
    Jules and Leo Claretie, Luxembourg Edition de Luxe. Comprising
    Longu's Daphnois and Chloe, Bourget's Pastels', Gautier's Jean
    and Jeanette and King Candoule, Musset's Last Abbe and The
    Mouche, Flaubert's, A Simple Heart and Herodias, Shakespeare's
    Anthony and Cleopatra and Romeo and Juliet. Each exquisitely
    illustrated with etchings by Lalauze and other famous French
    artists. 8 volumes, 8vo. Red buckram, gilt tops and backs.
    Printed in Paris (English text) by Societe des Beaux Arts.
    =$27.50=

    An unusually fine printed set.


8 Amatory. Dialogues of the Hetaerai. By Lucian of Samosata.
    In English. Translated by M. S. Buck. A series of fifteen
    incidents, familiar to the life of Greek courtesans, told in
    the dialogue form of which Lucian was so thoroughly the master.
    Printed from type on a high-grade antique-laid paper, and bound
    in half parchment, stamped in gold, Fabriano sides. Gilt top,
    uncut. Privately printed for subscribers only. =$5.00=

    Only 600 numbered copies.

    These dialogues are usually omitted from the published
    translations of Lucian's works. They are here printed in a
    literal translation absolutely without cuts.


9 Amatory. Lost Valentines Found, with Other Trifles in Rhyme.
    16mo., contemporary sprinkled calf, gilt back. London, 1821.
    Scarce. =$5.00=

    Oh: joy of my bosom, delight of my heart, Gay blooming
    Marchioness! thou shalt be mine--All buxom--all witching--all
    round as thou art--Thou were formed, my love! for thy own
    Valentine.


10 Amatory. Aucassin & Nicolete. Done into English by Andrew
    Lang. Post 8vo., new half calf, gilt top and back, uncut.
    London, 1896. =$5.00=

    Limited number of copies only printed. What the nameless author
    does care for, is his telling of the love story, the passion
    of Aucassin and Nicolete. His originality lies in his charming
    medley of sentiment and humor, of a smiling compassion and
    sympathy with a touch of mocking mirth. The Love of Aucassin
    and Nicolete.


11 Amatory. The Greek Anthology. (Palatine MS.) The Amatory
    Epigrams. Completely rendered into English for the first time.
    UNEXPURGATED. Small 4to. original boards, leather back, uncut.
    Privately printed, 1916. =$3.75=

    Of this edition, intended for private circulation only, is
    limited to 750 numbered copies.

    An 8-page Appendix has been added, separately printed and laid
    in, and not in previous copies, having been suppressed.


12 Amatory. The Works of Peter Pindar. Engraved titles. 5
    vols., 8vo., half tree calf, marbled board sides, leather
    labels. London, 1794-1801. =$22.50=

    Originally issued in 3 volumes, but the scarce 4th and 5th
    volumes have been added to this set, uniformly bound.

    Volume 5 contains: Nil Admirari; or, A Smile of a Bishop,
    occasioned by an Hyperbolical Eulogy on Miss Hannah More;
    Expostulation; or an address to Miss Hannah More; Duplicity,
    or The Bishop, and Simplicity, or the Curate; Julia, or The
    Victim of Love, Etc., Etc. A fine work on early English Amatory
    writings.


13 Amatory. Illustrious Dames of the Court of the Valois
    Kings. By Pierre de Bourdeille, and C. A. Saint-Beuve.
    Literally translated by Katharine P. Wormeley. With 8 full-page
    photogravure plates. 8vo. cloth, gilt top, uncut. N. Y. (London
    printed), 1912. =$3.00=

    The present issue, complete in every respect, with all the
    illustrations of the costly original edition, is now published
    to meet the demand for a less expensive form of this realistic
    and intimate chronicle of the illustrious women of the most
    luxurious European court at the most brilliant epoch of its
    existence.


14 Amatory. Ephemera. Greek Prose Poems. By Mitchell S. Buck.
    8vo. boards, vellum backs, uncut. Philadelphia, 1916. =$2.25=

    Edition limited to 750 copies printed entirely on Japan paper.
    The two series of antique sketches contained in this volume
    show the art of rhythmic prose, so successfully used in French
    by such writers as Baudelaire and Pierre Louys, presented
    directly in the English language.

    A keen perception of beauty has not distorted a necessary
    faithfulness to subject-matter; and those who still admire the
    flowers of past ages will find them here, still fragrant.


15 Amatory. Longinus on the Sublime. Translated into English by
    H. L. Havell. With a 12-page introduction by Andrew Lang. Post
    8vo. original cloth, uncut. London, 1890 Scarce. =$5.00=

    First Edition, in regard to Andrew Lang's Introduction. Scarce.
    Lang item.


16 Amatory. The Thousand and One Days. Persian Tales. Edited
    by Justin Huntley McCarthy. Frontispiece. 2 vols. Post 8vo.
    original boards, vellum backs, uncut. London, 1892. =$5.00=

    If the Thousand and One Days are not such splendid stories as
    The Thousand and One Nights, what stories in the world are so
    splendid? We may love the (The Thousand and One Nights) with
    all our hearts, and yet be willing to welcome The Thousand and
    One Days for the sake of that enchanted and enchanting Orient
    of which they tell.


17 Amatory. For a Night. By Emile Zola. Translated by Alison M.
    Lederer. 8vo. cloth. Phila., 1911. =$1.00=

    The imaginative realism, the poetic psychology, of this
    story of the abnormal Therese who kills her lover; of the
    simple-minded Julien who becomes an accessory after the act for
    love of her, and finally "let himself fall" into the river,
    having first dropped the body of Colombel over, are gripping
    and intense.

    This volume contains two other typical Zola stories: The Maid
    of the Dawber and Complements--two delightful, crisp bits of
    literature.


18 Amatory. The Diary and Letters of Madame D'Arblay (Frances
    Burney.) With Notes by W. C. Ward. Engraved frontispieces. 3
    vols., post 8vo. 1/2 red levant morocco, raised bands, gilt
    tops. London, 1890. =$15.00=

    The cream of the diarists and memoir writers.

    Privately printed Vizetelly edition. Scarce. Regarded as a
    series of pictures of the society of the time, the Diary is
    unsurpassed for vivid coloring and truthful delineation.


19 Amatory. (Hugo, Victor). SELECTED POEMS. Illustrated. 3
    vols., 8vo. 3/4 crushed blue levant morocco, extra, gilt
    paneled backs with raised bands, gilt tops, uncut. Phila.,
    1897. =$22.50=

    A limited edition printed entirely on Japanese vellum, with the
    illustrations in two states--one on Japan vellum, and the other
    on China paper. A magnificent set in a handsome binding.

    The beautiful illustrations include the following: Boaz
    Slumbering, The Sylph, Soul-Stress, The Feast of Freedom, The
    Ballad of the Nun, The Fay and the Peri, Oh, When I Sleep, To
    His Muse, Marriage and Feasts, Last Night, Etc., Etc.


20 Amatory. Sonnets from the Patagonian. 8vo. boards, uncut.
    Phila., 1918. =$2.00=

    Limited to 750 copies printed on Italian hand-made paper. This
    volume when it first appeared was not liked by divers nice
    people--it was thought nasty--but none put it down till he had
    finished it, a terror was on him lest he miss a word. And the
    terror was the sword of Beauty which slayeth all.


21 Amatory. The Grove; or, a Collection of Original Poems.
    Translation by W. Walsh, Dr. J. Donne, Mr. Dryden, Mr. Hall,
    The Cady E---- M----; Mr. Butler, Sir John Suckling, and other
    eminent hands. 8vo. contemporary blind tooled paneled calf,
    (neatly rebacked.) London, 1721. Curious old work. =$7.50=

    The list of subscribers includes the names of several ladies,
    and some clergymen, but some of the pieces are decidedly unfit
    for either women or the clergy.


22 Amatory. Two Deaths in the Bronx. By Donald Evans. 8vo.
    boards, antique wove paper. Philadelphia, 1918. =$1.50=

    The modernism, mistakenly called Futurism, that in the Sonnets
    from the Patagonian sometimes merely amazed, in the present
    instance, stimulates and satisfies. The volume is a series of
    pitiless photographs of profligate men and women who fritter
    away life, seeking new pleasures, new sensations. It is a
    gallery of incurable poseurs. A curious little volume.


22A Amatory. The Bohemians of the Latin Quarter. (Scenes de la
    Vie de Boheme.) By Henri Murger. A literal translation into
    English. UNEXPURGATED EDITION. With portrait and several very
    fine etchings printed on Japan vellum. 8vo. original buckram,
    uncut. Societe des Beaux-Arts. Paris, London and New York,
    1915. =$2.25=

    Most delightful reading of Paris' most famous art centre (The
    Latin Quarter).


23 Amatory. Plays and Sonnets. By Ernest Lacy. 2 vols. Printed
    on hand-made paper and illustrated with 7 etchings. 12mo.
    cloth, uncut. Phila., 1916. =$3.50=

    Volume I, The Bard of Mary Redcliffe, a play in 5 acts.
    Vol. II, Rinaldo, the Doctor of Florence, a play in 5 acts.
    Chatterton, a 1-act play. Sonnets.

    These three plays and sixty-odd sonnets are written with
    lucidity and emotion. A human heart throbs through them. The
    sonnets have evoked a fine critical eulogy from the greatest
    student of the Elizabethan sonnets (including Shakespeare's).


23A Amatory. The Lady with the Camellias. By Alexander Dumas,
    fils. UNEXPURGATED EDITION. With portrait and several fine
    etchings by Albert Lynch, printed on Japan vellum. 8vo.
    buckram, gilt tops, uncut. Societe des Beaux-Arts. Paris,
    London and New York, 1915. =$2.25=

    A literal translation of Dumas' charming story of a most
    handsome woman, courted by royalty itself, but at last met the
    fate of so many others of her class.


24 Amatory. Original Poems. Serious and Humourous. By Henry
    Baker. Post 8vo. half calf, board sides. London. Printed for
    the Author, 1725. =$5.00=

    First Edition Scarce.

    Contents: Kitty's Dream, The Beauties of Enfield, A Proof of
    Love, The Execration, The Rapture, Amanda's Character, Etc.


24A Amatory. Madame Bovary. By Gustave Flaubert. UNEXPURGATED
    EDITION. With portrait and several fine etchings by Faurie,
    printed on Japan vellum. 8vo. buckram, gilt top, uncut. Societe
    des Beaux-Arts, Paris, London and New York, 1915. =$2.25=

    Madame Bovary is a most fascinating story of a woman of culture
    and refinement, but ultimately followed the course of so many
    others.


25 Amatory. Secret Memoirs of Louise, Crown Princess, The
    Court of Royal Saxony, 1891-1902. From the pages of her
    diary, lost at the time of her elopement from Dresden with W.
    Andre ("Richard") Giron. By Henry W. Fisher. Illustrated from
    photogravures, 1/2 vellum, board sides, gilt top and back, as
    issued. N. Y., 1912. =$5.00=

    This edition printed on Japanese vellum paper, is limited to
    250 copies only. UNEXPURGATED.

    If Louise had lived at the time of Phryne, the philosophers
    would have characterized her as "an animal with long hair,"
    if he had known her, the great Mirabean might have coined his
    pet phrase, "a human that dresses, undressed and talks" (or
    writes) for Louise; as a matter of fact, she is one of those
    "Jansenists" of love who believe in the utter helplessness of
    natural woman to turn down a good-looking man.


26 Another Copy of the same edition, printed upon a beautiful
    laid deckle-edge paper. UNEXPURGATED. Cloth, 8vo. gilt tops,
    New York, 1912. =$3.00=


27 Amatory. The Works of Tibullus, containing his Four Books
    of Love--Elegies. Translated by Mr. Dart. To which is prefix'd
    the Life of the Author. Also, Some Observations on the Original
    Design of Elegiac Verse; with Characters of the most Celebrated
    Greek, Latin and English Elegiac Poets. Finely engraved
    frontispiece, and several head-and-tail pieces. Post 8vo. new
    1/2 polished brown calf extra, gilt tooled backs, with green
    levant labels, gilt top. London, 1720. =$12.50=

    The works of Ovid having been some time translated, and met
    with so favorable a reception, the translator thought it would
    not be disagreeable to introduce a polite contemporary of his,
    in our language, one whom Ovid himself imitated, and for whom
    he had so great a value that he recommends his pupils in Art of
    Love, to read his works, and gather from them all the tender
    sentiments expressed of the tenderest of passions.




    ANTHROPOLOGICAL WORKS SOLD ONLY TO DOCTORS, LAWYERS, AND
    EDUCATORS.


28 Anthropology. (Davenport, John). Curiositates Eroticae
    Physiologiae, or, Tabooed subjects freely treated. Six Essays,
    vis.: Generation; Chastity and Modesty; Marriage; Circumcision;
    Eunuchism; Hermaphrodism, and followed by a closing essay
    on Death. Small 4to. 1/2 morocco, gilt top, uncut. London:
    Privately printed, 1875. =$15.00=

    Let it not be supposed that the author's intention has been
    that of writing an obscene book, or even to employ obscene
    words. He holds that the grand subject--the Reproduction of
    the Human Race--which runs more or less through all the essays
    in this volume, is, in itself, most pure, and that the words
    which are necessary, adequately, and correctly to describe
    it in its various phases and ramifications, have acquired
    the stigma of obscene only in modern times, and, though an
    ultra-fastidiousness, which would hesitate to apply the word
    breech to a man's small clothes, but would rather designate
    them as unmentionables, indescribables, or femoral habiliments.


29 Anthropology. Aphrodisiacs and Anti-aphrodisiacs: Three
    Essays on the Powers of Reproduction; with some account of
    the Judicial "Congress" as practised in France during the
    Seventeenth Century. By John Davenport. Illustrated. Small 4to.
    1/2 levant morocco extra, gilt tooled back, gilt top, uncut.
    London. Privately printed, 1869. =$15.00=

    The reproduction powers of nature were regarded by the nations
    of remote antiquity with an awe and reverence so great as to
    form an object of worship, under a symbol, of all others the
    most significant--the Phallus; and this was founded a religion,
    of which the traces exist to this day, not in Asia alone, but
    even in Europe itself.


30 Anthropology. Psychopathia Sexualis. With especial reference
    to the Antipathic Sexual Instinct. A Medico-Forensic Study. By
    Dr. R. V. Krafft-Ebing. Translated from the German by F. J.
    Rebman. 8vo. buckram. New York, 1910. =$3.50=

    Few people are conscious of the deep influence exerted in
    sexual life upon the sentiment, thought and action of man in
    his social relations to others. Shiller, in his essay, Die
    Weltweisen, touches upon this subject in these memorable words:
    "So long as philosophy keeps together the structure of the
    Universe so long does it maintain the world's machinery of
    hunger and love."


31 Anthropology. A Problem in Modern Ethics. Being an Inquiry
    into the Phenomenon of Sexual Inversion. Addressed especially
    to Medical Psychologists and Jurists. By John Addington
    Symonds. 8vo. cloth. London, privately printed, 1896. =$3.50=

    Limited to 100 numbered copies only.

    Inverted sexuality, the sexual instinct diverted from its
    normal channel, directed (in the case males) to males, forms
    the topic of this volume. The study will be confined to modern
    times, and to those nations which regard the phenomenon with
    religious detestation.


32 Anthropology. A Problem in Greek Ethics. Being an Inquiry
    into the Phenomenon of Sexual Inversion. Addressed especially
    to Medical Psychologists and Jurists. By John Addington
    Symonds. 8vo. cloth. London, privately printed, 1901. =$3.50=

    Limited to 100 numbered copies only.

    For the student of sexual inversion, ancient Greece offers a
    wide field for observation and reflection. Its importance has
    hitherto been underrated by medical and legal writers on the
    subject, who do not seem to be aware that here alone in history
    have we the example of a great and highly-developed race not
    only tolerating homosexual passions, but deeming them of
    spiritual value, and attempting to utilize them for the benefit
    of society.


33 Anthropology. The Sexual Life of Woman, in its Physiological
    and Hygienic Aspect. By E. H. Kisch. Post 8vo. cloth. New York,
    1916. =$3.00=

    From the earliest days of the medical art this sexual life
    of woman has aroused in the leaders of medical thought the
    highest interest, and for this reason great attention has
    been directed, not only to the anatomy of the genital organs
    and to the diseases of the reproductive system, but also to
    the individual manifestations of sexual activity and to the
    influence exercised by these on the female organism as a whole.


34 Anthropology. The Sexual Question. A Scientific,
    Psychological, Hygienic and Sociological Study. By August
    Forel. English adaptation, revised and enlarged, by C. F.
    Marshall. Illustrated. 8vo. cloth. New York, n. d. =$3.50=

    In the domain with which we are concerned the French public are
    too much afraid of crudities and of calling things by their
    proper name. By veiled words and by indirect locution one
    may say anything, but the author decided not to employ such
    subterfuges in treating of such a vital social question with
    the seriousness it requires.


35 Anthropology. Histoire de la Prostitution, chez tous les
    peuples du monde. Depuis l'antiquite la plus reculee jusqu'a
    nos jours. Par Pierre Dufour. 6 vols. 8vo. 1/2 green morocco,
    gilt tops, uncut. Paris, 1851. =$50.00=

    This edition contains many engraved plates finely printed on
    India paper, which were omitted from subsequent issues on
    account of their free interpretation.

    This is about the most extensive work on prostitution, no phase
    of the subject having been omitted.


36 Anthropology. The History of Prostitution. Its Extent,
    Causes and Effects Throughout the World. By William W. Sanger.
    With numerous Editorial Notes and an Appendix. 8vo. cloth. New
    York, 1913. =$3.50=

    A vice which has been co-existent with the human race, which
    has prayed upon the morals as well as the health of all
    peoples in all ages, which in the past has defied the edicts
    of despotism no less than at present it defies the mandates of
    repressive legislation--such a vice should not in any spirit of
    prudery be put aside as unfit for public consideration.


37 Sex Worship. The Masculine Cross and Ancient Sex Worship, by
    Sha Rocco. Traces of Ancient Myths in Religions of To-day. A
    Compendium of Sex Worship based on standard, rare and expensive
    works. Long out of print. With 26 curious illustrations. 12mo.
    cloth. New York. =$1.00=


38 Flagellation. History of Flagellation among different
    nations. A narrative of the strange customs and cruelties of
    the Romans, Greeks, Egyptians, etc., with an account of its
    practice among the Early Christians, as a religious stimulant
    and corrector of morals. Many illustrations. 8vo. cloth. New
    York, 1903. =$1.50=

    Contains anecdotes of Remarkable Cases of Flogging, and of
    Celebrated Flagellants. A most curious work on the subject.


39 Flagellation. The Rodiad. By George Coleman. 18mo. original
    red boards, leather backs (new.) London, 1810 (reprinted.)
    Scarce. =$3.00=


40 Antique Gems from the Greek and Latin, with original Text
    and Translations. Embracing ANACREON, APULEIUS, APOLLONIUS of
    RHODES, CATULLUS, HORACE, LONGUS, LUCIAN, LUCIUS, MUSAEUS,
    OVID, PROPERTIUS, SAPPHO, TATIUS, THEOCRITUS, and VIRGIL.
    Translated into English by eminent scholar-poets, beginning
    with Sir Philip Sydney and including Marlow, Dryden, and
    Milton, among earlier writers, and Andrew Lang of the present
    day. Text is specially printed on Imperial Japanese vellum.
    With over two hundred beautiful illustrations. Limited edition
    de luxe, 12 volumes, top edges gilt. Printed for subscribers
    only. Philadelphia: George Barrie & Sons.

    Published at $180.00. =$60.00=


41 Arabian Nights. Burton (Sir R. F.). Unexpurgated Edition.
    A Plain and Literal Translation of the Arabian Nights'
    Entertainments, now entitled, The Book of the Thousand Nights
    and a Night, with introductions, explanatory notes on the
    Manners and Customs of Moslem Men, and a Terminal Essay upon
    the History of the Nights, by Richard F. Burton, 10 vols.;
    together with the Supplemental Nights to the Book of the
    Thousand Nights and a Night, with notes, Anthropological and
    Explanatory, by Richard F. Burton, 7 vols.; enlarged by the
    addition of all the characteristic illustrations by Lalauze,
    Letchford, Stanley Wood, and others. 17 volumes, Imp. 8vo. gray
    buckram, top edges gilt, uncut. Privately printed for members
    of The Burton Club only. Limited to 1,000 sets. Original cost
    to members $170.00. =$39.50=

    This edition is the very scarce unexpurgated reprint of the
    Benares edition, (which is at present extremely rare) with the
    numerous plates on Japan vellum, which never appeared in the
    first issue.

    A fine set in a substantial binding.


42 Arabian Nights. Burton (Sir R. F.). Unexpurgated Edition.
    With all the characteristic illustrations by Lalauze,
    Letchford, Stanley Wood, and others. 17 vols., Imp. 8vo.; newly
    and very handsomely bound in 3/4 dark green morocco, gilt
    tooled backs with Crescent inlays, gilt tops, uncut edges.
    Privately printed for members of the Burton Club only. Edition
    limited to 1,000 sets.

    Published at $250.00. =$95.00=


43 Arabian Nights. Payne (John). Unexpurgated Edition. The Book
    of the Thousand Nights and One Night, now first completely done
    into English Prose and Verse, from the original Arabic, by John
    Payne, 9 vols.; The Tales from the Arabic; 3 vols.; Persian
    Letters; Aladdin and the Enchanted Lamp, and other stories;
    A Thousand and One Quarters of an Hour; Tartarian Tales ...
    Altogether 15 volumes. Limited Edition de luxe, handsome 3/4
    red morocco, top edges gilt, gilt backs, uncut. Printed for
    subscribers only. London: 1884. Published at $150.00. =$57.50=


44 Arabian Nights. Payne (John). Unexpurgated Edition de luxe,
    limited to one thousand copies, 15 volumes, buckram, London:
    Privately printed for subscribers, 1884. Bindings worn,
    otherwise in good condition. =$20.00=


45 Burton (Richard F.). Translator of the Arabian Nights. Final
    Writings of, consisting of: Personal Narrative of a Pilgrimage
    to Al-Madinah and Meccah, 2 vols.; A Mission to Gelele, King
    of Dahome, with Notices of the so-called "Amazons," The Grand
    Customs, The Yearly Customs, The Human Sacrifices, The Present
    State of the Slave Trade, The Negro's Place in Nature, 2 vols.;
    First Footsteps in East Africa; or, An Exploration of Harar,
    2 vols.; Vikram and the Vampire or, Tales of Hindu Deviltry.
    In all 7 volumes. Newly and uniformly bound in a handsome 3/4
    levant morocco, buckram sides, with original cloth covers bound
    in, gilt extra, gilt tops. London: Tylston & Edwards, 11893-4.
    Exceptionally fine set. =$75.00=

    These writings are most essential to the possessor of the
    "Arabian Nights," as they are virtually a continuation of the
    author's many travels and studies in Orientalism.


46 Boccaccio's Decameron. Translated from the Italian into
    English. By John Payne. With 11 original etchings by Leopold
    Flameng. Unexpurgated Edition. 8vo.; new 3/4 red morocco, gilt
    top and back, 2 vols. bound in one. Privately printed. =$5.00=


46A Another Copy of the same edition. Bound in original red
    cloth, white paper label. =$2.25=


47 Bibliophilist's Library of Immortal Literature. Illustrated
    with etchings in two states--i. e., one set on hand-made
    paper, the other being a set of remarque proofs finely printed
    on Whatman paper. 10 vols. 8vo.; 3/4 crushed maroon morocco
    extra, elaborately gilt tooled backs with blue levant inlays,
    raised bands in gilt, gilt tops, uncut. Privately printed for
    subscribers only. =$100.00=

    A limited numbered edition printed on Holland hand-made paper,
    water-marked especially for this unique issue.

    The following titles comprise the work in its entirety: The
    Heptameron; Decameron of Boccaccio, Rabelais, Confessions of
    Rousseau, and Persian Letters, each title in two volumes.

    The best edition of these remarkable classics ever written, and
    with the complete series of these remarkable illustrations,
    omitted from most issues.


48 Casanova (Jacques). The Memoirs of. Written by himself, now
    for the first time translated into English. 12 vols., 12mo. New
    3/4 maroon morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt tops, uncut.
    Privately printed, 1894. =$250.00=

    An exceptionally fine and perfect copy in a most handsome
    binding. Seldom found in such pristine condition.

    A series of adventures wilder and more fantastic than the
    wildest of romances.

    These memoirs are almost impossible to obtain.


49 Casanova (Jacques). Memoirs de J. Casanova de Seingalt.
    Ecrits par lui-meme. Nouvelle Edition. With numerous quaint
    text illustrations by De Maillard. 8 vols.; 1/2 polished calf,
    gilt back with leather labels, marbled edges. Paris: 1910.
    =$35.00=

    A choice French edition of these intensely interesting memoirs.


50 Droll Stories. Balzac (H. de). Collected from the Abbeys of
    Touraine. Unexpurgated Edition. With curious illustrations by
    Dore. New 3/4 red morocco, gilt top and back. 2 volumes bound
    in one. Privately printed. =$5.00=


51 Another Copy of the same edition. Bound in original red
    cloth, white paper label. =$2.25=


52 Austen (Jane). Complete Novels of. Comprising: Sense and
    Sensibility, 2 vols.; Emma, 2 vols.; Pride and Prejudice, 2
    vols.; Mansfield Park, 2 vols.; Northanger Abbey, 1 vol.;
    Persuasion, 1 vol. Edited by R. Brinley Johnson. Finely
    illustrated in colors by C. E. & H. M. Brock. Together 10
    vols.; 12mo. New 3/4 blue morocco extra, floreated gilt backs
    with red levant inlays, gilt tops, uncut. London: Dent, 1898.
    =$40.00=

    The neatest and daintiest set of this well known author's
    novels issued.


53 Birds of America. From drawings made in the United States
    and their Territories, by John James Audubon. With numerous
    full-page illustrations finely printed in colors true to
    nature. 8 vols. Small 4to. new 3/4 crushed blue morocco extra,
    emblematic gilt tooled backs, gilt tops, uncut. New York:
    George R. Lockwood & Son, 1870. =$50.00=


54 Browning (Robert). Complete Works of. Edited by Charlotte
    Porter and Helen A. Clarke. With many quaint illustrations in
    two states--i. e., one on Japan vellum, the other on India
    paper. 12 vols. 8vo.; new 3/4 dark green levant morocco extra,
    floreated gilt backs with red levant inlays, gilt raised bands,
    gilt tops, uncut. New York: George D. Sproul, 1899. Published
    at $240.00. =$80.00=

    Connoisseurs' Edition limited to only 45 numbered sets with
    double set of plates with title pages printed on Japan vellum,
    for subscribers only.

    Contains a complete bibliography of all the writings of
    Browning.


55 Browning (Mrs. Elizabeth B.). Complete Works. Edited
    by Charlotte Porter and Helen A. Clarke. With many quaint
    illustrations in two states--i. e., one on Japan vellum, the
    other on India paper. 6 vols. 8vo.; new 3/4 crushed blue levant
    morocco extra, gilt backs with raised bands, gilt tops, uncut.
    New York: George D. Sproul, 1901.

    Published at $120.00. =$40.00=

    Connoisseurs' Edition, limited to only 45 numbered sets with
    double set of plates with title pages printed on Japan vellum,
    for subscribers only.

    Contains a Chronological Bibliography. This unique edition is
    autographed by the editors.


56 Beaconsfield (Earl). Benjamin Disraeli. Complete Works.
    Illustrated with numerous finely executed photogravures printed
    on Japan vellum, and exquisite hand-colored frontispieces. 20
    vols. 8vo.; 3/4 maroon morocco extra, elaborately gilt tooled
    back, gilt tops, uncut. New York and London. =$97.50=

    The finely printed Chancellor's Edition, of which only a
    limited number of sets have been issued to subscribers only.

    This Edition embraces Novels, Romances, Plays, Poems,
    Biography, Short Stories, and Great Speeches, with a Critical
    Introduction by Edmund Gosse, and a Biographical Preface by
    Robert Arnot.


57 Balzac (Honore de). Unexpurgated Royal Edition de Luxe.
    Edited by Prof. Saintsbury and staff. Splendidly printed.
    Comprises one hundred and fifty full-page plates, some of which
    are colored by hand from three sources; the best etchings of
    the famous English Edition; redrawings of well-known subjects
    in the best French Edition, and many original subjects made
    by distinguished American Artists, supplemented with two most
    satisfactory portraits of Balzac and the latest portrait of
    Prof. Saintsbury. The important additions to this set are: Five
    stories which are omitted from all other English Editions,
    The Dramas, a Repertory, also The Droll Stories. Handsome 3/4
    morocco, top edges gilt, richly gilt backs, uncut. 37 volumes.
    Published at $180.00. =$45.00=

    Limited to 1,250 copies.

    The best and most complete set of Balzac's works produced.


58 Balzac (Honore de). Unexpurgated Royal Edition de Luxe. Same
    as above, Dark green buckram, Japanese vellum labels, top edges
    gilt, uncut, 37 volumes.

    Published at $112.00. =$35.00=


58A Bentzon (Th.). Jacqueline. Translated by Mrs. Elizabeth
    Wormeley Latimer. With many exquisite photogravures by Goupil,
    after designs by Albert Lynch, of which the full-page plates
    are finely printed on India paper. 4to. 3/4 red levant morocco,
    heavy raised bands, gilt top, uncut. New York. (Paris printed),
    Boussod, Valadon & Co. (1893).

    Published at $25.00. =$7.50=

    One of the exquisite Goupil publications known for their fine
    printing, and their unsurpassed reproductions of illustrations
    in photogravure.

    An exceptionally fine copy in a new and handsome binding.


59 Bulwer-Lytton (Edward Lord). Complete Works. Illustrated
    with numerous full-page photogravures on Japan vellum, and
    remarque proof frontispiece etchings. 32 vols. New 3/4 polished
    levant morocco extra gilt bands with raised bands, gilt tops,
    uncut. Boston: Dana, Estes & Co.

    Published at $320.00. =$120.00=

    Warwick Edition, of which only a limited number of sets were
    issued for subscribers only.

    This is the finest set of Bulwer issued, printed in large type
    on hand-made paper, and bound in the best French leather.


60 Another Copy of the same edition. Bound in maroon buckram.
    Japan vellum labels, gilt tops, uncut. 32 vols.

    Published at $112.00. =$65.00=


61 Byron (Lord). Complete Works, with his Letters and Journals,
    and Memoirs of his Life, by T. Moore. Illustrated with a fine
    portrait, and exquisitely engraved vignette frontispieces and
    title-pages, by Finden, after drawings by Turner, Clarkson,
    Stanfield and others. 17 vols., new 3/4 morocco extra, gilt
    tooled backs, gilt tops. London: Murray, 1832-33. =$65.00=

    "The handiest, pleasantest and altogether the most
    distinguished edition of Byron the world has yet seen. The
    decorative and illustrative frontispiece and vignette titles
    were engraved after Turner, Stanfield and others at a time when
    English line engraving was at its best."--Athenaeum.


62 Byron (Lord). Complete Works, with his Letters and Journals,
    and his Life, by Thomas Moore. Edited and with an Introduction
    by Richard Henry Stoddard. With many beautiful illustrations,
    some hand-colored. 16 vols., new 3/4 dark green morocco extra,
    with levant inlays, Imperial silk sides, gilt tops and backs.
    Boston: Francis Nicolls, 1900.

    Published at $160.00. =$65.00=

    The well printed Newstead Edition, of which only a limited
    number of sets were issued for subscribers only.


63 Byron (Lord) The Works of. Unexpurgated Edition. Finely
    engraved portrait and frontispieces by Finden. 4 vols., 16mo.
    New 1/2 polished light brown calf extra, gilt tooled backs,
    with brown and blue levant labels, gilt tops, uncut. London:
    Murray, 1829. =$20.00=

    An exceptionally fine set of an early edition, containing all
    the suppressed passages omitted from later issues.


64 Another Set. With the vignette engraved frontispieces and
    titles by Finden, and EXTRA-ILLUSTRATED by the insertion of
    18 steel plates by Westall; 29 woodcuts by Cruikshank, and 39
    exquisite steel plates finely colored by hand. 17 vols., newly
    bound in 3/4 dark green morocco extra, elaborately gilt tooled
    backs, gilt tops by Morrell. London: Murray, 1833-34. =$150.00=

    Most assuredly one of the finest Extra-Illustrated sets.


65 Butler (Samuel). Hudibras: with Notes by Treadway Russel
    Nash. A new edition. With engraved portrait and views, and
    many vignette text illustrations. 2 vols., post 8vo. New 3/4
    polished wine colored calf extra, full gilt tooled backs, with
    green levant labels, gilt tops, uncut. London: 1847. =$12.50=

    Extra Illustrated by the insertion of 59 finely engraved
    portraits.

    Little or no apology need be offered to the public for
    presenting it with a new edition of Hudibras; the poem ranks
    too high in English literature not to be welcomed if it
    appear in a correct text, legible type, and on good paper.
    This edition has all those qualities, and besides is finely
    illustrated.


66 Boswell's Johnson. Life of Johnson. By James Boswell. Edited
    by Augustine Birrell. Portraits, 6 vols., 12mo., 1/2 crimson
    levant morocco extra, gilt tooled backs; gilt tops, uncut.
    Westminster, 1896. =$24.00=

    A neat little set.


67 Burke (Thomas). Nights in London. 8vo. cloth. New York.
    1916. =$1.50=


68 Book Repair and Restoration. A Manual of Practical
    Suggestions for Bibliophiles, including some selections
    translated from A. Bonnardot. By Mitchell S. Buck. 17
    illustrations. 12mo. cloth, paper label. Philadelphia: 1908.
    =$2.50=


69 Bryant (William Cullen). Thirty Poems. 12mo. original cloth.
    New York: 1864. =$3.50=

    First Edition. Exceptionally fine, clean copy.


70 Burnand (F. C). Happy Thought Hall. With numerous
    illustrations by the author. Sq. 12mo. original cloth. Boston:
    1872. =$2.50=

    First Edition. Scarce.


71 Bangs (John Kendrick). The Enchanted Typewriter.
    Illustrations by Peter Newell. 12mo. cloth. New York and
    London: 1899. =$1.50=

    First Edition.


72 Bangs (John Kendrick). The Dreamers, a Club. Being a more or
    less faithful account of the literary exercises of the First
    Regular Meeting of that Organization. Illustrated by Edward
    Penfield. 12mo. cloth. New York and London: 1899. =$1.50=

    First Edition.


73 Burns (Robert) Complete Works. With his life by Allen
    Cunningham. Illustrated with a fine portrait and exquisitely
    vignette engraved frontispieces and title pages. 8 vols. 12mo.
    full brown levant morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, inside gilt
    borders, solid gilt edges. London: Cochrane & M'Crone, 1834.
    =$35.00=

    A neat little edition in a handsome binding, uniform in size
    with the pretty editions, of Cowper, Boswell's Johnson,
    Crabbe's Poems, Byron, etc., with illustrations by the same
    engravers.


73A Burns (Robert) Poetical Works. Finely engraved vignette
    portrait. 3 vols. 12mo. full brown levant morocco, elaborately
    blind tooled sides and backs, solid gilt edges. London:
    Pickering, 1839. =$20.00=

    The scarce 3-volume Pickering Aldine Poets series, in a new and
    exquisite binding.

    The original issue of Burns had been issued in two volumes, but
    in this a third volume has been added, making it the complete
    poetical works of Burns.


74 Cervantes (Miguel de) Don Quixote de la Mancha. A
    Translation with Introduction and Notes by John Ormsby. With
    numerous fine full-page etchings by Cruikshank and Lalauze.
    4 vols. 8vo., new 3/4 morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt
    tops, uncut. New York: 1893. =$22.00=

    Edition limited to only 658 numbered copies. Exceptionally fine
    impressions of these beautiful etchings.


75 China. The Break-Up of China. With an Account of its Present
    Commerce, Currency, Waterways, Armies, Railways, Politics and
    Future Prospects. By Lord Charles Beresford. Portraits and
    maps. 8vo. cloth. New York and London: 1899. =$1.50=


76 Cruikshank's Illustrations of Popular Works. Part I. (all
    published) containing 6 clever etchings by Cruikshank, with
    the passages of letterpress illustrated. First Edition, Large
    Paper. Large 8vo. full polished, light blue calf extra, gilt
    tooled back with red leather label, inside gilt borders, by
    Zaehnsdorf. London; Published for the artist, (1830). =$12.50=

    For Burns collectors there is a very spirited etching to the
    short poem, "The Deil Cam' Fiddling Thro' the Town," while
    Knickerbocker's New York supplies two subjects.

    An exceptionally fine clean copy in a neat binding.


77 Colored Plates. The Tour of Doctor Syntax, in Search of
    the Picturesque. By William Combe. With 31 spirited full-page
    colored plates by Thomas Rowlandson. 8vo. original cloth.
    London: 1865. =$6.50=

    A fine copy of an early edition.


78 Caricature and Grotesque. A History of. In Literature
    and Art. By Thomas Wright. With numerous illustrations from
    various sources, drawn and engraved by F. W. Fairholt. Sq. 8vo.
    original cloth. London, n. d. =$3.00=

    Numerous curious plates.


79 California. The Natural Wealth of California. Comprising
    Early History, Geography, Topography and Scenery; Climate,
    Agriculture and Commercial Products; Geology, Zoology and
    Botany; Mineralogy, Mines and Mining Products, etc., etc. By
    Titus Fey Cronise. Illustrated. Imp. 8vo. cloth. San Francisco:
    1868. =$3.50=

    Exceptionally fine copy of this interesting history.


80 Criminal Trials. With an introduction by David Jardine. 2
    vols. 12mo. original cloth, uncut. London: 1832. =$5.00=

    An account of the most celebrated crimes in England.

    Contains: The Trials of Sir Walter Raleigh, Dr. Wm. Parry, Duke
    of Norfolk, etc., and Narrative of the Gunpowder Plot, etc.


81 Churchill (Charles) The Poetical Works of. With copious
    notes and a Life of the Author, by W. Tooke. 3 vols. 16mo., new
    3/4 dark green morocco extra, Imperial silk sides, gilt tops.
    Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1854. =$7.50=

    A very neat little set.


82 Classic and the Beautiful from the Literature of Three
    Thousand Years. By the authors and orators of All Countries.
    Edited by Henry Coppee. With numerous finely engraved full-page
    portraits and views. 6 vols. Small 4to. 1/2 dark red calf,
    marbled edges. Philadelphia: 1891. =$20.00=

    A very fine set with admirable impressions of the numerous most
    interesting plates.


83 Criminology. The Trial Between Mr. Henry Wright, and Mr.
    Braham, for Criminal Conversation with the Plaintiff's Wife, at
    the Court of Common-Pleas, Guildhall, before Sir Vicary Gibbs,
    and a Special Jury, on Tuesday, July 23, 1816. pp. 16, 8vo.
    boards, leather back, uncut. London, n. d. =$5.00=

    One of the most sensational trials of the period.


84 Criminology. The World's Famous Prisons, and Romance of
    Crime. An Account of the State of Prisons from the Earliest
    Times to the Present Day, with the History of Celebrated Cases,
    by Major Arthur Griffiths. Numerous full-page photogravure
    illustrations, printed in two states, i. e.--one set on Japan
    vellum, the other on Whatman paper, of which one set of the
    frontispieces are finely colored by hand. 12 vols. 8vo. New
    3/4 crushed green levant morocco extra, gilt paneled backs,
    with emblematic design inlaid in red levant, gilt tops, uncut.
    London: Grolier Society. Printed for subscribers only. =$65.00=

    Connoisseur Edition. Unexpurgated, limited to 150 registered
    and numbered sets only.

    There is no other work extant that covers the history of
    Prisons and their criminal inmates more extensively than these
    volumes do.

    Contents: England--Chronicles of Newgate, from the Eighteenth
    Century to its Demolition; A Sketch of the Tower, 2 vols.;
    Milbank Penitentiary, an Experiment in Reformation, 1 vol.;
    German and Austrian Prisons; Prisons of Prussia, Bavaria,
    Saxony and Austria-Hungary; The Fortresses of Magdeburg and
    Spielberg, 1 vol.; Oriental Prisons--Prisons and Crime in
    India; The Adaman Islands; Burmah, China, Japan, Egypt, Turkey,
    1 vol.; Modern French Prisons--Bicetre, St. Pelagie, St.
    Lazare, La Force, The Conciergerie, La Grande and La Petite
    Roguettes, Mazas, La Sante, 1 vol.; Russian Prisons--St. Peter
    and St. Paul, The Schlusselberg, The Ostrog at Omsk, The
    Story of Siberian Exile, Tiumen, Tomsk, Sachalien, 1 vol.;
    Spanish Prisons--The Inquisition at Home and Abroad; Prisons
    Past and Present, 1 vol.; Early Vincennes--The Bastile,
    Loches, The Galleys, Revolutionary Prisons, 1 vol.; Italian
    Prisons--St. Angelo, The Piombi, The Vicaria, Prisons of the
    Roman Inquisition, 1 vol.; Non-Criminal Prisons--English
    Debtors, Prisons and Prisoners of War, French War Prisons,
    with Reference to those of Other Lands, 1 vol.; Prisons Over
    Seas--Deportation and Colonization, British and American
    Prisons of To-day, 1 vol.


85 Another Edition of the same work. Edition Nationale, limited
    to 1,000 registered and numbered sets, 12 vols. 3/4 crushed
    brown morocco, gilt paneled backs with emblematic tooling, gilt
    tops, uncut. London: Grolier Society. Printed for subscribers
    only.

    Published at $90.00. =$45.00=


85A Criminology. Trials for Adultery; or, The History of
    Divorces. Being Selected Trials at Doctors Commons, for
    Adultery, Cruelty etc., etc., from the year 1760 to 1779-80.
    Together with the Letters, etc., that have been intercepted
    between the amorous Parties. 2 vols. 8vo. contemporary calf
    (broken.) London: Printed for S. Bladon, 1729-30. =$20.00=

    The scarce III and IV volumes of these celebrated crimes.

    Forming a History of the Private Life, Intrigues, and Amours of
    many Characters in the most elevated Sphere; every Scene and
    Transaction, however ridiculous, whimsical, or extraordinary,
    being fairly represented, as becomes a faithful Historian, who
    is fully determined not to sacrifice Truth at the shrine of
    Guilt and Folly.


85B Criminology. Argot and Slang. A new French and English
    Dictionary of the Cant Words, Quaint Expressions, Slang Terms
    and Flash Phrases, used in the High and Low Life of Old and
    New Paris. By A. Barrere. With a fine frontispiece etching
    by Godfroy Durand. Sq. 8vo. New 3/4 crushed morocco extra,
    full gilt back with raised bands, gilt tops, uncut. London:
    Privately printed, 1887. =$15.00=

    Very scarce, only a limited number of copies having been issued.

    The language of the dangerous classes, which so often savours
    of evil or bloody deeds, of human suffering, and also of
    the anguish and fears of the ever-tracked and ever-watchful
    criminal, though often disguised under a would-be humorous
    garb, cannot but be interesting to the philosopher.


86 Cowper (William) Poems. With a Biographical and Critical
    Introduction by Thomas Dale. With numerous quaint vignette
    engravings. 2 vols. Post 8vo. New 3/4 red morocco, gilt tooled
    backs, rippled silk sides, gilt tops, uncut. London: Tilt &
    Bogue, 1841. =$7.50=

    A well printed edition, prettily illustrated.


87 Curiosa. The Attis of Caius Volerius Catullus. Translated
    into English Verse, with Dissertations on the Myth of Attis,
    on the Origin of Tree-Worship, and on the Galliambic Metre, by
    Grant Allen. Royal 8vo. original half vellum, uncut. London:
    1892. =$7.50=

    One of only 50 numbered copies on Large Paper, signed by the
    publisher.

    The scarce Bibliotheque de Carabas edition.


87A Curiosa. Curll. Miscellaneous in Verse and Prose. [By
    Richardson Pack.] Post 8vo. contemporary calf, with armorial
    crest in gilt on sides (rubbed and back broken.) London:
    Printed for E. Curll, 1719. Very scarce. =$7.50=

    This volume contains some curious memoirs of Wycherley, and
    several translations from Ovid, which must have endeared the
    author to the disgraceful old publisher.


88 Curiosa. The Rest of Don Juan. Inscribed to the Shade of
    Byron. By Henry Morford. 8vo. half purple crushed levant
    morocco extra. Morris paper sides, yellow edges. New York:
    1846. =$5.00=

    Scarce First Edition, with the original covers bound in. Very
    fine copy.


88A Curiosa. The Royal, or Delicate Investigation into the
    Conduct of Her Royal Highness the Princess of Wales, before
    Lords Erskine, Spencer, Grenville, and Ellenborough, containing
    the Depositions of all the Evidences, Copies of the various
    Letters, Statements, Narratives, Reports, and Minutes of
    Council, etc., etc. Post 8vo. old sprinkled boards, leather
    back. London, 1813. =$5.00=

    A most notable and startling trial, which aroused the nobility
    of entire Europe.


89 Curiosa. Doctor Antonio. 16mo. half red morocco, gilt back
    (rubbed). Leipzig: 1861. =$3.00=

    Contains: Little Occupations; Bits of Information; Lucy's
    Scheme; Progress in the Sanctuary; The Idyl at a Close, etc.


89A Curiosa. The Genuine Poetical Works of Charles Cotton.
    Unexpurgated, containing--I. Scarronides; or, Virgil Travestie;
    II. Lucian Burlesqu'd; or, The Scoffer Scoff'd; III. The
    Wonders of the Peake. Illustrated with a number of curious
    copper-plate engravings. 12mo. half green calf (rubbed.)
    London, 1731. =$5.00=


90 Curiosa. Flim-Flams; or, the Life and Errors of Uncle and
    His Friends. With illustrations and obscurities by Messieurs
    Tag, Rag, and Bobtail. A Literary Romance. With curious
    copper-plate engravings. 3 vols. 12mo. original half leather,
    gilt, board sides. London: Murray, 1806. =$17.50=

    A new edition, with material alterations and additions.

    The illustrious author of Flim-Flams is no more! He died of
    vexation--and laughter! The ingenuity of his critics and his
    own, afforded him a plentiful source of both.

    The illustrations represent the following: "Baking a
    Wronghead," "My Uncle," "A Scale of Genius," "Virtue in
    Danger," "Lemons! Lemons!" "An Electrified Lover," "Greek
    Feeling," etc.


91 Curiosa. Bundling; its Origins, Progress and Decline in
    America. By Henry R. Stiles. Post 8vo. original cloth. Albany:
    1871. =$4.50=

    First Edition. Scarce.


92 Curiosa. Cent per Cent. A story, written upon a Bill Stamp.
    By Blanchard Jerrold. With 5 full-page, hand-colored plates.
    12mo. original cloth. London, n. d. =$5.00=

    "For if she will, she will, you may depend on't.

    "And if she won't, she won't, and there's an end on't."


93 Curiosa. An Account of the Trial of Thomas Muir, before the
    High Court of Justiciary, at Edinburgh on the 30th and 31st
    days of August, 1793, for sedition. Engraved frontispiece,
    8vo. half tree calf extra, gilt top and back, uncut. Edinburgh
    (1793). =$7.50=


94 Curiosa. The Poetical Decameron; or, Ten Conversations
    on English Poets and Poetry, particularly of the Reigns of
    Elizabeth and James I. By J. Payne Collier. 2 vols. Post 8vo.
    half crushed brown morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt tops,
    uncut. Edinburgh, 1820. =$7.50=

    First Edition, scarce. Exceptionally fine uncut copy.


95 Curiosa. The Committee; or, The Faithful Irishman. A comedy.
    By Sir Robert Howard. Engraved frontispiece by Vander Gucht.
    12mo. half polished brown calf extra, gilt back with red and
    green leather labels, gilt top. London: Tonson, 1735. =$5.00=

    With a prologue by Samuel Tuke. Scarce. Fine, perfect copy.


96 Curiosa. The Hermit; or The Unparalleled Sufferings and
    Surprising Adventures of Philip Quarll, an Englishman, who was
    lately discovered upon an uninhabited island in the South Sea.
    Engraved frontispiece. 12mo. old sprinkled calf extra, gilt
    tooled back. London, 1786. =$12.50=

    Contains: I. His Conference with those who found him, etc. II.
    His leaving his Master and being taken up with a notorious
    house-breaker, marrying a famous prostitute, etc. III. His
    being pardoned by the King, etc., etc.


97 Curiosa. The Case of the Unfortunate Bosavern Penlez. Post
    8vo. boards, green leather back. London, 1749. =$5.00=

    Scarce. An extremely curious case.


98 Curiosa. The Trial of Francis Ravaillac, for the Murder of
    King Henry the Great. Edited by Edmund Goldsmid. Post 8vo.
    original cloth, uncut. Edinburgh. Privately printed, 1885.
    Scarce. =$3.50=

    Edition limited to 275 copies only. Contains also an account
    of Ravaillac's torture and execution, extracted and translated
    from the Registers of the Parliament of Paris, 1610.


99 Curiosa. (Oscar Wilde). Oscariana Epigrams. Small 4to. pp.
    88, original paper wrappers, uncut. London: Privately printed,
    1895. Scarce. =$5.00=

    A very limited number of copies only printed.

    "Life imitates Art far more than Art imitates Life.... The
    Greeks with their quick artistic instinct understood this, and
    set in the bride's chamber the statue of Hermes and Apollo,
    that she might bear children as lovely as the works of art that
    she looked at in her rapture or her pain."


100 Curiosa. Oscar Wilde. His Life and Confessions. By Frank
    Harris. Illustrated. 2 vols. 8vo. cloth. New York: Privately
    printed, 1918. =$5.00=

    "I was advised on all hands not to write this book, and some
    English friends who have read it urged me not to publish it.

    "You will be accused of selecting the subject," they say,
    "because sexual viciousness appeals to you, and your method of
    treatment lays you open to attack."--The Author.

    Bernard Shaw writes: "This biography wipes out all other
    biographies ... Wilde's memory will have to stand or fall by
    it."


101 Curiosa. The Strange Voyage and Adventures of Domingo
    Gonzales, to the World in the Moon. Curious frontispiece
    depicting a flying-machine with birds used as power. 8vo. 3/4
    polished brown calf extra, gilt tooled back. London, 1768.
    =$7.50=

    Narrates of his being set down in China by his Birds, and his
    being taken for a magician by the Country People, and preserved
    from their fury by a Chinese Mandarin, etc., etc.


102 Curiosa. The Wonderful, Surprising and Uncommon Voyages and
    Adventures of Captain Jones, to Patagonia. Curious engraved
    frontispiece. 8vo. New 3/4 polished brown calf extra, gilt
    tooled back. London, 1766. =$7.50=

    Contains among, his other adventures "His Loves with the Queen
    of No-land," etc.


103 Curiosa. Thomas Deloney: His Thomas of Reading and
    Three Ballads on the Spanish Armada. Edited with Notes and
    Introduction, by C. R. Aldrich and Lucian S. Virtland.
    Woodcuts. Small 4to. 1/2 vellum, board sides, uncut. New York,
    1903. =$7.50=

    Edition limited to only 50 numbered copies, printed at the
    Westminster Press, entirely on Japan vellum.


104 Curiosa. The Muses' Library; or, a Series of English
    Poetry, from the Saxons to the Reign of King Charles II.
    Containing the Lives of Characters of all the known writers in
    that interval, the names of their patrons; complete episodes,
    by way of specimen of the larger pieces; very near the entire
    works of some, and large quotations from others. 8vo. new 3/4
    polished brown calf extra, full gilt tooled back, with blue
    levant labels, gilt tops, uncut. London, 1738. =$7.50=

    First and scarcest volume of the series. A general collection
    of almost all the old valuable Poetry extant, now so
    industriously enquir'd after, tho' rarely to be found, but in
    the Studies of the Curious, and affording entertainment on
    all subjects, Philosophical, Historical, Moral, Satyrical,
    Allegorial, Critical, Heroick, Pastoral, Gallant, Amorous,
    Courtly and Sublime.


105 Crabbe (George) Poetical Works. With His Letters and
    Journals, and His Life, by his son. With exquisite vignette
    engraved frontispieces and title-pages by Finden, 8 vols. 12mo.
    New 3/4 straight-grained green morocco extra, gilt tooled
    backs, gilt tops, uncut. London: John Murray, 1834. =$40.00=

    An extremely fine set of these choice poetical writings,
    prettily illustrated, and placed in a handsome binding.


106 Drama. The Drama of All Nations. Its History, Literature
    and Influence on Civilization. Editor-in-Chief, Alfred
    Bates. With fine photogravures on Japan vellum, and finely
    hand-colored frontispieces. Unexpurgated Edition. 20 vols. 8vo.
    buckram, gilt tops, Japan vellum labels, uncut. London and New
    York, 1906. Published at $60.00. =$40.00=

    The most extensive work on the subject ever issued. A limited
    number of sets only printed.


107 Dore's Illustrations. The Holy Bible, containing the Old
    and New Testaments according to the Authorized Version. With
    several hundred illustrations by Gustave Dore. 2 vols. 4to.
    full blind stamped brown morocco, raised bands, solid gilt
    edges. London and New York. =$50.00=

    Considered Dore's best work. Very fine copy.


108 Defoe (Daniel). Complete Works. With beautiful
    illustrations, some hand-colored, in 2 states. The text is
    finely printed on Holland hand-made paper. Unexpurgated
    Edition. 16 vols., new 3/4 levant morocco, gilt tooled backs
    with levant inlays, gilt tops, uncut. New York: George D.
    Sproul, 1905.

    Published at $300.00. =$150.00=

    Hand-made Edition, limited to 150 numbered and registered sets,
    issued to subscribers only.

    The finest edition yet published.


109 Dumas (Alexander) Complete Works. Illustrated with 253
    photogravures and etchings, also 24 finely hand-colored
    frontispieces. 47 vols. New 3/4 levant morocco extra, gilt
    tooled backs, gilt tops. Unexpurgated Edition. Boston: Dana
    Estes.

    Published at $470.00. =$235.00=

    Edition de Medicis, of which only a limited number of sets were
    printed for subscribers only.

    These are the complete writings of Dumas, containing The
    Celebrated Crimes, and stories usually lacking in other
    editions.


110 Dickens (Charles) Complete Works. Illustrated with 900
    etchings, photogravures and woodcuts, all finely printed
    on Japan vellum. Inserted are 24 exquisite hand-colored
    frontispieces on Whatman paper. 48 vols. 8vo. New 3/4 levant
    morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt tops, uncut. Boston:
    Dana Estes.

    Published at $480.00. =$260.00=

    New Century Edition printed on Large Paper in bold and clear
    type, limited to 1,000 numbered sets only.


111 Another Set of the same edition. 48 vols. 8vo. light brown
    heavy buckram, gilt tops, Japan paper labels, uncut. Boston:
    Dana Estes.

    Published at $168.00. =$110.00=


112 Dryden (John) Complete Works. Edited with Notes,
    historical, critical and explanatory, and a Life of the Author
    by Sir Walter Scott. With a fine portrait on copper by Fittler,
    and a large folding view of the Solemn Mock Procession of
    the Pope, Cardinals, etc., through the City of London, 1679.
    Revised and corrected by George Saintsbury. Unexpurgated
    Edition. 18 vols. New 3/4 brown morocco extra, full gilt backs,
    gilt tops, uncut. Edinburgh, 1882. =$75.00=

    An exceptionally fine set in a handsome binding.


113 Dryden (John) Complete Works. Edited with notes,
    historical, critical and explanatory, and a Life of the Author,
    by Sir Walter Scott. Illustrated with a portrait by Fittler and
    a large folding view of the Solemn Mock Procession of the Pope,
    Cardinals, etc., through the City of London, 1679. 18 vols.
    8vo. half calf, bindings rubbed, gilt backs, marbled edges.
    London, 1808. =$40.00=

    Scarce.


114 Dryden (John) Fables, from Boccaccio and Chaucer. Many
    quaint woodcuts in the text. 12mo. New 3/4 crushed maroon
    morocco extra, gilt tooled back with green levant inlays, gilt
    top. Chiswick: C. Whittingham, 1822. =$5.00=


115 Dodgson (L. C.) [Lewis Carroll]. Alice's Adventures in
    Wonderland. With the original illustrations by John Tenniel.
    8vo. decorated boards, cloth back, gilt top, uncut. London,
    1914. =$5.00=

    Limited to 1,000 numbered copies, printed in the Riccardi Fount
    on hand-made Riccardi Paper.


116 Dramatic. Colley Cibber. Written by Himself. Duplicate
    frontispieces, printed on Japan vellum, and on Whatman paper,
    finely colored by hand, and other full-page illustrations. 2
    vols. 8vo. 3/4 French levant morocco extra, gilt tops and backs
    with raised bands, uncut. London: Privately printed by the
    Grolier Society. =$10.00=

    One of the Amatory "Days of the Dandies" series. "Edition de
    Luxe" of which only a limited number of sets have been printed.


117 Dramatic. The Works of Thomas Otway, consisting of his
    Plays, Poems and Letters. 3 vols. 12mo. contemporary polished
    calf, raised bands. London, 1768. =$10.00=

    Very fine copy, now scarce. Contents: Alcibiades, Don Carlos,
    Titus and Berenice. With the Charts of Scapin, Friendship in
    Fashion, Soldier's Fortune, Atheist, Orphan, Poems and Letters,
    etc.


118 Dramatic. Songs from the Dramatists. Edited by Robert Bell.
    First Edition. 12mo. original cloth. New York, 1882. =$1.50=


119 Dramatic. The Virtuoso. A comedy, acted at the Duke's
    Theatre. Written by Thomas Shadwell. Small 4to. half red
    leather. London: Printed by T. W. for Henry Herringman, 1676.
    Title page neatly mended. =$7.50=

    A scarce play by Shadwell.


120 Dramatic. Crosby's Pocket Companion to the Playhouses.
    Being the Lives of all the principal London Performers, who
    may hereafter be engaged in the Theatres of Drury Lane, Covent
    Garden, and the Haymarket. To which are subjoined, Particulars
    of the Life of Mr. Dibdin. Dedicated to Richard Brinsley
    Sheridan. Fine stipple portrait of Sheridan. 16mo. new half
    polished brown calf extra, gilt tooled back, gilt top, uncut.
    London, 1796. =$3.50=


120A Dramatic. Annals of the English Stage, from Thomas
    Betterton to Edmund Kean. Actors--Authors--Audiences. By Dr.
    Doran. 2 volumes. Small 4to. original cloth, uncut. New York:
    W. J. Widdleton, 1865. =$10.00=

    Edition limited to 161 numbered copies only, printed on Large
    Paper. An exceptionally fine, tall copy for extra-illustrating.


121 Edgeworth (Maria). Complete Novels. With finely vignette
    engraved frontispieces and title-pages, and quaint etchings,
    all printed on India paper, 12 vols. Post 8vo. New 3/4 polished
    light brown calf extra, full gilt tooled backs, with red and
    blue levant labels, gilt tops. London: J. M. Dent & Co., 1893.
    =$60.00=

    Only 250 numbered copies of this edition have been printed on
    Holland hand-made paper. The daintiest edition of these well
    known novels yet issued.


122 English Literature, in the Reign of Victoria. With a
    Glance at the Post. By Henry Morley. Portrait, 12mo. 1/2 brown
    morocco, gilt top and back, uncut. Leipzig, 1881. =$2.75=

    A most interesting volume depicting the history of Queen
    Victoria's reign.


123 France (Anatole). First Complete Edition of the Authorized
    English Translation of the Novels, and Short Stories.
    Unexpurgated Edition. Illustrated with special drawings and
    reproductions on French plate paper, text printed on genuine
    Spartan deckle-edged paper. 19 vols. Newly and very handsomely
    bound in 3/4 levant morocco extra, gilt tooled backs with
    inlays, gilt tops, uncut.

    Published at $250.00. =$180.00=

    This Edition is limited to only 600 sets for subscribers only.


124 Another Set of the same edition, 19 vols. Bound in full
    wine colored morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt tops. New
    York, 1916.

    Published at $149.50. =$110.00=


125 Another Set of the same edition, 19 vols. Bound in original
    lavender cloth, gilt tops, Japan vellum labels. New York: 1916.

    Published at $90.00. =$60.00=


126 Flaubert (Gustave). Complete Works. Embracing Romances,
    Travels, Comedies, Sketches and Correspondence. With a
    Critical Introduction by Ferdinand Brunetiere of the French
    Academy, and a Biographical Preface by Robert Arnot. With
    numerous interesting illustrations on Japan vellum, and the
    frontispieces finely colored by hand. 10 vols. 8vo. new 3/4
    crushed green levant morocco extra, full gilt tooled backs,
    with red levant inlays, gilt tops, uncut. New York and London,
    1904.

    Published at $150.00. =$50.00=

    Only a limited number of this Unexpurgated Edition were issued
    for subscribers only.


127 Flaubert (Gustave). Complete Works. Illustrated.
    Unexpurgated Edition. 10 vols. 8vo. buckram, uncut. Akron and
    New York: M. Walter Dunn, 1904.

    Published at $40.00. =$20.00=


128 Fielding (Henry). Complete Works. With Author's Preface
    and Introduction by G. H. Maynadier. Unexpurgated Edition.
    Illustrated with numerous photogravures in two states, of
    which one set of the frontispieces are finely colored by hand.
    Text printed on Holland paper. 12 vols. 8vo. 3/4 crushed blue
    morocco extra, gilt tooled backs with red levant inlays, gilt
    tops, uncut. New York: George D. Sproul, 1903.

    Published at $240.00. =$110.00=

    Edition limited to 150 numbered and registered sets for
    subscribers only.

    An unusually fine large type edition, finely illustrated and
    handsomely bound.


129 Field (Eugene). The Writings in Prose and Verse. Finely
    illustrated. Scribner's subscription edition. 12 vols.
    Handsomely bound in 3/4 polished dark calf extra, richly gilt
    tooled backs, with purple and red levant labels, gilt tops,
    uncut. New York, 1903. =$42.00=

    A very handsome set, both as to illustrations and binding.


130 Family Devotion A Guide to. Containing a Hymn, a Portion of
    Scripture with Reflections, and a Prayer, for the Morning and
    Evening of Every Day in the Year. With an Appendix of Prayers
    and Hymns on Various Subjects. By Alex. Fletcher. With numerous
    fine full-page steel engravings. 4to. half brown morocco extra,
    gilt centres, raised bands, solid gilt edges. New York. =$7.50=

    Fine copy with splendid impressions of the numerous plates.


131 Fairbairn's Crests of the Leading Families in Great Britain
    and Ireland, and their kindred in other lands. Compiled
    from the best authorities by James Fairbairn. Revised by L.
    Butters, and edited by J. MacLaren. Illustrated with colored
    frontispiece and 137 plates containing several thousand designs
    of crests, etc. 2 vols. in one. 4to. 1/2 dark brown leather,
    marbled edges. New York, 1911. =$7.50=

    The best and most complete work on the subject yet issued.


132 Facetiae. Italian Novelists. The Facetious Nights of
    Giovanni Francesco Straparola, in four volumes; The Pecorone of
    Ser Giovanni, in three volumes. Illustrated with 44 fine plates
    on special paper from originals by Jules Garnier, of Paris,
    and E. R. Hughes, A.R.W.S., London. 7 volumes, 8vo., very
    handsomely bound in 3/4 morocco, gilt tooled back, top edges
    gilt. Edition strictly limited to 1,000 numbered and registered
    copies. Privately printed for Societe des Bibliophiles, a very
    fine, curious and facetious work. =$27.50=


133 Another copy of the same edition. Limited Edition de Luxe.
    Unexpurgated. Illustrated. 7 volumes, 8vo., in original green
    buckram, gilt tops, uncut edges. Privately printed for Societe
    des Bibliophiles. A very fine, curious and facetious work.
    =$19.50=

    "The Nights" of Straparola consist of an exquisite and
    delightful collection of humorous, witty and mirthful
    conversations, tales and enigmas, including singing, music and
    dancing during the thirteen nights of the Carnival at Venice,
    as related by ten charming and accomplished damsels and several
    nobles, men of learning, illustrious and honorable gentlemen of
    note at the entertainments of merriment and pleasure given by
    the Princess Lucretia at her beautiful Palace at Murano.

    The masterpiece of Italian prose, The Pecorone of Ser Giovanni,
    ranks in celebrity with Boccaccio's Decameron. The great
    popularity of the Pecorone arose from the fact that the amorous
    stories of love, intrigue and adventure therein contained cover
    comparatively fresh ground. Shakespeare borrowed Falstaff from
    Ser Giovanni, and The Merchant of Venice is founded on the
    first novel of the Fourth Day.


134 Facetiae. The Amours and Adventures of the Chevalier de
    Faublas, by John Baptiste--Louvet de Couvary. Founded on
    historical facts, interspersed with most remarkable narratives.
    A faithful reprint of the very rare, literal, unexpurgated
    translation of 1822, from the Paris edition of 1821, choicely
    printed on antique deckle-edged paper, and delightfully
    illustrated with numerous charming plates, etched by Louis
    Monzies from drawings by Paul Avril, printed on special paper.
    Complete in 4 vols. Newly bound in 3/4 morocco extra, gilt tops
    and backs, uncut. Edition strictly limited to 100 sets only.
    Privately printed for Societe des Bibliophiles, 1898. =$40.00=

    A very fine set of this very curious and facetious work.

    A most extraordinary work depicting the free and easy manners
    and customs of the Eighteenth Century.


135 Facetiae. The Life of Marianne; or, the Adventures of
    the Countess of * * * By M. de Marivaux. Translated from the
    Original French. 12mo. New 1/2 polished brown calf extra, gilt
    tooled back, with red levant inlays, gilt top, uncut. London,
    1736. =$20.00=

    Was this history a mere fiction, very likely the form of it
    would have been different. Marianne's reflections would be
    neither so long nor so frequent. It would contain more facts
    and less morality; in short, the author would have indulged
    the universal inclination of the present age, which, in books
    of this kind, does not relish abundance of arguments and
    reflections.


136 Facetiae. The Secret History of Betty Ireland. Copper-plate
    frontispiece. 8vo. New 3/4 polished brown calf extra, gilt
    tooled back, linen sides. London, n. d. Very scarce. =$12.50=

    Read Flanders Moll, the German Princess scan,
    Then match our Irish Betty, if you can;
    In Wit and Vice she did 'em both excel,
    And may be justly call'd a Nonpareil.


137 Facetiae. La Fontaine (J. de). Tales and Novels in Verse.
    Unexpurgated Edition. With quaint illustrations. New 3/4 red
    morocco, gilt tops and backs. 2 volumes bound in one. Privately
    printed. =$5.00=


138 Another copy of the same edition. Bound in original red
    cloth, white paper label. =$2.25=


139 Facetiae. The Heptameron. By Margaret, Queen of Navarre.
    Illustrated with full-page etchings. New 3/4 red morocco, gilt
    top and back. Unexpurgated Edition. 2 volumes bound in one.
    Privately printed. =$5.00=


140 Another copy of the same edition. Bound in original red
    cloth, white paper label. =$2.25=


141 Facetiae. The Novellino of Masuccio. Now first translated
    into English by W. G. Waters. With 11 full-page illustrations
    by Hughes. Waters Edition. New 3/4 red morocco, gilt top and
    back. Unexpurgated Edition; two volumes bound in one. Privately
    printed. =$5.00=


142 Another copy of the same edition. Bound in original red
    cloth, white paper label. =$2.25=


143 Facetiae. Rousseau (J. J.) Confession of. Unexpurgated
    Edition. With portrait and 20 original etchings by Ed. Hedouin.
    New 3/4 red morocco, gilt top and back, 2 volumes bound in one.
    Privately printed. =$5.00=


144 Another copy of the same edition. Bound in original red
    cloth, white paper label. =$2.25=


145 Facetiae. Rabelais, the Works of. Unexpurgated Edition.
    With 10 full-page engravings by Chalon. 3/4 red morocco, gilt
    top and back. 2 volumes bound in one. Privately printed.
    =$5.00=


146 Another copy of the same edition. Bound in original red
    cloth, white paper label. =$2.25=


147 Facetiae. Mademoiselle de Maupin, by Gautier. Unexpurgated
    Edition. With full-page etchings by Toudouze. New 3/4 red
    morocco, gilt top and back, uncut. 2 volumes bound in one.
    Privately printed. =$5.00=


148 Another copy of the same edition. Bound in original red
    cloth, white paper label. =$2.25=


149 Facetiae. Plays written by Sir John Vanbrugh. Curious
    copper-plates. 2 vols. 12mo. full mottled calf extra, finely
    gilt tooled backs. London, 1734. =$10.00=

    Very fine copy. Scarce.

    Contents: The Relapse, or Virtue in Danger; The Provok'd Wife,
    AEsop, The Confederacy, The False Friend, The Mistake, A Journey
    to London, The Provok'd Husband.


150 Facetiae. A New Description of Merryland. Containing
    a Topographical, Geographical and Natural History of that
    Country. Post 8vo. 1/2 cloth, leather label. Bath (1741).
    =$10.00=

    Of this scarce re-issue only 200 copies have been printed for
    private subscription, each numbered.


151 Facetiae. The Monk. A Romance. By M. G. Lewis, 2 vols.
    12mo. new half blue morocco, gilt tops, uncut. London, n. d.
    =$15.00=

    Unabridged reprint of the First Edition.

    One of the most remarkable, powerful, and mystical novels ever
    written.


152 Facetiae. Musarum Deliciae; or, The Muses' Recreation,
    containing several pieces of poetic wit. By Sr. J. M. and
    Ja. S., 1656, and Wit Restor'd, in several select poems, not
    formally published, 1658. Also, Wits Recreations, selected from
    the finest fancies of modern muses, with a thousand outlandish
    proverbs, 1640. With all the wood engravings, plates, memoirs,
    and notes. 2 vols. 12mo. new half brown levant morocco extra,
    gilt tooled backs, gilt tops. London, n. d. =$20.00=

    New Edition, with additional notes, Indexes, and a portrait of
    Sir John Mennis. Scarce.


153 Facetiae. The Plays, Histories and Novels of the Ingenious
    Mrs. Aphra Behn. With Life and Memoirs. Portrait. 6 vols. 8vo.
    3/4 crimson levant morocco extra, gilt backs with raised bands,
    gilt tops, uncut. London, 1871. =$45.00=

    The above Collection of Plays needs no other recommendation
    than that they were writ by the incomparable Mrs. A. Behn;
    a person whose character is so universally known, and whose
    performances have met with such a general applause, that 'tis
    needless to bespeak the readers' favor on her behalf.

    Contents: The Dutch Lover, The Rover; or, The Banish'd
    Cavaliers; The Town Fop, Forc'd Marriage, The False Count, The
    Lover's Watch, The Ladies' Looking-Glass to Dress Themselves
    By; or, The Whole Art of Charming all Mankind.

    This is a literal reprint of the First Edition--unabridged, and
    unexpurgated. An exceptionally fine set of this scarce reprint,
    of which only a limited number of copies have been printed.

    Mrs. Behn devoted herself to intrigue and writing for support;
    and, as she had a good person and much conversational talent,
    she became fashionable among the men of wit and pleasure of
    the time. She published three volumes of poems by Rochester,
    Etherege, Crisp, and others, with some poetry of her own; and
    wrote seventeen plays, the heartless licentiousness of which
    was disgraceful both to her sex and to the age which tolerated
    the performance of same.


154 Facetiae. Moore (Thomas). The Poetical Works of the late
    Thomas Little. Post 8vo. boards, uncut. London, 1835. =$5.00=

    Scarce. Very fine and facetious poems by Tom Moore, published
    under a nom de plume.


155 Facetiae. The Plays of Philip Massinger. From the text of
    William Gifford. With the addition of the tragedy, "Believe As
    You List." Edited by Lt.-Col. Francis Cunningham. 8vo. cloth.
    London, n. d. =$5.00=


156 Facetiae. Memoirs of a Coxcomb. By the author of Memoirs of
    a Lady of Pleasure. [John Cleland]. 12mo. pp. 251. Half calf,
    gilt back. Dublin, 1751. =$25.00=

    Very scarce. Fine copy of the First Issue of the First Edition.
    A later issue was printed the same year in London, with
    omissions.


157 Facetiae. The Satyricon; or, Trebly Voluptuous. By Titus
    Petronius Arbiter, Minister of Pleasure to the Emperor Nero.
    Unexpurgated. 12mo. New York, 1866. =$5.00=

    Scarce. The Satyricon shows more plainly than any other book,
    how abominably depraved human nature has become under the
    Social System that has been experimented with ever since the
    human race begun.


158 Facetiae. A Satyrical Dialogue; or, A Sharplye--Invective
    Conference between Alexander the Great and that truly
    woman-hater, Diogenes. [By Williams Goddard.] Edited by John
    S. Farmer. Small 4to. half leather (broken.) London: Privately
    printed for subscribers only, 1897. Very scarce, only one
    copy of the original (1615) being known (that in the British
    Museum). =$12.50=

    Imprinted in the Lowcountryes for all such gentlewomen as are
    not altogether idle nor yet well.

    To the Vertuous, beauteous; to the all-illustrious and most
    puissant creatures of the Earth, Women. William Goddard, sole
    desirer of your goddess-like virtues (with all reverence to
    your Angelical sex), commends to your protection this unlearned
    Dialogue.


159 Facetiae. Boccaccio's Decameron. Faithfully translated by
    J. M. Rigg. Exquisitely illustrated by Louis Chalon. 2 vols.
    Small 4to. beautifully bound in green rippled silk, uncut.
    London: Privately printed. =$22.50=

    Edition de Luxe, of which only a limited number were printed
    entirely on Japanese vellum paper.

    This being the latest and best translation (no passages being
    omitted), makes it the most desirable edition, printed in
    beautiful clear type.


160 Facetiae. The Comedies of Publius Terentius Afer.
    Translated into English, with Introduction, Bibliography and
    Brief Notes. The original Latin, with translation on opposite
    page. 2 vols. 8vo. boards, vellum back, uncut. Privately
    printed for the Roman Society, 1900. =$12.50=

    Limited to only 250 numbered copies for distribution amongst
    the members of the Roman Society. None of these copies were for
    sale.


161 Facetiae. Sophie Arnould: Actress and Wit. By Robert B.
    Douglas. With 7 exquisite copper-plate engravings by Adolphe
    Lalauze. 8vo. cloth. Paris, 1898. =$10.00=

    Edition limited to only 500 copies printed entirely on Japan
    paper, issued by Carrington.

    The genuine unexpurgated edition.


162 Facetiae. My Uncle Barbassou. By Mario Uchard. Prettily
    illustrated with 40 vignette etchings by Paul Avril. Royal 8vo.
    original cloth, uncut. London, 1888. =$7.50=

    First Issue. Scarce. Published by Vizetelly. Only a limited
    number of this most humorous and facetious work were printed.


163 Facetiae. Fables from the Female Sex. By Edward Moore.
    16mo. boards. Philadelphia, 1812. =$7.50=

    Very scarce. Contents: The Female Seducers, Love and Vanity,
    The Farmer and the Colt, The Poet and His Patron, Hymen and
    Death, etc.


164 Facetiae. Young Scarron. [By Thomas Mozeen.] 16mo. old calf
    (broken.) London, 1750. =$7.50=

    The real first issue. Scarce.


165 Facetiae. The Works of Don Francisco de Quevedo.
    Translated from the Spanish. With finely engraved copper-plate
    frontispieces. 2 vols. 8vo. old mottled calf. Edinburgh, 1798.
    =$7.50=

    A very fine set of this scarce and curious work of Quevedo.


166 Facetiae. Les Faceties de Pogge. Traduites en Francais,
    avec le texte Lation. Complete Edition. 2 vols. 12mo. original
    wrappers. Paris, 1878. =$12.50=

    The scarce little edition published by Isidore Liseux, printed
    on hand-made paper. Limited number of copies only.


167 Facetiae (De Couvray, Louvet). Une Anee de la Vie de
    Faublas. With full-page colored and many text illustrations by
    E. Barcet. Sq. 12mo. half brown morocco. Paris, n. d. =$7.50=

    Scarce little volume of the life of Faublas, finely illustrated.


168 Facetiae. The Dramatick Works of George Farquhar. Curious
    fine copper-plates. 2 vols. 12mo. contemporary mottled calf
    extra, finely gilt tooled backs. London, 1736. =$10.00=

    Very fine copy. Scarce.

    Contents: Beaux Stratagem, Love and a Bottle, Constant Couple,
    Stage-Coach, Recruiting Officer, Sir Henry Wildair, Inconstant,
    Twin Rivals.


169 Gautier (Theophile) Complete Works. Unexpurgated Edition.
    Translated and Edited by Prof. F. C. de Sumichrast, Department
    of French, Harvard University. With an Introduction by the
    Editor. With numerous illustrations in two states--one on Japan
    vellum, the other on India paper, and one of the frontispieces
    finely colored by hand. 24 vols. 8vo. New 3/4 crushed morocco
    extra, floreated gilt tooled backs, with red levant inlays,
    gilt tops, uncut. Published for subscribers only. New York:
    George D. Sproul, 1901.

    Published at $360.00. =$175.00=

    Edition limited to 300 numbered and registered sets only.


170 Goldsmith (Oliver) Complete Works. Edited by Peter
    Cunningham. With numerous photogravure illustrations on Japan
    vellum, the frontispieces signed by the artist. Unexpurgated
    Edition. 12 vols. original red buckram, paper labels, gilt
    tops, uncut. London and New York, 1900. =$50.00=

    Wakefield Edition, limited to 500 numbered sets only. The best
    and most complete edition of Goldsmith's Writings, printed in
    large type on fine paper, finely illustrated, and substantially
    bound.


171 Goldsmith (Oliver) Works. Edited by Peter Cunningham. 4
    vols. 8vo. New 3/4 morocco extra, Imperial silk sides, gilt
    tops and backs. New York: Harper & Bros., 1881. =$16.00=

    A very neat set.


172 Goldsmith (Oliver). Miscellaneous Works. With stipple
    portrait and quaint illustrations throughout the text. 2 vols.
    12mo. New polished 3/4 dark blue calf, full gilt tooled backs,
    with brown levant labels, gilt tops, uncut. London, n. d.
    =$10.00=

    A neat little set of Goldsmith's miscellaneous writings.


173 Greek and Latin Authors. Works of one hundred and ninety
    Greek and Latin authors, with few exceptions complete and
    unabridged. Translated by one hundred and fourteen great
    English authors. Special introductions by fifty-two eminent
    classical scholars. The only collection containing literary
    translations of the great works of all the classic authors.
    Every branch of literature is represented--poetry, philosophy,
    history, science, biography, oratory, satire, drama, romance,
    medicine, law, religion, mythology, essays and letters. It
    contains literature never before translated into English.
    It contains a critical biography of every Greek and Roman
    author, thus forming a complete history of classic literature.
    It contains extensive indexes of proper names (marked for
    pronunciation) and subjects, making the work the best form of
    a classical dictionary or hand-book of information concerning
    the great Greeks and Romans and their beliefs and customs.
    Exquisitely illustrated throughout the text, some finely
    colored by hand. 15 vols. 8vo. New full morocco extra, gilt
    tops and backs, uncut. New York.

    Published at $115.00. =$90.00=

    The most extensive and authoritative work on the Greek and
    Latin authors yet issued.


174 Another Set of the same edition. 15 vols. Bound in green
    cloth, gilt tops and backs, uncut. Illustrated, New York.

    Published at $75.00. =$35.00=


175 Great Operas, The. The Romantic Legends upon which the
    Masters of Song have Founded Their Famous Lyrical Compositions.
    Introduced by Giuseppe Verdi. Edited by James W. Buel. With
    many full-page photogravures on Japan vellum, and numerous text
    illustrations. 5 vols. Large 4to. red art cloth, gilt. London
    and Philadelphia: Societe Universelle Lyrique, 1890. =$20.00=

    Educational Edition, of which only a limited number of sets
    were issued.


176 Gaskell (Mrs.) Ruth. A novel. By the Author of "Mary
    Barton." 3 vols. Post 8vo. half red morocco extra, gilt tops
    and backs, uncut. London, 1853. =$10.00=

    Exceptionally fine copy of the First Edition.


177 Gaskell (Mrs.) Mary Barton. A Tale of Manchester Life. 2
    vols. Post 8vo. half red morocco extra, gilt tops and backs,
    uncut. London, 1869. =$6.00=

    Third and best edition. Uniform with the above.


178 Gay's Poems. Poems on Several Occasions. By John Gay. With
    finely engraved copper-plates. 2 vols. Post 8vo. old calf, gilt
    backs with leather labels. London, 1767. =$5.00=

    A neat set with fine impressions of the plates.


178A Great West. The Early Empire Builders of the Great West.
    By Moses K. Armstrong, a Pioneer Congressman. Compiled and
    Enlarged from the Authors' Early History of Dakota Territory
    in 1866. Many interesting illustrations. 8vo. cloth. St. Paul,
    Minn., 1901. =$1.50=

    Contents: Early History of Dakota Territory; Natural Resources
    of the Northwest Territories as Seen in 1866; Early Elections;
    Pioneer Legislatures and Indian Wars; Sketches of Travel and
    Early Hardships; A Journey to Sioux Falls and the Red Pipestone
    Region in 1864; Sketches of Congress and Western Empire;
    Speeches in Congress on Behalf of the West; After a Quarter of
    a Century--Two Capitals: Washington and Richmond; Racy Sketches
    of Southern Life, etc.

    A most interesting and authentic narrative on the Early West.


179 Henry (O.) Complete Writings. Beautifully printed,
    exquisitely illustrated with full-page photogravures. 14 vols.
    8vo. Half vellum, cartridge board sides, and vellum corners,
    gilt tops, uncut. New York, Doubleday, Page & Co., 1917.
    =$119.00=

    The last two volumes contain stories that never appeared in any
    other editions--in fact, are first issues.

    The first complete edition ever published. The illustrations
    are by the celebrated artist, Mr. Gordon Grant.

    The prince of short story writers--every story's a
    masterpiece--considered by many critics the greatest short
    story writer of modern time; his common sense and irresistible
    humor; the pathos; the richness of his style surpass all modern
    writers of the short story.


180 Henry (O.) Works. Comprising nearly 250 stories. 12 vols.
    12mo. 3/4 brown morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt tops,
    uncut. Doubleday, Page & Co., 1910. =$42.00=

    Fine type and thin paper Edition de Luxe.


181 History. Great Events by Famous Historians. A comprehensive
    and readable account of the world's history, emphasizing the
    more important events, and presenting eminent historians.
    Non-sectarian, non-partisan, non-sectional. On the plan
    evolved from the consensus of opinions gathered from the
    most distinguished scholars of America and Europe, including
    brief introductions by specialists to connect and explain
    the celebrated narratives, arranged chronologically, with
    thorough indices, bibliographies, chronologies, and courses of
    reading. Editor-in-chief, Rossiter Johnson, LL.D.; associate
    editors: Charles F. Horne, Ph.D., John Rudd, LL.D., with a
    staff of specialists. Profusely illustrated throughout the
    text. Twenty-two vols., 8vo., buckram, top edges gilt, leather
    labels. New York. =$39.50=


182 Harte (Bret) Complete Works. Illustrated with portrait,
    many full-page photogravures, and vignette engraved titles. 20
    vols. 8vo. New 3/4 morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt tops,
    uncut. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin & Co., 1906.
    =$75.00=

    Standard Library Edition, of which only a limited number of
    sets were issued.


183 Another Copy of the same edition. 20 vols. 8vo. original
    green cloth. Boston and New York: Houghton, Mifflin & Co.,
    1906. Published at $45.00. =$28.00=


184 Hugo (Victor) Complete Works. Illustrated with 200
    exquisite etchings and photogravures, of which the
    frontispieces are finely colored by hand. Unexpurgated Edition,
    30 vols. New 3/4 levant morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt
    tops, uncut. Boston: Dana Estes.

    Published at $300.00. =$150.00=

    The very fine Centenary Edition, limited to 1,000 sets for
    subscribers only.


185 Hogarth (William) The Works of. In a series of 150
    exquisite steel engravings by the first artists, with
    descriptions and a comment on their moral tendency. By John
    Trusler. To which are added, Anecdotes of the Author and
    his Works, by J. Hogarth and J. Nichols. 2 vols. Small 4to.
    full red morocco extra, with floreated borders and portrait
    of Hogarth in gilt on sides, gilt tooled backs, inside gilt
    boards, solid gilt edges. London, n. d. =$20.00=

    A very fine copy in a neat binding.


186 Heine (Heinrich) French Affairs. Translated by Charles
    Godfrey Leland. With portraits and engraved titles on Japan
    vellum. 2 vols. 8vo. 3/4 red morocco extra, gilt tooled backs
    with raised bands, gilt tops, uncut. New York. Printed for
    subscribers only. =$7.50=

    A very interesting work on the Napoleonic period.


187 Hemans (Felicia). Songs of the Affections. Prettily
    illustrated with vignette engravings. 8vo. cloth. New York,
    1874. =$2.00=


188 Ingersoll (Robert G.) Complete Works. Illustrated with 13
    photogravure portraits; 2 facsimile reproductions of MSS., and
    many fine half-tones. 13 vols. New 3/4 morocco extra, gilt
    tooled backs, gilt tops, uncut. New York: Dresden Publishing
    Co. Published at $97.00. =$75.00=

    This is the very handsomely printed Dresden Edition, of which
    only a limited number of sets were issued for subscribers only.

    The only authorized of Ingersoll's works. Published with
    authority and supervision of the family from his manuscripts,
    notes and literary memoranda. Out of print.


189 Ireland and the Irish, Character Sketches of. By Carleton,
    Lover, and Mrs. Hall. With etchings by Kirkwood. 12mo. 1/2
    green polished calf, extra. Halifax, 1846. =$3.50=

    Very fine copy of the First Edition.


190 Ingoldsby Legends; or, Mirth and Marvels. By Thomas
    Ingoldsby. With numerous full-page colored and text
    illustrations by Arthur Rackham. 8vo. half crushed olive levant
    morocco, emblematic gilt tooled back, gilt top, uncut. London,
    1898. =$7.50=

    The three series complete in one volume, and the first issue
    with the exquisite illustrations by Rackham.


191 Johnson (Samuel) Complete Works. With 48 photogravure
    portraits, of which the 16 frontispieces are finely colored by
    hand. 16 vols. polished buckram, paper labels, uncut. New York:
    Pafraets Press, 1903. =$50.00=

    Literary Club Edition, limited to 774 sets, large type, printed
    on Special Watermarked Paper.

    The best edition of Johnson's Works issued.


192 Kock (Charles Paul de) Complete Works. An unexpurgated and
    literal translation into English. With a general introduction
    by Jules Clariette. Illustrated with 100 etchings and
    photogravures especially drawn by the very best artists of
    modern time to conform with the text of the books. 25 vols.
    8vo. buckram, Japan paper labels, gilt tops, uncut.

    Published at $50.00. =$25.00=

    Artists' Edition de Luxe, limited to 1,000 numbered and
    registered sets only.


193 Knight (Charles). Half Hours with the Best Authors.
    Including biographical and critical notices. By Charles Knight.
    With 52 quaint illustrations by William Harvey. New Edition,
    remodelled and revised by the original editor, 4 vols. 12mo.
    New 3/4 brown morocco extra, gilt backs with blue levant
    inlays, gilt tops. London: Warne & Co. =$12.00=

    These authors include: Massinger, Lantor, Coleridge, Swift,
    Lacomb, Jane Austen, Webster, Jeffrey, Plutarch, Addison,
    Carlyle, Dickens, Smollett, etc., etc.


194 Kipling (Rudyard). From Sea to Sea. Letters of Travel. 2
    vols. Post 8vo. original cloth. New York, 1899. =$3.50=

    First Edition. Fine copy.


195 Lever (Charles). Complete Novels. With an Introduction
    by Andrew Lang. Many fine full-page illustrations by Phiz,
    E. Van Muyden, L. J. Bridgman and others, also numerous text
    illustrations. 32 vols. New 3/4 crushed dark red morocco extra,
    gilt tooled backs, with shamrock design, and green levant
    inlays, gilt tops, uncut. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1904.

    Published at $240.00. =$150.00=

    Only a limited number of these interesting novels have been
    printed, in large type on hand-made paper, and placed in an
    attractive and substantial binding.


196 Lever (Charles). Maxims of Sir Morgan O'Doherty. Bart.
    16mo. original limp cloth, gilt edges. Edinburgh & London:
    1849. =$7.50=

    Scarce First Edition, in the original binding.


197 Love Tales. German Love Tales. 16mo. half olive morocco,
    gilt top. London and Philadelphia, 1891. =$2.50=

    Contains: "Dumb Love," "The Love Potion," "The Lady's Palfry,"
    etc.


198 Love Tales. Irish Love Tales. 16mo. half olive, morocco,
    gilt top. London and Philadelphia, 1891. =$2.50=

    Contains: "The Love Draught," "Shane Fadh's Wedding," "The
    Dispensation," etc.


199 Love Tales. Scotch Love Tales. 16mo. half olive morocco,
    gilt top. London and Philadelphia, 1891. =$2.50=

    Contains: "Mansie Waugh's Calf-Love," "The Lover's Last Visit,"
    "The Loves of the Learned," etc.


200 Love Tales. American Love Tales. 16mo. half olive morocco,
    gilt top. London and Philadelphia, 1891. =$2.50=

    Contains the "Unwritten Poetry," "The Marriage Blunder," "The
    Seaman's Widow," etc.


201 Love Tales. English Love Tales. 16mo. half olive morocco,
    gilt top. London and Philadelphia, 1891. =$2.50=

    Contains "The Virgin's Fountain," "The Widowed Bride," "Love in
    a Mist," etc.


202 London (Jack). White Fang. Illustrated. 12mo. original
    cloth, New York and London, 1906. =$2.50=

    First Edition.


203 Longfellow (H. W.) Christmas: A Mystery. First Edition.
    8vo. cloth. Boston, 1873. =$2.00=


204 Leech Illustrations. Smith (Albert). The Wassail-Bowl.
    With full-page etchings, and numerous text illustrations by
    John Leech. 2 vols. post 8vo. full olive levant morocco extra,
    gilt paneled backs, inside gilt borders, solid gilt edges, by
    Morrell. London: Bentley, 1843. =$20.00=

    An exceptionally fine copy of the scarce First Edition.


205 Leech Illustrations. The Works of Douglas Jerrold. With
    an Introductory Memoir by his son, W. Blanchard Jerrold. With
    full-page etchings by John Leech. 4 vols. Post 8vo. half
    polished English calf extra, elaborately gilt tooled backs,
    levant leather labels, gilt tops. London, 1863-4. =$28.00=

    First Edition. Exceptionally fine clean set.


206 Leech Illustrations. Follies of the Year. With exquisite
    full-page colored plates by John Leech. A series of etchings
    from Punch's Pocket Books, 1844-64. With some Notes by Shirley
    Brooks. Oblong 4to. original half red leather, gilt cloth
    sides, solid gilt edges. London: Bradbury, Evans & Co., n. d.
    =$15.00=

    Fine copy of the First Edition.


207 Le Gallienne (Richard). The Book Bills of Narcissus.
    Frontispiece. Post 8vo. original cloth, uncut. New York and
    London, 1895. =$2.50=

    This, the third edition, has been revised, and Chapter V. is
    entirely new.


208 Le Gallienne (Richard). Sleeping Beauty and Other Fancies.
    Post 8vo. original cloth, uncut. London and New York, 1900.
    =$3.50=

    First Edition. Fine copy.


209 Macaulay (Lord) Complete Works. With fine full-page
    illustrations, text finely printed in large type. 20 vols. 8vo.
    1/2 polished calf (as new) gilt tooled backs, gilt tops. New
    York: G. P. Putnam & Sons.

    Published at $100.00. =$50.00=

    Whitehall Edition, limited to 1,000 sets only.


210 Macaulay (Lord) Complete Works. Comprising History of
    England, Critical and Miscellaneous Essays, and Miscellaneous
    Writings. Edited by his sister, Lady Trevelyan. Large type
    edition. 8 vols. 8vo. 3/4 morocco extra, gilt tooled backs,
    gilt tops. New York: Appleton & Co., 1866. =$27.50=


211 Milton (John). Prose and Poems. Complete Works, with a Life
    of the author. Critical Remarks by Charles Symmons, D.D., of
    Jesus College, Oxford. 14 vols. New 3/4 brown levant morocco,
    gilt tooled backs, gilt tops, uncut. London, 1806-1809. =$40.00=

    A rare and fine old set of Milton's complete writings.


212 Milton's Poetical Works. With Life, Critical Dissertation,
    and Explanatory Notes, by George Gilfillan. 2 vols. 8vo. full
    polished tree calf extra, gilt tooled backs, levant leather
    labels, marbled edges. Edinburgh, 1853. =$10.00=

    Extra Illustrated by the insertion of 19 exquisite vignette
    engravings neatly mounted.

    A well printed copy finely illustrated.


213 Memoirs and Secret Chronicles. Comprising Marie Antoinette,
    The Court of Berlin, Madame Du Barry, Diary of John Evelyn,
    Napoleon, and Memoirs of Louis XIV. and the Regency. With fine
    illustrations on Japan vellum, and the frontispieces finely
    colored by hand. 11 vols. 8vo. Magnificently bound in full
    Persian morocco, Saint Dunstan bindings. Unexpurgated Edition,
    printed for subscribers only, 1901.

    Published at $198.00. =$50.00=

    A fine set of these interesting and facetious memoirs.


214 Maupassant (Guy de) Complete Works. Embracing Romance,
    Travel, Comedy and Verse. For the first time complete in
    English, with Critical Preface by Paul Bourget, and an
    Introduction by Robert Arnot. With numerous full-page
    photogravures on Japan vellum, of which many are finely colored
    by hand. Unexpurgated Edition. 17 vols. 8vo. New 3/4 blue
    levant morocco extra, gilt tooled backs with red and green
    levant inlays, raised bands, gilt tops, uncut. New York and
    London: M. Walter Dunne (1903). =$75.00=

    Editor's Autographed Edition, of which a limited number of sets
    were printed for subscribers only.


215 Marryat (Capt. Frederick) Complete Works. Illustrated
    with 144 full-page etchings printed on Japan vellum. The text
    printed on fine deckle-edged paper. 24 vols. 8vo. New 3/4
    crushed dark morocco extra, emblematic gilt tooled backs with
    raised bands, gilt tops, uncut. Boston: Dana Estes & Co.

    Published at $240.00. =$110.00=

    Author's Limited Edition, of which only 1,000 numbered sets
    were issued.


216 Moths and Butterflies of the United States; East of
    the Rocky Mountains. By Sherman F. Denton. With over 400
    photographic illustrations in the text, and many transfers of
    species from life. 3 vols. Royal 8vo. 3/4 maroon levant morocco
    extra, emblematic gilt tooled backs, gilt tops, uncut. Boston,
    1900. =$35.00=

    The colored plates, or Nature Prints, used in this work, are
    direct transfers from the insects themselves; that is to
    say, the scales of the wings of the insects are transferred
    to the paper while the bodies are printed from engravings
    and afterward colored by hand. The making of such transfers
    is not original with the author, but it took a good deal of
    experimenting to so perfect process as to make the transfers,
    on account of their fidelity to detail and their durability,
    fit for use as illustrations in such a work. And what
    magnificent illustrations they are, embodying all the beauty
    and perfection of the specimens themselves!

    Edition limited to only 500 numbered copies, privately bound in
    a handsome levant morocco binding.


217 Minor Poems. The Works of Celebrated Authors, of whose
    writings there are but small remains. 2 vols. 12mo. half
    polished calf, gilt tooled backs. London, 1750. =$5.00=

    Contains the Works of the Earls of Roscommon, Dorset, and
    Hallifax; Sir Samuel Garth, George Stepney, William Walsh,
    Thomas Tickell, and Poems by Bishop Sprat.

    From the library of John M. Dana, with his armorial book-plates.


218 New Nature Library. With 276 beautiful full-page
    illustrations in color, 416 full-page half-tones, and 5,120
    pages of fascinating text. The books, each written by an
    authority, are Bird-Neighbors, Game Birds, Flowers, Trees,
    Butterflies, Moths, Insects, Fish, Animals. 9 vols., finely
    printed on fine super calendared paper, bound in new flexible
    full morocco, gilt stamped sides and backs, silk headbands.
    Sold only by subscription. Doubleday, Page & Co.

    Subscription price, $44.50. =$26.00=

    Latest and best edition of this sumptuous work, the 276
    beautiful full-page colored plates being true to nature.


219 Naturalist's Library. Edited by Sir William Jardine.
    Illustrated with several hundred copper-plates, finely colored
    by hand. 42 vols. 12mo. New 3/4 polished green calf extra, full
    gilt backs with red levant labels, gilt tops, uncut. London, n.
    d. =$140.00=

    Contains: Birds, 14 vols.; Insects, 7 vols.; Fishes, 6 vols.;
    Animals, 13 vols.; Humming Birds, 1 vol.; Natural History of
    Man, 1 vol.

    The most complete and accurate work on the subject. The
    numerous plates are colored truly to nature by experts. The
    many finely engraved portraits also add to its value. An
    exceptionally fine set in an appropriate binding.


220 Napoleon. Memoirs of Napoleon Bonaparte. By De Bourrienne.
    Edited by R. W. Phipps. New and Revised Edition. With numerous
    illustrations. 4 vols. Post 8vo. new half crimson levant
    morocco, gilt tooled backs with green levant inlays, gilt tops.
    New York, 1895. =$15.00=

    An exceptionally fine set.


221 Naples Museum, Specimen from. 165 plates engraved on copper
    by the best Italian artists, illustrating 500 objects from
    every branch of Art and Archaeology. By Domenico Monaco. With
    descriptive letterpress, carefully revised and amplified from
    the best authorities, and an historical and descriptive sketch
    of Pompeii and Herculaneum. By E. Neville Rolfe. 4to. cloth.
    Naples, 1895. =$10.00=

    The present edition has been remodelled, the old plates have
    been carefully touched up, and several new plates representing
    Greek vases have been added.


222 New York City. Francis (John W.). Old New York; or,
    Reminiscences of the Past Sixty Years. Being an Enlarged and
    Revised Edition of the Anniversary Discourse delivered before
    the New York Historical Society (Nov. 17, 1857). =$5.00=

    An old history of New York City dating back to 1798. Scarce.


223 Oriental Series. Comprising--RUSSIA, 3 vols., by Sir Donald
    MacKenzie Wallace and Luigi Villari. CHINA, 4 vols., by Capt.
    F. Brinkley. PHILIPPINES, 1 vol., by Mrs. Campbell Dauncey.
    JAPAN, 8 vols., by Capt. F. Brinkley. KOREA, 1 vol., by Major
    Austen. MANCHURIA, 1 vol., by Sir Alexander Hosie. SIAM, 1
    vol., by P. A. Thompson. BURMA, 1 vol., by R. Talbot Kelly.
    AFGHANISTAN, 1 vol., by Agnes Hamilton. INDIA, 1 vol., by Col.
    J. D. Rees. PERSIA, 1 vol., by F. B. Bradley-Birt. TURKEY, 1
    vol., by Edward T. Knight. Numerous full-page photographic
    reproductions, with the frontispieces finely printed in colors.
    24 vols. Royal 8vo. 3/4 Japan Vellum, thick board sides,
    elaborately colored backs, with emblematic designs to each
    series, gilt tops, uncut. Boston and Tokyo: J. B. Millet Co.,
    1910.

    Published at $76.00. Special Price, =$45.00=

    The standard work on the Asiatic and Oriental countries. Here
    is a set of books the like of which has never been seen before.
    It describes the manners, morals, customs, religions, art,
    literature, politics, industries, of all the great people who
    live on the other side of the Pacific, with whom our immediate
    future is vitally connected for better or worse. The day that
    Japan won over Russia marked the birth of a new courage in all
    the countries west of us, and the recorded observations of
    trained writers, skilled in all languages, took on a vastly
    increased importance.

    These magnificent volumes contain over 7,600 pages, printed in
    large type, on excellent laid paper especially made for this
    edition, and placed in a de luxe binding.


224 Oriental Tales. Translated into English Verse. By J.
    Hoppner. Engraved frontispiece. 8vo. old mottled calf. London,
    1805. =$5.00=

    Should some of these Tales appear to bear a little hard upon
    the female character, the author would request the fair reader
    to consider that they represent Eastern manners and morals, and
    that they are the actions of a people whose gods were monsters
    or whose prophet was Mahomet.


225 Ovid's Metamorphoses. Translated by the most Eminent Hands.
    Also, Ovid's Art of Love, together with His Remedy of Love.
    Translated into English Verse by Dryden, Congreve, and others.
    To which are added, the Court of Love, A Tale from Chaucer, and
    the History of Love. Illustrated with many fine, curious and
    amatory copper-plates. Unexpurgated Edition. 3 vols. 12mo. New
    3/4 maroon morocco levant inlays, gilt tops. London: Davies,
    Becket, Caslon, Cadel, Robinson, Evans, and J. & R. Tonson,
    1764-1773. =$22.50=

    An exceptionally neat little set with the scarce volume of Art
    of Love, Court of Love, and History of Love added. The many
    curious copper-plates are the earliest impressions.


226 Pugilism. Fistiana; or, The Oracle of the Ring. Comprising
    a Defence of British Boxing. A Brief History of Pugilism, from
    the earliest Ages to the Present Period. By the Editor of Bells
    Life in London. 16mo. original cloth gilt, gilt edges. London,
    1841. Scarce. =$5.00=

    Contains Chronological Tables of Prize Battles, from 1780 to
    1840 inclusive, alphabetically arranged with the issue of each
    event. Also, scientific hints on sparring, etc. etc.


226A Pugilism. Boxiana; or, Sketches of Ancient and Modern
    Pugilism, from the Days of the Renowned Broughton and Slack--to
    the championship of Cribb. By Pierce Egan. Illustrated with
    numerous copper-plate portraits, boxing scenes (some folding
    plates), of which one is etched by George Cruikshank (very
    scarce). Also the New Series of Boxiana, being the only
    original and complete Lives of the Boxers, with many engraved
    portraits. Together 5 vols. 8vo. pictorial boards (3 vols.
    paper rebacked), uncut. London, 1823-29. =$65.00=

    A very fine set of this the only complete and authentic work on
    Boxiana by the inimitable Pierce Egan.


227 Pepys (Samuel). Diary and Correspondence of Samuel Pepys,
    M.A., F.R.S., Clerk of the Acts and Secretary to the Admiralty.
    Transcribed from the Shorthand Manuscript in the Pepysian
    Library, Magdalene College, Cambridge, by the Rev. Mynors
    Bright. With a Life and Notes by Lord Braybrooke. Facsimiles.
    10 vols. 8vo. 3/4 blue morocco, gilt tops and backs, uncut. New
    York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1884. =$45.00=

    Large Paper Edition limited to only 150 numbered and signed
    copies, finely printed on Holland paper.

    From the library of Herbert Carleton Wright with his armorial
    book-plate in each volume.


228 Pope (Alexander). Works, with Memoir of the Author, Notes
    and Critical Notices on each poem by G. Croly. With fine steel
    portrait, frontispieces and vignette titles. 4 vols. 12mo. New
    3/4 polished wine colored calf extra, gilt tooled backs, blue
    levant labels, gilt tops, uncut. London: Valpy, 1835. =$20.00=

    This unexpurgated edition contains: Eloisa to Abelard; The
    Dunciad; Sappho to Phaon; January and May; The Wife of Bath,
    etc. etc.


229 Poe (Edgar Allan) Complete Works. With etched portrait and
    24 quaint photogravure illustrations. 8 vols. 12mo. New 3/4
    wine colored polished calf extra, full gilt tooled backs with
    blue and green levant labels, gilt tops, uncut. London and
    Philadelphia, 1895. =$40.00=

    Edition de Luxe, limited to 100 numbered sets only.


230 Pickering's Aldine Poets. The Poetical Works of Thomas
    Parnell. Portrait. 16mo. full morocco gilt. London: Pickering,
    1833. =$3.50=

    First Issue of this series of Poets.


231 Peerage. The Manual of Rank and Nobility; or, Key to the
    Peerage. Containing the origin and history of all the various
    Titles, Orders and Dignities, etc., etc., of the British
    Nobility; with the origin and history of the Royal Titles,
    Prerogatives, Ceremonies, Great Officers of State, and of His
    Majesty's Household, etc. 8vo. half brown polished calf, red
    and green leather labels. London, 1828. =$5.00=


232 Psyche, with Other Poems. With fine stipple portrait. New
    edition. 8vo. old mottled calf, rebacked. London, 1812. =$2.50=


233 Queens of England. Strickland (Agnes). Lives of the Queens
    of England, from the Norman Conquest. With an Introduction
    by John Foster Kirk. With numerous full-page plates (some in
    colors.) And with special frontispieces printed on Whatman
    paper, carefully colored by hand. 16 vols. finely bound in red
    silk cloth, white paper labels, gilt tops, uncut. Philadelphia.
    Printed for subscribers only. =$48.00=

    Imperial Edition, of which only a limited number of sets with
    the hand-colored frontispieces were issued.

    Attention is directed to the very complete index. This is
    an index for the whole sixteen volumes, and is issued with
    the last. By its use, immediate reference can be made to any
    person, place, or event, thus making the series, in addition to
    being the most delightful reading, valuable reference books.


234 Reynolds (George W. M.). The Mysteries of the Courts of
    London. Unexpurgated Edition. With numerous etchings on Japan
    vellum and a frontispiece on Whatman paper finely colored by
    hand. 20 vols. 8vo. New 3/4 crushed blue levant morocco extra,
    gilt tooled backs, with tulip designs inlaid in white levant,
    gilt tops, uncut. London. Privately printed for members of the
    Oxford Society.

    Published at $300.00. =$160.00=

    De Luxe Edition, limited to 1,000 numbered sets.

    Contents: Pauline Clarendon; Rose Foster, 2 vols.; Mrs.
    Fitzherbert; Caroline Walters; Venetia Trelawney, 5 vols.; Lady
    Saxondale's Crimes, 5 vols.; The Fortunes of the Ashtons, 5
    vols.

    A very fine set of these startling and facetious narratives,
    and the complete writings of Reynolds, entirely unexpurgated,
    many pages and passages having been suppressed in other
    editions.


235 Reade (Charles) Complete Works. Illustrated with 64
    photogravures on Japan vellum. 18 vols. 8vo. 3/4 morocco extra,
    gilt tooled backs, gilt tops, uncut. New York.

    Published at $100.00. =$60.00=

    An excellent edition, printed in clear type on hand-made paper.


236 Richardson (Samuel) Complete Works. With a Life of
    the Author, by William Lyon Phelps. Comprising: Pamela;
    Clarissa Harlowe, and The History of Sir Charles Grandison.
    Unexpurgated Edition. With numerous illustrations finely
    printed on Japan vellum. 18 vols. 8vo. cloth, Japan paper
    labels, gilt tops, uncut. New York: Croscup & Sterling, 1901.

    Published at $95.00. =$30.00=

    Edition de Luxe, limited to 1,230 numbered and registered sets
    for subscribers only. This is the best edition of Richardson's
    unexpurgated writings, splendidly printed on large paper, and
    finely illustrated.


237 Ruskin (John) Complete Works. With numerous illustrations
    on Japan vellum, some finely printed in colors. 26 vols. 8vo.
    New 3/4 dark blue levant morocco extra, gilt backs, with raised
    bands, gilt tops, uncut. New York: Bryan & Taylor, 1904.
    =$125.00=

    Edition de Luxe, limited to 750 numbered sets, printed on Large
    Paper.

    The best and most complete edition issued of the greatest
    writer on nature, art, and architecture that ever lived.


238 Riley (James Whitcomb) Complete Writings. With portrait and
    many photogravure illustrations finely printed on Japan vellum.
    14 vols. Post 8vo. New 3/4 dark green morocco, gilt tops and
    backs, uncut. New York: Scribners & Sons, 1906. =$49.00=

    Homestead Edition, of which only a limited number of sets were
    issued. These are the complete writings of Riley compiled and
    gathered by the author himself.


239 Scott (Sir Walter). Waverly Novels. With Introductory Essay
    and Essay, by Andrew Lang. With numerous exquisite etchings and
    photogravures finely printed on Japan vellum. 54 vols. 8vo. New
    3/4 blue levant morocco extra, gilt tooled backs with raised
    bands, gilt tops, uncut. Boston: Dana Estes, 1900.

    Published at $405.00. =$250.00=

    New Abbotsford Edition, limited to 1,000 numbered sets, printed
    on laid deckle-edged paper for subscribers only.

    An exceptionally well printed set in a most appropriate binding.


240 Scott (Sir Walter). Minstrelsy of the Scottish Border;
    consisting of Historical and Romantic Ballads, collected in the
    Southern Countries of Scotland; with a few of modern date, 8vo.
    half contemporary calf, gilt. Edinburgh, 1806. =$7.50=

    Very fine copy of the third and best edition. From the library
    of Robert Tindal with his book-plate.


241 Sumner (Charles) Complete Works. Edited by George F. Hoar.
    Illustrated with 21 photogravures and steel engraved portraits,
    finely printed on Japan vellum. 20 vols. 8vo. red buckram,
    Japan paper labels, gilt tops, uncut. Boston: Lee & Shepard,
    1900.

    Published at $70.00. =$30.00=

    Statesman Edition, printed on water-marked deckle-edged paper,
    and limited to 1,000 numbered sets only.

    A fine large type edition.


242 Smollett (Tobias) Complete Works. With the Author's
    Preface, and an Introduction by G.H. Maynadier. Unexpurgated
    Edition. Illustrated with many fine etchings in two states--one
    set on Japan vellum, the other on India paper, with one set of
    frontispieces finely colored by hand. 12 vols. 8vo. New 3/4
    crushed levant morocco extra, gilt tooled backs with red levant
    inlays, gilt tops, uncut. New York: George D. Sproul, 1902.
    =$110.00=

    Edition limited to 150 numbered and registered sets, finely
    printed on Holland paper for subscribers only.

    An exceptionally well printed edition on large paper and with
    early impressions of the beautiful illustrations.


243 Smollett (Tobias) Complete Works. Edited by George
    Saintsbury. Unexpurgated Edition. Illustrated with portrait and
    many fine photogravures printed on Japan vellum. 12 vols. 12mo.
    New 3/4 polished light brown calf extra, gilt tooled backs,
    with purple and green levant labels, gilt tops, uncut. London:
    Gibbings & Co., 1895. =$39.50=

    An exceptionally well printed handy volume edition, in a neat
    binding.


244 Smollett (Tobias) Complete Works. With the Author's
    preface, and an Introduction by W. E. Henley. With photogravure
    illustrations on Japan vellum, of which the frontispieces are
    colored by hand. 12 vols. 8vo. half red leather, gilt tops and
    backs, uncut. New York: Jenson Society, 1907. =$35.00=

    Unexpurgated Edition, limited to 1,000 numbered and registered
    sets.


245 Secret Memoirs of the Courts of Europe, from the 16th
    to the 19th Century. Contains: Two Kaisers: William II. of
    Germany, Francis Joseph of Austria-Hungary. By the Marquise
    de Fontenoy, 2 vols.; The Secret Memoirs of the Court of
    St. Petersburg, particularly toward the end of the reign of
    Catharine II. and the commencement of that of Paul I., 1 vol.;
    Memoirs of the Court of Marie Antoinette, Queen of France. By
    Madame Campan, 2 vols.; Original Memoirs of the Sovereigns of
    Sweden and Denmark. By John Brown. 2 vols.; Memoirs of Madame
    la Marquise de Montespan, 2 vols.; Memoirs of Margaret de
    Valois, Queen of Navarre, containing the Secret History of
    the Court of France for seventeen years, viz.: from 1565 to
    1582, during the Reigns of Charles IX. and Henry III., 1 vol.
    With many photogravure illustrations after nature, designs,
    paintings, and portraits. 10 vols. 8vo. watered silk finish
    cloth, gilt tops, uncut. Philadelphia: Barrie & Sons. Privately
    printed for subscribers only.

    Published Price $150.00. =Our Special Price $45.00=

    This is an unexpurgated edition of the only authentic Memoirs
    of the Courts of Europe published--many of the most startling
    and facetious passages having been omitted from all other
    editions.


246 Sue (Eugene) The Works of. Illustrated with original
    full-page etchings printed on Japan vellum. Unexpurgated
    Edition. 20 vols. 8vo. 3/4 maroon levant morocco extra, cloth
    sides, finely gilt tooled backs with red levant inlays, gilt
    tops, uncut. London and New York. =$95.00=

    Annecy Edition, of which only a limited number of sets were
    issued with remarque proofs of the beautiful etchings.


247 Symonds (John Addington). Wine, Woman and Song: Medieval
    Latin Students' Songs, now first translated into English Verse
    with an Essay. Woodcut illustrations. Post 8vo. cloth, uncut.
    New York and London, 1907. =$3.00=

    Second Edition, with an appendix. Fine copy.


248 Smith (Albert). The Struggles and Adventures of Christopher
    Tadpole. With 26 full-page etchings by John Leech. 8vo. cloth,
    uncut. London, 1897. =$5.00=

    First Edition. Contains a biographical sketch of the author by
    Edmund Yates.


249 Stockton (Frank R.) Stories of New Jersey. 12mo. original
    cloth. New York, etc. =$1.50=

    First Edition.


250 Songster. Grigg's Southern and Western Songster. Being a
    Choice Collection of the most Fashionable Songs, many of which
    are original. 16mo. old sprinkled calf. Philadelphia, 1829.
    =$3.50=

    New Edition, greatly enlarged.


251 Spenser (Edmund) Poetical Works. With Memoir and Critical
    Dissertations, by George Gilfillan, 5 vols. 8vo. New 3/4 red
    levant morocco extra, gilt backs, with raised bands, gilt tops,
    Edinburgh: James Nichol, 1859. =$15.00=

    A very neat set of Spenser's complete Poetical Works.


252 Tatler, The. Edited with Introduction and notes by George
    A. Aitkin. Contains fine portraits from contemporary prints of
    Addison, Steele, and Swift. 8vo. New 3/4 red levant morocco,
    gilt tooled backs, Morris paper sides, gilt tops, uncut. New
    York and London, 1899. 4 vols. =$18.00=

    Large type and large paper edition in a handsome binding.
    Limited number of sets only have been printed.


253 Tennyson (Alfred, Lord) Works. With a Preface by Elizabeth
    L. Cary. Illustrated in photogravure from original designs by
    F.S. Coburn and Gustave Dore. 8 vol. 8vo. blue buckram, gilt
    backs, tops gilt, uncut. New York and London: G.P. Putnam's
    Sons, 1909. =$20.00=

    Centenary Edition, limited to 1,000 signed and numbered sets,
    printed in large type on hand-made paper.


254 Thackeray (W. M.) Complete Works. Many illustrations by the
    author and others. 24 vols. 3/4 crushed blue levant morocco
    extra, gilt tooled backs, floreated designs with red levant
    inlays, gilt tops, uncut. London: Smith, Elder & Co., 1869.
    =$150.00=

    This edition has originally been issued in 22 vols., but
    2 vols. of the Life of Thackeray have been subsequently
    added--making this the most complete set in existence. A
    splendid copy of the best edition.


255 Tennyson (Alfred). Gareth and Lynette. Illustrated. 12mo.
    original cloth. Boston, 1872. =$4.00=

    First Edition. Scarce.


256 Tennyson (Alfred). The Song of the Brook. With 15 full-page
    photogravures, after original drawings by William J. Mozart.
    4to. cloth. Troy, N.Y. (1886). =$2.00=


257 Timbs (John). The Romance of London. Historic Sketches,
    Remarkable Duels, Notorious Highwaymen, Rogueries, Crimes,
    Punishments, and Love and Marriage. 12mo. half calf. London, n.
    d. =$2.50=


258 Tomson (Graham R.). The Bird-Bride. A Volume of Ballads and
    Sonnets. Post 8vo. original cloth, uncut. London, 1889. =$3.50=

    First Edition, of which only a limited number were printed on
    Holland paper.


259 Thackerayana. Notes and Anecdotes. Illustrated by hundreds
    of sketches (many full-page colored plates) by William
    Makepeace Thackeray. Depicting humorous incidents in his school
    life, etc. 8vo. half red levant morocco extra, gilt paneled
    back, gilt top. London, 1875. =$7.50=

    The rare first edition (which was suppressed on account of the
    copyright matter it contained.) A rare Thackeray item.


260 Taine (H. A.). History of English Literature. Translated
    from the French by H. Van Laun. With preface by R.H. Stoddard.
    Illustrated with fine steel engravings. 4 vols. New 3/4 maroon
    morocco extra, linen sides, gilt tops and backs, uncut. New
    York: Worthington Co., 1891. =$12.00=

    Fine large type edition.


261 Tolstoy (Leo N.). The Living Corpse. A Drama in Six Acts
    and Twelve Tableaux. Translated from the Russian by Anna M.
    Evarts. 12mo. cloth. New York, 1919. =$1.00=

    It is Tolstoy's protest against the absurdity of certain
    marriage and divorce laws which he shows up with masterly
    satire.


261A Tolstoy (Leo N.). Complete writings. Translated from
    the original Russian and edited by Leo Wiener. With numerous
    illustrations finely printed on Japan vellum. 28 vols, 8vo.,
    red cloth, Japan paper labels, gilt tops, uncut. Boston: Dana
    Estes (1904). =$75.00=

    Edition de Luxe, limited 1,000 numbered sets. This is the most
    complete edition issued, printed in large type on special
    hand-made paper for subscribers only.


261B Another copy. Bound in new three-quarter levant morocco,
    extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt tops, uncut. Boston: Dana Estes
    (1904). Published at $240.00. =$145.00=

    Edition de Luxe, limited to 1,000 numbered sets, issued to
    subscribers only.

    A magnificent set in a most sumptuous binding.


262 Valpy's Shakespeare. The Plays and Poems of Shakespeare,
    according to the Imperial Text of Edmund Malone, including the
    latest revisions, with a Life, Glossarial Notes, and Index.
    Edited by A. J. Valpy. With 170 exquisite outline illustrations
    from designs by England's best artists. 15 vols. 12mo. full
    crushed blue levant morocco extra, gilt paneled backs, with
    raised bands, inside gilt borders, original marbled edges.
    London: Bohn, 1857. =$65.00=

    This edition, edited by Valpy and improved by Malone, is the
    best of the handy volume edition published. The illustrations
    are magnificent and drawn with great skill and exactness.


263 Verne (Jules) Complete Works. Edited by Charles F. Horne.
    With many full-page illustrations printed on laid paper, and
    five of the photogravures are finely colored by hand. 15 vols.
    8vo. New 3/4 light blue levant morocco extra, full gilt tooled
    backs, gilt tops, uncut. New York and London: Vincent Parke &
    Co., 1911. =$90.00=

    Limited Edition de Luxe, printed in large type on water-marked
    paper especially for this edition.

    These are the complete unexpurgated writings of Jules Verne.


264 Another Copy of this work. Prince of Wales Edition. With
    very fine illustrations, some hand-colored. Original red
    buckram, gilt stamped backs, gilt tops, uncut. New York and
    London: Vincent Parke & Co.

    Published at $60.00. =$30.00=


265 Voltaire (Francois) Complete Works. Translated by Wm.
    Fleming, with Introduction by O. H. G. Leigh, and Notes by
    Tobias Smollet. Also, a critique and biography by John Morley.
    Finely illustrated with 132 colored and black and white
    drawings on plate paper. 22 vols. 8vo. red interlaken cloth,
    gilt tops, uncut.

    Published at $64.00. =$24.00=


266 Walford (Edward). Tales of Our Great Families. 2 vols. Post
    8vo. 1/2 blue levant morocco extra, gilt tooled backs, gilt
    tops. London, 1877. =$7.50=

    First Edition, fine copy.

    Contents: The Two Fair Gunnings; The Three Miss Walpoles; The
    Bad Lord Stourton; The Witty Duke of Wharton; An Eccentric
    Lady, etc., etc.


267 Walford (Edward). Chapters from Family Chests. 2 vols. Post
    8vo. 1/2 red levant morocco extra, raised bands, gilt tops,
    uncut. London, 1887. =$7.50=

    First Edition. Very fine uncut copy.

    Contents: The Bad Lord Byron; The Escape of Lady Ogilvy; A
    Romance of the House of Audley; An Incident in the House of
    Montgomery; Bess of Hardwicke; Three Very Fair Seymours, etc.


268 Curiosa. The Case of the Unfortunate Bosavern Penlez.
    London. Printed for T. Clement, 1749. Bound in same volume.
    A True State of the Case of Bosavern Penlez, who suffered
    on account of the late Riot in the Strand, in which the Law
    regarding these Offences, and the Statute of George the First,
    commonly called the Riot Act, are fully considered. By Henry
    Fielding. First Edition. Post 8vo., boards, green leather back.
    London: printed for A. Miller, 1749. =$10.00=

    A scarce Fielding item, in very fine condition.


269 Curiosa. Henry the Eighth, and George the Fourth; or,
    the Case Fairly Stated. By Thomas Harral. Second Edition,
    with additions. Frontispiece containing four finely engraved
    portraits. 12mo., old half calf, board sides. London, 1820.
    Scarce. =$7.50=

    Contents: Strictures, historical and illustrative, on the
    English Law of Divorce; with a General View of the Modes of
    Adultery in the Ecclesiastical Courts, etc.; Historical Sketch
    of the Trials of Henry the Eighth's Queens--Catharine of
    Arragon, Anne Boleyn and Catharine Howard; Narrative of the
    Proceedings Against Her Majesty, Caroline Amelia Elizabeth,
    whilst Princess of Wales, etc., etc.


270 Johnson (Samuel). The Life of. Comprehending an Account of
    his Studies and Numerous Works. By James Boswell. Illustrated.
    4 vols. Johnson's Lives of the British Poets. Compiled by
    William Hazlitt. Illustrated. 4 vols. The Journal of a Tour
    to the Hebrides with Samuel Johnson. By James Boswell.
    Illustrated. Together 9 vols. Post 8vo., half blue polished
    calf, leather labels, gilt tops, uncut. London, n. d. =$20.00=

    A well printed handy edition of the Life of Johnson, and his
    Lives of the British Poets, including his Tour to the Hebrides.


271 Apuleius, the Works of. Comprising the Metamorphoses, or
    Golden Ass, the God of Socrates, the Florida, and his Defence,
    or a Discourse on Magic. A new translation, to which are added
    a Metrical Version of Cupid and Psyche, and Mrs. Tighe's
    Psyche. Finely engraved frontispiece. 12mo. New three-quarter
    red levant morocco extra, gilt tooled back, gilt top. London,
    1889. =$7.50=

    An expurgated edition with additional notes.


272 A'Beckett (G. A.). The Comic History of England. With
    20-full-page hand-colored etchings and 200 woodcuts, by John
    Leech. 2 vols. bound in one. 8vo., full polished claret calf
    extra, full gilt-back (slightly rubbed), marbled edges. London:
    Bradbury, Agnew & Co., n. d. =$10.00=

    An exceptionally fine copy with early impressions of Leech's
    best work--finely colored by hand.


273 Carlyle (Thomas). A History of the First Forty Years of His
    Life, 1795-1835. 2 vols. Also, A History of his Life in London.
    1834-1881. 2 vols. Portrait. By James Anthony Froude. Together
    4 vols. 8vo., original cloth. New York: Scribners, 1882-84.
    =$7.50=

    This is scarce First American Edition.


274 Homer. The Iliad of. Translated by Alexander Pope. With
    Observations on Homer and His Works, and Brief Notes, by J. S.
    Watson. With portrait and complete series of outline engravings
    by Flaxman. Thick 12mo. New three-quarter maroon morocco extra,
    gilt tooled back, gilt top, uncut. London, 1873. =$6.00=

    A fine printed edition with clear impressions of Flaxman's
    designs.


275 London. Saunterings in and About London. By Max
    Schlesinger. With numerous illustrations by McCullough. Post
    8vo. Half blue polished calf, leather labels, gilt tops, uncut.
    London, 1853. =$3.50=


276 London. Picturesque Sketches of London, Past and Present.
    By Thomas Miller. Numerous illustrations. Post 8vo. Half green
    polished calf, leather labels, gilt top, uncut. London, n. d.
    =$3.50=


277 Myths and Folk-tales, of the Russians, Western Slavs, and
    Magyars. By Jeremiah Curtin. 8vo., original cloth, uncut.
    Boston, 1890. =$3.00=

    Fine copy of the First Edition.


278 Ruskin (John). Poems by. Collected and edited by James
    Osborne Wright. With finely etched frontispiece. Royal 8vo.,
    original cloth, uncut. N. Y., 1882. =$5.00=

    With Mr. Wright's inscription, "Only 50 copies printed."

[Illustration]


[Illustration]

A night telegram would be advisable if item is especially desired,
as only one copy of most of the books listed in this (our special)
catalogue are on hand, and doubtful whether duplicates can be procured.
Always state number and catchword of item desired, as an error would
lose you the coveted volume, and cause disappointment.

[Illustration].


_To Harry F. Marks, 116 Nassau St., New York._

_Please send from your Catalogue of Choice and Rare Books, the
following:_

  No.        First Word of Title
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------
       |                                             |
       |                                             |
  -----+---------------------------------------------+-----------

  _Signed._ ___________________________________________________

  _Address._ __________________________________________________

  _Date._ _____________________________________________________


BOOKS WANTED

  To HARRY F. MARKS
  116 NASSAU ST., NEW YORK

DEAR SIR:--Please quote prices for the books named below. If you cannot
supply from stock, register my name on your list and report results as
soon as possible. This is not to be considered as binding me to take
any book.

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

  ______________________________________________________________

I shall also be glad to hear of any books you receive relating to:--

  NAME _________________________________________________

  ADDRESS _______________________________________________

  DATE _____________________________ 191_


       *       *       *       *       *

Persons in search of out-of-print books are invited to send us their
lists of wants, and if desired, quotations will be furnished before
purchase. This service involves no additional expense to our customers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Libraries and collections of Books purchased for cash.

       *       *       *       *       *

We desire to inform our customers that owing to the scarcity of good
books, and at high prices when they appear, you will find in this
catalogue a choice collection of rare and desirable items, which we
were fortunate in procuring recently, and are now offering at unusual
low prices.

       *       *       *       *       *

I will buy back at the purchase price any books that do not meet with
your expectation.

                             HARRY F. MARKS
                 110-116 Nassau Street,   New York City

    This is but a partial list of our large stock. If any items of
    interest to you are not found catalogued please communicate
    with us, and very possibly we may have what you wish on hand.

    We invite comparison with others as to prices.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration]




    Transcriber's Notes:


    Simple spelling, grammar, and typographical errors were
    corrected.

    Punctuation normalized.

    Anachronistic and non-standard spellings retained as printed.

    Italics markup is enclosed in _underscores_.

    Bold markup is enclosed in =equals=.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Harry F. Marks Catalogue No. 4, 1919, by
Harry F. Marks

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARRY F. MARKS CATALOGUE NO. 4 ***

***** This file should be named 47014.txt or 47014.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/0/1/47014/

Produced by Richard Tonsing, Bill Tozier, logista and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

