Project Gutenberg's The Art of Drinking, by Georg Gottfried Gervinus

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.


Title: The Art of Drinking
       A Historical Sketch

Author: Georg Gottfried Gervinus

Release Date: October 8, 2014 [EBook #47076]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ART OF DRINKING ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Fay Dunn and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









TRANSCRIBER'S NOTE.


In this plain text version of "The Art of Drinking":

  Words in italics are marked with _underscores_.
  Small capital letters are shown in upper case.

"Phoenicia" was originally printed with an oe ligature.

Minor printer's errors have been corrected, but variant and irregular
spellings are retained.




  THE ART OF DRINKING.


  A HISTORICAL SKETCH.

  FROM THE GERMAN OF

  G. G. GERVINUS.


  TRANSLATED FOR THE

  UNITED STATES BREWERS' ASSOCIATION.

  NEW YORK:
  UNITED STATES BREWERS' ASSOCIATION.
  1890.




TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.


G. G. Gervinus (1805-1871) is recognized as one of the foremost
historians of Germany. He was a man of marvelous erudition. His
fame rests not only upon a great number of profoundly learned
works, but also upon his brilliant advocacy of the constitutional
rights of the people, as against the reactionary tendency of the
German princes during Metternich's despotic rule. He was one of
the seven celebrated professors of the University of Goettingen who
boldly protested against the violation of the Constitution by the
King of Hanover. His best-known works are "History of the Poetical
Literature of the Germans," "History of the Nineteenth Century," and
a voluminous commentary on Shakspeare, "made popular in England"--as
the Encyclopaedia Britannica states--"by an excellent translation."

The following sketch was designed by Gervinus as an outline of what
a history of potology would be, if conceived and executed by a
philosophical mind.

An English translation of this sketch needs no justification in our
time.




THE ART OF DRINKING.

A HISTORICAL SKETCH.


A sketch of the art of drinking might seem to announce a subject
unworthy of a man whose energies have been devoted to earnest purposes
and serious aims in life. But it is not my intention to make the sketch
a mere treasure-box of all sorts of curiosities, nor to gratify thereby
the curiosity of idle readers. When it is approached from a scientific
standpoint, the dignity of science must necessarily exclude all
frivolous treatment, as well as all shallow and superficial purpose.
Many would be satisfied if an insignificant sketch of this kind simply
bore some pathetic motto, as these words of Seneca's: _Animum aliquando
debemus relaxare et quibusdam oblectamentis reficere; sed ipsa
oblectamenta opera sint._ I, however, would scorn a justification of
this kind, for I hold that recreation ought to be recreation, and not
work, and should consider it far better if our labors were pleasures,
rather than our pleasures, labors.

I wish in this sketch to point out the importance and serious
significance of a work of this sort, and shall have, above all, to
prove that the apparently somewhat jocular subject has a very serious
side, and may be contemplated from a grave standpoint.

If I succeed from the very first in inducing the reader to adopt the
same historical view of the matter that I take myself, I shall have
gained a great point, for he will then lay aside all prejudice and
preconceived opinion. The real historian must be a stranger to all
prejudice and preconceived opinion; he cannot treat of any subject
separately, but is attracted by everything in a certain order and
connection. He must not choose any subject from personal inclination,
but according to the needs and demands of his time and of human
society; nor must he treat the chosen subject with that pathological
interest and sympathy so common among the writers of the New World. He
must understand and know, from historical experience, that in times
like ours, which have outgrown the activity of imagination--that
is to say, _Art_--and, on the other hand, are not yet ripe for
speculation--that is to say, _Philosophy_,--universal observation,
which includes all departments of human activity, is the only
thing that in these very times and for this generation can furnish
positive information and prove a certain gain. The real historian,
whose profession it is to be equally interested in everything, thus
becomes an image of impartiality. The impartial observer is attracted
by all phenomena, and to him nothing appears small, insignificant
or unimportant, as soon as he begins to draw conclusions from his
observations and to discover laws in the physical as well as the moral
world. In the world of reason there exists nothing small, accidental or
unimportant. If the same laws of chemical combination govern immense
masses of matter as well as the smallest atom, if the march and
development of mankind are the same as those of the most insignificant
individual, the observation of the smallest as well as the greatest is
of equal importance, and man may well feel comfort in the fact that
each hair upon his head is, indeed, numbered. This alone might refute
any serious objection to my theme.

A history of oinology or potology would be able to show that man, in
satisfying a partly physical and partly intellectual desire, is bound
by the same laws that govern him in the satisfaction of the highest
needs of his striving mind. And if this be the case, the theme might
be considered worthy of being chosen by the most severe scientific
moralist; and matters of this kind are apt to be overlooked only
because other things appear comparatively more important. There is
a history of wine and wine-drinking (for of these alone I speak),
because it is connected with our spiritual development. Wine itself
shows a certain element of development and perfectibility--a relation
to organic life in its fermentation, and a sympathetic feeling, as
it were, in its movement during the period of the blooming of the
vine, while in the plant itself it shows an inner development. I have
just called wine-drinking a partly physical, partly intellectual
enjoyment, and it is almost impossible to call up the image of any
social gathering or entertainment without it. And since all human
culture proceeds from the manners and forms of society and social
intercourse, we would plainly see in such a history--what has often
been divined and pointed out, but also frequently smiled at--that wine
is most closely connected with the civilization of States and with the
development of free human culture, and that the art of drinking at
all times keeps step with this culture and development, and sinks or
rises with them. For not at all times have men practiced this art with
equal wisdom, nor yet even practiced it in like manner; and there is
spiritual progress from the blood-thirsty revels of AEgisthe to those of
the philosophers with Plato; from the cup-bearer Hephaestos to Hebe and
Ganymede; from the heavy, dull metal cup to the transparent, rounded
crystal glass, in Lucian's time, or our own, which shows the color,
retains the perfume and promotes sound. _As the culture of the grape
is only found where a higher human civilization has begun to develop,
it also shows itself at once where a new civilization appears; it may
be even in regions unfavorable to it, where it is only cultivated till
wine has become so great a want that it can no longer be dispensed
with, despite the lack of sufficient native production._ The first
cultivators of the vine, history praises as benefactors of mankind
and propagators of civilization. Noah was the elect of God, in spite
of the improprieties produced by his wine; old Dionysos, for all the
ravings of his service, a kindly god; and Urban, of the Middle Ages, a
saint, although he committed the greatest misdeeds under the influence
of wine. And wherever, on the other hand, in more enlightened history,
a man took an active part in the development of human civilization,
he did so also instinctively, it would seem, for that of wine--be it
a Heracles Ipoctonos among the Erythraeans; or an Alexander, who, with
his Greek culture, brought the grape-vine back to hot Babylon; or a
Charles IV., who, with his Italian education, wished to force it upon
cold Bohemia. We shall see that wherever hierarchical constitutions
deprived the people of the advantages of education, the wisdom of the
priests was subtle enough to forbid wine too, and the course of the
Mohammedan hierarchy will show us most plainly how the art of drinking
brought with it bold reformatory deviations from the laws. We shall
observe, even with Christian nations, how, among certain races where
the use of wine was confined to the Communion table, civilization also
came to a stand-still. We can then point to a patriarchal and heroic
period of the art of drinking, where wine, as was formerly done by
the Gauls, and even by our own Suabian ancestors, was despised, and
afterwards, by all sorts of artificial means, made more substantial
than it is by nature--more like mead or beer, which is at such periods
the natural drink of the people. At an aristocratic and knightly epoch,
in which society is unnaturally sublimated, it is sought to increase
and make more spiritual still the effect of wine also, by the addition
of spicy herbs. With the first civil development of nations they return
to simple nature; a number of corporations and brotherhoods make it
their business to watch over the art of drinking, over the purity of
the wine itself, and its lawful use; from king to beggar, all cultivate
the cheering art, just as all are anxious, also, for spiritual
enlightenment. We see, then, in the last centuries the pedantic return
to tea and coffee, and among those nations who have shared but in very
small measure in the intellectual progress of Europe, we find that the
coffee-house (cafe)--an institution which is scarcely a century and a
half old--almost crowded out the wine-saloons.

I have alluded to wine-drinking as a partly intellectual and partly
physical enjoyment. Among material enjoyments, it is one of the most
spiritual; among spiritual ones, one of the most material, keeping
about the right middle course. A history of the art of drinking would
prove this. Everywhere in the history of nations we shall come upon
times where amid a fulness of physical power, the desire for more
refinement in outward life, as well as a striving for greater inner
perfection, began to manifest itself. In Germany, the time of the
Reformation was such a period. And at such times, when outer and inner
powers begin to stir with wonderful energy--times as yet divided
between old roughness and new humanity; between the coarse, ordinary
fare of every day for mind and imagination, and the new hope of some
finer nourishment--at such times the genial enjoyment of wine, and the
delights of regular social pleasures, have always struck deepest root
and had freest play. Such images as those, this history would most
willingly depict; nor would it be superfluous to present them in our
day, when society seems more and more to forget that its aim is to
be simply pleasure and recreation. The future seems to offer nothing
that could take the place of the great simplicity of past manners; of
those feasts of youth which asked nothing but uncontrolled enjoyment;
of those evening entertainments of the citizens, which were devoted
to their immediate surroundings in house or community; of the frank
and manly rectitude of that race which seemed, indeed, to find truth
and constancy in wine, and its best pleasures in an afternoon spent
in the "wine-garden," surrounded by wife and children, relatives and
friends. All public pleasure has disappeared from among us, and we
arrange parties and receptions that only tire ourselves and others.
Ceremonious etiquette gives us work and trouble when we should find
recreation, and fatigues our minds when imagination should have free
play. Only where men, here and there, permit themselves to meet about
the bottle, according to the good old custom, and where no committee
is necessary to approve of the toasts, pure, genuine pleasure revives
once more, together with the pure, genuine art of drinking. For there
is no intellectual power that is so directly quickened and strengthened
by any nourishment as imagination is by wine. Tea keeps conversation
within the bounds of pedantic propriety, and beer soothes but checks
quick repartee; but wine sharpens the sting of wit, stimulates spirited
conversation, and brightens the whole social atmosphere. The poet,
who lives in imagination, and turns his back upon reality, was always
a lover of wine--the beverage which intensifies reality, and, at the
same time, lifts him above it. The drinking-song, from Anacreon down
to all his imitators in Germany, occupies a special and very prominent
place in literature. To wine are dedicated the first productions of
the tragic art; and to it has been assigned a particular dithyrambic
measure, which a poet who should set water above wine could never
soar high enough to make his own. And whosoever has any cause to turn
away from the real world, and longs for the freedom of living in an
ideal one, is fond of wine. If I wished to spoil my idyllic picture by
satire, I should here name the converts and the monks; but I should
rather call up the wandering beggar, whom want and hardship have made
weary of the world. Sleep has been praised as the friend of poverty;
but there were times when wine also was called its friend, which,
even in waking hours, calls up dreams that charm away the burden of a
miserable existence. For wine tempts even the beggar to extravagance,
that vice which has often been set down to the account of wine;
although, if there be such a thing as degrees in vice, it may be called
one of the nobler ones. And this genial pleasure in spending helps the
poor man in his misery; consoles him for his destitution; offers him
who is homeless a spot where he may feel comfortable, and teaches him
to forget all that oppresses him. Wine makes man liberal and generous;
the offered cup was formerly the symbol of hospitality granted, and
even the miser is more ready to share tobacco and wine than any of
his other possessions. For it makes us communicative and confidential
in social intercourse; it founds friendships, and is still the symbol
of brotherhood. If it sometimes stirs up heat and dissension, it also
smooths the way to union again; and, formerly, no reconciliation
could take place without having a seal set upon it by a common cup of
wine. At your cup you find the freest and most enlightened spot in
the world, where you may not only think what you please, and say what
you think, but where your thoughts themselves take the highest flight
man is capable of. I do not know whether it is due to jealous gods
that the excessive enjoyment of wine proves its own penalty. Without
this depressing fire in the wine itself, it seems to me heaven and
its secrets would be far more endangered by the spiritual flight of
the drinker than by the towering rocks of the Titans. Thus, wherever
despots and hierarchs intended to keep nations in drowsy stupidity,
they forbade wine. Only at times, when liberty and enlightenment
were common property, when no castes possessed an exclusive monoply
of wisdom, right or might, was it possible to introduce political
discussion at the cup. For only at such times of universal public
spirit and feeling could one take counsel of the imagination in
practical affairs and matters of State, and hope for such results of
the evening discussion at the cup as would bear the test of the sober
next day's light. For only such heroic conditions as are represented by
the Germans and Persians of ancient times can really show the virtues
of truth and faithfulness, and in the most public concerns could hear
the voice that always speaks in wine; and, in those days, no one needed
to fear that wine would impel him to speak truth too freely. Only
nations of really active nature, who called manliness and war-power by
the name of virtue, could do full honor to wine, and it could only be a
Greek who asked, as did Aristophanes:--

    "Dost thou boldly venture to say wine is not good for our reason?
    What more than wine impels us to deeds and to action?
    Why, look you, as soon as men are drinkers of wine, then
    Rich are they all and active, victorious in law-courts;
    Aye, very happy too, and to their friends useful."

Among the Germans, too, it has long been customary to settle all
business with a drink, and there was no betrothal, no bargain, and no
compact that was not accompanied by the purchase of wine. All German
history is filled with the love of wine. When the German border-line
was first drawn, the Germans insisted on keeping the left bank of the
Rhine, on account of its richness in grapes. They wrote books about the
national disposition to drink; they divided their history according
to drinking periods, and old proverbs call the love of drink the
German national vice, as theft is that of the Spaniards, deceit that
of the Italians, and vanity that of the French. Nowhere exist wines
so capable of purity as the German wines, and no real German will
ever compare with their genuine wine-qualities those of the tricky
southern wines; and nowhere have mixtures been so carefully avoided,
as well as the purity of the art of drinking, and the old drinking
customs so scrupulously preserved, as in Germany. Only in Germany could
be conceived the idea of a history of the art of drinking. Perhaps
the fates have ordained me to be the historian of wine, in the very
meaning of my name--ger-win, not ger-win. And perhaps some readers may
be found for it in Germany who do not consider it too indelicate to
speak or to read of the natural needs of man. Let man never, in foolish
pride, think himself above his own natural wishes and enjoyments, for
it is the reasonable care given to these which keeps him close to
human nature. As long as a people cannot live on newspaper reading and
on staring about in public places, as do Frenchmen and Italians, it
keeps its hands busy, its powers actively employed, and its eyes open,
and wherever active powers are astir, no nation is in so very bad a
condition. I should be well content if I could bring before active
and manly minds a cheerful picture of those manly enjoyments, and
induce them to taste of this somewhat coarser fare, in addition to the
delicate dishes of our literature.




I.

THE FATHERLAND OF WINE.


I would only here and there touch upon the botanical and industrial
culture of the grape, as many very valuable works on the subject
already exist (among others, Henderson's "History of Ancient and
Modern Wines"), which make almost a complete literature of wine.
I shall also speak of the home of the grape only for the sake of
preserving the natural order of things, and shall touch later upon the
mythical origin of wine, or the preparation of wine. If we look for
the original country of the grape, we shall find that here, too, as in
almost every other branch of culture, the western highlands of Asia
are pointed out to us, whether we follow the fable of Father Noah,
the Nysaean Bacchus, or the researches of the naturalists. The latter
teach us that on the Canary Isles and in America the grape grows not
so much wild as in a degenerate condition; but in the southwest of
Europe, for instance the Italian woods, it is here and there found
growing really wild; that in the southeast this is still more common,
and in Asia ever on the increase. It is singular that at the Ararat,
to which Jewish tradition also points, Tournefort, in his "Journey
to the Levant," discovered a regular workshop of the European plant,
and on the borders of transcaucasian Georgia he saw the land covered
with wild grape-vines and fruit-trees. In the Caucasus, Marshall found
the grape flourishing independently in the forest and covering whole
trees, and we see in the rough and indifferent manner in which the
inhabitants of these countries harvest and treat the grape that they
consider it a very common product. The manner in which they preserve
the wine, and the quantity they daily consume, prove the same, and this
entirely agrees with what Xenophon tells of the preservation of the
wine in cisterns. Elphinstone, in his report on Cabul, relates that
the Sultan presented him with grapes that grew without cultivation in
his country. And not only the quantities of the wild grapes in those
countries induce us to regard them as their native soil, it is also
the excellent quality of the cultivated grape in Persia. The quantity
and quality of the Persian wine opposed in this respect an effective
barrier to the laws of the Koran, which enjoined against the enjoyment
of the beverage, even in the Orient, which is so set in its religious
rites and ceremonies. Olivier preferred the grapes about Ispahan to
all he had tasted in Greece, on the islands of the Mediterranean, and
in Syria. None, he says, equals the _Kismish_, which bears a berry of
middling size, without seeds and with a thin skin. Shiraz, rich in
poets, is celebrated on account of the excellence and plenty of its
wine and its fine air, and Morier, in his "Journey through Persia,"
places the wine of Kazwin even above that of Shiraz, and the former
city is so beautifully situated in so mild a climate that the Persians
have given it the name of "Paradise." In regard to the fruitfulness of
the vine, Strabo tells us that in Hyrcania _one_ vine was apt to yield
about thirty-three quarts of wine. In Margiana were said to be vines
measuring at the base of the stem two fathoms in circumference and
bearing grapes two yards long. In Asia the fruitfulness is said to be
still greater, and there the wine keeps, in unpitched vessels, through
three generations.




II.

WINE IS NOT DOMESTICATED AMONG THE NEGROES.


The course from east to west, marked by the higher culture of the human
race, has been also closely followed by the culture of the grape. Other
regions, north and south from the boundary marked out, may have had
a certain share in that civilization; but it seems now to be proved
that the negro races, the original inhabitants of Africa, have not
in any way been connected with it. In those regions of Africa always
inhabited by these races, no grape-culture is, up to the present
day, to be found; and, both in ancient and modern times, the grape
has been a stranger in Africa, and a stranger scarcely to be called
naturalized anywhere. To that king of the long-lived Ethiopians in
Herodotus, to whom Cambyses sent his gifts, wine, therefore, seemed
the only desirable thing they possessed, and to it he ascribed the
brief old age which, in the best case, it was given the Persians to
attain. His negroes, therefore, were not acquainted with wine, and in
this they were like all uncivilized people, as we shall frequently see;
nor did they ever accept it, any more than they accepted any other
part of civilization; they never advanced any further than to their
_Towak_, the palm-wine made of flower-stems; even the lotus-wine, of
the preparation of which Herodotus knew, seems to belong only to the
Libyans. Only emigrants, in the most ancient as well as most recent
times, have introduced the grape-vine at different times into Africa,
and we will briefly glance at this. First, the Egyptians must be
named, Caucasian races not autochthonically at home in Libya. The
ancient culture of the grape in Egypt is proved not only by historical
documents, but even by the ruins of old buildings, and I shall return
to the paintings in the vaults near El Kab, which represent, among
other things, the manner of gathering the grapes, and of preserving and
cooling the wine. Several regions are specially mentioned as celebrated
for their wine. Eleithya had grape-culture; the lakes of Mareos and
Taenia, where all is now a barren desert, were commended for their
wine; Alexandria exported wine to Rome, and Horace is acquainted
with that of Mareos. To the Epicureans, however, the Falernian wine
seemed better when treated in the Egyptian manner; and the wine of
Taenia was considered stronger and spicier than the Alexandrian. But
even in the time of Ahenaeos this culture had almost disappeared, and
only that of Antylla still had a good name in those days. And even
in better times, the native wine does not seem to have sufficed for
home consumption, for Herodotus speaks at length of imported wine from
Hellas and Phoenicia. The Libyans and Berbers probably never knew a
grape-culture of their own without foreign aid. It is certain that in
old times the colonies of the Greeks and Carthagenians in the north
of Africa were full of the grape; and we shall find further on that
the cult of Bacchus was widespread in Cyrenaica, and that traces of
it still remain in the ruins. Pliny speaks of vineyards as traces of
ancient civilization in the mountains of Dyris (Atlas); and there
are still, more for the sake of the grapes than the wine, vineyards
near Tunis, in the rich district of Derna, as well as the poor one of
Mafa, in Fezzan. In Mauritania, as Strabo reports, were found grapes a
yard in circumference. In the oases, Belzoni saw grapes, and in that
of Siwah they are excellent, as other southern fruit also. In recent
times the Portuguese brought the grape, with other fruit, as well to
Madeira and the Canary Isles as to Abyssinia. There the poorness of
the plant itself, no less than the peculiar use of it, shows plainly
what a stranger it is. Thus, also, among the Griquas it is cultivated
by the missionaries only, who, confining, as they are wont, all
civilization which they offer to the elements of Christian religion,
give to grape-culture also only a Christian significance, planting the
vine merely for its use at the Communion table. The celebrated Cape
wine is a different matter. Enlightened French emigrants, Protestants
driven from home by the Edict of Nantes, first planted the grape
there; but it is not certain whether the vines came both from Persia
and from the Rhine, or only from Shiraz. The climate seems there to
favor the culture of the grape extremely; the soil, however, appears
most unfavorable, and Colebrooke, in his work on the condition of the
Cape of Good Hope, ascribes the earthy taste, which makes the Cape
wines unpleasant, to a substratum of the soil, otherwise rather good,
consisting in many places of layers of clay and sand that has been
washed up. And what is not spoiled by the soil, seems to have been
spoiled by the indolence of the Dutchmen, or some other disadvantage
with which the African country is cursed. A sort of fairy-tale is told
of the totally wrong manner of planting the first vineyard; and still
not even the example of the far better Constantia wine has induced men
to make vineyards in rockier spots.




III.

THE DEGENERATE CULTURE OF THE GRAPE AND THE ART OF DRINKING IN CHINA.


If the learned men of China can be trusted, the grape-vine must have
been known in their country more than a thousand years B. C. They refer
to this in old books, the "Tshu-ly" and the "Shi-King;" but as to the
latter, that seems everywhere to refer to the wine made of various
grains, which is almost exclusively used in China.

At all events, it seems to be proved by the most trustworthy witnesses
that rice-wine is older in China than the wine of grapes; for while
the highest age that can be assigned to wine is only given by the
doubtful testimony of the supposed author of the "Tshu-ly," Tshu-Kang,
who mounted the throne 1122 B. C., the invention of rice-wine is set
down to the Dynasty Hia, 2209 (1716 B. C.). This also accords with
experience elsewhere, for beer of various kinds (and the grain-wines
of the Chinese are nothing else, except that they frequently mix them
with all sorts of fruit, including grapes) everywhere became the
national drink in advance of wine, as brandy and other liquors follow
wine. Grape-brandy has, it appears, been known in China only since the
seventh century of our era, but is now a favorite beverage with the
common Chinamen, and is drunk by them warm and almost as strong as
alcohol in large quantities, in spite of its very unpleasant taste.
For only a comparatively short time the grape-culture seems to have
flourished in China. The Chinese always have had their grain-wines and
their brandy more at heart. The inventor of the rice-wine was, it is
true, banished by the Emperor Yu-te, because he well foresaw the sad
consequences of its use, and yet the beverage has kept its place to
the present day as an ornament of the Chinese table. It is like this
people, who live on nothing but that water-plant, rice, and tea, to
cling with the same obstinacy as they do to all old orders and customs,
to this beverage, which is something between brandy and water, and
taken neither hot nor cold. These wines are said to have a very bad
effect; they fatten at first, but then bring on consumption, entire
loss of appetite, and at last complete emaciation and death. It was
natural, therefore, that the paternal Emperors, who looked after their
subjects as after real children, and in whose laws dietetics always
played a great part, should forbid these injurious beverages, and
several of the Emperors set the good example. The third Emperor of the
Dynasty Mant-shu, Yong-Tsheng, devoted one of his ten commandments to
this subject, and the great Kanghi says in his writings that, despite
his pleasure in them, he never became accustomed to wine and spirits.
At feasts and banquets he only touched it with his lips, and so might
well boast of not drinking any at all. Moreover, this wine consumes a
great deal of grain, which in a densely peopled country, whose very
existence depends upon its supplies of grain, is a matter of some
importance, so that perhaps from this higher standpoint also there
was good reason for the prohibition. But the most important reason
lies deeper still, and was still more carefully considered; and as
this chiefly concerns the wine from grapes, we must first cast another
glance at grape-culture.

We have seen above that grapes existed of old in China. The
just-mentioned learned, philosophical and humane Kanghi himself shows,
in his remarks on natural history in China, that grapes came to China
from the West, and that before his time but few kinds had existed in
China, and boasts that he had sent for three new varieties to Ha-mi,
as he would rather introduce a new fruit into his country than build
a hundred porcelain towers. He observes, also, that these grapes
degenerate in the south, but do well in the north in dry and stony
soil. The experiences of the missionaries in Pekin, however, were
unfavorable; the soil was against them, as well as the remarkably rough
climate, and possibly they went to work awkwardly in other respects
also. For it is certain that these very southern provinces once had
many grape-vines, and the wine made in Shan-si, Shen-si, Petshe-ly,
Shantong, Honan and Hu-Kuang, put into well-closed vessels and buried
in the ground, could be preserved for years. This goes to prove an
observation we shall often find repeated, that after a time the most
favorable soil no longer suffices for the grape, which demands a
certain youthful power in the soil in which it is to flourish most
luxuriantly. In the older and middle ages of China we therefore find
the grape-wine mentioned in all their songs, and that of the river
Kiang is specially praised. It is known that at different periods vines
were introduced from Samarcand, Persia, Thibet, Kashgar, Turfu and
Ha-mi, and the annals themselves plainly mention wine under the reign
of Emperor Wu-ty, Dynasty Han, 140 B. C. From there we can follow up
its use almost from reign to reign, and after the already-mentioned
Kanghi, the last dynasty shows still more rulers who introduced new
grapes from distant countries, so that the southern provinces begin
to restore their old grape-culture again. But the grapes in Ha-mi and
Shan-si seem mostly to be used for raisins, and what we occasionally
hear of their condition in Hoai-lai-hien--that their berries are of
gigantic size, like plums, with a thick skin, and that their size
is not so much due to the climate as to the fact that the vines are
grafted on mulberry-trees, and that they ripen as early as April, May
and June--all this seems highly characteristic of a degenerate culture,
and gives us the poorest possible opinion of the wine that might
be made there. Highly, therefore, as the Jesuits attempt to praise
grape-culture in China, we can yet have but little belief in it; but in
the Middle Ages it must have been all the more brilliant. The reports
concerning it are, however, wrapped in a certain obscurity, from
which no fact stands out clearly. The grape, it is said, flourished
only too well in China--it caused various revolutions. As often as the
Government had ordered the destruction of such trees as obstructed
the grain-fields, the useless grape-vine was also included, and, if
memory served the reporters, that plant was several times specially
mentioned. It is certain that the destruction of the vine in most of
the provinces, under various reigns, was carried so far that even the
recollection of it was lost, and this induced the belief that the
grape had been brought to China but recently from the Occident. It is
plain that there was always a pretense put forward that the grape-wine
detracted from the culture of the grain, although, with some care,
the same area might probably have yielded a nobler beverage than was
made of the rice and barley, grown where the grape had been rooted
out. But the intellectual effect of it was evidently feared. In so
regular a clock-work as the Chinese State, what might be more dangerous
than irregular movements so very easily produced by wine in the heads
of people? Even the making of the grape-wine was often prohibited.
When that did not avail, its use was limited to feasts, banquets and
sacrifices, and to guests and infirm old age. Not enough with this, at
such feasts a special Mandarin was set over even the princes of the
blood to keep watch over and not permit them to drink more than three
glasses. And still more, certain ceremonies were prescribed, long
healths and salutations, circumstantial rites, at which a free-thinker,
as the Jesuits say, may laugh, but in which a philosopher must
admire the wisdom of the lawgiver, and the subtlety with which he
banished intemperance, and that injudicious freedom of speech which
is its inseparable companion, from among the people! We have seen the
effects of grain-wine in China. The wise Emperor Kanghi complains that
it makes one stupid and dull and confuses the brain. And how much
more terrible still must have been the effect of the grape-wine! This
is probably meant in a certain book of the Dynasty Tshu, where it is
said in warning explanation of the well-founded apprehensions of the
Chinese Government, that if a spirit of rebellion and insurrection was
then rife among the people of China, if they had lost much of their
old virtues and principles, the cause of it must be sought solely in
the effects of wine. Away, therefore, with that cursed boldness which
betrays a tongue set free by wine; that noisy action and damnable
confidence in one's own strength; that rising of the spirit, which must
have appeared to the learned Emperor as synonymous with confusion;
the impudent overstepping of the good old laws of etiquette; the wild
breaking away from the good old ruts! How should not all this, which
was inseparably connected with wine, seem to the philosophical head
of the State in his immovable peace and calmness, and to the council
of his ministerial pedants, extremely dangerous to the State, and
worthy of being annihilated to the last trace? Need we be surprised,
therefore, at the stories of abstinence told of the Emperors? It was
their duty to give a good example to the people. Had not their prophet,
Confucius, left these words of moderation--that coarse rice for food,
and water for drink, and the curved arm for a pillow, were enough for
happiness!

And thus the Governments of China succeeded in establishing, even
in very early times, a condition of submissive decency everywhere.
They confined wine to festive occasions, and we learn from the
"Shi-King" that to the guest was granted the honor of the cup; even
to him, however, in but the spare measure that chimes with the sordid
miserliness of the Chinaman, who could never have understood the art
of drinking, if for no other reason than because he has nothing of the
liberality which the Orient calls the "flowing hand." They say in a
guest-song:--

    "A noble guest has come beneath our roof;
    For him melodious tunes were played,
    So long as thus it pleased our guest,
    And with the cup I sought to cheer him.

    "The sound of music rang incessantly,
    And ever was the cup kept full;
    And in our honor did he empty it;
    The wine was light and pure, and harmed him not."

And in another place:--

    "A hare is roasting on the spit;
    A pumpkin leaf we go to pick;
    A banquet we prepare our guest,
    And fill his cup with wine the best."

We have seen from other authorities that wine was chiefly reserved to
old age, and here it is confirmed:--

    "Serve round the circle the wine-cup, ye bearers;
    With the spiced wine the aged refresh them;
    In it their youth and their vigor reviving,
    But your own youth surely needs no concoction."

Even at the feasts where wine was permitted, its use was limited
by cautious restrictions. All meals and banquets were subjected to
rules of etiquette almost as rigorous as those which the Court is
accustomed to give its ambassadors. The careful law is extended to
the very preparation and serving of the viands, and everywhere clips
the wings of the art of cooking and of drinking. If the Emperor U-tse
gave his warriors a banquet to gain their favor, he still preserved
the most rigid order of rank in the seating, and the food and the
drink; and the Emperor Tsi-she-hoang is praised for restoring the old
invitations and banquets, where every single ceremony took its due
course in beginning and end, so that a modest and decent joy beamed
in all eyes. To give a model for domestic feasts, they order public
ceremonies in all the cities; Mandarins preside at them; the law
invites scholars and distinguished citizens to them; and here, too,
the rites are prescribed down to the minutest detail. The chief object
of these feasts is to signalize merit, to preserve morality, and the
friendly as well as conventional proprieties. The President reads aloud
for that purpose, in the name of the Emperor, certain paragraphs of
the law, the introduction to which specially calls to mind that the
gathering is not really made for the sake of the enjoyment of meat
and drink, but to revive loyalty to the Prince, and more to the same
effect; and all their songs and pieces of music have reference to that.
A single drinking-song, of somewhat more liberal spirit, I found in
the "Shi-King," but in that the translator may possibly have had a
large share, especially in regard to the form. The contents are very
characteristic of Chinese poetry in general, whose bare realism offers
a remarkable contrast to that of the Orientals:--

    "Water, the fresh,
    Is drunk by the fish--
    The carps and the pikes;
    And each noble knight
    At the board
    Drinks water pure and bright.

    "Water, the fresh,
    Is drunk by the fish--
    The eels and the salmon;
    You sad fellows all
    At the board,
    Drink, till for more ye shall call.

    "Water, the fresh,
    Is drunk by the fish--
    The perch and the barbel;
    Ye good chums of mine
    At the board,
    Now drain ye the pearl of the wine.

    "Water, the fresh,
    Is drunk by the fish--
    The trout and the merlin;
    But we boys gay and bold
    At the board
    Drain waves of the wine untold."

But, even in their highest ecstasy, the brave drinkers still preserve a
sort of calmness; and if there is anything that can be called a sober
intoxication, this seems to be excellently expressed in the following
very characteristic song:--

    "Now our guests are growing tipsy;
    Decency is at an end;
    Sparks from out their eyes are darting,
    And the babbling tongues unbend.

    "Crooked caps shake back and forward,
    Hung but by a single hair;
    Stiff old legs the dance are trying,
    Hoarse old voices sing out fair.

    "At the first cup which thou drainest,
    Didst thou seem transformed to me;
    If another now thou'dst empty,
    Wholly tipsy wouldst thou be.

    "Truly thou dost shame me sorely;
    Sober quite you see I stay;
    But if thou wilt take me homeward,
    Lead me gently on the way.

    "True, thou lead'st me into ditches,
    But my own head reels at last;
    Hold me by thy arm supported,
    By thy pig-tail hanging fast."

With this extreme point of drinking I will close. This dull
intoxication is about what a warm grain-wine would produce, and fits
the disagreeable character of the Chinese as well as the anecdote
occurring in another song, where one whose invited guests do not appear
at the right time, is actually rejoiced to think he may now drink up
his wine alone. The value of wine for social enjoyment can scarcely
be known there, where conventionality ties the tongues, where there
is a tribunal of ceremonies, and where the tea-kettle is forever on
the fire, which among us, too, fosters only embroidery, gossip and
nervous debility. And then the greedy desire for physical enjoyment
is the one thing which makes the Chinaman love his wine and his spicy
concoctions, and which in this point has ever driven him into a
never-before-heard-of opposition against his Government. How dreadful
it is, however, to see these crude and childish remnants of antiquated
customs most closely knit now with the most refined and elaborate
tastes, wants and habits thus in vogue among the people, together
with secret and most pernicious vices, and yet to find that not a
single voice can be raised against it, because, with the most subtle
cunning, down to the very limits of physical needs, every expression of
indignation or of joy has been forbidden by law!





End of Project Gutenberg's The Art of Drinking, by Georg Gottfried Gervinus

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ART OF DRINKING ***

***** This file should be named 47076.txt or 47076.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/0/7/47076/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Fay Dunn and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
