Project Gutenberg's Lazy Matilda and Other Tales, by Katharine Pyle

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Lazy Matilda and Other Tales

Author: Katharine Pyle

Release Date: November 4, 2014 [EBook #47283]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAZY MATILDA AND OTHER TALES ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)










LAZY MATILDA
_and_ OTHER TALES




[Illustration:

    "Oh, grandmamma, I'm reading now,"
       The lazy Annie said,
    "I do not want to leave my book,
       Mayn't Mary go instead?"]




LAZY MATILDA
_and_ OTHER TALES

    BY

    KATHARINE PYLE

    AUTHOR OF "CARELESS JANE AND OTHER TALES,"
    "WHERE THE WIND BLOWS," "FAIRY TALES
    FROM MANY LANDS," ETC.

[Illustration]

    NEW YORK
    E. P. DUTTON & CO., INC.




    COPYRIGHT, 1921,
    BY E. P. DUTTON & COMPANY


    _All Rights Reserved_


    _First printing_       _September, 1921_
    _Second printing_      _September, 1925_
    _Third printing_           _March, 1926_
    _Fourth printing_           _July, 1930_


    Printed in the United States of America




CONTENTS


                                     PAGE
    LAZY MATILDA                        9
    THE WITCH AND THE TRUANT BOYS      27
    THE VISITOR                        37
    DADDY CRANE                        49
    ENVIOUS ELIZA                      63
    THE NIXIE                          75
    STEPHEN'S LESSON                   89
    THE CATERPILLAR                    99
    MISCHIEVOUS JANE                  113
    THE SWEET TOOTH                   125
    VAIN LITTLE LUCY                  139
    THE MAGIC MAN                     161




LAZY MATILDA

[Illustration:

    Matilda's kind to pussy cat,
    It shows her gratitude for that.]

[Illustration]

    "I FEEL ashamed Matilda
       To see you such a shirk!
     I really think you'd run a mile
       To get away from work."

     So spoke Matilda's mother
       Reprovingly one day,
     But Mattie only shrugged and sulked
       And turned her face away.

     Soon mother left her then alone,
       The door was open wide.
     On tip-toes Mattie crossed the floor,
       And gaily ran outside.

     She left her room undusted,
       She left her bed unmade,
     Indeed she really was a shirk
       I'm very much afraid.

[Illustration]

    With joy she gaily scampered
      Across the meadows wide,
    And chased the pretty butterflies
      That flew from side to side.

    And on and on she wandered
      Until she reached a wood,
    And there, deep in the shadows
      A little grey house stood.

[Illustration]

     A dwarf was in the doorway,
       The door stood open wide,
     A lean and hungry-looking cat
       Was mewing just inside.

     The old dwarf grinned and beckoned,
      "Come in, come in," cried he;
    "I need a little servant maid,
       And you will do for me."

[Illustration]

    "I have no wish to serve you,"
       Matilda quickly cried.
     But still the old dwarf beckoned her
       And made her step inside.

     He made her cook the dinner,
       He made her work all day.
     He watched her close, and left no chance
       For her to run away.

[Illustration]

     The pussy rubbed about her,
      "Meow, meow," said she.
    "I've been so starved, please look about
       And find some scraps for me."

    "Whatever I may have to eat
       I'll always share with you,"
     Matilda cried, "for I can see
       That you're unhappy, too."

     One day the dwarf sat smoking
       Outside the open door,
     While Mattie worked about inside
       And scrubbed and swept the floor.

    "Matilda," whispers pussy,
      "You've served me well each day,
     And now the dwarf is safe outside
       I'll help you run away.

[Illustration]

    "The kitchen door is open,
       So now be off," says she.
    "Yes," Mattie whispers, "but suppose
       The dwarf should call to me."

    "You needn't be afraid of that,"
       The clever pussy said,
    "For even if by chance he calls
       I'll answer in your stead."

    Now little Mattie's scarcely gone
       Before the old dwarf cries,
    "Are you at work?" "I'm kneading bread,"
       The pussy cat replies.

     The old dwarf smoked and nodded,
       But soon again he said,
    "Are you at work?" "Oh, yes," cried puss;
      "I'm shaking up the bed."

[Illustration]

    Again the old dwarf calls her,
       "Now what are you about?"
    "I'm waiting here to catch a mouse
       If only he'll come out."

    "What's that?" the old dwarf bellows.
      He bounces from his chair,
     He rushes in and quickly sees
       That only puss is there.

     At once he knows the trick they've played.
       He catches up the broom,
     And chases poor old pussy cat
       Around and around the room.

    "Good-bye to you," says pussy,
      "Indeed, I've had my fill,"
     And up she bounds and out she goes
       Across the window sill.

[Illustration]

    "Come back! I will not beat you!
       Come back, come back!" cries he.
    "If I must lose both maid and cat
       What will become of me?"

     But pussy does not heed him.
       Indeed, she's far away.
     She's followed little Mattie home
       And there she means to stay.

     Matilda's now a useful child,
       She never tries to shirk,
     But helps, with ready cheerfulness,
       At any kind of work.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




THE WITCH AND THE TRUANT BOYS

[Illustration:

    John is cleverer than the old witch
    And he has her in a trap.]


[Illustration]

    PETER and John, against the rule,
    Are playing truant from their school.
    With eager steps away they go
    To seek a fishing pool they know.

    But see a witch is hiding there--
    She'll catch them if they don't take care.
    Oh boys! make haste and hurry past!
    No--she has caught them tight and fast.

[Illustration]

     And now away with them she hies,
     In spite of all their kicks and cries.
     She hurries home and shuts the door
     And then she drops them on the floor.

    "These boys are plump and soft," says she,
    "A fine fat meal they'll make for me.
     I'll fill my very biggest pot,
     And cook them when the water's hot."

[Illustration]

    But while her pot she's getting out,
    The frightened Peter looks about.
    He sees the bread trough open wide,
    And into it he jumps to hide;

    Then with a bump he shuts the lid.
    And there he lies all safely hid.
    But the old witch has heard the sound.
    And quick she turns herself around.

[Illustration]

     She peers about with blinking eyes,
    "Where is that other boy?" she cries.
    "He can't have run away so quick.
     He must be hiding for a trick."

    "You haven't treated me so well
     That you can think I want to tell,
     But if you look outside," says John,
    "Maybe you'll see which way he's gone."

[Illustration]

    The old witch throws the window wide
    And leans to look about outside.
    But while she's peering all around
    John creeps up close without a sound,

    And shuts the window on her tight,
    And holds it down with all his might.
    'Tis vain for her to kick and bawl,
    John does not heed her cries at all.

[Illustration]

    "Quick, Peter! Bring me from the shelf
     Hammer and nails. Bestir yourself."
     Out from the dough-trough Peter springs;
     Quickly he fetches John the things.

    "Here they are, brother!" Now, tap-tap!
     John drives the nails with many a rap.
     He has the window nailed at last
     So tight 'twill hold the old witch fast.

[Illustration]

    No matter how she squirms and cries,
    She can't get loose howe'er she tries.
    But now the little boys are free
    To run on home, as you may see.

    I'm sure it will be many a day
    Before again from school they stay.
    As for the witch, if she's stuck tight
    Until this day it serves her right.




THE VISITOR

[Illustration:

    Children should never eat like this,
    Although for pigs 'tis not amiss.]

[Illustration]

    JOHN'S manners at the table
      Were very sad to see.
    You'd scarce believe a child could act
      In such a way as he.

    He smacked his lips and gobbled,
      His nose down in his plate.
    You might have thought that he was starved,
      So greedily he ate.

[Illustration]

     He'd snatch for what he wanted,
       And never once say "please,"
     Or, elbows on the table,
       He'd sit and take his ease.

     In vain papa reproved him;
       In vain mamma would say,
    "You really ought to be ashamed
       To eat in such a way."

     One day when lunch was ready,
       And John came in from play,
     His mother said, "A friend has come
       To eat with you to-day."

    "A friend of mine?" cried Johnny,
      "Whoever can it be?"
    "He's at the table," mother said,
      "You'd better come and see."

[Illustration]

     Into the dining-room he ran.
       A little pig was there.
     It had a napkin round its neck,
       And sat up in a chair.

    "This is your friend," his father cried,
      "He's just a pig, it's true,
     But he might really be your twin,
       He acts so much like you."

    "Indeed he's _not_ my friend," cried John,
       With red and angry face.
    "If he sits there beside my chair
       I'm going to change my place."

    "No, no," his father quickly cried,
      "Indeed that will not do.
     Sit down at once where you belong,
       He's come to visit _you_."

[Illustration]

     Now how ashamed was little John;
       But there he had to sit,
     And see the piggy served with food,
       And watch him gobble it.

    "John," said mamma, "I think your friend
       Would like a piece of bread."
    "And pass him the potatoes, too,"
       Papa politely said.

     The other children laughed at this,
       But father shook his head.
    "Be still, or leave the room at once;
       It's not a joke," he said.

    "Oh, mother, send the pig away,"
       With tears cried little John.
    "I'll never eat that way again
       If only he'll be gone."

[Illustration]

    "Why," said mamma, "since that's the case,
       And you your ways will mend,
     Perhaps we'd better let him go.
       Perhaps he's not your friend."

     Now John has learned his lesson,
       For ever since that day
     He's lost his piggish manners,
       And eats the proper way.

     And his papa, and mother too,
       Are both rejoiced to see
     How mannerly and how polite
       Their little John can be.




DADDY CRANE

[Illustration:

    Each child should be content to do
      Some useful thing each day,
    And not be thinking all the time
      Of pleasure or of play.]




DADDY CRANE


     NED was so fond of swimming
       No punishment nor rule
     That mother made could keep him long
       Out of the swimming pool.

     One morning she had set him
       To clear a flower bed,
    "And do not stop till every weed
       Is out of it," she said.

     But oh, that naughty Edward!
       She scarce had turned away
     When up he rose, and off he ran;
       He did not stop nor stay.

     Soon, naked as a little frog,
       With many a joyous shout,
     He jumped into the swimming pool,
       And kicked and swam about.

     But while he played so gaily
       Old Daddy Crane, unseen,
     Stood watching him, and grinning,
       Among the rushes green.

    "I'll wait until that funny thing
       Has dressed, and then," says he,
    "I'll catch him by the trousers seat
       And take him home with me."

     Soon, cooled and freshened by his swim,
       Young Ned comes splashing out.
     In haste he gets into his clothes
       And never looks about.

[Illustration]

     Now Daddy stretches out his neck!
      "Oh! Oh," poor Edward cries,
     For Daddy has him in his beak,
       And off with him he flies.

     Far, far off by a river,
       Where no one comes to see,
     Old Daddy lives among the reeds,
       He and his children three.

     'Tis there he carries Edward.
      "Look children! Look!" cries he.
    "I've brought you such a funny thing.
       It swims, as you shall see."

     And now with cackling laughter
       He throws poor little Ned
     Far, far out in the river,
       Ker-splash! heels over head.

[Illustration]

     Then how the young ones clap their wings,
       And laugh and dance about,
     As, blowing water from his nose,
       Poor Ned comes scrabbling out.

    "Quick, Daddy, throw him in again,"
       The youngsters cry with glee.
    "There never was a froggy thing
       As comical as he."

     In vain poor Edward struggles.
       His cries are all in vain.
     No sooner does he get on shore
       Than splash! he's in again.

    "Oh dear!" he cries, while water
       Is mingled with his tears,
    "I've had enough of swimming
       To last for years and years."

[Illustration]

     And so, next time they throw him in,
       Instead of swimming round
     He hides himself among the reeds,
       And hopes he won't be found.

     He hears old Daddy calling,
      "Hi there! You frog, come out!
     You needn't try to hide from me.
       I know what you're about."

     He hears the young ones rustle round,
       They bitterly complain,
    "Oh Daddy, find our frog for us.
       We want him back again."

     But quick Ned gathers lily leaves,
       All broad and green and flat,
     And fixes them to hide his head
       As though they were a hat.

[Illustration]

     Then out beyond the reeds he floats;
       The green leaves hide him still
     As down the stream he swims away
       Past meadow, wood and hill.

     In vain old Daddy hunts about,
       And little does he dream
     That Ned was underneath the leaves
       That floated down the stream.

     Now Edward's reached his home again.
       He runs in through the door,
     Leaving a trail of water
       Across the kitchen floor.

    "You need not scold me mother,"
       With chattering teeth he says.
    "I've had enough of swimming now
       To last me all my days."

[Illustration]




ENVIOUS ELIZA

[Illustration:

    Eliza never was content.
      Indeed 'twas very sad
    That any child could envy so
      The things that others had.]

ENVIOUS ELIZA

     ELIZA was an envious child,
       Indeed 'twas very sad
     To see the way she wished for things
       That other children had.

     Instead of playing like the rest,
       She'd stand about and whine,
    "I do not see why every one
       Has better things than mine.

    "Jane's doll is prettier than mine.
       John has a better ball.
     The one Aunt Sarah gave to me
       Will hardly bounce at all.

[Illustration]

    "My picture book is old and torn
       And Mary's looks quite new.
     And Tom has all the building blocks.
       I wish I had some, too."

     'Twas thus the envious little girl
       Complained day after day.
     She made herself unhappy,
       And spoiled the fun and play.

     At last one day when she began
       With her complaints once more,
     John quickly gathered up his toys
       And games from off the floor.

    "Here, you may have my things," he said,
      "I'll give them all to you."
    "And you may have my doll," said Jane,
      "And all her dresses, too."

[Illustration]

    "Yes," Mary cried, "and take my books,
       "My grace-hoop, sticks and all,
     And Noah's Ark." "And here!" said Tom,
       "Here are my blocks and ball."


     Eliza scarce believed her ears,
       "You'll give them all to me,--
     The books and games and toys? Oh dear!
       How happy I shall be."

     The other children ran away,
       And left her standing there,
     But since they'd also left their things
       But little did she care.

     Quite happily, all by herself,
       She played that afternoon,
     It seemed to her that supper time
       Had never come so soon.

[Illustration]

     Next day, all by herself again;
       She settled down to play,
     But oh! the room seemed strangely still
       With all the rest away.

    "I wonder what they're all about,
       And where they are," thought she;
     And then she called them, "Come in here
       And play awhile with me."

    "We can't," she heard them answer back,
       "There's nothing we can do
     Now we have given all our toys
       And games and books to you!"

    "But oh! I cannot always play
       All by myself," cried she,
    "Come here, and you shall have again
       The things you gave to me.

[Illustration]

    "The toys and books and dolls and games--
       Each one shall take his own,
     I'd rather never have a thing
       Than always play alone."

     The children now have taken back
       The toys they gave to her,
     The nursery's full of merriment
       And fun and cheerful stir.

     Eliza now is quite content
       To play like all the rest,
     And never gives a single thought
       To which one has the best.




THE NIXIE

[Illustration:

    Up through the water see her rise,
    The nixie with her sea-green eyes.]

[Illustration]

     ONCE John and Jane were playing
       Beside a shining lake
     When suddenly the waters
       Began to stir and shake.

     And up there rose a nixie
       From out the waters green.
     She was the strangest looking thing
       That they had ever seen.

     She called the children gently.
       She coaxed them, "Come with me,
     And I will show you castles,
       And gardens fair to see."


    "Our mother's often told us,"
       The children both replied,
    "We must not go with strangers,
       Or evil may betide."

     But still the nixie coaxed them.
       "Come see my lovely things.
     I'll show you strings of shining shells,
       And fishes that have wings."

     She took them by their shoulders,
       She took them by the hands,
     She drew them down beneath the lake
       To where her castle stands.

[Illustration]

     But now the nixie had them
       She lost her pleasant smile.
     She set the children both to work
       And scolded all the while.

    "Now scrub about, and sweep about,
       And fill the iron pot,
     And hang it up above the fire
       To make the water hot.

    "No idling now, you lazy ones;
       Be quick and stir your feet,
     The while I go outside a bit
       And catch some fish to eat."

     Soon as the nixie leaves them
       The children set to work.
     Indeed they're both so frightened
       They do not dare to shirk.

[Illustration]

     Just as the work is finished
       The nixie comes once more,
     And leaves a trail of water
       Across the kitchen floor.

     Her net is full of fishes.
      "Here, child! be quick," cries she,
    "Now clean these fish and cook them,
       And serve them up to me."

     Quick little Janie sets to work,
       She cooks the fish in haste,
     The greedy nixie eats them all;
       She does not leave a taste.

     Then after she has finished
       She lies down on the bed,
     And snores so loud the rafters
       Are shaken overhead.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

     Then Janie beckons Johnnie,
       And whispers in his ear,
    "Now, John, I'm going to run away.
       I will not stay down here."

     But little John is frightened.
      "Oh dear! I'd be afraid.
     I know she'd come and catch us,
       This cruel water-maid."

[Illustration]

    "But I've a plan," says Janie,
      "It just came in my head.
     We'll take the nixie's fishing-net
       And tie her down in bed.

    "Be quick or she may waken,
       We have no time to waste."
     So now the little children
       Have set to work in haste.

     They wrap her net about her,
       They tie her tight in bed.
     Now, even if she wakened
       She scarce could lift her head!

    "So there! that job is finished,"
       Cries little Jane with glee.
    "Unless someone unties her
       She never can get free."

     Now quick the little children
       Run tip-toe out the door,
     And never stop nor turn about
       Till they are home once more.

     But for the cruel nixie,
       Whether she's still in bed,
     Or whether she has wriggled out
       No one has ever said.

[Illustration]




STEPHEN'S LESSON

[Illustration:

    Poor Stephen is in such disgrace
    He is ashamed to show his face.]

[Illustration]

    'TIS very very sad indeed
      When little children choose
    To say the naughty, ugly words
      That no one ought to use.

    That was the way with Stephen,
      Such naughty words he said
    That grandmamma looked shocked and grieved,
      And auntie shook her head.

[Illustration]

     Mamma said, "Son, I've told you
       Such words you must not say,
     And yet, in spite of warnings,
       I hear them every day.

    "So now, my child, I'm taking
       These sticking plaster strips.
     I'm going to put them on your mouth
       And seal those naughty lips."

[Illustration]

    "But mother, how then shall I eat?"
       Cries Stephen anxiously.
    "Oh, I will take them off for meals.
       'Twill not be hard," says she.

     In vain poor Stephen pleads with her;
       In vain he sobs and cries.
     She lays the strips across his lips
       In straight and criss-cross wise.

[Illustration]

    Now only sounds like "Um! Um-hum!"
      From Stephen's lips are heard,
    Because, with all those plasters on
      He cannot speak a word.

    Now Stephen cannot go to school,
      He sits at home all day.
    He feels ashamed to go outside,
      Or join the boys at play.

[Illustration]

     And if he's at the window,
       And some one passes by,
     He quickly turns aside his head,
       Lest they the plasters spy.

     One day, when mother changed the strips
       In haste poor Stephen cried,
    "I do not think my lips could say
       Those words now if I tried."

[Illustration]

    "If that's the case," cried mother,
      "No need to use these slips,"
     And with a smile of joy she kissed
       The one-time naughty lips.

     Indeed the lesson had been learned,
       For Stephen nevermore
     Was heard to say those naughty words
       That he had used before.

[Illustration]




THE CATERPILLAR

[Illustration:

    The Caterpillar has to crawl.
    He cannot run or jump at all.]

[Illustration]

     ANNE was a lively child at play,
       And quick as she could be,
     But when an errand must be run
       Ah, slow of foot was she.

    "My child," said grandmamma one day,
      "Run to my room and look,
     And bring me, from my bureau there,
       My spectacles and book."

    "Oh, grandmamma, I'm reading now,"
       The lazy Annie said,
    "I do not want to leave my book,
       Mayn't Mary go instead?"

[Illustration]

     No wonder grandmamma looked pained
       When Annie answered so,
     But little Mary cried, "Why, yes!
       Of course I'd love to go."

    "Come little Anne," her mother called,
      "Run down the street for me,
     And get some thread to sew your frock.
       Let's see how quick you'll be."

[Illustration]

    "Oh dear! I'm tired," Anne replied,
      "Why cannot Mary go?
     Or nurse? She's not been out all day,
       Indeed she told me so."

    "My child, my child!" her mother said,
      "Whatever shall I do?
     You're such a lazy, useless girl
       I feel ashamed of you.

[Illustration]

    "Your little feet run fast enough
       For pleasure or for fun,
     But you can hardly crawl about
       When errands must be run."

     But listen now! One day Anne woke
       And felt quite strange and queer.
    "Whatever's happened to me now,"
       She cried; "Oh dear, oh dear!

    "Oh mother! nurse! Come in here quick
       And tell me what is wrong.
     I seem to have so many feet--
       My body feels so long."

     Mamma and nurse came hurrying in,
       Ah what a sight to see!
     Poor Anne! A caterpillar's legs
       And stubby feet had she.

[Illustration]

     She scarce knew how to turn herself
       Nor how to climb from bed.
    "However shall I run or play!"
       The poor child sadly said.

     Mamma and nurse were shocked and grieved,
       And so was grandma, too,
     While little Mary sobbed, "Oh dear!
       Whatever will she do!"

     But like a caterpillar soon
       She learned to crawl around,
     Although her legs were now so short
       She almost touched the ground.

     'Twas sad indeed to be so slow
       When she had been so fleet.
     No longer could she play about
       Nor run out in the street.

[Illustration]

     Her greatest pleasure was to find
       Some errand she could go,
     And up and down the stairs she'd trudge
       With patient steps and slow.

     She waited on her grandmamma,
       And on her mother, too.
     No one could ask her anything
       She was not glad to do.

     One day her watchful mother said,
      "It really seems to me
     Anne's legs are growing long and slim,
       More like they used to be.

    "She does not have so many now.
       Her body's shorter, too.
     I saw her standing up to-day
       Quite as she used to do."

[Illustration]

    "I've noticed that," her grandma said,
      "Indeed I hope some day
     To see our Anne herself again,
       And fit for work and play."

     And so it was. For one day Anne
       Awoke to find once more
     She was the selfsame nimble child
       That she had been before.

     Then what rejoicings filled the house,
       All gathered round to see;
     And as for Anne, as you may guess,
       A thankful child was she.

     And never since has Annie lost
       Her willing, useful ways,
     And her mamma and every one
       All speak of her with praise.




MISCHIEVOUS JANE

[Illustration:

    Only see how this naughty Jane
    Is frightening her nurse again.]

[Illustration]

    JANE'S greatest pleasure and delight
    Was putting others in a fright.

    She loved to bounce and scream and climb,
    She kept nurse nervous all the time.

    Her dear mamma was worried, too,
    She never knew what Jane would do.

[Illustration]

     One day she climbed up in a tree.
     A very daring child was she.

     Then she began to scream and call,
    "Oh nurse, come quick! Oh! Oh! I'll fall!"

     Quickly her nurse came running out,
     And anxiously she looked about.

    "Where are you, Jane? Where can you be?"
    "Here I am, nurse, up in the tree."

[Illustration]

     Poor nurse was in a dreadful fright.
    "Oh Jane!" she cried. "That is not right."

    "Come down! If your mamma should see
     You know how worried she would be."

     Jane laughed aloud to see her fright,
     She thought it such a funny sight.

     Now higher up the tree she went,
     On nurse's further torment bent.

[Illustration]

    "_Now_ look!" she cried. But as she spoke
     The branch where she was standing broke,

     And then--a fearful sight to see--
     Down she came crashing through the tree.

     Her nursie screamed so loud with fear
     That all the neighborhood could hear.

     But luckily, when half way down
     A ragged branch caught Janie's gown.

[Illustration]

     It stopped her fall, and held her there
     Swinging and turning in the air.

     Her nurse's cries brought mother out,
     And neighbors ran from all about.

     They talked and made a great to-do,
     But how to reach her no one knew.

     Till some one cried, "Without a doubt
     We'll have to call the firemen out.

    "They have a ladder that's so high
     It almost reaches to the sky."

     Mamma cries, "Oh, for mercy's sake
     Be quick! Suppose the branch should break?"

     Now clang! clang! clang! the fire-bells go.
     People are running to and fro,

     And down the street--ah only see!
     There comes the fire company.

[Illustration]

    "Quick! Get the ladder up!" "Look out!"
    "Be careful there what you're about."

     Now up, up, up, the ladder goes.
     It's up as high as Janie's toes.

     Up further still; it's resting now
     Its topmost rung against a bough.

     Then quick a fireman, strong and brown
     Runs up and lifts the poor child down.

     And listen how the anxious crowd
     That has been watching shouts aloud.

     No need for any more alarms.
     He's placed her in her mother's arms.

    "Oh dear! I'll never try," sobs Jane
    "To frighten any one again."

[Illustration]




THE SWEET TOOTH

[Illustration:

    Alas poor Fred! So fat is he,
    Only a pig could fatter be.]

THE SWEET TOOTH

    A SWEET-TOOTH was our Frederick.
      He scorned the bread and meat
    And all the other wholesome things
      That children ought to eat.

    He ate the sugar from the bowl;
      He fed on cakes and pies,
    The very sight of lollipops
      Brought water to his eyes.

    He grew too fat to play about,
      Too fat to run or jump,
    On either side his arms stuck out
      Like handles of a pump.

[Illustration]

    It grieved his kind mamma to see
      How fat and fatter grew
    Her little Fred, in spite of all
      That she could say or do.

    One day, with pennies in his hand
      He set out for a shop,
    To buy himself some sugar-cakes
      Or tart or lollipop.

[Illustration]

     But oh the day was very hot,
       The sun a fiery ball,
     And soon the heat made Fred so soft
       He scarce could walk at all.

    "Oh dear, oh dear! I feel so queer;
      What's happening?" cried he.
    "If I should melt in all this heat
      How dreadful it would be!"

[Illustration]

    It is a sorry tale to tell,
      But greedy ones take heed!
    Fred's arms and legs and all of him
      Were melting down indeed.

    They melted till you scarce could tell
      Fred was a boy at all,
    For now he looked all smooth and round
      As though he were a ball.

[Illustration]

     That afternoon the girls and boys
       Came running out to play,
     And wondering they gathered round
       The place where Frederick lay.

    "Oh what a great enormous ball!
      "Let's play with it," they cried;
     And then they rolled and pushed poor Fred
       About from side to side.

[Illustration]

    Hither and yon, in giddy round
      The wretched Frederick sped,
    And sometimes he was on his heels,
      And sometimes on his head.

    At supper time the mothers called,
     "Now put your ball away.
    To-morrow you can get it out
      And have another play."

    Ah Frederick, poor Frederick!
      Though he lay quiet now
    He could not even lift his hand
      To wipe his heated brow,

    And now each day they came to play
      With Fred, until at last
    His fat began to wear away
      They rolled him round so fast.

[Illustration]

     The disappointed children said,
      "Someone has spoiled our ball.
     It's growing such a funny shape
       It scarcely rolls at all."

     One time when they had stopped to rest
       Fred's little brother said,
    "It's queer, but don't you think our ball
       Looks very much like Fred?"

[Illustration]

    "Why it _is_ Fred," his sister cried.
      "I know his eyes and nose.
     And only see! Those are his hands,
       And down there are his toes."

     They called his mother out to see.
       With eager steps she came,
     At once she knew her Frederick,
       And called him by his name.

[Illustration]

     And now he found that he could turn,
       That he could move and rise.
     He stood before his mother
       With shamed and tearful eyes.

    "Oh, mother, mother, dear, I've had
       A dreadful time!" cried he,
    "But now that I'm a boy again
       Less greedy I will be."

[Illustration]




VAIN LITTLE LUCY

[Illustration:

    Her godmamma once sent to her
    A frock of ruffled lace.]

VAIN LITTLE LUCY

     MISS LUCY was a pretty child,
       But vain as she could be,
     She loved all sorts of furbelows,
       And frills and finery.

     Her godmamma once sent to her
       A frock of ruffed lace,
     A flowered hat, and parasol
       With which to shade her face.

     And in the box was also packed
       A pair of pink kid shoes.
    "Oh dear!" her mother sighed; "they all
       Are quite too fine to use."

[Illustration]

     But Lucy cried, "Oh mother, no!
       I'm sure they're what I need.
     When I am dressed and walking out
       I will look fine indeed."

     And then she begged to put them on,
       And with a peacock pride
     She stood before the looking-glass
       And turned from side to side.

    "May I go out and show them off?"
       Cried Lucy eagerly.
    "How all the little girls will stare!
       And how they'll envy me!"

    "Why Lucy! What a way to speak!"
       Her loving mother cried.
    "I am surprised my child should show
       Such vain and silly pride."

[Illustration]

    "Now go put on your calico,
       And run outdoors and play.
     These things were meant for special times,
       And not for every day."

     But Lucy has another plan.
       She sulks, and hangs about,
     Till later in the afternoon,
       When her mamma goes out.

[Illustration]

    Then quick she dresses up again
      In all her frills and lace,
    And out she runs, to trip along
      With air of dainty grace.

    She walked with such a haughty air,
      She held her head so high,
    The other children scarcely dared
      To speak as she passed by.

    But even as, with scornful air,
      She minced along the street,
    There came a sudden rushing wind
      That swept her from her feet.

    It caught her by her parasol,
      It caught her by her frills,
    It swept her up into the sky,
      And off across the hills.

    No knowing where she would have gone,
      Still driven by the blast,
    But luckily a branching tree
      Has caught her skirts at last.

    It catches her and holds to her,--
      It will not let her go;
    Whatever will become of her
      Poor Lucy does not know.

[Illustration]

     In vain she twists herself about
       And strives with all her might.
    "Oh, dear kind tree," she says to it,
      "Don't hold me quite so tight."

     The tree replies, "My branches
       Shall quickly set you free
     If you'll give me your parasol
       To wear as finery."

    "Oh, take it, do," cries Lucy.
      "I do not care at all,
     If you will only set me free;
       But do not let me fall."

     So now the twigs and branches
       Bend back to let her go,
     And safely Lucy clambers down
       Into the field below.

[Illustration]

     Now Lucy looks about her
       With frightened, tearful eyes.
    "Oh dear, oh dear, I'm lost I fear!
       What shall I do!" she cries.

     High overhead a raven
       Is sitting in the tree,
    "I know the way you ought to go."
       Cries Lucy, "Tell it me!"

    "Oh it is not for nothing
       I tell the things I know,
     But if you'll let me have your hat
       I'll tell you how to go."

    "Alas, I meant to keep it,
       And wear it for my best.
     But take it," cries poor Lucy.
      "'Twill make a pretty nest."

[Illustration]

     Now with his wing the raven points,
      "There yonder lies your way."
     And off Miss Lucy runs in haste.
       She does not stop nor stay.

     But see! across the pathway
       A thorn tree towers high.
     Its thorns will surely catch her
       Before she can go by.

    "Oh prickly, stickly thorn-tree,
       That stands to bar the way,
     Draw back your boughs," cries Lucy,
      "And let me pass, I pray."

     The thorn replies, "My blossoms
       Have dropped and left me bare,
     I'll let you pass if I may have
       That little frock you wear."

[Illustration]

    "Here take my frock," cries Lucy,
       And gives it to the tree,
     Then quick it draws aside its thorns
       And leaves the pathway free.

     Now on again runs Lucy.
       Indeed she is in haste.
     If she would reach her home by dark
       She has no time to waste.

     And now she sees a river,
       It flows so deep and wide
     There seems no way for Lucy
       To reach the other side.

     But look! A duck is sailing
       Upon the flowing tide,
     His legs are strong for swimming,
       His back is flat and wide.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

    "Oh pretty duck," cries Lucy,
      "Come here, come here to me.
     If you will carry me across
       How thankful I will be."

    "In winter time," replies the duck,
      "My toes get nipped with frost.
     If you will give your shoes to me
       I'll carry you across."

[Illustration]

    "Here! Take them quick," cries Lucy.
      "Indeed I do not care!
     I have a stouter pair at home,
       And they will do to wear."

     And now see little Lucy
       On ducky's back astride,
     As steadily he swims across
       Unto the other side.

[Illustration]

     Now on she runs--she reaches home--
       In through the door she creeps,
    "Oh mother dear, I'm back again,"
       With joyful tears she weeps.

     Now Lucy's grown more sensible,
       She's quite content when dressed
     In just the plain and simple things
       That mother thinks are best.

[Illustration]




THE MAGIC MAN

[Illustration:

    Be careful, children, lest some day
    The Magic Man should come your way.]

[Illustration]

    'TIS very naughty for a child
      To try to hang about
    And overhear what people say,
      And find their secrets out.

    Our James was such a child as that.
      He loved to overhear
    The very things he knew were not
      Intended for his ear.

[Illustration]

     The older people often said,
      "Now James, please run away.
     You're always, always hanging round
       To hear what we may say."

     Once mother asked some ladies in
       To drink a cup of tea,
     And nurse said, "James, don't go downstairs;
       Come in the room with me."

    "I want to hear them talk," said James.
      "_I_ like to listen, too."
    "But that's exactly what mamma
       Has told you not to do."

    "I'll stay here, anyway," said James,
       And sat down on the stair,
     And when nurse found he would not move
       She went and left him there.

[Illustration]

    "And now she's gone, I'll creep downstairs
       Into the hall," thought he,
    "And listen at the parlor door,
       I'm sure no one will see."

     But James had hardly risen up
       Before, all silently,
     Some one came stealing down the hall
       As soft as soft could be.

[Illustration]

     And then James felt that somebody
       Had caught him by each ear,
    "Ho!" cried a voice, "so you're the boy
       Who always wants to hear."

     Quite suddenly he felt his ears
       Begin to stretch and spread.
     Until, like any elephant's
       They stood out from his head.

[Illustration]

    "Let go!" cried James, "Let go, I say!
       Take care what you're about!"
     And then the hands had set him free,
       And quick he turned about.

     He peered around with frightened eyes.
       No one at all was there,--
     Only the clock that said tick-tock,
       And shadows on the stair.

     Into the nursery quick he ran,
      "Oh, nursie! Only see!
     Somebody came and stretched my ears
       And scared me terribly."

     Nurse looked at him and gave a cry.
      "Oh James! What shall we do!
     It must have been the Magic Man
       Who did this thing to you.

[Illustration]

    "I know when children misbehave
       He often comes about,
     And punishes their naughty ways
       If he can find them out."

     And now mamma is called in haste.
       She comes, and "Oh!" cries she,
    "Whatever's happened to your ears?
       They are a sight to see!"

     James tells her all the doleful tale,
       But ah, 'tis very plain
     The only thing is just to wait
       And hope they'll shrink again.

    "If you are very patient, James,
       And if you will be good,
     Perhaps some day your ears once more
       Will look the way they should."

[Illustration]

    Now James is different indeed,
      For ever since that day
    He's never wished to overhear
      What other people say,

    And if a secret's being told
      That he perchance might hear
    He runs away, or else he stuffs
      A finger in each ear.

[Illustration]

    His ears are shrinking day by day,
      And soon I hope we'll see
    They are as small as any lad
      Could wish his ears to be.





End of Project Gutenberg's Lazy Matilda and Other Tales, by Katharine Pyle

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LAZY MATILDA AND OTHER TALES ***

***** This file should be named 47283.txt or 47283.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/2/8/47283/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

