The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hand of Providence, by J. H. Ward

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Hand of Providence
       As Shown in the History of Nations and Individuals, From
       the Great Apostasy to the Restoration of the Gospel

Author: J. H. Ward

Release Date: February 16, 2015 [EBook #48276]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAND OF PROVIDENCE ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(MormonTextsProject.org), with thanks to Paul Freebairn
and Cheryl Jennings for proofreading.







[Frontispiece Image: Mount Calvary.]


THE HAND OF

PROVIDENCE,


AS SHOWN IN THE

HISTORY OF

NATIONS AND INDIVIDUALS,


From the Great Apostasy to the Restoration of the Gospel.


ILLUSTRATED.


BY ELDER J. H. WARD.


SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH:

Published at the Juvenile Instructor Office. 1883.



PREFACE.

Don't throw this book down carelessly. It will do you no harm. It
assumes no dictation. It may benefit you if you will read it carefully.

"We have plenty of histories."

True. But most are too large to be of practical value to the sons and
daughters of toil. Many are written in the interest of some party or
sect, and in order to gain favor, they flatter the vanity of men.

"But they tell of wonderful deeds, and thrilling adventures."

Very true. Some of them are mostly composed of recitals of legalized
slaughter, and praise of tyrants who have climbed to power over the
mangled bodies of their fellow-men, and whose names will not live
in one grateful memory; while the real benefactors of the race, the
unfolding of new and higher truths and, above all, the over-ruling hand
of God are unnoticed, or, at most, barely mentioned.

"Does God rule the world?"

Yes, verily. The greatest actors on the theatre of the world are only
instruments in the hand of God, for the execution of His purposes.

"Where have you obtained the facts contained in this volume?"

From many authentic works, some of them not easily accessible to most
readers.

{IV.}

"This will be a good book for the young, and all those who have not the
opportunity to consult larger works, will it not?"

With this idea it has been written and to this end I dedicate it to my
children as heirs in the kingdom of God, to the youth of Zion and to my
earnest friends everywhere.

THE AUTHOR.

Salt Lake City,

March 16th, 1883.



CONTENTS.

CHAPTER I.

Injustice of Roman Governors--Nero Emperor--Vespasian and Titus
Sent to Judea--Fortifications of Jerusalem--Titus Offers Terms of
Peace--Horrors of the Siege--Women Devour their own Children--Temple
Burned--City Destroyed--Dispersion of the Jews--Universal
Apostasy--Priesthood no More--Ideas of God Perverted--Worship
Corrupted with Heathen Rites--Persecution of Christians--Emperor
Constantine--Rise of Monastic Order.

CHAPTER II.

Description of Arabia--Arabian Customs--Birth of Mahomet--Early
Life--Journey to Syria--Christian Sects--Doctrines Taught by
Mahomet--His Marriage--Proclaims Himself a Prophet--Persecution--Flees
to Medina--Becomes Powerful--Sickness and Death--Personal Appearance.

CHAPTER III.

Causes of Triumphs--Abou-Beker Elected Caliph--War Declared--Fall of
Bozrah--Battle of Aiznadin--Siege of Jerusalem--Departure of Roman
Emperor--Saracen Fleet--Eastern Conquests--Fall of Alexandria--Conquest
of Northern Africa--Conquest of Spain--Battle of Poictiers--Extent of
Saracen Empire.

CHAPTER IV.

Intellectual Stagnation--Saracens and Jews Revive Learning--University
of Bagdad--Public Schools--Medical College of Cairo--Circulating
Library--Modern Form of Books--Arabic Notation--Discoveries in
Chemistry--Rotundity of the Earth--Mariner's Compass--Discoveries of
Alhazin--Astronomical Observatories--Golden Age of Judaism--Cities of
Andalusia--Saracen Dwellings--Condition of Women--Female Physicians.

CHAPTER V.

Jerusalem the Sacred City--Alexandria Noted for Philosophy--School of
Hypatia--Mob Murders Her--Doctrines of Cyril--Jerusalem a Scene of
Suffering--Fulfillment of Prophecy--Herculaneum and Pompeii--Their
Destruction--Evidences {VI.} of their Wickedness--Excavations--Roman
Rule--Removal of Capital--Crimes of Constantine--Commencement
of Greek Empire--Description of Constantinople--Its
Capture by Crusaders--Taken by the Turks--Intellectual
Degradation--Priestcraft--Debauchery--Turkish Rule.

CHAPTER VI.

Growth of Relic-Worship--Schemes of the Roman Pontiffs--Manufacture
of Relics--Their Great Variety--Value of Relics--Insults Offered to
Pilgrims--Peter the Hermit--Crusades--Disorderly Rabble--Terrible
Suffering--Capture of Jerusalem--Terrible Massacre--Capture
of Constantinople--Crusades of the Children--Results of the
Crusades--Revival of Learning.

CHAPTER VII.

The Morning Dawns--Rise of Knighthood--Principles of
Knights--Apostate Priests Held in Contempt--Waldenses--Persecutions
in Southern France--Rise of the Inquisition--Liberal Policy of
Frederick--"Everlasting Gospel"--Its Remarkable Teachings--Bacon's
Discoveries--Geographical Knowledge--Azores and Canary Islands--Travels
of Marco Polo--Condition of European States--Modern States.

CHAPTER VIII.

Lesson from Heathen Mythology--Vicissitudes of Roman Church--Boniface
Pope--Advancement in Civilization--Work of the Roman Church--Invention
of Printing--Gutenberg--Bible First Printed--Columbus--His Wonderful
Dream--His Great Voyage--Discovery of America--Trials and Triumphs.

CHAPTER IX.

History in Words--British Coat of Arms--The Ten Tribes--Account
of Esdras--Dispersion of the Tribes--Mixed Seed of Israel--Effect
on European Society--Jewish Influence--Discovery of Cape of Good
Hope--Pacific Ocean Discovered--Magellan's Voyage--Discovers Cape
Horn--Distance Sailed--Death of Magellan--Voyage Completed--Its Effect
on the Public--Huss and Jerome Burned--John Ziska--Persecutions
of Waldenses--Capture of Mentz--Dispersion of Printers--Hans
Boheim--Joss Fritz--Sale of Indulgences--Martin Luther Burns the Pope's
Letter--Grand Council at Worms--Rome in a Rage--Luther Kidnapped.

CHAPTER X.

Germany Aroused--Peasants' War--Muntzer's Proclamation--Emperor
Quarrels With the Pope--Results in Other {VII.} Countries--Growth
in Modern Languages--Luther's Crowning Work--Power of
Superstition--Witchcraft--Reformers not Inspired--Extracts from
Mosheim--Battle-Ax of God--Copernicus--Galileo--Newton--Death of
Bruno--Change in Commercial Affairs--Spanish Armada--Blessed by the
Pope--Destroyed by a Storm--Its Effect on Europe--England's Influence
and Position--America the Land of Refuge.

CHAPTER XI.

Columbus Destroyed Papal Dogmas--Cruelty of Spaniards--Their
Retribution--Relics in Massachusetts--Newport Tower--Mounds in
Ohio--Remains Found in Iowa--Plates Found in Illinois--Ancient Mexican
Pyramids--Human Sacrifices--View from the Great Pyramid--Ancient
American Sculptures--Mammoths--Mexican Customs--Religious
Rites--Computation of Time--Arts and Sciences--Description of Peru--Its
Civilization--Massacre of the Incas--Testimony of Travellers--Indian
Traditions.

CHAPTER XII.

England's Development--Reign of Elizabeth--Influence of the
Bible--Tyranny of the Kings--Jacques Cartier--Discovery of the
St. Lawrence--Quebec Founded--Acadia Colonized--Transferred to
England--Extracts from Longfellow's Poem--Virginia Settled.

CHAPTER XIII.

Character of the Colonists--They Leave England--Sojourn in
Holland--Brewster's Printing Press--Puritans Embark for America--Their
Trust in God--Robinson's Prophecy--Plymouth Founded--Sufferings of the
Colonists--Conflict in England--Peculiarities of the Puritans--Harvard
College Founded--Extent of Settlements--First Confederation.

CHAPTER XIV.

Description of Holland--A Land of Refuge--Tyranny of Alva--The Struggle
for Independence--Siege of Leyden--The Country Submerged--Famine in the
City--Speech of the Mayor--Heroic Conduct--Trust in God--Storm Raises
the Waters--Spaniards Retreat--Leyden is Saved--Thanksgiving--Waters
Retire.

CHAPTER XV.

Rise of Quakerism--George Fox--William Penn--Founds
Pennsylvania--Kindness to the Indians--Philadelphia Founded--Maryland,
Carolina and Georgia Settled--Roger Williams--Rhode Island Founded--Its
Toleration.

{VIII.}

CHAPTER XVI.

Condition of English Society--Manufacture of Gin and Rum--Origin of
Methodism--Eloquence of Whitfield--John and Charles Wesley--Remarkable
Teachings--Robert Raikes--John Howard--William Wilberforce--Mechanical
Inventions--Growth of American Freedom--Three Great Battles--Cook's
Voyages--Extension of the English Language--Greatness of
Pitt--Washington's Early Life--Benjamin Franklin.

CHAPTER XVII.

Gathering of Political Forces--General Revolution--Civil
Reformers--Decay of Old Institutions--Rosseau and His
Writings--Voltaire--Holland, a Political Refuge--American
Settlers--Lines of Albert B. Street--Growth of the Colonies--Love for
England--Causes of Revolution--Manufactures Forbidden--Stamp Act--Tax
on Tea--Philadelphia Convention--Address to the King--Appeal To
England--To Canada--Incident in Old South Church, Boston--Paul Revere's
Ride.

CHAPTER XVIII.

Battle of Lexington--Officers Chosen--A Year of Discussion--Declaration
of Independence--Spirit of English Nobility--Defeat of American
Forces--Success at Trenton and Princeton--Sufferings at Valley
Forge--Washington's Prayer--Burgoyne's Campaign--Arrival of La
Fayette--Arnold's Treason--Andre's Death--Siege of Yorktown--Close
of the War--Treaty of Peace--Army Disbanded--Washington Resigns
his Commission--Constitutional Convention--Washington Elected
President--His Death--His Tomb.

CHAPTER XIX.

Influence of La Fayette--Despotism in France--The Bastile--Corruption
of the Church--Commencement of the Revolution--The Marseillaise--Its
Wonderful Influence--Reign of Terror--Napoleon Bonaparte--His Wonderful
Career--Jewish Sanhedrim--Fall of Napoleon--His Death--Progress of
Liberty.

CHAPTER XX.

The Genius of the Age--European Wars--American
Tranquil--Declaration of War--Divisions of North America--United
States--Canada--Mexico--American Common Schools--Their
Influence--Progress of Invention--First Steamboat--First
Locomotive--Electric Telegraph--Improvements in Printing--Spiritual
Darkness--The Kingdom of God--Wants of the Present Age--Joseph
Smith--His Tragic Death--Conclusion.

{9}



THE HAND OF PROVIDENCE.



CHAPTER I.

THE DESTRUCTION OF JERUSALEM AND APOSTASY OF THE EARLY CHURCH.

INJUSTICE OF ROMAN GOVERNORS--NERO EMPEROR--VESPASIAN AND TITUS
SENT TO JUDEA--FORTIFICATIONS OF JERUSALEM--TITUS OFFERS TERMS OF
PEACE--HORRORS OF THE SIEGE--WOMEN DEVOUR THEIR OWN CHILDREN--TEMPLE
BURNED--CITY DESTROYED--DISPERSION OF THE JEWS--UNIVERSAL
APOSTASY--PRIESTHOOD NO MORE--IDEAS OF GOD PERVERTED--WORSHIP
CORRUPTED WITH HEATHEN RITES--PERSECUTION OF CHRISTIANS--EMPEROR
CONSTANTINE--RISE OF MONASTIC ORDER.

According to the best records that have come down to us, the last book
of the New Testament (commonly called the Apocalypse of St. John) was
written about sixty years after the ascension of our Savior.

At that time the gospel of Jesus Christ had been preached in all the
principal cities and countries of the known world. Numerous branches of
the primitive church had been planted in Palestine, Syria, Egypt, Asia
Minor, Greece and Italy.

In the meantime the awful doom which the Savior predicted against
Jerusalem had been literally fulfilled. Shortly after the crucifixion
and ascension of the Savior, Judea became the theatre of many cruelties
and oppressions arising from contentions between the Jewish priests,
the depredations of numerous bands of robbers, which infested the
country; but more than all from the injustice and avarice of the Roman
governors.

{10} The last of these governors was Gessius Floras, whom Josephus
represents as a monster in wickedness and cruelty, and whom the Jews
regarded rather as a bloody executioner, sent to torture, than as a
magistrate to govern them.

[Image: Jerusalem.]

During the government of Felix, his predecessor, a dispute having
arisen between the Jews and Syrians about the city of Caesarea, their
respective claims were referred to the emperor, Nero, at Rome. The
decision was in favor of the Syrians, and the Jews immediately took up
arms to avenge their cause.

{11} In this state of things, Nero gave orders to Vespasian to march
into Judea with a powerful army. Accordingly, Vespasian, accompanied
by his son Titus, marched into Palestine at the head of 60,000
well-disciplined troops. While Vespasian was thus preparing more
effectually to curb the still unbroken spirit of the Jews, intelligence
arrived of the death of the emperor and his own election to the throne.
Departing therefore for Rome he left the best of his troops with his
son, ordering him to besiege and utterly destroy Jerusalem.

Titus lost no time in carrying into effect his father's injunction.
Jerusalem was strongly fortified both by nature and art. Three walls
surrounded it which were considered impregnable; besides which it had
numerous towers outside of the walls, lofty, firm and strong. The
circumference was nearly four miles.

Desirous of saving the city, Titus repeatedly sent offers of peace to
the inhabitants; but they were indignantly rejected. At length finding
all efforts at treaty ineffectual, he entered upon the siege determined
not to leave it until he had razed the city to its foundation.

The internal state of the city soon became horrible. The inhabitants
being divided in their counsels fought with one another, and the
streets were often deluged with blood shed by the hands of kindred.
In the meantime famine spread its horrors abroad, and pestilence its
ravages. Thousands died daily and were carried out of the gates to be
buried at the public expense; until being unable to hurry them to the
grave the wretched victims were thrown into houses as fast as they
fell, and there shut up.

During the prevalence of the famine, the house of a certain woman by
the name of Miriam was repeatedly plundered of such provisions as she
had been able to procure. So extreme did her suffering become, that she
entreated those around her, to put an end to her miserable existence.
At length frantic with fury and despair she snatched her infant from
her bosom, killed and cooked it; and having satiated her present
hunger, concealed the rest. The smell of food soon drew the voracious
human tigers to her house; they threatened her with tortures; she hid
her provisions from them. Being thus compelled {12} she set before them
the relics of her mangled babe. At the sight of this horrid spectacle,
inhuman as they were, they stood aghast, petrified with horror, and at
length rushed precipitately from the house.

When the report of this spread through the city, the consternation was
universal and inexpressible. The people now, for the first time, began
to think themselves forsaken of God. In the mind of Titus the recital
awakened both horror and indignation, and he resolved to push the siege
with still greater vigor, aiming particularly to obtain possession of
the temple. The preservation of this noble edifice was strongly desired
by him; but one of the Roman soldiers being exasperated by the Jews,
or, as Josephus says, "pushed on by the hand of Providence," seized
a blazing firebrand, and getting on his comrades' shoulders, threw
it through a window, and soon the whole north side was in a flame.
Titus immediately gave order to extinguish the fire; but the enraged
soldiers, bent on destroying the city and all it contained, either did
not hear or did not regard him. The flames continued to spread until
this consecrated edifice, the glory of the nation, became one mingled
heap of ruins. Then followed a terrible massacre in which thousands
perished, some in the flames and others by the sword of the enemy. At
length the city was abandoned to the fury of the soldiers. It is said
that nearly one million five hundred thousand persons perished in the
siege.

The conquest of the city being achieved, Titus proceeded to demolish
its noble structures, its fortifications, palaces and walls. So
literally were the predictions of the Savior fulfilled respecting its
destruction that not one stone was left upon another that was not
thrown down.

From that day the Jews have been dispersed through the world, despised
and hated, persecuted and yet upheld--lost as it were among the
nations, and yet distinct--they live as the monuments of the truth of
God.

While the apostles lived the churches planted by them continued to
exist with more or less of spiritual life.

But the spirit of apostasy was already at work. In some places pagan
rites and ceremonies had perverted the worship of the true God and but
few could be found who remained {13} pure amid the corruptions of the
age or undaunted by the trials and persecutions that surrounded them on
every side.

So universal was this apostasy that only seven churches throughout
Asia, Africa and Europe were considered worthy of being either reproved
or blessed by the voice of revelation. (_See Revelations 2nd and 3rd
chapters_.)

The whole eastern continent of which we have authentic history was at
that period under the control of Rome, and paganism was the religion
of the empire. Thus the whole power of the realm was brought to bear
against the infant church.

Pagan priests excited the populace to frenzy, and royal decrees
delivered the saints to the most terrible tortures and death.

In a few years the apostolic organization and priesthood were no more.
A few glimmerings of spiritual light remained for a short time, among
those who had taken refuge in the catacombs or subterranean vaults of
Rome, or had fled to the wilds of the Libyan desert. But even this
light was soon extinguished, and then fell that mental, moral, and
spiritual night from which mankind are only now slowly emerging.

But false religion could never satisfy the cravings of the immortal
soul.

Paganism presented only a cheerless prospect. It gave itself no concern
for the lowly and unfortunate, limited the hopes and destiny of man to
this present life, and taught him that temporal prosperity might be
selfishly gained at any cost to others in property and suffering. For
example, Rome, for many ages had enriched herself with the wealth of
conquered nations, and impoverished them that her sons and daughters
might live in luxury and grandeur. Yet throughout her vast dominions
there were no institutions of benevolence; no hospitals for the sick,
no asylums for the afflicted or unfortunate. The pleasant pastimes of
her populace were to witness scenes of cruelty; and the most refined
ladies of that period eagerly thronged the amphitheatres to view the
agonies of captives from distant tribes or early Christian martyrs as
they were thrown to famished and enraged wild beasts in the public
arena. Many of the early Christians were thus put to death {14} in the
Coliseum, the ruins of which are shown in the engraving.

[Image: Engraving of Coliseum in ruins.]

No wonder then that when the church was taken from the earth, and its
forms amalgamated with pagan institutions, the {15} world presented an
unparalleled scene of carnage and cruelty, bloodshed and terror.

But Rome was destined to endure a terrible retribution. The northern
barbarians whom she had so long oppressed, and from whom she had drawn
many of the victims of her gladiatorial combats now wreaked their
long-sought vengeance, spreading terror and devastation wherever they
went.

One of them, Attila, king of the Huns, called himself the scourge of
God, and boasted that grass never grew where his horse had trodden.
These incursions spread an intellectual famine throughout Europe. The
only men of learning were the monks, who seldom left their cloisters,
and the only books were manuscripts concealed in the libraries of
the monasteries. Not only were the common people extremely ignorant,
but also the rich and noble, and even the kings could scarcely read
or write. The reign of superstition was universal. The simplicity
of primitive worship was changed to an unmeaning round of rites and
ceremonies: and the glorious principles of the gospel were hidden
from sight by a dark cloud of ignorance, mysticism and unintelligible
jargon, out of which there too often flashed the lurid lightenings of
priestly vengeance and persecutions.

The Lord, speaking by the mouth of Jeremiah, says, "My people have
committed two errors; they have forsaken me, the fountain of living
waters and hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns that can hold no
water." When the voice of revelation was hushed men began to follow
fables and traditions, and he who possessed the liveliest imagination
invented the greatest number.

They, instead of the word of God, became the rule of life; and men
sought by bodily suffering to purchase admission to the courts of
heaven.

{16}

[Image: Fakir.]

We pity the devotee of India, who measures by the length of his body,
the wearisome journey of hundreds of miles; or the fakir who sits with
his legs in an upright position, for years until the limbs becomes,
withered, distorted and useless. But what shall we say of a professed
follower of the Savior who makes a pilgrimage of a thousand miles with
sharp spikes driven into the inside of his shoes, by which his feet are
lacerated {17} at every step! Or of one who spends the greater part of
his life sitting on a column thirty feet high and only three feet in
diameter, through all the vicissitudes of the seasons, storm and
sunshine, cold and heat, with the idea that, by this means, he could
secure salvation and exaltation in the presence of God! Surely it was
the self-same pagan idea that actuated all.

In those days, also, even the forms and ceremonies of the primitive
church underwent complete transformation. Pagan rites were celebrated
at Christian festivals, and days commemorative of great events were
made to conform to the times appointed for the worship of heathen
divinities.

For example, the festival of Easter as observed by the Catholic church,
was and still is degraded by pagan rites. And the day that commemorates
our Savior's birth, which event took place in April, when the shepherds
were abroad on the plains of Bethlehem, with their flocks, was changed
from the beautiful Spring time to the dark and gloomy December, that it
might conform to a day already set apart for pagan ceremonies, and by
this means was secured its universal observance.

The ideas concerning God were also perverted. Space will permit only
a glance at this subject. The passions that were said to control the
character of heathen gods were attributed to the great Creator and
loving Father of us all. He was represented as delighting in vengeance;
and glorying in the eternal sufferings of His creatures. Thus the
most inhuman persecutors claimed they were doing His will; and hence
arose the doctrine of endless torments beyond the grave, which still
disgraces nearly all the sects of Christendom. The doctrine of fate has
ever been a prominent doctrine of pagan religions.

This dogma was also engrafted into their creed; hence, we find learned
teachers of the present age gravely asserting that, owing to the
unalterable decrees of God, there are young and irresponsible infants,
scarcely a span in length, who are and ever will be doomed to suffer
the torments of the lost.

Such was the condition of the social and religious world at the time of
the Emperor Constantine.

{18} This politic prince was not a man of religious convictions, but
hoping to consolidate his power and gain vast numbers of adherents
he granted universal religious toleration and even went so far as to
proclaim himself a Christian.

This act of toleration gave a temporary protection to all classes
and was of especial benefit to those who wished to retire from the
confusion and corruption of the age, and spend their lives in pursuit
of science, literature and philosophy.

Such were the tasteless and often brutal amusements, the low
sensuality, the base intrigue and bloody warfare of those times, that
many longed for retirement and seclusion.

Men and also women, sometimes of the highest rank, awoke, suddenly to
the discovery that life was given them for nobler purposes.

Loathing society, despising themselves, and often their companions,
to whom they had been wedded in loveless marriages--companions whose
infidelities and licentiousness they had too often, to endure, they
fled from a world which had sated and sickened them.

Thus arose the monastic order.

By the side of Alpine torrents and in the valleys of Piedmont, by the
rocky shores of the beautiful Aegean sea and on its lonely yet lovely
islands, as well as on the classic hillsides of Judea, arose thousands
of monasteries.

At first, no doubt, the inmates sought for a higher and purer life; but
after a time they too sunk into luxury, licentiousness and debauchery.

Yet these monastic institutions served one good purpose, and that one
was important. During these perilous times science and literature here
found an asylum. Libraries were formed and carefully preserved, which,
on the restoration of learning, were of great value to the world.

The foregoing will indicate to some extent the condition of mankind
at the close of the sixth century of the Christian era. The light of
antiquity had perished. The dawn of modern days had not yet gilded
the eastern horizon. The world presented over its whole surface one
vast field of contention and {19} bloodshed, with scarcely an object
sufficiently prominent to excite interest or deserve attention.

It was the midnight hour of human history.

Though the early church had been destroyed and the priesthood taken
from the earth; yet God did not give it up as lost, nor entirely
withdraw His Spirit. Then as now "the earth is the Lord's," and He will
yet make good His claim to it. It is a blood-bought world, and He who
ransomed it at so dear a price will one day return to rule over it as
King of kings and Lord of lords. The earth that was bedewed with the
Savior's tears and sweat--the earth that was trodden by His hallowed
feet--the earth that drank His life blood shall yet throw off the curse
that has so long blighted it and receive its paradisaic glory.

Through agencies the most diverse the minds of men were developed and
disciplined for the reception of truth until in the Lord's due time in
a prepared place and among a people prepared to receive His truth, He
would again restore His priesthood, and set up His kingdom upon the
earth.

{20}



CHAPTER II.

MAHOMET.

DESCRIPTION OF ARABIA--ARABIAN CUSTOMS--BIRTH OF MAHOMET--EARLY
LIFE--JOURNEY TO SYRIA--CHRISTIAN SECTS--DOCTRINES TAUGHT BY
MAHOMET--HIS MARRIAGE--PROCLAIMS HIMSELF A PROPHET--PERSECUTION--FLEES
TO MEDINA--BECOMES POWERFUL--SICKNESS AND DEATH--PERSONAL APPEARANCE.

Far away in the south-western part of Asia, lies a strange and peculiar
country called Arabia. It is bounded on the north by Syria, on the east
by the Persian Gulf, on the south by the Indian Ocean, and on the west
by the Red Sea, and comprises more than a million of square miles, or
about twelve times the area of Utah.

This vast region possesses a diversified landscape. In some places
vast sandy deserts stretch away farther than the eye can reach; in
others, immense piles of dark volcanic rock rear aloft their barren
peaks, around whose base the dry, hot winds have drifted the sands of
the desert for untold centuries. However, in the secluded valleys of
the mountains, and along the base of the great mountain chains, may be
found many fertile tracts, where, watered by pure and never-failing
mountain streams, and warmed by the rays of a tropical sun, the earth
produces in abundance nearly every kind of grain, vegetable, fruit,
flower and aromatic shrub that can conduce to the happiness of man.
Indeed, some portions are so wonderfully productive, that in ancient as
well as modern times it has received the significant title of "Araby
the blest."

Most of the inhabitants of this country are generally considered
to be the descendants of Ishmael, the son of Abraham. Many of them
lead a wild, nomadic life, supported by their flocks and herds and
the spontaneous productions of the soil, {21} and retain among their
laws and customs, many of the usages that prevailed in the primitive,
patriarchal times of their great ancestor.

Others live in towns and cities and engage in commerce, either with
foreign countries or with distant parts of their own land.

The usual method of transporting their merchandise is on the backs
of camels, and sometimes several hundred or even a thousand of these
animals, accompanied by their drivers, may be seen slowly wending their
way across the desert, carrying with them the coffee of Mocha and
spices of Muscat to the distant cities of Bagdad and Damascus.

As among the Jews the ruling priests were chosen from the tribe of Levi
and family of Aaron, so, among the ancient Arabs, the guardians of the
sacred things of their worship were chosen from the tribe of Koreish
and family of Haschem.

Abd-Al-Mutallib was the ruling priest in Mecca, the sacred city of
Arabia, at the time that his grandson, Mahomet, was born, which event
occurred at Mecca, in the year 570 of the Christian era.

Of Mahomet's parents, but little is recorded, except that his father,
Abdallah, was remarkable for his commanding presence and great personal
beauty. He died when his future illustrious son was only two months
old. Amina, his mother, who is said to have been of Jewish descent,
also died when Mahomet was only six years old.

The early life of Mahomet was spent in the house of his Uncle, Abou
Taleb, who had become the principal guardian of the Ca-aba, or great
temple, of ancient Arabian worship.

The ceremonies and devotions connected with this temple-worship may
have given an early bias to Mahomet's mind, and inclined it to those
speculations and ideas in which it afterwards became engrossed. His
education in childhood seems to have been neglected; for he was not
taught either to read or write. But he was a thoughtful child, quick to
observe, prone to meditate on all that he had observed, and possessed
of an imagination fertile, daring and expansive.

{22} At the age of twelve years, Mahomet solicited the privilege of
accompanying his uncle, Abou Taleb, to Syria, whither he was about to
conduct a caravan. Their route lay through regions fertile in fables
and traditions, which it is the delight of the Arabs to recount in the
evening halts of the caravan.

With an attentive ear, the youthful Mahomet listened to those tales of
enchantment and wonderful events which happened in days of old, and
doubtless imbibed ideas that had a powerful influence on him in his
after life. In this journey also he listened to the conversation of
many of those exiles from the Christian sects, who, in fleeing from
persecution had taken refuge in the wilds of Northern Arabia. Thus he
learned many facts concerning the Christian religion.

Having arrived at the city of Bozrah, which was situated on the
confines of Syria, about seventy miles south of Damascus, Mahomet was
entertained at a Nestorian convent. One of the monks named Bahira, was
very much interested by the spirit of inquiry and intelligence which
the youth manifested, especially on religious subjects, and gave him
all possible information.

Mahomet returned to Mecca, his imagination teeming with the wild tales
and traditions picked up in the desert, and his mind deeply impressed
with the teachings he had received among the Nestorians.

In order that we may understand the nature of the teachings which
Mahomet received on this and subsequent journeys to Syria, an
enumeration of the leading dogmas of the jarring sects of oriental
Christians will be necessary:

The most numerous of these sects were the Arians, so called from Arius,
a great religious teacher of Alexandria. They claimed that Jesus Christ
was the Son of God, the Father; that His existence commenced at His
advent in this world; that He was created for a special mission, but
was subject to the influences of virtue and vice like common mortals.

The followers of Nestorius, the great bishop of Constantinople, were
also very numerous; and Mahomet, in his subsequent journeys to Syria,
frequently came in contact with them. They claimed that Christ had two
distinct natures, human and divine; that Jesus was a man; that Mary
was only His {23} mother according to the flesh, and that it was an
abomination to style her "Mary the mother of God," as was and still is
the custom of the Catholic church.

Another sect was the Marianites, or worshippers of Mary. They regarded
the trinity as consisting of God, the eternal Father, Mary, the eternal
mother, and Christ, their Son.

The Valentinians were another sect, who taught that Jesus Christ was
only a wise and virtuous mortal, selected by God to reform and instruct
mankind. Their creed is still professed by some of the Unitarian sects
of the present day.

The Nazarenes were a sect of Jewish Christians, who considered Christ
as the promised Messiah, but conformed in all other respects to the
rites and ceremonies of the Mosaic law.

Many other sects might be enumerated who took their names from learned
and zealous leaders, and who were subdivided into various and opposing
parties of fanatical enthusiasts.

A glance at these dissentions which convulsed society at this period is
sufficient to acquit Mahomet of any charge of conscious blasphemy in
the opinions he taught concerning the nature and mission of our Savior.

The principal doctrines taught by Mahomet were drawn from the writings
of the Old and New Testaments. He recognized in all about three hundred
prophets. This number included all the ancient worthies of the Old
Testament, as well as the Savior and the apostles, evangelists and
martyrs mentioned in the New. However, four persons were considered as
greater prophets than the rest, and were reverenced as the founders
of four distinct dispensations. These were Abraham, Moses, Jesus and
Mahomet.

The book containing the writings and revelations of Mahomet is commonly
called the Koran. However, Mahomet should not be held responsible for
all that the Koran contains, as there is abundant evidence that it has
been changed and corrupted in many places since his death.

Prayer, fasting and acts of charity are inculcated by it. Merchants
were especially commanded to perform acts of charity, as they were the
class who were most liable to the sins {24} of deception and extortion.
The creed which all were required to believe, was simply, "There is one
God, and Mahomet is His prophet."

But little is known of Mahomet's history between his twelfth and
twenty-fifth year. He seems to have been engaged principally in
conducting caravans across the desert. He thereby gained much practical
knowledge, and became known as a young man of ability and integrity,
pleasing appearance, and engaging manners.

At the age of twenty-five, he became the steward or business agent
of a certain wealthy widow, named Cadijah; and a few years later she
married him and faithfully followed him till her death, through all the
vicissitudes of his strange and eventful life.

When Mahomet, in his fortieth year, proclaimed himself the prophet of
God, Cadijah replied, "I will be thy first believer." They knelt down
in prayer together.

Twelve centuries have passed since then, and nine thousand millions of
human beings have followed her example.

We are told that as Mahomet lay wrapped in his mantle, in the silent
watches of the night, he heard a voice calling upon him. Uncovering his
head, a flood of light burst upon him of such intolerable splendor that
he swooned away.

On regaining his senses, he beheld an angel, who, approaching him
from a distance, displayed a scroll, covered with written characters.
"Read," said the angel.

"I know not how to read," replied Mahomet.

"Read," repeated the angel, "in the name of God, who has created all
things."

Upon this, Mahomet instantly felt his understanding illumined, and read
what was written. These words were afterwards promulgated in the Koran,
which also contains many of the doctrines taught in the New Testament.

When he had finished reading, the heavenly messenger announced, "O,
Mahomet, verily thou art a prophet of God, and I am His angel Gabriel."

Mahomet, we are told, came trembling and agitated to Cadijah in
the morning, and told her what he had seen and {25} heard. She saw
everything with the eye of faith, and embraced those teachings with the
devotion of an affectionate woman.

"Joyful tidings dost thou bring!" exclaimed she. "By Him in whose hand
is the soul of Cadijah, I henceforth regard thee as the prophet of
our nation. Rejoice! rejoice! Allah will not suffer thee to come to
shame. Hast thou not been loving to thy kindred, kind to thy neighbors,
charitable to the poor, hospitable to the stranger, faithful to thy
word, and ever a defender of the truth?"

The announcement of Mahomet's message provoked bitter opposition among
his kindred. Only one of them, his cousin Ali, became his disciple.
Those who had known him from his infancy, who had seen him a boy about
the streets of Mecca, and afterwards engaged in the ordinary concerns
of life, scoffed at the idea of his assuming the prophetic character.
When he walked the streets he was subjected to jeers and insults. If
he attempted to preach, his voice was drowned by discordant noises
and ribald songs. As gradually his followers increased, so did the
opposition in bitterness and intensity.

At length he was obliged to flee from his native city and take refuge
in Medina, a city of north-western Arabia.

Space will not permit a recital of the numerous intrigues of his
enemies, or his various successes. Suffice it to say that, in a few
years he became the leader of a powerful, constantly-increasing and
enthusiastic people.

The time had at length arrived when the wild, wandering and discordant
tribes of Arabia were to be marshalled under one banner, united in one
creed and animated by one cause; when a mighty genius had arisen, who
should bring together those scattered remnants, inspire them with his
own religious zeal and daring spirit, and send them forth an invincible
host, to shake and overturn the empires of the earth.

Mahomet survived the most of his children, and died in the sixty-third
year of his age.

In his last illness, he gave his followers three parting commands:
"Expel all idolaters from Arabia; allow every believer equal privileges
with yourselves; devote yourselves to prayer and the propagation of the
faith."

{26} When the hour of death approached he feared it not, but, gazing
upwards with unmoving eyelids, he exclaimed, "O, Allah! be it so,
forever with the glorious associates in paradise."

Thus passed away the man who gave embodiment to a faith that is still
adhered to by more than 130,000,000 of the human family; and who
founded an empire that was the most extensive the world has ever seen.

In appearance, he was of the middle stature. His head was capacious,
and well set on a neck that rose like a pillar from his ample chest.
He had an oval face; dark eyes, long, wavy hair and a full beard. His
deportment was calm and dignified, and he is said to have possessed a
smile of captivating sweetness. His complexion was fairer than Arabs
usually are, and in his enthusiastic moments there was a glow and
radiance to his countenance. He was extremely cleanly in his person,
abstemious in his diet, and simple and unaffected in his dress and
manners. He seemed to have an intuitive knowledge of human nature, and
an innate power to counsel, command, reprove and inspire his followers
with his own ardent nature. Take him all in all, the race has seldom
seen a teacher more kind, more noble or more sincere.

{27}



CHAPTER III.

THE SARACENIC CONQUEST.

CAUSES OF TRIUMPHS--ABOU-BEKER ELECTED CALIPH--WAR DECLARED--FALL OF
BOZRAH--BATTLE OF AIZNADIN--SIEGE OF JERUSALEM--DEPARTURE OF ROMAN
EMPEROR--SARACEN FLEET--EASTERN CONQUESTS--FALL OF ALEXANDRIA--CONQUEST
OF NORTHERN AFRICA--CONQUEST OF SPAIN--BATTLE OF POICTIERS--EXTENT OF
SARACEN EMPIRE.

After the death of Mahomet, his followers assumed the name of Saracens,
by which title they were afterwards generally known. This term, it
is said, is derived from two Arabic words which signify eastern, or
oriental, and conquerors.

Scarcely was Mahomet buried, when it was found necessary to form
a civil and political constitution and code of laws, by which his
followers were to be governed. This government was called the Caliphate.

Mahometanism, even during the life of its founder, gave unmistakable
indications of overpassing the bounds of Arabia.

A few years later it entered upon a system of conquest unparalleled in
the history of the world.

One cause of this phenomenon is to be found in the moral and social
condition of the world. The influence of religion had long before
ceased. Christianity was completely paganized. Her popes were busy
denouncing and excommunicating each other, in their rivalry for
earthly power; or bribing royal females and courtesans to influence
the decision of councils, that were supposed by the masses to speak
with the voice of God. Her bishops no longer sought to feed their
flocks with the bread of life. On the other hand they were concerned in
assassinations, poisonings, adulteries, riots, treason and civil {28}
war. The religious teachers of those days never raised their voices in
the sacred cause of liberty, or spoke in defense of the outraged rights
of man.

No wonder then that, in the midst of the wrangling of sects, and
unintelligible jargon of Arians, Augustinians, Nestorians and
Marianites, society stood in breathless awe, when it heard the terrible
Arabian battle cry, "There is but one God, and Mahomet is His prophet!"
enforced as it was by the tempest of Saracen armies. These warriors,
armed with lances and cimeters, and mounted on fleet Arabian steeds,
passed swiftly from city to city, and frequently found the masses of
the people so crushed by tyranny, so worn out by wrangling and civil
wars, that they welcomed the Saracens as deliverers.

Mahomet's life had been almost entirely occupied in the conquest or
conversion of his native country. It is true, in the latter part of his
career he felt himself strong enough to threaten Persia for the aid
she had given his enemies; and he even declared war against the Roman
Empire for the same reason. But failing health frustrated his designs.
He had made no provision for the perpetuation of his own power. Hence,
a struggle ensued before a successor was appointed. At length, Abou
Beker, the father of his wife Ayesha, was selected. He was proclaimed
the first Caliph, and immediately attacked both the Romans and the
Persians.

The renowned general, Khaled, commonly called by Saracen historians,
"the sword of God," was despatched into Syria. His name struck terror
into the hearts of the inhabitants. The fortified town of Bozrah
fell into his hands without a struggle. This was the same town where
fifty years previous the youthful Mahomet had been entertained at the
Nestorian convent. Marching northward seventy miles, to Damascus,
Khaled laid siege to the Syrian capital. A decisive battle took place
on the plain of Aiznadin. The Roman army was overthrown and dispersed.
A few days later Damascus surrendered to the Saracens.

Guarded on the right by the beautiful river Orontes, and on the left
by the snow-clad peaks of Lebanon, they still continued their march
northward. To resist their further progress, the Roman emperor,
Heraclius, collected an army of one hundred {29} and forty thousand
men. A great battle took place on the plains of Yermuck. At the first
onset the Saracens were repulsed; but driven back to the field by the
heroism of their women, who also aided them, they ended the conflict by
the complete overthrow of the Roman army.

The whole of Syria now fell into the hands of the Saracens.

They then turned south and laid siege to the city of Jerusalem. After
a defense of four months the patriarch, Sophronius, appeared on the
wall and asked the terms of capitulation. It was stipulated that the
surrender should take place in the presence of the Caliph himself.
Accordingly, he came all the way from Medina for that purpose. At
that time such were the customs among the Saracens, that it is said
the ambassador found the Caliph Omar asleep under the shadow of a
mosque. It is also said that he journeyed alone on a red camel,
carrying with him a bag of dates for his own food and one of corn
for his camel, a wooden dish and a leathern water bottle.

[Image: Damascus.]

After receiving the surrender of the city, Omar returned to Medina as
quietly as he had come.

Thus fell the Roman power in Syria and Palestine, after having ruled
those countries nearly eight hundred years. Thus {30} was transferred
without tumult or outrage the religious capital of the professedly
Christian world into the hands of the Caliph Omar. Thus, Jerusalem, so
long considered the birthplace of Christianity, the scene of its most
sacred and tragic memories, passed into the hands of the Mahometans.
Considerably more than a thousand years have elapsed since then, and
it is still under their dominion. The mosque of Omar now rears its
glittering dome where once stood the temple of Solomon.

Heraclius, the Roman emperor, struggled valiantly to retain his
possessions. He plainly saw that the corruptions of Christianity were
among the causes of Saracenic triumphs. He made a heroic attempt to
rouse the clergy to their duties, but it was then too late. Heraclius
himself was obliged to seek safety in flight. From the deck of the
little vessel that bore him homeward, he gazed intently on the receding
hills, and in bitterness of anguish exclaimed, "Farewell, Syria,
forever farewell!"

The remaining details of the Saracen conquest we need not here relate.
The naming of their victories is sufficient to indicate the greatness
of their triumphs.

The great cities of Tyre and Caesarea were captured. With the cedars
of Lebanon and sailors of Tyre they equipped a fleet that drove the
Roman navy into the Hellespont. Thus they gained undisturbed control of
the Mediterranean, and conquered or colonized the islands of Cyprus,
Candia, Rhodes, Sicily, Sardinia, Corsica and many others. A Saracen
naval expedition even appeared before the walls of Rome, and after
threatening the imperial city, carried away the altar of silver from
St. Peter's church, and gathered other relics from the tombs of St.
Peter and St. Paul.

One of the Saracen armies turned eastward, and on the battlefield of
Cadesia the fate of Persia was decided. After the battle of Neha-vend
the treasury and royal arms of Persia fell into the hands of the
Saracens.

After this battle the eastern army divided into two divisions. One
marched northward to the Caspian Sea and took possession of the
neighboring countries; another, southward to Persepolis, from whence
the king of Persia fled for his life across the drearv deserts of
Khorassan. The name of Saracen terrified {31} the wild tribes of
independent Tartary, and they hastened to pay tribute and accept the
faith of their conquerors.

The emperor of China, in his palace at Peking, heard of their exploits,
and sent ambassadors to them, craving their friendship. The kingdoms
now included in Afghanistan and Beloochistan surrendered at their
approach, and the Mahometan standard of the crescent waved on the banks
of the Indus.

Meanwhile important events were transpiring in the west. A large
proportion of the Egyptian people welcomed the Saracens. The Arabs of
the desert loitered in the palaces of the ancient Pharaohs. Alexandria,
aided by Roman troops, alone held out. After a siege of fourteen
months it also fell, and with it Egypt and Abyssinia were added to the
dominions of the Caliphs.

The most powerful religious empire that the world has ever seen had
suddenly sprung into existence. It stretched from the Great Wall of
China to the burning sands of Tripoli, and from the Caspian Sea on the
north to Abyssinia on the south. Yet this was but little more than half
the territory that it soon afterwards controlled. One of its armies
advanced on Constantinople. It did not fall then, but afterwards became
the capital of the Mahometan power in Europe. Another took possession
of the whole north of Africa, and, having consolidated its power there,
under the command of their general, Tarik, they crossed the straits
that separate Africa from Spain, and landing on the rocky clift of
Gib-el-Tarik, or mountain of Tarik (now called Gibraltar), unfurled
their green banner with golden crescent for the first time on the soil
of Europe.

Tarik was soon followed into Spain by his superior officer, the emir
Musa. They took possession of the whole southern portion of Spain
and Portugal, which in their own picturesque language, they named
Andalusia, or the region of the evening.

It was soon found that the whole peninsula was ripe for revolution. The
Jews comprised a large proportion of the Spanish people. They were, to
a great extent, the cultivators of the soil, which pursuit well repaid
their labors. They were {32} then, as now, famous as merchants and
money-lenders, and many of them held high positions in the government,
while thousands of them were scattered in every city, town and village,
as the physicians and teachers of the people.

Their wrongs had been accumulating for centuries. Bigotry, envy and
avarice had conspired to point them out as objects of persecution. Laws
were passed which were never intended to be executed. It was expected
that they would purchase a remission of the penalties by pouring their
hard-earned treasures into the lap of Rome. No doubt the Jews exulted
as the tide of Saracen conquest swept onward. They did not deplore a
change of masters for those who would leave them in possession of civil
and religious liberty.

Before long the whole Iberian peninsula fell into the hands of the
Mahometans. Not content with this, they crossed the Pyrenees, and took
possession of that portion of France that lies to the south of the
river Loire. All Central France was overrun. Castles, churches and
monasteries were despoiled. For a time they held undisturbed dominion.
The empire of the Saracens was then at its greatest extent. It reached
from the confines of China to the Atlantic ocean, and comprised within
its limits forty degrees of latitude and nearly one hundred and twenty
of longitude. In Western Europe alone it stretched in an unbroken line
more than a thousand miles northward from the cliffs of Gibraltar.
More than thirty-six thousand cities paid tribute to the successors of
Mahomet in the city of Medina.

In attempting to extend their conquests northward the Saracens were
met by an army under Charles Martel, king of France, A. D. 732.
Between Tours and Poictiers a terrible battle was fought, which lasted
seven days. The Franks and Goths lost so many that it was impossible
to tell the number of the slain. But these losses were more than
counterbalanced by the losses of the Saracens whose great general,
Abderahman, was found among the slain. Their previous successes
had filled them with pride. They looked with contempt upon their
enemies. For example, when the Roman emperor, Nicephorous, had sent
a threatening letter to the Caliph Haroun-al-Raschid, the latter
replied, "In the name of the most merciful {33} God, Haroun-al-Raschid,
commander of the faithful, to Nicephorous, the Roman dog! I have read
thy letter, O thou son of an unbelieving mother! Thou shalt not hear my
words; thou shalt behold my reply!" A few weeks later it was written in
letters of blood on the plains of Phrygia.

Although the Saracen empire had reached the zenith of its power, in
one sense Mahometanism had not reached its culmination. The day was
to come, when under the name of Ottoman Turks, it would expel the
descendants of the Caesars from their capital, hold the classic land of
Greece in subjection, and under the very walls of Vienna dispute the
empire of Europe in the center of that continent; and in Africa extend
its dogmas and faith across burning deserts and pestilential forests
far south of the equinoctial line.

It is a mistaken idea that the progress of the Saracens depended on the
sword alone. The causes of their success were many and various. One of
these, the paganization of Christianity, has already been noticed. The
long and desolating wars of the Romans had thrown the whole oriental
and African trade into the hands of the Arabs. Hence a commercial
interest and sympathy had grown up between these peoples. Another
reason was the mildness of the Saracen government in comparison with
that of the Romans. The only taxation was a single annual tribute,
amounting to less than one-half the various taxes by the Romans.
Another feature was complete religious toleration except to idolators.
The only creed required was simply, "There is but one God, and Mahomet
is His prophet." Still, another cause of Saracen success was the
effective plan adopted for the consolidation of their power. In battle
they were simply terrible, and the destruction of human life was in
some instances without a parallel; yet the widows and children of their
fallen foes were universally treated with kindness. As a consequence,
the children became ardent disciples of Mahometanism, and the widows
often married their former conquerors. This was all the more frequent
as polygamy was an established custom. The children of these unions
gloried in their descent from their conquering fathers.

{34} No wonder then, that in a little more than a single generation
Abderahman wrote to the Caliph that in North Africa and Andalusia all
tribute must cease, as all the children born in those regions were
Mahometans, and Arabic had become the language of the county.

But above all these causes, the careful student of history will
perceive the hand of Providence. Though Christianity was paganized,
and the priesthood and divine authority were taken from the earth,
God had put forth His hand, and through agencies the most diverse was
disciplining the minds of men for the reception of truth, and preparing
a place and a people for the coming of the Son of Man.



CHAPTER IV.

ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE SARACENS.

INTELLECTUAL STAGNATION--SARACENS AND JEWS REVIVE LEARNING--UNIVERSITY
OF BAGDAD--PUBLIC SCHOOLS--MEDICAL COLLEGE OF CAIRO--CIRCULATING
LIBRARY--MODERN FORM OF BOOKS--ARABIC NOTATION--DISCOVERIES IN
CHEMISTRY--ROTUNDITY OF THE EARTH--MARINER'S COMPASS--DISCOVERIES OF
ALHAZIN--ASTRONOMICAL OBSERVATORIES--GOLDEN AGE OF JUDAISM--CITIES OF
ANDALUSIA--SARACEN DWELLINGS--CONDITION OF WOMEN--FEMALE PHYSICIANS.

The civilized world is dotted over with theological seminaries, the
teachers in which are considered to be men well educated in the
learning of ancient and modern times. The avowed purpose of these
institutions is to teach the facts, philosophy and history of the
so-called Christian religion, yet not a teacher in these institutions
can be found who dares to assert the stupendous fact that from the time
of the apostles to the ninth century science, literature and philosophy
were well nigh extinct. During all this time, with the exception
{35} of Jewish and Saracen writers, scarcely a work can be found of
sufficient merit to rescue the name of the author from oblivion. Let
the skeptic answer this question: Why was it that when the voice of
inspiration was hushed and the gospel and its ordinances taken from
the earth, there fell upon it an intellectual stagnation, an invisible
atmosphere of oppression, ready to crash down morally and physically
whatever provoked its weight? Thus the dreary and weary centuries
rolled on, until a nation, hitherto considered barbarous, yet of the
seed of Abraham, and heirs of the promises made to Ishmael and Esau,
aroused society from the hideous fanaticism, ignorance and superstition
into which apostasy had plunged it.

If it be true that the Saracens burned the Alexandrian library, it
must be considered that this was the act of an uneducated general and
the vengeance of the soldiery after a terrible siege, rather than the
deliberate policy of the government. Within twenty-five years from the
death of Mahomet the Caliphs had become famous for their patronage of
learning. Ali, the fourth Caliph and son-in-law of Mahomet, used to
say, "The world is sustained by four things only: the prayers of the
good, the learning of the wise, the justice of the great, and the valor
of the brave." This sentiment was echoed and re-echoed until it became
an honored maxim in the minds of millions.

Under the influence of Jewish, Nestorian and Saracen teachers the
manners of the Saracens became more polished and their thoughts more
elevated. They made conquests in the realms of science, literature and
the arts as quickly as in the provinces of the Roman empire.

For example, Almansor, who reigned as Caliph from A. D. 753 to 775,
established the University of Bagdad, and endowed it with two hundred
thousand pieces of gold, and an annual revenue of fifteen thousand
dinars, equal in commercial value to one hundred and twenty thousand
dollars of our money. He invited thither learned men from every land,
irrespective of their religious opinions. By these men were founded
celebrated schools of mathematics, astronomy, chemistry, medicine, law
and languages.

{36} His grand-son, Haroun-al-Raschid, ordered in A. D. 786, that a
public school should be attached to every mosque in his dominions.
This was more than seven hundred years before the establishment of the
famous parish schools of Scotland.

The Caliph-al-Mamun, in A. D. 813, founded the great medical college
of Cairo, which required students to pass a rigid examination before
receiving authority to enter on the practice of their profession. At
this college we have the first account of dissecting human bodies for
the purpose of ascertaining the nature and locality of diseases, and
the first circulating library for students. These books were bound
according to the modern form, which then began to be used among the
Saracens in place of the ancient form of the scroll.

By the means just mentioned, the ancient sciences were greatly extended
and new ones introduced. To the Saracens we are indebted for our
present system of arithmetical notation. If, for example, we wish
to multiply 1882 by 125 and then attempt it by the ancient method
MDCCCLXXXII., multiplied by CXXV., we shall soon perceive the vast
superiority of the Arabic system over that formerly in use. No wonder,
then that under the ancient system those who were engaged in solving
difficult mathematical problems were frequently styled "sweating
calculators."

In this case as in many others the Arab has left his impress on this
science. For instance, our word cipher, and kindred words, such as
decipher, ciphering, etc., are derived from the word _tsaphara, or
ciphra_, the name for the 0 in the Arabic language.

In experimental sciences, they originated chemistry and discovered
the nature and properties of sulphuric acid, nitric acid, alcohol and
many other chemical agents. From their schools of medicine may be
traced such words as julep, syrup, elixir, alchemy, etc. To them we
are indebted for algebra, or universal arithmetic, and in astronomy
they made such advances that many constellations and stars of the first
magnitude still retain the Arabic names.

In geography, the Saracens made important discoveries. Hitherto mankind
had been taught that the earth was a vast {37} plain, surmounted by an
immense vault commonly called the sky. They were the first to prove
that the earth is a vast globe, or ball; and in order to determine its
size, they first ascertained on the level shore of the Red sea the
exact position of the North Star. Then traveling directly north until
it had attained another degree of elevation, they measured the distance
between these points, and multiplying the result by three hundred and
sixty (the number of degrees in a circle), they found the earth to be
nearly twenty-five thousand miles in circumference. So accurate were
their observations and measurements that the best calculators of recent
times differ from them less than one-third of a mile.

Five hundred years later the Roman pontiffs were excommunicating and
torturing those who taught the rotundity of the earth. While Catholic
monks were teaching, in all its absurdity, the flatness of the earth,
and how it rested on a vast rock, and that rock on another and so on
all the way down to the bottom(?), the Saracens were teaching geography
from globes in their common schools. It cost a long struggle through
several centuries, "with spiritual wickedness in high places," before
the truth finally triumphed.

European historians have generally given great credit to Pope Gregory
for the invention and adoption of the Gregorian calendar and a more
accurate method of measuring the exact length of the civil year.
Yet, Gregory only adopted what had been discovered and taught by
Thebit-Ben-Corrah, the Saracen astronomer, more than five hundred years
before, and what Gregory himself had learned in youth while attending a
Saracen university.

The mariner's compass was well known to the Arabs, who probably brought
it from China and introduced it to the nations of Europe. From this we
may correctly infer that they were a maritime people. In fact, long
before the time of Mahomet, Arabian merchants were acquainted with the
Indies, and even China and the eastern coast of Africa as far south as
Madagascar.

Alhazin, who wrote about A. D. 1080, made the great discovery of
atmospheric refraction--that a ray of light when it touches the
atmosphere is bent from a straight line; and {38} consequently we see
the sun before it rises and after it sets, in the same manner that
an object lying at the bottom of a bucket filled with water appears
in quite a different position from that in which it really is. He
was the first to give that beautiful and scientific explanation of
twilight, viz., the refraction of light, which is still regarded by
modern scientists as the true one. He even attempted to ascertain the
height of the atmosphere, which he estimated to be about fifty-eight
and a half miles. This philosopher also wrote a treatise on weights and
measures, and introduced that excellent system of weighing by means
of a small, movable weight attached to the longer arm of a lever, as
in our modern scales or steelyards. The Arabian astronomer, Ebn-Junis,
was the first who made use of the pendulum in the machinery of clocks
for the accurate measurement of the hours.

In the golden age of the Saracen empire, there were colleges in every
part of its vast dominions. So numerous were these institutions, that
more than six thousand students received instructions in them annually.
In the far east were the college and astronomical observatory of
Samercand; while in the western province of Andalusia were the famous
school and observatory of Giralda.

The first medical college established in Europe was that founded by the
Saracens at Salerno, in Italy; the first famous school of mathematics
and astronomy was that established by them at Seville, in Spain.

Among them, learning was not confined to the rich, but every class
received its benefits. The teachers of their colleges were paid liberal
salaries for their services, and an allowance was made for indigent
scholars, so that the son of the mechanic could graduate from the same
class as the heirs of the Caliphs.

At first glance it seems remarkable that the wild ferocity of the Arabs
should so suddenly change into a passion for intellectual pursuits; yet
it should not be forgotten that this ferocity was to a great extent
caused by religious enthusiasm. Thus, when the General Akbah had
conquered his way from Egypt to the Atlantic ocean, opposite the Canary
Islands, he rode his horse into the sea and drew his sword, exclaiming,
{39} "Great Allah! if my course were not stopped by this sea, I would
still go on to the unknown regions of the West, preaching the unity
of thy holy name, and putting to the sword the rebellious nations who
worship any other gods than thee."

Again, when we consider that a large majority of their teachers and
philosophers were of the Jewish nation, we see a beautiful Providence
in all this. The remnants of God's chosen people, though exiles and
wanderers, despised and down-trodden by the Gentiles, were yet the
instruments in God's hands for the execution of His purposes and the
elevation of the race.

Surely there is a broader, higher, grander meaning in the promise
given to Abraham, "In thy seed shall all the nations of the earth
be blessed," than many are willing to admit! And this is all the
more remarkable, that, at the very time when mankind so much needed
instruction, should occur what Milman so aptly terms, "The golden
age of Judaism." Not an age of royal pomp and political power--that
passed away with David and Solomon--but an age of intellectual culture,
scientific research and practical discovery.

Strange it would appear to the casual student, if upon further
research he should find that all great religious teachers have been of
Israelitish origin, as well as a large proportion of those who have
achieved distinction in the arts and sciences. But it was in Spain,
southern France and Sicily that the Saracens attained their greatest
power and influence; for there they came in contact with the nations of
western Europe, and so influenced European manners, customs and modes
of thought that through them that influence has been transmitted to our
times.

To the ingenuity of the Saracens we are indebted for the origin of
many articles of clothing and personal comfort. Their religion taught
them to be clean in person. They did not therefore clothe themselves,
according to prevailing customs in that age, in an under-garment made
from the skins of wild beasts--a garment which remained unwashed and
unchanged until it dropped to pieces of itself, a loathsome mass of
vermin, stench and rags. They taught us the use of that often-changed
and often-washed garment commonly called a shirt, {40} which still is
known among the ladies under its old Arabic name, _chemise_.

To them we are indebted for some of our most valuable fruits, such as
the apricot and peach.

Remembering the cooling effects of water in their own hot climate, they
spared no pains in constructing artificial lakes and fountains and
streams for the irrigation of their gardens.

Andalusia became the paradise of the world. The capital was Cordova,
which they greatly embellished as well as the rival cities Toledo,
Seville and Granada. A person might walk for miles through their cities
after night-fall by the light of their public lamps. Seven hundred
years afterwards, not a single public lamp could be found in the city
of London. The streets of these cities were solidly paved, through
which rolled magnificent carriages, drawn by horses, the fame of which
has descended to our times. Five hundred years later the sovereigns of
Great Britain and Germany were still traveling in uncouth wagons, drawn
by oxen, goaded on by pedestrian drivers.

The sidewalks of Cordova, Toledo, Seville and Granada were paved with
flagstones; while at a corresponding period the inhabitant of London or
Paris who ventured beyond his threshold on a rainy day sank ankle-deep
in filth and mud. Their residences were frequently in the midst of
orchards or embosomed in shady groves. They had cool and spacious
porches for rest in the heat of the day. Often these porches had roofs
of stained glass, on which fell in soothing cadences the glittering
pearl-drops of water from elevated fountains.

Their houses were usually built of brick or stone, and contained
many apartments, such as sleeping rooms, baths, libraries, parlors
and dining halls. In the best class of dwellings, the ceilings were
frescoed and the walls covered with paintings, representing scenes of
paradise, groves and fruits, lawns and fountains. Yet, delineations of
the human form, either nude or partly so, were religiously forbidden,
as it was considered that such representations were promotive of
licentiousness.

{41} Some of these apartments were furnished with musical instruments,
where the young of both sexes were wont to join in mirth and festivity,
and dancing to the music of the lute and mandolin. In others, the
sedate and reflecting, could engage in scientific research or
philosophical discussion. The {42} dwellings of the rich were carpeted,
and sometimes warmed by furnaces in winter and cooled in summer with
perfumed air, brought by under-ground pipes from distant flower
gardens. The use of wine was prohibited. The feasts of the Saracens
were marked with sobriety, and furnished a pleasing contrast to the
drunken revelries of their northern neighbors.

[Image: Interior of a Saracen Palace.]

The enchanting moonlight evenings of Andalusia were frequently spent
by the devout in sequestered gardens, consoling themselves for
the disappointments of this life by the hope of immortality, and
reconciling themselves to their daily toil by the expectation of the
joys of paradise, where flowers never fade nor fruits decay, where
sickness, and sorrow, and death are known no more.

Under Saracen government, religious persecution was unknown. Students
from Great Britain, Ireland, France and Germany came to study at
Saracen universities. There, among distinguished characters, whose
names and influence have descended to our times, was Frederick,
afterwards Frederick II., king of Italy; Gerbert, afterwards famous as
Pope Sylvester II.; Peter the Venerable, Abelard, the poet, and Arnold
of Brescia.

No wonder then that the Saracens looked with contempt upon the
barbarism of the native races of Europe, who could scarcely be said to
have emerged from the savage state--unclean in person, benighted in
mind, inhabiting huts in which it was a mark of wealth if there were
bulrushes on the floor and straw mats against the wall; subsisting on
barley, beans, cabbages, herbs and even the bark of trees; clothed
in rudely-tanned skins of wild animals, which were famous indeed for
durability, but not very conducive to personal cleanliness.

But the arts, sciences and general culture were not confined to the
Saracen men alone. Among the women there were many who, like Valada,
Ayesha, Labana and Algasania, achieved a national reputation. Some
of these were daughters of Caliphs, who considered it not beneath
their dignity to devote their lives to science and the elevation of
their sex. Where shall we find their equals at that time in so-called
Christian countries? Albucasis, a celebrated physician of Cordova,
{43} in his medical works, makes mention of several female physicians,
and recommends the employment of such in certain cases. No doubt the
condition of women was superior and their duties and position better
understood among polygamous Saracens than in monogamous Christendom.

The foregoing will indicate to some extent the condition of Saracen
society in the tenth and eleventh centuries. Shall we compare it with
the contemporary barbarism of the other portions of Europe?

Were we to pursue this subject further it would not be difficult to
show that Venice owed her commercial greatness to Saracen fleets
and Jewish merchants; that Marco Polo only traveled over countries
already well delineated on maps, and well described by Abulfeda and
other Arabian geographers; that Columbus himself first received
scientific proof of the rotundity of the earth while corresponding with
Torricelli, the great Florentine astronomer, who in turn had received
his education at the Saracen university of Seville, and modelled his
globes, maps and charts from those in its possession.

The careful student of history must deplore the attempts made by many
historians to ignore our indebtedness to the Saracens, who in the
providence of God have left their impress on the religions, arts and
sciences of the world. Surely prejudice founded on national conceit and
sectarian bigotry cannot last forever.

{44}



CHAPTER V.

REMARKABLE CITIES OF MEDIEVAL TIMES.

JERUSALEM THE SACRED CITY--ALEXANDRIA NOTED FOR PHILOSOPHY--SCHOOL OF
HYPATIA--MOB MURDERS HER--DOCTRINES OF CYRIL--JERUSALEM A SCENE OF
SUFFERING--FULFILLMENT OF PROPHECY--HERCULANEUM AND POMPEII--THEIR
DESTRUCTION--EVIDENCES OF THEIR WICKEDNESS--EXCAVATIONS--ROMAN
RULE--REMOVAL OF CAPITAL--CRIMES OF CONSTANTINE--COMMENCEMENT
OF GREEK EMPIRE--DESCRIPTION OF CONSTANTINOPLE--ITS
CAPTURE BY CRUSADERS--TAKEN BY THE TURKS--INTELLECTUAL
DEGRADATION--PRIESTCRAFT--DEBAUCHERY--TURKISH RULE.

The four great cities of medieval times were Jerusalem, Rome,
Alexandria and Constantinople. The first named has ever been the sacred
city, not merely of the Jews, but also of devout Christian pilgrims
of all ages. During the crusades it was the great object for the
possession of which so much blood and treasure were expended.

Alexandria, for the first three centuries of the Christian era, was
the commercial metropolis of the world, as well as the chief seat of
pagan learning and philosophy. It was here that Hypatia, the daughter
of Theon, the mathematician, held her famous school. Each day before
her academy stood a long train of chariots. Her lecture room was
crowded with the cultured classes of Alexandria. They came to ask those
profound questions that human reason, unaided, can never answer: "What
am I? Where am I? What can I know?"

At this time, Cyril, archbishop of Alexandria, was attempting to force
upon the world his trinitarian views. His absurd ideas could not endure
the sharp criticism of philosophic {45} minds. Cyril employed a mob of
Alexandrian monks. Amid the fearful yelling of these bare-legged and
black-cowled fiends, Hypatia was dragged from her chariot. In mortal
terror she fled to an adjacent church, and was there brutally murdered
by the club of Peter the Reader. But this was not all. We can only get
a faint idea of the depraved condition of paganized Christianity, when
we call to mind the fact that the monks finished their infernal crime
by dismembering her body and scraping the flesh from her bones with
oyster shells.

Cyril then procured the banishment of all who held opposing doctrines,
and thus his absurd doctrines were forced upon society. Such was the
debased condition of society in a city where had been planted one of
the apostolic churches. As vice increased her prosperity decreased.
During the reign of Constantine, the influence of Alexandria was much
diminished, and with the Mahometan conquest it fell to the rank of a
provincial town.

Jerusalem, once the "glory of the earth, and the pride of the nations,"
never recovered from the siege by Titus, in A. D. 70. The answer
which the Jews made to Pilate, "_His blood be upon us and upon our
children_," which they spake in reference to the Savior, has been
terribly and literally fulfilled. It may be safely asserted that
Jerusalem has witnessed more scenes of human suffering than any other
spot on earth.

Who does not see the hand of Providence in her retribution, as well as
in the fate of Herculaneum and Pompeii?

These cities were destroyed in A. D. 79, by an eruption of Mount
Vesuvius, and buried by a shower of ashes, sand and stones. Herculaneum
was situated about eight miles south of the present city of Naples, and
Pompeii about fifteen miles eastward.

Thus they remained buried for nearly seventeen hundred years. Extensive
excavations have been made during the past century, disclosing the city
walls, streets, temples, theatres, private dwellings, domestic utensils
and statuary. Many objects have been found which indicate the wicked
and licentious character of the inhabitants, and go to prove that they
were ripe for the destruction which awaited them. The inhabitants died
just as the catastrophe found them, guests in their {46} banqueting
halls, soldiers at their posts, prisoners in their dungeons, maidens at
the mirror and students at their books.

[Image: Eruption of Mount Vesuvius.]

{47} When the city was unearthed, the houses were found standing. The
interior paintings were still fresh, and the skeletons remained in the
very position and the very place in which death had overtaken them so
long ago. The marks left by the cups of the tiplers still remained on
the counters; the prisoners still wore their fetters, the ladies their
chains and bracelets. The researches are still going on, new wonders
are every day coming to light, and we shall soon have quite a distinct
idea of Roman towns in the first century of the Christian era.

Rome, from before the commencement of the Christian era, had been the
political and military capital of the world. From her gates issued
forth those imperial armies that conquered nations and crushed the
liberties of mankind. Her rule was not one of reason but one of force.
From the age of Augustus Caesar her power had been waning, and when the
Emperor Constantine removed the capital to Constantinople, Rome became
a city of secondary importance. Though her political prestige was gone
she became the seat of a religious empire which had and still has a
mighty influence in the nations of the earth. The wrongs which she
inflicted on others have recoiled with terrible retribution on herself.
Her ruins are silent and majestic witnesses of the providence of God.

To the reign of Constantine the Great, must be referred the
commencement of those dark and dismal times which oppressed Europe for
a thousand years.

Constantine, while dwelling at Rome, had murdered his son Crispus, his
nephew Licinius, and had suffocated, in a steam bath, his wife, Fausta,
to whom he had been married twenty years, and who was the mother of
three of his sons.

The public abhorrence of his crimes could no longer be concealed.
Constantine therefore determined to change his residence and build
another metropolis, which he named in honor of himself. He also found
it politic to favor the paganized and wrangling Christian sects, that
by their aid he might be able to triumph over the powerful coalition
that had been formed against him. The reign of Constantine is therefore
the true close of the Roman empire: the beginning of the Greek. The
transition from the one to the other is emphatically {48} and abruptly
marked, by a new metropolis and a new national religion.

Constantinople, at present the capital of the Turkish empire, stands,
like Rome, on seven hills, and on a tongue of land projecting into the
Bosphorus, which here forms an inlet or small bay known as the Golden
Horn.

The Bosphorus, as most of our readers are aware, is the name given to
the strait through which flow the waters of the Black sea into the sea
of Marmora, and which divides Europe from Asia.

Constantinople is admirably situated for commerce. This is one reason
why Russia has so long looked upon it with a covetous eye. In fact, the
reason why the bay, on the shores of which the city is built, has been
called the "Golden Horn," or horn of abundance, is because into it was
brought the wealth of three continents and the products of every clime.

That which is commonly called Constantinople, in reality consists of
three great cities, divided by arms of the sea, yet so near to each
other that the edifices of either of the cities may be seen distinctly
from the other two.

The view here given represents Constantinople looking from the north.
In the background is seen the city of Scutari, on the Asiatic side of
the Bosphorus. The hills in the distance are those of Asia Minor. On
the right is shown the city of Stamboul, which stands on the site of
the ancient Byzantium, and the foreground represents the modern city of
Galata, where the greater part of the foreign population resides, and
where the exchange, custom-house, and most of the churches, convents
and hospitals are situated.

As here depicted the current of the Bosphorus flows from left to right
and disappears in the distance.

{49}

[Image: Constantinople.]

The history of this city is very remarkable, and runs far back into
the mist of antiquity. Long before the Christian era it was a place of
considerable trade and political importance. Here the barbarians from
the coast of the Black sea came to barter their furs for the products
of more favored regions. Near this point Alexander the Great crossed
the Bosphorus on his great campaign of eastern conquest. In the second
century before Christ, the Romans having subdued the neighboring
{50} countries, built a fort on the site of the ancient city and named
it Byzantium.

The Roman emperor, Constantine the Great, enlarged and beautified the
city and made it the capital of the Roman empire, and in honor of
himself changed the name to Constantinople. After his death the Roman
empire was divided, and Constantinople continued to be the capital of
the eastern division.

For more than one thousand years it was the residence of the Caesars
and the commercial metropolis of the world.

Owing to the religious rivalry of Rome it was taken and partly burned,
by the Crusaders, in A. D. 1205. But the most memorable siege it has
ever endured was in A. D. 1453, when it fell into the hands of the
Ottoman Turks. By a strange coincidence a Constantine gave his name to
the city, and a Constantine reigned at its fall.

It was on the morning of April 6th, A. D. 1453. that Mahomet II.,
gave the signal for the attack, and the Turkish cannon (then a new
invention) thundered against the walls of the city. For fifty days the
siege was carried on with little success. At last, food was getting
scarce, and the pangs of hunger were sorely felt by the Christians
within the city. But hope revived as away on the sea of Marmora, they
spied five great ships well laden with supplies and with the Christian
flag unfurled. Onward the vessels flew before the breeze, but what a
sight met them as they neared the port! Three hundred Turkish ships
were drawn up in a line across the straits, each filled with troops and
eager for the fight. But there were brave hearts in those five gallant
Christian ships, full willing to meet the outnumbering enemy. Gaily
they careened before the swelling breeze, and steering straight for the
Turkish line bore down upon the foe. Suddenly from the Christian ranks
there burst a joyous shout, as the Turkish ships first wavered and then
fled. In vain the fierce sultan, Mahomet II., mad with rage, called
upon his captains to make good the fight. But the rent was made, and
amid a hundred thousand Christian cheers the succoring ships sailed in
victoriously to the Golden Horn, and many a mother's heart was glad as
she closely clasped her half-famished child.

{51} A strong chain had meanwhile been placed across the harbor, to
prevent the entrance of the Turkish fleet. But Mahomet was determined
not to be baffled. In the silence of the night he caused eighty boats
to be dragged ten miles across the neck of land that divides the sea of
Marmora from the tip of the Golden Horn. Rafts were then made, on which
cannon were floated to bombard the city from the harbor.

By the 29th of May all was ready for the final battle. The great
Byzantine empire, once foremost in the powers of the world, had shrunk
into the narrow limits of a few square miles.

The sun had set, and night fell upon the contending hosts. Christian
warriors, as they lay under the starry canopy of heaven, cast off the
sterner half of man, and let their softer natures free: and loving
thoughts of sisters, mothers, wives went winding through the air, to
meet in last embrace.

And now the solemn calm before the storm drew near, and all was hushed
and still. Constantine did not sleep. He knew that his hour was at
hand. With a few chosen knights, he retired to the great church of
St. Sophia, and there uncovered stood before the cross. To-morrow the
great Byzantine empire would pass away with him! His tears fell thickly
at the thought; and he prayed that he might die as became a Christian
knight. Then for the last time he partook of the sacrament, and,
turning to those around, he said, "I pray forgiveness if I have injured
any one in thought, or word, or deed."

He stepped to the portal of the church, where stood his impatient
steed, placed his helmet on his noble head, and mounting into the
saddle, the humble penitent rode off as warrior Christian king, to
battle and to die. He was afterwards found among a heap of the slain.

The banner of the crescent waved over the waters of the Bosphorus, and
what was then the richest capital and finest country in Europe. Four
hundred and thirty years have rolled by since then. It is still in
their possession.

The appearance of Constantinople at the present time is very peculiar.
The city is embosomed in gardens, orchards and vineyards. The houses
are for the most part built in the form of a hollow square, with flat
roofs and the windows facing {52} inward. This gives to the compact
parts of the city a rather dingy appearance. The streets, especially in
the ancient portions, are extremely narrow, and frequently filthy. It
is therefore pleasant to turn from these crowded thoroughfares, and in
a few moments' walk, find yourself surrounded with shady trees, singing
birds, fountains and flowers.

Here, in the limits of a single city, may be found representatives
of almost every race and clime. The fair-haired natives of northern
Europe, the swarthy inhabitants of Tartary, tall fierce-looking
Circassians, and flat-nosed, woolly-headed negroes from central Africa;
all mingling with the more polished inhabitants of western Europe, each
dressed in his own peculiar garb, and presenting a living picture no
less striking than strange. In this great hive of humanity may be heard
at least fifty different languages making a complete Babel of sounds.
Here, also, may be seen in striking contrast, the different manners,
customs and usages of oriental and western nations.

The different methods used in the transportation of merchandise are no
less peculiar; for while on the eastern side of the city, may be seen
approaching long caravans of camels laden with the rich products of the
East, on the western side may be heard the shriek of the locomotive,
announcing the arrival of a train, bringing passengers, merchandise and
latest intelligence from western nations.

But the most significant custom is that five times a day the
_muezzins_, or Mahometan priests, ascend to the top of the mosques (as
places of worship are called) and which are thickly scattered through
the city, and in a loud wailing voice exclaim, "God is great! There is
one God! Mahomet is His prophet! Come to prayer!" This is repeated four
times facing the east, south, west and north, and has a penetrating
effect on the mind of the hearer, much more than the sound of the
church-bell of the Christians, or the trumpet of the Jews.

Most European historians have lamented the seizure of Constantinople
by the Turks as a terrible disaster. To the unprejudiced student of
history there seems to be but little reason for regret. For eleven
hundred years Constantinople had greatly influenced the destinies of
the world; but during {53} all that time her power had tended more
to the degradation than to the elevation of mankind. Her citizens
possessed all the classical writings and works of art of the great
authors of antiquity; yet in a thousand years they never produced one
original, never advanced one step in philosophy or science, or made a
single practical discovery. What was it that produced this barrenness,
this intellectual degradation in Constantinople? It was the tyranny
of priestcraft over thought. For a thousand years Constantinople had
been not merely the leading commercial city, but also the leading city
in debauchery and crime. In this respect it has vastly improved under
Turkish rule. At the present time, especially in the Mahometan portions
of the city, it is the least licentious of all the great capitals of
modern Europe.



CHAPTER VI.

RELIC-WORSHIP, PILGRIMAGES AND CRUSADES.

GROWTH OF RELIC-WORSHIP--SCHEMES OF THE ROMAN PONTIFFS--MANUFACTURE
OF RELICS--THEIR GREAT VARIETY--VALUE OF RELICS--INSULTS OFFERED TO
PILGRIMS--PETER THE HERMIT--CRUSADES--DISORDERLY RABBLE--TERRIBLE
SUFFERING--CAPTURE OF JERUSALEM--TERRIBLE MASSACRE--CAPTURE
OF CONSTANTINOPLE--CRUSADES OF THE CHILDREN--RESULT OF THE
CRUSADES--REVIVAL OF LEARNING.

In previous chapters has been traced the apostasy of the early church,
also the career of Mahomet, and the conquests and achievements of the
Saracens. While these events were transpiring, other causes were at
work which led eventually to the elevation of mankind, the history of
which plainly indicates the workings of an All-wise Providence.

{54} At this period there were no printed books, and the only means
of religious instruction to which the masses had access, were the
pictures and images to be found in the churches, together with the
explanations of them given by the priests. By means of these practical
object-lessons much useful information was imparted. The principal
events in the life of our Savior were thus depicted, and, though the
people did not fully understand the grandeur of His mission, they at
least learned something of His history, their duties to each other and
their own future destiny.

Thus there came to be associated in their minds a reverence for the
picture or image itself, and this idea extended until it included the
localities where the great events of the Savior's life, death and
resurrection transpired.

With the growth of devotion to the person of Christ, grew the feeling
of reverence for every place which He had visited and every memorial
which He had left behind Him. The impulse once given, soon became
irresistible. Every incident of the gospel narratives was associated
with some particular spot, and millions believed that the sight of
these places brought them nearer to heaven. The cave or excavation in
which it was said the Redeemer was born, and where the wise men of the
East laid before Him their royal gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh,
the mount from which He uttered His blessings on the meek, the merciful
and the pure in heart, in short, every spot connected with his life,
death and resurrection called forth emotions of passionate veneration.
These feelings were greatly intensified by the alleged discovery of the
cross on which the Savior died, together with the two crosses on which
the thieves were crucified.

The splendid churches raised by the Emperor Constantine and his mother
Helena over the supposed spot of our Savior's birth at Bethlehem, and
His sepulchre at Jerusalem, became for the Christian of that day what
the tomb of the prophet at Medina became afterwards to the followers of
Mahomet.

The remission of sins and eternal rewards in the world to come were
the blessings promised to the weary pilgrim when he should tread the
classic soil of Judea, bathe in the river Jordan, chant his quiet
anthem of praise in the cave at Bethlehem, {55} walk in the quiet
shades of Gethsemane and kneel in reverence at the Savior's tomb.

No wonder then that a hundred thousand pilgrims might have been seen
each year wending their way across the plains of Asia Minor, destined
for Jerusalem.

The Roman pontiffs, owing to the ignorance of the times, had already
built up a wide-spread system of superstition.

[Image: Church of the Holy Sepulchre.]

They held almost imperial sway over the countless hordes of central and
northern Europe. Even kings and emperors paid tribute, and sovereigns
dared not disobey their commands. As an instance, might be mentioned
Henry IV., of Germany, who having displeased Pope Gregory VII., was
obliged, under penalty of losing his kingdom, to stand as a penitent at
the pope's castle gate during three dreary winter {56} days, seeking
pardon and reconciliation of the inexorable pontiff.

It is not surprising that the popes, who had long trafficked in human
credulity, saw, in the growth of relic-worship, an opportunity to
increase their own power and the revenues of the church of Rome.
Accordingly an understanding was made with the monks of Palestine and
relics were manufactured in untold numbers.

An amusing and instructive chapter might be written on this subject:
amusing because of its absurdity, and instructive as it shows to what
extremes of folly men will go when left without the guidance of the
Holy Spirit.

The crimes and corruptions of the papacy had destroyed public
confidence. The devout instinctively turned with reverence towards
every object that recalled the memories of the pure and good who once
lived upon the earth.

No sooner had the wild rage for relics fairly set in than each
monastery in the vicinity of Jerusalem made a specialty of some
particular relic. The monks at Bethlehem sold thousands of pounds of
half rotten rags, each fragment purporting to be a portion of the
swaddling cloths of the infant Savior. The monks who guarded the
supposed sepulchre of Christ, sold hundreds of thousands of little
chips of stone said to have been broken off from the very walls of
the tomb where the body of Jesus had lain. It does not seem to have
shaken the credulity of the pilgrims in the least, that the tomb still
remained in as good repair as ever, and showed no marks of demolition.

The monks who inhabited the monasteries on the banks of the Jordan
could point to at least twenty places where it was said the Savior had
been baptized, and each monastery possessed numerous pebbles which
the monks claimed had been touched by His feet. No less than seven
monasteries claimed to have the true cross in their possession, and
thousands of pieces, of wood amounting to many tons in weight, were
sold to devout pilgrims. Each of these pieces, it was claimed, was a
part of the true cross.

But it would require a long and tedious list to even enumerate the
various articles comprised in this relic-worship. In {57} order to get
some faint idea of their extent and variety, the relics which the Abbot
Martin obtained for his monastery in Alsace might be mentioned. These,
among other things, included "a piece of the true cross, a fragment
of the infant Savior's swaddling cloths, some pebbles from the river
Jordan which the Savior's feet had touched, a branch of the tree under
which He prayed in the garden of Gethsemane, a piece of the Savior's
robe, for which the Roman soldiers cast lots," (see Matthew, 27th
chapter), "a tooth of St. Mark, seven hairs of the martyr, Stephen, a
thigh bone of the animal which Jesus rode into Jerusalem," (see Luke,
19th chapter), and (I hesitate to write such blasphemy) "a bottle of
the milk of the mother of God."

In connection with this relic-worship, an amusing anecdote is related:
It so happened that about thirty pilgrims were traveling homeward
from Palestine together. Being somewhat weary, they concluded to
rest and refresh themselves. Having partaken of some wine too freely
they commenced to boast of the various relics which each had in his
possession. One claimed that he had actually the identical piece of
money which Peter took out of the fish's mouth (see Matthew, 17th
chapter, 27th verse). But, to their mutual surprise, they soon found
that each had made a similar purchase. It was plain that at least
twenty-nine of them had been defrauded. But they reasoned that if it
was not wrong for the monks to defraud them, it would not be wrong for
them to defraud others. So they quietly sold the pieces of money as
soon as possible.

No doubt one reason why relic-worship became so extensive, was the
encouragement given to it by the Roman pontiffs. It was boldly asserted
that the possession of a relic was a specific against evil spirits,
accidents, disease, and, in short, nearly every evil to which humanity
is heir. Hence the great demand for relics by the ignorant and
superstitious, and the vast sums of money which were thus poured into
the treasury of the church of Rome.

For example, a tooth of an apostle was valued at a sum equal
commercially to one hundred dollars of our money, and a thousand
dollars would scarcely buy a piece of the true cross {58} as large as a
common friction match. Of course these prices varied according to the
wealth and the credulity of the purchaser.

When, in A. D. 637, Jerusalem was captured by the Saracens, the
Christians and pilgrims were treated with much consideration. They were
not only to be safe in their persons, but undisturbed in the exercise
of their religion and in the use of their churches.

The yearly influx of at least one hundred thousand pilgrims, however,
aroused suspicion among the great mass of Mahometans, who failed to
comprehend the purport of their extraordinary journey, but perceived
the necessity of putting some restraint on this annual rush of such
countless multitudes. The consequence was that wrongs were inflicted
and retaliated until the mere journey to Jerusalem involved dangers
from which even the bravest might shrink. Insults offered to the
pilgrims were accompanied by insults offered to the holy places and to
those who ministered in them.

Still the pilgrims went forth by thousands, and occasionally hundreds
and frequently only tens returned to recount the miseries and wanton
cruelties they had undergone.

Throughout the length and breadth of Christendom a fierce indignation
was stirring the hearts of men, and their rage, like pent up waters,
needed only an opportunity to rush forth as a flood over the lands
under the control of the Mahometans. That opportunity was not long
wanting. Peter, the hermit, who had witnessed the barbarities to which
the pilgrims were exposed, roused Europe to a frantic state by his
preaching.

Dwarfish in stature and mean in person, he was yet filled with a zeal
that knew no bounds. The horrors which fired his soul were those which
would most surely stir the conscience and arouse the wrath of his
hearers. His fiery appeals carried everything before him. Wherever he
went, the rich and the poor, the aged and the young, the nobles and
the peasants thronged in thousands around the emaciated stranger. He
traveled with his head and feet bare, calling on all classes to deliver
from the unbeliever the land which was the cradle of their faith.

{59} The vehemence which choked his own utterance became contagious.
His sobs and groans called forth the tears and cries of the vast crowds
who hung upon his words and greedily devoured the harrowing accounts of
the pilgrims, whom Peter brought forward as witnesses of the truth of
his picture. The excitement and frenzy of the moment threw, no doubt,
a specious coloring over an enterprise of doubtful morality, and which
eventually pandered to the basest passion of humanity.

These wars are known in history by the name of Crusades, from the
Latin term _crux_, a cross, which emblem was painted on the breasts or
shoulders of all who engaged in them.

When the masses were thoroughly excited, Pope Urban gave the enterprise
his sanction, and promised to all who would enlist a full remission of
their sins. This encouraged innumerable desperadoes to assume the badge
of the cross. Fanaticism and hypocrisy, lust and avarice strangely
urged their several votaries to pursue one path, and all under the
sacred and now woefully profaned name of Christian zeal!

Yet the hand of Providence was in all this. Even the rage of men worked
out His purpose, and, as the sequel will show, produced results which,
under the controlling hand of God led to the elevation of the race.

To give a detailed description of the Crusades would alone require a
volume. It is enough to say that the first Crusade failed, not only
disastrously, but hideously, so far as the ignorant rabbles under
Peter, the hermit, and Walter, the penniless, were concerned. The long
and ghastly line of bones whitening the roadside all the way from
Hungary to Judea, showed how different a thing it was for a peaceable
and solitary pilgrim with his staff and wallet and scallop-shell to beg
his way, and the disorderly rabble of thousands upon thousands to rush
forward without any organization, and gathering their daily supplies
by robbing and killing the helpless peasants on their route. This, in
their ignorance or blasphemy, they called "trusting in the providence
of God."

The van of the Crusades consisted of two hundred and seventy-five
thousand men. Behind these came a rabble of {60} two hundred thousand
men, women and children, preceded by a goat and a goose, into which
some blasphemous lunatic had told them that the Holy Ghost had entered.
When at length these animals died, a representation of them was painted
on their banner.

In this vile horde no pretense was kept up of order or of decency.
Driven to madness by disappointment and famine, and expecting, in
their ignorance, that every town they came to must be Jerusalem, they
laid hands on whatever they could in their extremity. Their track was
marked by robbery, fire and bloodshed. In the first Crusade alone, more
than five hundred thousand human beings perished. However, a better
organized expedition soon followed, commanded by Godfrey de Bouillon,
Duke of Lorraine. By him Jerusalem was captured July 15th, A. D. 1099.
As might be expected, its siege and capture were attended by the
perpetration of cruelties almost surpassing belief.

What a contrast to the conduct of the Arabs, when the Caliph Omar
took Jerusalem, A. D. 637! He rode into the city by the side of the
patriarch, Saphronius, conversing with him on its antiquities. When the
time of evening prayer arrived, he declined to pay his devotions in the
church of Constantine, fearing that his followers might wish to imitate
his example, and thus render it practically useless to the Christians;
but he knelt outside in the yard near the entrance gate. What a supreme
act of religious toleration! When will free-born Americans learn to act
thus nobly?

But in the capture of Jerusalem by the Crusaders the brains of young
children were dashed out against the walls, infants were thrown over
the battlements, men and women were tortured that they might be
compelled to disclose hidden wealth, the Jews were driven into their
synagogue and there burnt. A massacre of seventy thousand persons took
place, and the pope's especial ambassador was seen "partaking in the
triumph."

Such were the exploits of the first Crusade. The second was barren of
results except the inhuman butchery of thousands of unoffending Jews.
The third produced no permanent effects, but a halo of false glory
is shed around it, from the {61} exploits of Richard the Lion-heart,
king of England, who was connected with it, and whose adventures have
stirred to enthusiasm even the dullest of historians. With great
difficulty, Pope Innocent III., succeeded in preparing the fourth
Crusade, A. D. 1202. The government of Venice agreed to furnish ships
to carry them to Palestine, but, actuated by a love of plunder, and a
desire to gratify the bitter feeling which existed between the popes of
Rome and the bishops of Constantinople, they turned aside to vent their
rage on their fellow-Christians. Constantinople was taken by storm A.
D. 1204. On the night of its capture more houses were burned than could
be found in any three of the largest cities of France. The treasures
of the churches were carried away, and even the tombs of the ancient
emperors were rifled in the mad search for relics.

Thus, Crusade followed Crusade for more than one hundred and fifty
years, until nine armies, comprising more than three millions of men,
laid their bodies down to decay and their bones to whiten on the plains
and hill-sides of the East.

Among all the enterprises, none were more wild and wicked than those
which are called the "Crusades of the children." Emissaries from Rome
went throughout Western Europe, preaching and declaring that God would
only give the Holy Land into the hands of innocent children. Pope
Innocent III. applauded their wild enthusiasm. "These children," said
he, "are a reproach to us of riper age. While they hurry to Palestine,
we are asleep."

{62}

[Image: Ancient Vessels.]

A few words will suffice to tell the story how twenty thousand
children, under the boy Stephen, encamped around Vendome. In less
than a month ten thousand of them had perished or strayed away. When
they reached Marseilles, they lingered near the shore, expecting the
Mediterranean to divide, and, like the Red Sea in ancient times, give
them a dry passage to Palestine. At length two merchants offered to
convey them there in ships, without charge; but at the end of their
journey they found themselves, not in Palestine, but in the slave
markets of Alexandria and Algiers.

A sequel to this "o'er true tale" is found in the sufferings of another
rabble of thirty thousand boys and girls, who, under {63} the peasant
lad, Nicholas, in crossing the Alps lost nearly half their number. Five
thousand reached Genoa, and, being invited by the senate, concluded
to settle there. The rest marched to Brindisi, and, setting sail for
Palestine, were never heard of more.

Worthless in themselves and wholly useless as a means for founding any
permanent dominion in Palestine or elsewhere, these enterprises were a
means in the overruling hand of God of effecting the nations of Europe
in a way which the promoters never dreamed of.

Their results were many and various. One was that they drew away many
of the warlike and turbulent, and gave, as it were, a resting time
for the states of Western Europe, during which, learning, science and
general culture, among the quietly-disposed, made rapid advances, and
many cities and smaller states rose from obscurity to opulence and
power.

Another was the change of feeling which took place in the Crusaders
themselves. What a surprise awaited these religious barbarians--for
such they really were--when for the first time they gazed on the
splendors of Constantinople in its palmiest days! What a contrast to
their own rude homes, when they passed into Asia Minor, that garden
of the world, presenting well-cultivated fields, orchards, vineyards,
palaces and schools, the civilization of a thousand years! How
unexpected the character of those Saracens, whom they had been taught
to regard as no better than bloodthirsty fiends, but whom they found to
be valiant, merciful and just!

When Richard the Lion-heart, king of England, lay in his tent consumed
by a fever, there came into the camp camels laden with snow, from Mount
Lebanon, to assuage his disease. It was a present from his enemy, the
great Mahometan Saladin--the homage of one brave soldier to another.
But when Richard was returning to England it was by a Christian prince,
who should have aided him, that he was treacherously seized and
secretly confined.

This was doubtless only one of many such incidents. Every Crusader
must have recognized the difference between what they had anticipated
and what they had found. They had seen undaunted courage, chivalrous
bearing, intellectual culture and {64} religious toleration far greater
than their own. When the Crusaders returned to their native lands, they
carried with them the memory of their experiences, and a relish for
more polished manners and a higher civilization than that to which they
had been accustomed at home. Hence, immediately after the Crusades the
arts and sciences began to be sedulously cultivated in Europe. They had
departed with the intent of conquering, aye even exterminating their
enemies; but by contact with those enemies they had learned in some
things "a more excellent way." The words of the Koran inscribed on the
banner of Saladin are true: "There is no conqueror but God!" Equally
true the words written by the Prophet Esdras, as he sat by the side
of the willow-fringed river of Babylon more than twenty-three hundred
years ago: "As for truth, it endureth and is always strong; it liveth
and conquereth for evermore," (see Apocrypha, I. Esdras, iv., 38).



CHAPTER VII.

THE DAWN OF MODERN INTELLIGENCE.

THE MORNING DAWNS--RISE OF KNIGHTHOOD--PRINCIPLES OF
KNIGHTS--APOSTATE PRIESTS HELD IN CONTEMPT--WALDENSES--PERSECUTIONS
IN SOUTHERN FRANCE--RISE OF THE INQUISITION--LIBERAL POLICY OF
FREDERICK--"EVERLASTING GOSPEL"--ITS REMARKABLE TEACHINGS--BACON'S
DISCOVERIES--GEOGRAPHICAL KNOWLEDGE--AZORES AND CANARY ISLANDS--TRAVELS
OF MARCO POLO--CONDITION OF EUROPEAN STATES--MODERN STATES.

Those who have waited for the dawning of the morning in the latter part
of a clear summer night, can understand the delight experienced at the
first tokens of approaching day. At first the rays of light are very
faint and only perceptible to a keen and experienced eye. As time wears
on the timid approach of twilight becomes more perceptible. The intense
blue of the sky begins to soften. The rays that first darted up {65}
in the far north-east, though occasionally intercepted by mountains or
banks of clouds, gradually swing around to the east. The darkness of
the night dissolves into the glories of the dawn. The great watch-stars
fade away, one by one. The whole firmament is filled with the inflowing
tides of morning light. At length a stream of golden sunlight flashes
out from above the hills and turns the dewy tear-drops of flower and
leaf into rubies and diamonds. Thus the king of day begins his course
arrayed in glories too severe for the gaze of man.

In like manner we may in imagination gaze at the dawning of "the
dispensation of the fullness of times," and watch the increasing rays
of moral, intellectual and spiritual light, feeble indeed at first, yet
constantly growing stronger, though sometimes intercepted by mountains
of bigotry and mists of error, until at length the gospel's glorious
sunshine again lights a benighted world, and the divine authority
and Priesthood are restored to the children of men. But let us not
anticipate. Let us rather patiently decipher on history's scroll the
characters written there by the finger of God. Let us carefully watch
the development of His purposes amid the strife and commotion of those
perilous times.

With the close of the Crusades the midnight darkness of human history
ended. Human misery had reached its climax. Superstition and ignorance
had done their most terrible work. Thousands, aye even millions had had
an opportunity of comparing the teachings and pretenses of Rome with
other civilizations. It is almost needless to say that Catholicism had
seriously suffered by the comparison. Rome was weighed in the balance
and found wanting.

Those of the Crusaders who remained in Palestine were soon blended
with the Mahometan population, and in a few years scarce a vestige of
them remained. Many of the leaders who returned were, like Richard
the Lion-Hearted, full of praise of the treatment they had received
from their enemies, and spent much of their time in founding various
orders of chivalry and knighthood. At first those orders received the
benediction of the popes. Some of them were even organized before
they returned from the Holy Land. Of such were the famous {66}
knights of St. John and Knights Hospitaller. But it was soon found
that those brave men loved liberty more than priestcraft, so after a
time, notwithstanding their eminent services, they were weakened and
divided by stratagem, charges were preferred against them and they were
cruelly put to death. The story of their fate will ever, remain one
of the darkest pages in the annals of our race. But their death only
accelerated the progress of their ideas. The spirit and institutions
of chivalry spread rapidly.

Treachery and hypocrisy were held by them in detestation. "To speak the
truth, to succor the helpless and never turn back from an enemy," was
the first vow of the youth who sought the honors of chivalry.

In an age of darkness and degradation, chivalry developed the character
of woman. It caused her virtues to be appreciated and honored, made
her the equal and companion of man, and the object of his love and
devotion. The love of God and the protection of women were enjoined as
a single duty (see Halem's Middle Ages, page 512). He who was faithful
to his vow and true to his wife was sure of salvation in the opinion of
the knights, though he failed to perform the penance prescribed by the
Romish clergy.

Chivalry was the religion of the heart, in a rude and untutored age.
It had the effect of infusing more of humanity and generous principle
into the operations of war than the ancient nations had any conception
of. Hence we seldom or never hear in modern times of such scenes
of unmingled atrocity, such deadly treachery, such extensive and
cold-blooded massacres as we so frequently read of in ancient pagan or
papal history.

At the close of the Crusades a great change commenced in society. The
minstrels, who with harps had gone about singing ballads, commemorating
deeds of heroism and adventure, now changed their theme and sang songs
of a very different character. Amid shouts of laughter they went
through the land, wagging their heads, and slyly winking their eyes,
and singing derisive songs about the amours of the priests, who in
turn were not slow to denounce the minstrels as lewd blasphemers and
atheists.

{67} While the young were singing, the old were thinking; while the gay
were carried away with romance and chivalry, the grave and reflecting
were falling into heresy.

About A. D. 1100, Peter Waldo, a wealthy citizen of Lyons, became
convinced of the corruptions of Rome. He, probably aided by others,
translated the scriptures into Provencal French. Thus, to him the
world is indebted for the first translation of the Bible into a modern
tongue. Waldo could not long remain in Lyons. He fled into Germany
and afterwards settled in Bohemia, where he died about A. D. 1179.
He was the instrument of spreading those liberal ideas in Bohemia,
of which John Huss and Jerome of Prague became in after times worthy
representatives. At the time of his death it is said that Waldo had
five hundred thousand followers.

Already, A. D. 1134, Peter de Brueys had been burned at Languedoc for
denying infant baptism. Already the valleys of Piedmont were full of
Waldenses, who denounced the greed of the popes and the intermingling
of bishops in bloodshed and war. At this juncture Innocent III.,
ascended the pontifical throne. Here was a state of things which, as
he considered, demanded immediate attention. The methods to which
he resorted for the suppression and extinction of heretics, as
misbelievers were called, have made his name forever infamous.

Innocent well knew that the greed and the corruptions of the clergy
had made them unpopular with the people. He therefore established
the mendicant orders of priests, more commonly known under the names
of Franciscans and Dominicans. Vowed to poverty and living on alms,
they lived and moved among the masses, and yet were held sacred. The
accusations and dissipation of luxury so forcibly urged against the
regular clergy, were altogether inapplicable to these half-starved
wandering fanatics. Once more for a time the popes had gained
possession of the ear of the masses.

At this time Southern France was the garden of reform. Here the
eloquence of Abelard, the patriotism of Arnold and the statesmanship
of Frederick wielded a mighty influence. Like seeds falling into good
ground, they brought forth much fruit. Already Arnold had been burned
at the stake and his {68} ashes thrown on the waves of the Tiber. He
has thus become the heritage, as it were, of every nation whose shores
are washed by the tides of the sea. Seven centuries have rolled by
since then, yet the memory of Arnold of Brescia is ever green; the
principles for which he lived and died are now incorporated in every
constitutional government on the globe.

In no land were his principles more prevalent than in Southern France,
and on it Innocent determined to vent his rage. In looking around for
a suitable pretext that would rouse the masses and excite them to
religious frenzy, he soon discovered the object for which he sought.
It was Raymond, earl of Toulouse, who had so far turned Mahometan that
he had no less than three wives in emulation of his Saracen neighbors
beyond the Pyrenees. An investigation of the domestic life of Raymond,
would have shown it to have been far more honorable than that of the
popes, themselves. Raymond was therefore arrested on the charge of
heresy, of harboring heretics and placing offices of trust in the hands
of worthy Jews. His subjects were indignant, for Raymond, it would
seem, was a wise and good ruler and much loved by his people.

In the disputes that ensued the pope's ambassador was accidentally
killed. Innocent considered this a sufficient reason for sending into
the earl's dominion an army of nearly five hundred thousand men. There
was no alternative for the earl but to submit. He surrendered up his
strong places, and even acknowledged the justice of his punishment. He
was publicly stripped naked to the waist, and, with a rope around his
neck, led to the altar of the cathedral and there scourged.

But the humiliation and scourging of the earl was not sufficient to
satisfy the soldiery. They had come for blood and plunder, and blood
and plunder they must have. Then followed such a scene of horror as
tongue or pen cannot describe. The army was officered by Roman and
French prelates. Bishops were its generals and an archdeacon its
engineer. The pope's ambassador was the commander-in-chief, who, when
asked by a subordinate officer at the battle of Beziers, how the
Catholics might be distinguished from the misbelievers {69} and saved,
replied: "Kill them all, God will know His own in the resurrection."
In the church of St. Mary Magdalene, seven thousand persons were
massacred. In the city twenty thousand more were slaughtered. The place
was then fired and left as a monument of priestly vengeance.

[Image: Dungeon of the Inquisition.]

{70} At the massacre of Levaur four hundred persons were piled together
and burned. The embassador, in making up his dispatches to the
pope, said that "they made a wonderful blaze, and then went to burn
everlastingly in hell."

It was hoped that these horrors would so terrify men that they would
never again dare to use the God-given power of reason. The soil had
been steeped with the blood of men and the air polluted by their
burnings; yet all this did not stifle the truth, nor prevent its
growth. Hoping still to effect this, that infernal institution, the
Inquisition, was established. Its projectors intended it not only to
put an end to public teaching, but also to private thought. When once
the Inquisition seized its victim, no person, not even the nearest
relative, could converse with him, write to him or intercede for him.
He was lost to public view until the hour for his torture or execution
had arrived. In Spain alone more than three hundred and forty thousand
passed through its terrible ordeal. But this fearful tribunal did not
fail to draw upon itself the indignation of men. Such outrages against
humanity cannot be perpetrated without bringing retribution in the end.

The great forces which were then at work in society, were well
illustrated in the characters of the two leading actors. On one side
stands Innocent III., his hands red with the blood of his fellow-men,
and hesitating at no atrocity in order to accomplish his purposes.

On the other, was Frederick II., emperor of Germany and Italy.
Frederick's early life had been spent in familiar intercourse with Jews
and Arabs. In a Saracen university he had received his education; and
to his many other accomplishments, he added the speaking of the Arabic
as fluently as a Saracen. Jewish and Saracen philosophers had taught
him to sneer at the pretensions of the church of Rome: as might be
expected he soon came in conflict with her authority.

Between Innocent and Frederick was perpetual enmity; but for a time
the conflict was deferred. During this interval the greatness of
Frederick was manifested in the internal improvements of his kingdom.
He instituted a representative assembly or parliament, which by his
sanction framed a {71} code of wise and useful laws. This code asserted
the principle of equal rights to all, the peasants, the nobles and
the church, and an equal proportion of taxation. It also provided
for the toleration of all religions, Catholic, Jewish and Mahometan.
Frederick emancipated all the serfs and slaves of his dominions,
established cheap courts of justice for the poor, and regulated trade
and commerce. He even laid down some of those commercial and political
maxims recently discussed by Adam Smith and John Stuart Mill, and only
in our own times finally received as true. He also established fairs
and markets, for the exchange of products, and offered prizes for
mechanical improvements and the best breeds of domestic animals. In
Naples he founded a great university with liberal provision for worthy
but indigent youths. Under him sculpture, painting, poetry and music
were liberally patronized, and the Italian tongue first rose to the
dignity of a language.

All this was an abomination in the sight of Rome. Gregory IX.,
succeeded to the pontifical chair in A. D. 1228. Frederick and
his parliaments, his laws and universities, his libraries and his
toleration were all denounced, and Frederick himself was delivered over
to Satan for the good of his soul. For thirty years Frederick combated
the power of the church, but he sank in the conflict at last. But the
fate of men is by no means an indication of the fate of principles.

  "Truth crushed to earth will rise again,
  The eternal years of God are hers."

Though denounced then, Frederick is now considered one of the
benefactors of his race.

Meanwhile an ominous cloud was gathering in the horizon of Rome.
The Franciscans, weary of poverty, began to denounce the luxury and
corruptions of the regular clergy. At this juncture a strange book made
its appearance, which, under the title of "The Everlasting Gospel,"
struck terror to the hearts of the papal authorities.

It was affirmed that an angel brought it from heaven and gave it to
the priest called Cyril, who it was said delivered it to the Abbot
Joachim, by whom the book was published. Cyril {72} had been dead about
fifty years when the work first made its appearance. According to the
admissions of Catholic historians, "The work displayed an enlarged
and masterly conception of the historical progress of humanity." It
claimed that Romanism had done its work and must now make way for a new
order of ideas. It proceeded to show that there are epochs, or ages in
the divine government of the world. During the Jewish dispensation,
it had been under the immediate influence of God the Father. For the
next twelve hundred years, it had been under the control of God the
Son, but the time has now arrived when the world would be under the
special control of the Holy Spirit. That man need no longer treasure
up the relics of antiquity, search after the sayings of the early
fathers or even solely and implicitly rely on the letter of the ancient
scriptures, for the Holy Spirit would manifest itself in visions,
dreams and revelations to the children of men.

One of the grand principles which it taught was, "the divine right of
private judgment." It asserted that genius should not be considered
an individual possession, but rather "the gift of God--the visible
manifestation of the secret workings of the Holy Spirit for the
elevation of the race." In short, it taught that "every invention and
discovery was only, in some degree, a revelation of God to man," an
unfolding of the secret laws of nature to man's finite understanding.
It considered, "those heroes as inspired, who, springing from society
at appointed epochs, displayed a mental or moral power beyond the
ordinary limits of humanity, and around whom, as around a superior and
mysterious power, nations and individuals unhesitatingly gather."

It recognized the hand of God in those grand revolutions, those great
men, those mighty nations, which, arising from obscurity, communicate
a fresh impulse, new vigor and advanced ideas to the human race. It
was without doubt the most powerful written work which had appeared
since the days of the apostles. No wonder the pope, Alexander IV., took
immediate measures for its destruction. So far from being suppressed,
its copies were multiplied rapidly, though printing was as yet unknown.

{73} On the far off plains of Bohemia, among the rugged mountains
of the Tyrol, by Alpine torrents and in the valleys of Piedmont, as
well as on the distant shores of England and Scotland, its words were
carefully read and pondered. In size it was nearly equal to the New
Testament, and by many of the humble classes it was revered as its
equal in authority. Many of its truths were conveyed in the form of
fable or parable. Historians generally write in the interest of some
sect or party, and finding in it little to flatter the pride or vanity
of man, have frequently passed it by in silence or have given it merely
a passing notice, but it was evidently an instrument in the hands of
God for awakening human intellect.

Meanwhile the boundaries of human knowledge were greatly enlarged.
Chemistry and medicine had taken their places as established sciences.
Roger Bacon, who was born A. D. 1214, had already astonished the
learned by his experiments and discoveries in optics, mathematics and
chemistry. At the present time it is almost impossible to comprehend
the difficulties and perils which then attended every step in
experimental science. For example, in making some experiments on the
properties of antimony, or stibium, as it was then called, it was
found that when given to the swine in their food it increased their
fatness with surprising rapidity. But when it was administered to some
half-starved monks the poor fellows were every one killed. Hence the
modern name of antimony, from _anti_, against, and _moine_, a monk. It
may also be added that antimony, whether used as a medicine or in the
composition of printer's type for the dissemination of truth is equally
unhealthy for sectarian bigots of every description.

Geographical knowledge had also been greatly extended. Adventurous
merchants had sailed along both the eastern and western shores of
Africa far south of the equator, for they discovered stars and
constellations invisible in northern latitudes. The Azores and Canary
Islands had been rediscovered after a lapse of more than a thousand
years. Portuguese sailors had already made voyages to far off Iceland,
the "Ullima Thule" of the ancients. With the exception of north-eastern
Asia and southern Africa, the entire boundaries of the eastern
continent were known. Marco Polo, in the {74} interests of Venetian
commerce, had explored the vast regions of central Asia, and Moorish
merchants of Tripoli, by means of caravans, had trafficked with the
tribes of central Africa.

The states of Europe had commenced to assume their modern forms;
Portugal had become independent of Spain about A. D. 1139; Switzerland,
under Rudolph of Hapsburg, became a distinct nationality in A. D.
1151; Ireland was subjugated by Henry II., of England, in A. D. 1172,
and British constitutional government commenced by wresting the Magna
Charta from King John, in A. D. 1215.

In fine arts we find that Cimabue, who was born in A. D. 1140, and
his pupil Giotto, who was born in A. D. 1276, established the Italian
school of modern painting.

The foregoing will indicate to some extent the condition of society
at the latter end of the thirteenth century. The darkness of night
had commenced to vanish. The morning star of intelligence had arisen,
heralding the coming of a peaceful day--

  "A day not cloudless or devoid of storm,
  But sunny for the most and clear and warm."



CHAPTER VIII.

THE MORNING OF MODERN TIMES.

LESSON FROM HEATHEN MYTHOLOGY--VICISSITUDES OF ROMAN CHURCH--BONIFACE
POPE--ADVANCEMENT IN CIVILIZATION--WORK OF THE ROMAN CHURCH--INVENTION
OF PRINTING--GUTENBERG--BIBLE FIRST PRINTED--COLUMBUS--HIS WONDERFUL
DREAM--HIS GREAT VOYAGE--DISCOVERY OF AMERICA--TRIALS AND TRIUMPHS.

  "It breaks--it comes--the misty shadows fly:
  A rosy radiance gleams upon the sky;
  The mountain tops reflect it calm and clear,
  The plain is yet in shade, but day is near."--_Chas. Mackay_.

The fifteenth century may be justly considered the commencement of
modern times; for then began the great {75} revolution in science,
religion and general knowledge, which has continued until the present
time. The time-worn colossus of Rome was tottering under its own
weight. Great princes filled the thrones of all the principal countries
of Europe. The minds of men seemed awakening as from a sleep. A spirit
of scientific research had seized the learned, and a desire for
knowledge found its way even to the homes of the lowly.

In every grade of society a new life was in motion. "What an age!"
exclaimed Huetton, the religious knight of Germany, "studies flourish,
minds are awakening; it is a joy merely to be alive!"

The history of those times cannot be correctly told by a simple recital
of facts. This truth should ever be acknowledged, that God is ever
present on that vast theatre where successive generations of men meet
and struggle. It is true He is unseen; and the unthinking multitude may
pass heedlessly by. To the ignorant crowd, the history of the world
presents a confused chaos; but to men of thought, it appears as a
majestic temple on which the invisible hand of God is at work.

Modern minds might learn a lesson from heathen mythology. The name
given by the ancient Greeks to the Deity shows that they had received
some primeval revelation of this great truth. He was styled _Zeus_, or
the life-giver to all that lives--to nations as well as individuals.
From his inspirations Minos and other legislators professed to have
received their laws; and on his altars kings and people swore their
solemn oaths. This great truth is taught by one of the most beautiful
fables of heathen mythology.

Thus _Zeus_, the life-giving principle is the father of _Clio_, the
muse of history, whose mother is _Mnemosyne_, or memory. History then
is the memory of men's acts and God's providences, and combines a
heavenly with an earthly nature. She is the daughter of God and man;
but, alas, the purblind philosophy of the nineteenth century has not
attained to the lofty views of heathen wisdom!

What a startling fact, that men brought up amid the glorious light of
the present age should deny that divine {76} intervention in human
affairs which even the very heathens admitted!

The beginning of the fifteenth century finds Boniface IX., on the
pontifical throne. During his reign the papal power culminated and
began to decline.

No empire of ancient or modern times has experienced such marvelous and
varied vicissitudes, as those which have befallen the empire of the
Roman church. Born in obscurity and reared in adversity, that church
nevertheless succeeded in climbing to a loftier throne and grasping
the scepter of a more absolute dominion than either a Xerxes or an
Alexander could boast. Pretending to despise mere worldly gains, she
cunningly turned the channels of riches towards herself, and emptied
them without scruple into her own coffers.

When Boniface ascended the papal throne, the authority of Rome was
apparently greater than ever; but in reality it was much undermined by
the advancing labors of civilization.

Society had made a great advance in the previous eight hundred years.
In the seventh century, a cloud of more than Egyptian darkness
overshadowed Europe. Then it was occupied by wandering savages; now
it was organized into families, neighborhoods and cities. The seventh
century left it full of bondmen; the fifteenth found it without a
slave. Where there had been trackless forests there were now the abodes
of civilized men. Instead of bloody chieftains drinking out of their
enemies' skulls, there were grave professors teaching the laws of
nature and the principles of science.

Nor was this all. Rome herself had a preparatory work to do, and had
she confined herself to that work, and sought not to trammel the minds
of men, she would have continued a blessing to the race. Never before
in the history of the world was there such a system. From her central
seat she could equally take in a hemisphere at a glance or examine
the private life of any individual. In all Europe there was not a man
too great or too obscure, too insignificant or too desolate for her.
Surrounded by her solemnities every one received his name at her altar;
her bells chimed at his marriage; and her knell tolled at his funeral.
When even to his friends his lifeless corpse had become an offense, she
received it into her {77} consecrated ground, there to rest until the
great reckoning day. In times of lawlessness and rapine, she sheltered
the helpless from the tyrant, and made her sanctuaries a refuge for the
despairing and oppressed, But like all man-made systems of religion,
she failed by attempting to enforce fixed laws on society in the
presence of higher truths and advancing civilization.

During all these centuries mankind had slowly but surely advanced and
Abraham's seed, the Jews and Saracens, had been the leaders of that
progress. Quietly the materials had been gathering until the whole
continent was ripe for revolution.

Meanwhile God had raised up instruments, by which the commerce,
politics and religious thought of Europe were completely changed.

In A. D. 1484, there were living in various parts of Europe three
persons who were destined to set in motion these mighty movements.
These were Gutenberg, Columbus and Luther. Around these men cluster
many notable events; and a history of their lives and times would
include some of the brightest pages in the annals of our race.

Gutenberg was then an old man living at Mentz, in Germany. His
broad shoulders, well knit frame and strong arms showed that he was
acquainted with labor, and capable of great endurance. His broad
and full forehead indicated a man of reflective mind and inventive
faculty. His keen, full grey eye revealed a soul full of earnestness,
intelligence and power. He had conferred on mankind the most useful
invention, since Cadmus, nearly three thousand years ago, taught the
barbarian Greeks the art of writing. This invention was the art of
printing, which has been such a mighty instrument for the transmission
of thought, and the civilization of the world. The Saracens had
already invented the art of making paper from linen rags. Previous to
this, parchment was the only substance well adapted for writing upon.
Paper-making and printing produced great changes in the manufacture of
books. By the one, books were greatly cheapened, by the other, greatly
multiplied. Thought could now be transmitted cheaply and swiftly in a
thousand different directions. Priestcraft saw the {78} danger, and,
terrified lest truth should emerge, immediately attempted to control
and restrain the press. At this time the art of printing was known to
only five or six persons. It is curious to observe that even war was
the means of quickening the growth and extension of this wonderful art.
In 1462, the storming of Mentz dispersed Gutenberg and his co-workers
and gave the secret to the world. In A. D. 1465, it appeared in Italy;
in 1469, in France; in 1474, Caxton brought it to England, and in 1477
it was introduced in Spain.

Meanwhile Pope Alexander VI., excommunicated all printers not licensed
by him, and an order was issued to burn all books not recommended by
the papal authorities. But these frantic struggles of the powers of
darkness were unavailing. Lovers of books were gratified by seeing them
multiplied by thousands. The Bible was printed as early as 1454, and
was followed shortly afterwards by other important books.

The power of the press continued to increase, until at the present time
it is without doubt the most powerful aid to modern civilization.

At the beginning of the fifteenth century a profound ignorance
prevailed concerning the western regions of the Atlantic. Its vast
waters were regarded with awe and wonder; and though from time to time,
pieces of carved wood and other relics of Indian skill had floated
to the shores of the old world, giving to its wondering inhabitants
evidences of land beyond the watery horizon, yet no one ventured to
spread a sail and seek that land veiled in mystery and peril.

Columbus was the first who had the inspiration to conceive and
the heroic courage to brave the mysteries of this perilous deep.
He unfolded to the wandering gaze of the inhabitants of Europe a
new hemisphere, and opened it to their spirit of discovery and
enterprise--opened it also, alas, to their cupidity and cruelty!

Christopher Columbus was born in the city Genoa, about 1447, and became
one of the most remarkable men of any land or time. Having carefully
studied the sciences of geography and astronomy he became convinced
that the earth was not flat, as most men then believed, but was really
a vast globe or ball. He perceived that when the moon was eclipsed,
the {79} shadow which the earth cast upon the moon was round; and he
reasoned that as the shadow was round, the object that made that shadow
must be round also.

He visited the great Saracen schools in Spain, and there received
additional proof of this truth. Spain, was then a great maritime
nation, and there he conversed with great sea-captains whose voyages
were already attracting the attention of the learned. He himself also
made a voyage to far off Iceland, and possibly to Greenland, to which
country the pope had already sent a bishop and several missionaries.

[Image: Christopher Columbus.]

In A. D. 1485, when Columbus was about thirty-eight years of age he
made his first application to the king of Portugal for aid in his great
scheme of maritime discovery, but without success. He then successively
applied to Spain, Genoa, Venice and England.

But the monarchs of Europe were under the control of Rome, and
therefore too busy in aiding her religious persecutions to listen to
the appeals of science.

Indeed in the very year in which Columbus made his first application,
the Inquisition put to death nearly seventeen thousand persons, besides
imprisoning thirty-two thousand {80} more. Nor was this all, ninety-two
thousand Jews had suffered confiscation of their property, and had
been given the unenviable choice of death, banishment or perpetual
slavery. And the Saracens, who had dwelt in Spain for more than seven
hundred years, or nearly twice as long a time as has elapsed since the
discovery of America, were expelled from the lands which they had so
long cultivated and beautified, and from their cities which had so long
led the world in the arts, sciences and general civilization.

One evening in the autumn of A. D. 1485, a man of majestic appearance,
pale, care-worn, and though in the meridian of life, with silver
hair, leading a little boy by the hand, asked alms at the gate of a
Franciscan convent near Polos--not for himself, but only a little bread
and water for his child. That man was Columbus, destined to startle the
inhabitants of Europe with the discovery of a new continent. But he was
obliged to wait until he could take advantage of the commercial rivalry
of Spain and Portugal.

The trade of Eastern Asia had always been a source of immense wealth
to the nations that had controlled it. For more than a thousand years
Venice had held the keys to that commerce. As discoveries extended,
other nations perceived the possibility of opening new routes to the
East and thus rivalling the commercial greatness of Venice. One of these
plans was to sail around the southern end of Africa, the other to sail
directly westward across the Atlantic. It was plain to every thinking
person that if India could be reached by sailing westward, maritime
power would pass from the Mediterranean countries to those upon the
Atlantic coast.

About this time Columbus had a wonderful dream, or vision. An
unknown voice spoke to him, and said: "God will cause thy name to
be wonderfully resounded throughout the earth; and will give thee
the keys to the ocean which are held with strong chains." From this
time forward, Columbus looked upon himself as chosen from among men
to accomplish the purposes of heaven; to bring the ends of the earth
together, that all nations, and peoples, and tongues might be united
under the banner of the Redeemer.

{81} Isabella and Ferdinand were then joint king and queen of Spain.
Meanwhile, Columbus had gained many influential friends, among whom
was a Jewish sea-faring family named Pinzon, and Luis de Santangel the
spiritual adviser of Queen Isabella.

At this time Columbus seemed more likely to fall into the hands of the
Inquisition and suffer for his heresy than to succeed in his great
enterprise.

At this juncture Luis de Santangel obtained audience with the queen,
and addressed her with all the energy of a man who speaks for the last
time in behalf of a favored project. Isabella listened attentively,
hesitated a moment and then pledged her jewels to raise the amount
necessary for the expedition. Contemporary writers have been
enthusiastic in their descriptions of Isabella: but time has sanctioned
their eulogies. She is one of the purest and most beautiful characters
on the pages of history.

At length, on the 17th of April, A. D. 1492, Columbus was ushered
into the royal presence, and received his commission. Immediately he
commenced preparations, and on the 3rd of August, 1492, set sail on his
ever-memorable voyage. The expedition consisted of three small vessels:
the _Santa Maria_, commanded by Columbus; the _Pinta_, by Martin Alonzo
Pinzon; and the _Nina_, by Vincent Yanez Pinzon. "The Pinzons were
doubly interested in this voyage, for while they sought for a new and
profitable route of commerce, they doubtless also felt a desire to find
an asylum for their persecuted Jewish brethren." (See Lovel's American
History, Canadian edition.)

Having touched at the Canary Islands they sailed directly westward. On
losing sight of the last trace of land the hearts of the crews failed
them. Behind them was everything dear to the heart of man: country,
family, friends, life itself; before them everything was chaos, mystery
and peril.

Columbus tried in every way to soothe their distress and inspire
them with his own glorious anticipations. He described to them the
magnificent countries to which he was about to conduct them: the
islands of the Indian seas, teeming with {82} gold and precious stones;
the regions of Mangi and Cathay with their cities of unrivalled wealth
and splendor. Nor were these promises made for purposes of deception.
Columbus evidently believed that he would realize them all.

For many days they were gently but speedily wafted over a tranquil sea,
but when near the middle of the Atlantic, they, for the first time,
observed the variation of the needle of the compass, which no longer
pointed directly north, but had veered around and pointed in a somewhat
different direction.

[Image: Ships of Columbus.]

Columbus was greatly perplexed yet dared not communicate his thoughts
to anyone. It seemed as if the very laws of nature were changing,
as they advanced, and they were entering another world subject to
unknown influences; that the compass was about to lose its mysterious
virtue, and without that guide what was to become of them on a vast and
trackless ocean? Columbus gave an explanation of this phenomenon which
satisfied the crew though unsatisfactory to himself. His situation was
daily becoming more critical in proportion as they {83} approached
the regions where he expected to find land. At length, on the 9th of
October, the crew broke out in open mutiny and threatened to throw
him overboard, designing then to return to Spain. A compromise was
effected, that if they would continue to sail westward three days
longer, and no land was discovered he would then return. Two days
passed away and still no sight of land.

[Image: Landing of Columbus.]

{84} On the evening of the second day, Columbus remained on deck. What
were the feelings that pervaded his breast no one but God can tell;
with nothing but the heaving ocean beneath him and the silent stars
o'er head. Anxiously he stands upon the prow of his vessel and peers
into the darkness. It is one o'clock! Suddenly a gleam as of a torch is
seen in the horizon! Is it a flash of phosphoric light as is sometimes
seen on the surface of these tropical seas, or is it a blaze of fire
indicating the habitations of men?

Soon the joyful cry of "Ho! land, ho!" resounded throughout the ship,
and the booming of cannon announced the discovery to the other vessels.

When the dawning of the morning came, they beheld in all their grandeur
and beauty, the hills and valleys, streams and forests of a new world.
The men who had been so lately mutinous now came forward and bowed down
before Columbus, and did homage to him as though he were a god.

Trials before triumphs have ever been the lot of self-taught men, and
will be to the end of time. If the chosen heroes of this earth were
counted over, they would be found to be men who stood alone and labored
and waited; while those for whom they agonized and toiled poured upon
them contumely and scorn.

The very martyrs of the past who were hooted at, reviled and spit upon
by the mob, are the ones who are honored now. They suffered cruel
tortures and burnings; to-day, the children of this generation are
gathering up their scattered ashes to deposit them in the golden urn of
a nation's history.

{85}



CHAPTER IX.

INFLUENCE OF ISRAEL--DISCOVERERS AND REFORMERS.

HISTORY IN WORDS--BRITISH COAT OF ARMS--THE TEN TRIBES--ACCOUNT
OF ESDRAS--DISPERSION OF THE TRIBES--MIXED SEED OF ISRAEL--EFFECT
ON EUROPEAN SOCIETY--JEWISH INFLUENCE--DISCOVERY OF CAPE OF GOOD
HOPE--PACIFIC OCEAN DISCOVERED--MAGELLAN'S VOYAGE--DISCOVERS CAPE
HORN--DISTANCE SAILED--DEATH OF MAGELLAN--VOYAGE COMPLETED--ITS EFFECT
ON THE PUBLIC--HUSS AND JEROME BURNED--JOHN ZISKA--PERSECUTIONS
OF WALDENSES--CAPTURE OF MENTZ--DISPERSION OF PRINTERS--HANS
BOHEIM--JOSS FRITZ--SALE OF INDULGENCES--MARTIN LUTHER BURNS THE POPE'S
LETTER--GRAND COUNCIL AT WORMS--ROME IN A RAGE--LUTHER KIDNAPPED.

One of the most pleasing and at the same time instructive amusements
in which a thoughtful mind can engage, is to trace the derivation of
certain words of our language to the primitive times and people where
they originated, and thus learn the social and mental condition of the
people who first used them. It is pleasing to know that _dish_ and
_mop_, _mat_ and _rug_, and other household terms are the very words
that were spoken by the women of ancient Britain, two thousand years
ago, and have been handed down from generation to generation, with
little or no variation. In like manner the words _ax_, _plow_, _house_,
_post_, _bed_, _fire_, and hundreds of others, can be easily discerned
under the old Saxon forms. And as these words are precisely those that
would be used by a rude or half-civilized people, while those words
that refer to a more advanced state of society cannot be traced to our
Saxon ancestors we may correctly infer the extent of their knowledge
{86} and social condition. Further, as the ancient British words refer
to domestic affairs while those of Saxon origin refer exclusively to
the avocations of man, we can easily perceive that the Anglo-Saxon
tongue has originated from the marriage of the ancient British women
with their Saxon conquerors.

Hence Max Muller, the learned professor of languages, in the university
at Oxford, England, very justly remarks that "by means of philology we
have a more accurate record of our race than any narrative written by
prejudice or ill-informed historians."

Now it is generally admitted that Germans, Anglo-Saxons and men
descended from these nationalities, in one word, German thought, led
the van of progress in science, literature and religious thought,
during the fourteenth, fifteenth and sixteenth centuries, and in fact
has continued to do so up to the present time.

From the fifth century, when Attila, king of the Huns, declared himself
"The scourge of God," wave after wave of conquest by these hardy
warriors had swept over the hills and plains of western and southern
Europe, until their blood and their love of civil and religious liberty
were infused into every European nation.

Now the language of the Goths, or ancient Germans, plainly indicates
that they were not the primitive people of Europe, but had conquered
and intermingled with them in the same manner as the Saxons conquered
and intermingled with the inhabitants of ancient Britain, or the
Spaniards with those of Mexico.

But it may be asked, whence came they? In this connection two other
questions may also be asked: why is it that the German language
contains so many idioms and terms that bear a close relationship to
the language of the ancient Hebrews and Chaldeans? (_See Max Muller's
lectures on language_.) And why is it that the lion, which was the
emblem of Judah, and the unicorn, which was the emblem of Israel, are
in modern times, emblazoned on the coat of arms of England? (_See
Ant. of Jews by Josephus, also Num. xxiii., 22 and Deut. xxxiii, 17_.)
These questions are worthy of deep and {87} careful consideration; and
to better understand them it will be necessary to briefly trace the
history of the children of Israel.

As is well known, after the death of Solomon the kingdom was divided
into two parts, known as the kingdom of Judah and the kingdom of
Israel. In 730 B. C, Hashem, king of Israel, became tributary to
Shalmaneser, king of Assyria. Nine years later his capital was taken
and the greater portion of the people were carried away captive beyond
the river Euphrates, and people from other countries were put in
possession of their inheritance. In the Apocrypha the Prophet Esdras
states that these ten tribes went a journey of a year and a half into
the north country. He says: "These are the ten tribes which were
carried away prisoners out of their own land in the time of Hosea the
king, whom Shalmaneser the king of Assyria led away captive; and he
carried them over the waters so they came into another land. But they
took this council among themselves, that they would leave the multitude
of the heathen and go forth into a farther country where never mankind
dwelt, that they might there keep their statutes which they never kept
in their own land. For through that country there was a great way to
go, namely, in a year and a half's journey, and the same region is
called Arsareth." (_II. Esdras, xiii, 40, 41, 42 and 45_.)

Now by looking on a map of the eastern continent it will be seen at
once that the Black Sea and the Caucasus mountains lie directly north
of the river Euphrates. It is quite possible that the Black Sea is
the "waters" to which Esdras refers. Also Josephus, in speaking of
the return of the Jews under Esdras, says, "Many of them took their
effects with them and came to Babylon, as very desirous of going down
to Jerusalem, but then the entire body of the people of Israel remained
in that country, wherefore there are but two tribes in Asia and Europe
subject to the Romans, while the ten tribes are beyond the Euphrates
till now, and are an immense multitude and not to be estimated by
numbers." (_Ant. Book II. chapter 5_.)

Perhaps the words of the ancient Roman are not altogether fable when
he says that "Beyond the Borean (Caucasus) Mountains live a people who
are sublime in their virtue since they {88} dwell very distant form the
provinces, in great simplicity and give great heed to the oracles which
their gods have given unto them." Thus we have not only the sure word
of prophecy, but likewise the admission of heathen writers.

Max Muller, in his work on language, in referring to the migrations of
ancient European tribes, says, "Two great routes lay before them, one
by way of the valleys of the Don and Volga across modern Russia to the
shores of the Baltic, the other along the shores of the Black Sea to
the valley of the Danube."

He also demonstrates the close relationship that exists between the
Hebrew language and the language of the people of Finland in western
Russia. Considering that more than twenty-five centuries have rolled by
since the dispersion of Israel, sufficient time has elapsed for mighty
changes. Muller adds in another place, "The time was when the ancestors
of the Indians, the Fins, the Slavonic and German tribes of central
Europe and the modern English lived in one enclosure, nay, under the
same roof."

In the latter part of the second century or beginning of the third,
these new settlers had spread as far westward as the Danube, and
settled in the Roman province of Dacia, which lay on the north bank of
that river. They also asked permission to cross the river which was
granted under certain stipulations.

Still they continued to increase in numbers, and by inter-marriage with
the native tribes had in the fifth century become formidable enemies
of Rome and under the name of Dacians, Huns, Vandals, Ostrogoths,
Visigoths, Suevi and Heruli precipitated themselves upon Italy and
wreaked a terrible vengeance.

The history of some of these, as the Huns for example, may be traced to
the second century before the Christian era and to the very locality
indicated by the Prophet Esdras and by Josephus. For over twenty-six
centuries these scattered tribes have continued to mix up with the
nations of the earth, but in their long migrations westward they have
lost many of their distinctive characteristics.

{89} Doubtless it is from this mixed seed of Israel that many, aye
nearly all, the great reformers, inventors and discoverers have sprung.
This infusion of new blood had a marked effect on the nations of
western Europe, but more especially on Italy, which had continued to
decline, from the days of Augustus, until these nations mingled with
the degenerate ancient race, and infused new life into her decaying
civilization. The result was that a succession of poets, painters,
sculptors, philosophers, inventors and discoverers sprung up in Italy
and western Europe unparalleled in the history of the world. Above all,
the invention of printing had just come in time to spread whatever new
ideas were afloat, with a rapidity never known before. In fifty-two
years from the time of that invention came the discovery of America.
Five years later two Jewish priests, Rabbi Abraham, and Rabbi Joseph,
brought to King John II., of Portugal, a Saracen map of the entire
coast of Africa.

Thus instructed King John sent out several expeditions in one of which
Brazil was accidentally discovered. Aided by this, Vasco de Gama set
sail, and on Nov. 20th, 1497, rounded the cape of Good Hope. Sixteen
years later Balboa discovered the Pacific Ocean, and six years still
later, or in A. D. 1519, Magellan set out on his memorable voyage to
circumnavigate the world.

The story of that voyage of wild adventure seems never to grow old by
repeating. The narrative of that voyage is too long for this brief
sketch, but a few items may not be out of place.

After many months of sailing in strange seas, he at length discovered a
new land to which he gave the name of Patagonia. Here he found giants
clad in skins, one of whom was greatly terrified at seeing his own
image in a looking-glass.

{90}

[Image: The Straits of Magellan.]

His perseverance was at last rewarded, and after fifteen months of
struggling and adventures he discovered Cape Horn, passed through the
strait which now bears his name and entered the Great South Sea, on
Nov. 28th, 1520. An eye-witness relates that he shed tears of joy when
he recognized its great expanse, and that God had brought him where
he might grapple with its unknown dangers. Admiring its placid {91}
surface he courteously gave it the name it will ever bear, the "Pacific
Ocean." Magellan was the first European to discover that when the
nights are long in the northern hemisphere they are correspondingly
short in the southern. When he passed through the straits the nights
were only four hours long. At the same time in Spain they were nearly
fifteen hours long. And now the great sailor having burst through the
barrier of the great American continent steered for the north-west. For
three months and fifteen days he sailed on and on, but saw no inhabited
land.

He and his crew were compelled by famine to soak old leather in the
sea, then boil it and make of it a wretched food; and to drink water
that had become putrid by keeping; yet he resolutely held his course,
though his men were dying daily. He estimated that he sailed over this
unknown sea more than twelve thousand miles.

In the whole history of human undertakings there is nothing that
exceeds, if indeed there is anything that equals, this voyage of
Magellan. That of Columbus dwindles away in comparison. It is a display
of super-human courage and perseverance, an exhibition of heroic
resolution, not to be diverted from its purpose by any motive, or any
suffering, but inflexibly persisting to its end.

This unparalleled resolution met its reward at last. He reached the
Ladrones, a group of islands north of the equator. Thence he sailed
to the Spice Islands, where he met with European merchants. He had
accomplished his object and proven that the earth was round. At an
island called Zebu, or Mutan, he was murdered either by the natives
or by his own men. In a few days more his crew learned that they were
actually in the vicinity of their friends. On the morning of Nov. 8th,
1521, they entered Tidore, the capital of the Spice Islands, and the
king swore upon the Koran alliance to the sovereign of Spain.

Magellan's crew continued their voyage amid hardships and perils, and
at length, on Sept. 10th, 1522, the good ship, _San Vittoria_, sailed
into the very port from which she had departed just three years and
twenty-seven days before. She had accomplished the greatest achievement
in the history of the {92} human race. She had circumnavigated the
earth. Magellan lost his life in his great enterprise, but he made his
name immortal. His lieutenant Sebastian d'Elcano received the proudest
and noblest medal ever given to a sailor. It was a golden globe belted
with this inscription, _Primus circumdedisti me_--"Thou hast first
circumnavigated me."

At the present time it is almost impossible to conceive the effect of
Magellan's voyage had upon the public mind. One of the leading dogmas
of Rome had been that the earth was flat. Now it was proved that the
earth was indeed a vast ball. If Rome had been in error in this case,
where was her infallibility? Might not some of her other teachings be
equally false? Many leading minds began to doubt her authority. Even
Pope Leo X., is said to have become skeptical. At all events he chose
to spend his leisure time in his library reading to his sister out
of the beautiful new printed books which were then throwing a flood
of intellectual light on all grades of society. The philosophy of
Aristotle and Plato, the poems of Homer and Virgil, the sciences of the
Saracens and the narratives of the adventures of Columbus and Vasco de
Gama had more charms for him than burning and torturing heretics as his
predecessors had done.

While science was undermining the influence of Rome in one direction,
religious thought was busy at work in another. That great religious
revolution commonly called the Reformation had long been gathering its
forces; and already sounded from behind the Alps the loud clarion of
battle.

The memory of John Huss and Jerome of Prague was still fresh in the
minds of the populace. Huss had been burned at Constance, in A. D.
1415, and Jerome the year following. When the news of these barbarous
executions reached Bohemia, it threw the whole kingdom into confusion
and a civil war was kindled from the ashes of the martyrs.

John Ziska, the leader of the populace, collected an army of forty
thousand men and defeated the emperor, Sigismund, in several battles.
When Ziska found that he was dying, he gave orders that his skin
should be made into a drum which was long the symbol of victory to his
followers.

{93} [Image: The Rack.]

The Waldenses also who dwelt in the valleys of Switzerland and Piedmont
had lively memories of cruel wrongs. Their ancestors had been destroyed
by Pope Innocent III., and as late as A. D. 1487, they had been driven
to the mountains and obliged to wander there until their feeble and
little ones were {94} left buried in the Alpine snows. No wonder they
chanted that grand old Hymn, commencing:

  "O God, arise, avenge Thy slaughtered Saints,
  Whose bones lie bleaching on the Alpine mountains cold."

The writings of Dante and Petrarch, Reuchlin and Erasmus, were already
scattered in every direction, by means of the printing press, and
wielded a mighty influence in society.

The siege and capture of Mentz, in A. D. 1462, had the effect of
scattering Guttenberg and his co-workers. Printing presses were
established immediately afterwards in Italy, Spain, Portugal, Holland,
France and England.

In 1476, on the banks of the river Maine, in central Germany had
appeared a strange character named Hans Boheim. He professed to be
a prophet of God, to have received visions, and to have been sent
to proclaim that the kingdom of heaven was at hand. More than forty
thousand men flocked to his standard. At length the bishops of Mentz
and Wurtzburg interfered, dispersed the crowd and burned the prophet.
He was but a sign of the times--"a voice crying in the wilderness." His
memory was not forgotten. In 1493, another movement took place, and
again in 1501. Maximilian, the emperor of Germany, ordered the leaders
to be quartered alive and their wives and children to be banished.
But the fire was only slumbering. In 1512, it commenced again on a
larger scale. It found a leader in Joss Fritz, a soldier of commanding
presence and great natural eloquence, used to battle and above all to
patience. He was one of those who had escaped being quartered. His
banner was blue silk with a white cross, and underneath the motto, "O
Lord, help the righteous." Fritz was the William Tell of his times. No
wonder his name is a favorite one among the Germans.

These conflicts, commonly known as the "Wars of the Peasants," had
shown the masses that with more union and better information they were
the real strength of the nation.

Such was the condition of affairs in the very locality where, four
years afterwards, burst forth the great religious revolution known as
the Reformation.

Society seemed waiting for a coming man of strong will and fervent
religious nature, who should give something of organization {95} to
those movements, and gather around him an irresistible phalanx of the
noble, the learned and ardent spirits of the age. This man was Martin
Luther. He came from his cell a shaven monk, in his hand no sceptre, on
his head no crown. But he had a human heart within him; and it gushed
out for human woe.

Strong in the principles of right he hurled the firebrands of truth
right and left and kindled such a flame that all the waves of error
could never quench it.

The immediate cause of the Reformation was when John Tetzel, in 1574,
was sent into Germany to sell indulgences.

The church of Rome had long taught the people that the pope and clergy
under him held the keys of heaven. At this time the pope was in need of
means to complete that great cathedral called St. Peter's Church. He
therefore issued indulgences or pardons for all kinds of sins. These
pardons or indulgences entitled whoever bought them to a free passport
to heaven. Nor was this all. A man of sufficient wealth could purchase
the pardon of a sin he _intended_ to commit. Thus the civil law was
shorn of its power and the nation of its wealth.

This bold blasphemy provoked the indignation of a people already ripe
for revolution.

Luther, then thirty-four years of age, began to denounce the sale of
these indulgences. In 1520, the pope issued a decree, or bull, as it
was called, condemning Luther and his writings. Luther in turn defied
the pope. When the news reached him he took the decree and all the
Roman books he could find, and on December 10, 1520, burned them in a
public place just outside the walls of the city of Wittenberg. Then
Luther was summoned to appear before a grand council, or court, to
be held in the city of Worms. His friends procured him a passport or
pledge of security, lest the papal authorities should take his life.

Accordingly, on the 17th of April, 1521, Luther appeared before the
council, or diet, as it was called. The Emperor Charles V., of Germany,
presided in person. When Luther was asked to recant his opinions and
deny his own teachings, he not only refused to do so but also pleaded
his own cause {96} with eloquence and power. So powerful were his
arguments that many of the nobility were won over to his side. A poor
monk, the son of a simple peasant, clad in the armor of truth, had
defied and defeated the proudest potentates of earth! No wonder that
Rome was in a rage! No wonder that the friends of Luther deemed it
advisable to kidnap him and carry him away to the castle of Wartburg,
in the solitudes of the Thuringian forest! No wonder that those
valiant knights, Ulrich von Hutten and Franz von Sickingen, prepared
to use their swords and eloquence in defense of right! We may not in
all things admire the character of Luther or defend his acts; yet no
grander figure appears on the pages of modern history than Luther, as,
with one hand upon his breast and the other lifted towards heaven, he
refused the emperor's demand to retract his writings or deny the truth,
closing with these memorable words, "_Hier stehe ich, Gott helfe mir.
Amen_." "Here I stand, God help me. Amen."

The battle that Luther fought was not only for Germany and the
sixteenth century, but for all countries, all peoples and all coming
times. It was a battle not merely against the pope, but against all
powers religious or secular, that seek to enchain the human mind or
prevent the free exercise of religion.

{97}



CHAPTER X.

RESULTS OF THE REFORMATION.

GERMANY AROUSED--PEASANTS' WAR--MUNTZER'S PROCLAMATION--EMPEROR
QUARRELS WITH THE POPE--RESULTS IN OTHER COUNTRIES--GROWTH
OF MODERN LANGUAGES--LUTHER'S CROWNING WORK--POWER OF
SUPERSTITION--WITCHCRAFT--REFORMERS NOT INSPIRED--EXTRACTS FROM
MOSHEIM--BATTLE-AX OF GOD--COPERNICUS--GALILEO--NEWTON--DEATH OF
BRUNO--CHANGE IN COMMERCIAL AFFAIRS--SPANISH ARMADA--BLESSED BY THE
POPE--DESTROYED BY A STORM--ITS EFFECT ON EUROPE--ENGLAND'S INFLUENCE
AND POSITION--AMERICA THE LAND OF REFUGE.

As the booming of cannon, announcing the beginning of battle echoes
and re-echoes far and wide, so did the result of the council, or diet,
in the city of Worms. The answer of Luther was repeated by thousands
of sympathizing friends. Instead of growing fainter as it died away
in the distance, it increased in intensity and power, till its echoes
reverberated through every valley, and over every hill-top in central
Germany.

Within twenty-four hours Ulrich von Hutten and Franz von Sickingen had
mustered four hundred armed knights and eight thousand foot soldiers
all ready to fight, or, if need be, to die for the principles Luther
had advocated. The commotion continued until it culminated in a civil
war, in A. D. 1525. The horrors of that war no tongue can tell. Nightly
the papal party burned at the stake the prisoners they had taken. Amid
the groans of wounded and dying peasants on the battle field around
them, and the drunken revelry of the camp, might be heard the laughter
of the nobles as they watched the struggles and heard the shrieks of
their victims as they slowly roasted to death. But the revolution
continued to spread. The rage of {98} the peasants, who had so long
been crushed by the iron heel of oppression, knew no bounds. A few
extracts from the proclamation of their leader, Munzer, may not be out
of place, as they indicate to some extent the nature of the conflict
then going on!

"Arise and fight the battle of the Lord! On! on! on! Now is the time;
the wicked tremble when they hear of you. Be pitiless! Heed not the
groans of the impious! Rouse up ye townsmen and villagers; above all,
rouse up ye free men of the mountains! On! on! on! while the fire is
burning, while the warm sword is yet reeking with the slaughter! Give
the fire no time to go out, the sword no time to cool! Kill all the
proud ones! While they reign over you it is no time to talk of God!
Amen.

  "Given at Muhlhausen, 1525.
      "THOMAS MUNZER,
          "servant of God against the wicked."

Such was the character of the men with whom the pope had to deal. At
length the emperor, Charles V., found it politic to side with his
people. Meanwhile Clement VII., succeeded to the papal throne, in 1523.
The emperor and the new pope soon quarrelled, and, in 1527, a German
army acting under the direction of the German emperor captured and
sacked the imperial city of Rome, and more pitilessly pillaged it than
it had been a thousand years before by the Goths and Vandals. From this
time Rome ceased to be the capital of the professedly Christian world.

But the revolution stayed not here. Its principles of reform passed
over the Alps and found a hearty welcome among the hardy mountaineers
of Switzerland. It reached the Rhine and with the current of that
mighty river flowed onward to the sea. The sturdy sons of Holland
received its teachings; and the patient peasantry of Denmark, Norway
and Sweden accepted it as an improvement on the past.

Germany continued in the throes of revolution for more than thirty
years, or until the peace of Augsburg, in 1555.

In the meantime England had revolted from Rome, in 1532; Denmark
followed in 1538; Geneva in 1541; Norway and Sweden in 1550; Scotland
in 1560; and Holland in 1581.

{99} Never in the history of the world was fulfilled more literally the
words that our Savior said in reference to the truth:

"Think not that I am come to send peace on earth: I came not to send
peace but a sword," etc. (_See Matt. x. 34, 38_.) For more than a
hundred years Europe continued to be the theatre of civil wars, until
the nations were completely exhausted--in some cases their power and
influence permanently weakened.

We might in view of its immediate results, be inclined to look upon
the Reformation as producing more evil than good. Yet amid the wars,
bloodshed, anarchy and persecutions, society made rapid steps in the
path of progress.

The Reformation promoted national growth, and mental activity. During
the middle ages, the various nations of Europe were in the condition
of colonies to a vast religious empire whose center and seat of
government was Rome. But after the peace at Augsburg, 1555, all this
was changed. Each nation that accepted the Reformation, became socially
and religiously as well as politically free. Rome was shorn of her
power. She was no longer the supreme court of appeal; nor did the high
dignitaries of those realms look to her for preferment.

The Reformation was obviously only partially successful. Where it
succeeded it infused new energy; where it failed it produced reaction.
Those nations that rejected the light, glimmering though it was, fell
back into the double bondage of kingcraft and priestcraft. The Bastile
of France was a symbol of the one; the Inquisition of Spain a type of
the other. Wave after wave of revolution has swept over these unhappy
countries. The guilty streets of Paris and Madrid have been deluged
with blood until their population has sunk down into religious apathy
or brazen infidelity.

In no particular was the effect of the Reformation more apparent than
in the impulse it gave to national languages and literature. Latin had
been the language of the Roman empire and Roman church. But when the
nations revolted from this central authority they immediately began to
cultivate their own native tongues. Learning was no longer confined
to the {100} few, nor communicated through the medium of a foreign
language, but became the heritage of the people.

The crowning work of Luther was in giving to the German people his
German Bible and hymns. The earnest, vigorous German in which they were
written fixed the future style of the language. The classic German of
to-day is the German of Luther's Bible, and Luther's hymns.

In England, too, the same thing is to be marked. The English
translation of the Bible, together with other works of that era, such
as Shakspeare's dramas, Milton's poems and Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress,
have done more to stamp the character of our modern English than all
later publications.

It may be asked, Why did not the human mind, in this era, free itself
from its trammels, claim its true freedom and concede it to every one?
The answer is, the range of knowledge was too narrow. The minds of
men could not take a broader view of things than the horizon of their
knowledge let them. Ignorance and superstition still held a terrible
sway.

It is true that the whole character of that age bears the stamp of
the German rather than the Italian intellect. It was the energy of a
Luther, the learning and loving heart of a Melanchthon, the polished
wit of an Erasmus, which then gave impulse and direction to the
thoughts and opinions of the world, much more than the frivolous
jesting of the infidel priests who thronged the streets of Rome and
the halls of the Vatican. Yet even these great men were controlled
by superstition, to a very great extent. Witchcraft was universally
believed in at that time. Hundreds, aye thousands, of unoffending old
women, with no other fault than that they were poor and old, were
burned to death as witches, instead of being treated with that respect
due to those who have lived many years and spent their best days for
the good of others.

Social eminence was no safeguard against these delusions. When it was
affirmed that Agnes Sampson, with two hundred other witches, had sailed
in sieves from Leith to North Berwick church to hold a banquet with
the devil, James I., {101} had the torture applied to the wretched
woman, and took pleasure in putting appropriate questions to her. It
then was charged that the two hundred old women had baptized and then
drowned a black cat, thereby raising a dreadful storm in which the ship
that carried the king narrowly escaped being wrecked. Upon this, Agnes
was condemned to the flames. She died protesting her innocence, and
piteously calling on Jesus to have mercy on her for Christian men would
not.

Of all the early reformers, Luther and Melanchthon were perhaps the
freest from superstition, and yet even they devoutly believed that in
the Tiber, not far distant from the pope's palace, a monster had been
found having the head of an ass, the body of a man and the claws of a
bird. After searching their Bibles to find out what the prodigy meant,
they at length concluded that it was one of the signs and wonders which
were to precede the fall of the papacy, and published a pamphlet about
it. Yet Luther and Melanchthon were the leaders of a great movement,
the teachers of a great nation, and were in every respect the most
influential persons in that nation. The people, credulous and grossly
ignorant, listened and believed. We, at this distance of time and
living in another realm of thought, can form but a faint conception of
the effect these horrible conceits produced upon them.

But the greatest need of those times was the want of divine authority.
The writings of Luther, Melanchthon, Erasmus and Calvin were never
considered as inspired. Luther himself never professed to have divine
authority for his teachings; but on the other hand denounced the very
idea of inspiration.

When, in 1525, Munzer and his associates (commonly known as the
prophets of Zwickaw) claimed divine authority, Luther was foremost in
denouncing and persecuting them, and their followers. According to
Mosheim, their principal crimes were in denying infant baptism and
the right of a distinct class to preach for hire; and asserting that
"God still continued to reveal His will to chosen persons by dreams
and visions." (_See Mosheim Vol. II, p. 128_.) They also claimed
"that God in His own good time would erect to Himself a holy church
possessing a perfect organization, and would set {102} apart for the
execution of this grand design, a certain number of chosen instruments
divinely assisted and prepared for this chosen work, by the aid and
inspiration of His Holy Spirit." As a consequence they claimed the right
to rebaptizing persons coming from other churches.

Mosheim further admits, "The extreme difficulty of correcting or
influencing by the prospect of suffering, or even by the terrors of
death, minds that are firmly bound by the ties of religion. In almost
all the countries of Europe, an unspeakable number of those unhappy
people preferred death, in its worst forms, to a retraction of their
opinions. Neither the view of the flames that were kindled to consume
them, nor the ignominy of the gibbet, nor the terrors of the sword,
could shake their invincible constancy or make them abandon tenets that
appeared dearer to them than life itself and all its enjoyments." (_See
Mosheim Vol. II, p. 131_.)

To this sect and its principles Luther was bitterly opposed, but this
opposition argues nothing in his favor, nor does it strengthen his
authority. It may also be added that if Rome had divine authority,
Luther had no right to secede from her. But if, as Luther claimed, she
had through apostasy lost her authority, then, it may be asked, From
whence did Luther receive his authority? In all this, Luther's actions
were indeed logical, but fatal to the claims of modern sectarians who
profess to be the ministers of Christ.

Luther was simply the battle-ax of God to hew down the edifice of
popery which stood in the way of human progress. The churches, which,
under the leadership of Luther, Melanchthon, Zwingle, Calvin, Knox
and Henry VIII. of England, separated from Rome received the name of
Protestant. And this very name implies that they were merely a protest
against Rome, her teachings and authority. The right of protesting
being once granted, it follows that others, also, have the right
to protest against them. This principle caused the long and bloody
wars which were only closed by the peace of Westphalia, in 1648, and
then it was found that central and northern Europe had cast off the
intellectual tyranny of Rome, and had established the right of every
man to think for himself.

{103} The Protestant party having thus established its existence, by
protest and separation, was obliged to submit to the operation of the
same principles. A decomposition into many rival sects was inevitable.
These having no central or controlling authority, and no longer in
fear of their great Roman adversary, commenced bitter warfares on
each other; Lutherans persecuted Catholics and Catholics persecuted
Protestants, and they in turn persecuted Puritans. Even Calvin proved
the darkness of his own mind when he put to death the celebrated
philosopher and physician, Michael Servetus, whose greatest crimes were
that in religion he denied that the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost
were one and the same person; and in science he had partially succeeded
in discovering the circulation of the blood. The circumstances also
were of the most atrocious character. For two hours he was roasted in
the flames of a slow fire, begging for the love of God that they would
put on more wood, or do something to end his torture.

Yet the death of Servetus was not without advantage to the world.
Men asked with amazement and indignation if the atrocities of the
Inquisition were again to be revived. They saw at once that intolerance
was not confined to the Romish church.

In spite of all these commotions, science was making rapid progress.
Copernicus lived at the same time as Luther and died two years before
him. His was as brave a life as ever lived in story. For thirty-six
years--at the very time the Protestant struggle was raging--he was
working at that immortal book, in which he so clearly demonstrates the
motions of the earth and the revolutions of the planets around the
sun. But he did not dare to publish it until there was a lull in the
political storm. He was then an old man in broken health. His book
was in the printer's hands when he was on his death bed. He waited at
death's door from day to day. At length the messenger arrived with the
printed book. He received it with tears in his eyes, composed himself
and died.

Copernicus was followed by Tycho Brahe, Kepler and Galileo, and last,
but by no means least, Isaac Newton, that scientific giant, who burst
through the fetters of the ages, and taught {104} man the laws, harmony
and grandeur of the Creator's works.

During these troublous times Leonardo da Vinci wrote his celebrated
works on mathematics and natural philosophy; and the arts of painting,
sculpture and music were greatly improved under the direction of
Titian, Corregio, Michael Angelo and Filippo Neri. A few years later
Bruno wrote his work on the plurality of worlds.

Copernicus having died soon after the publication of his works, was
beyond the reach of his persecutors. Galileo was brought before the
Inquisition, and after years of imprisonment, only saved his life
by denying the great truths he had discovered. But Bruno heroically
refused to recant, and was tortured to death February 16th, 1700, a
martyr to the cause of truth.

While these things were transpiring, great changes had taken place
in the maritime and commercial affairs of the world. Bold navigators
had sailed along the whole eastern coast of America, and a large part
of the western coast. Tolerably accurate maps of the outlines of the
western hemisphere, had been published as early as 1590. After these
discoveries, the great centers of commerce were no longer to be found
on the shores of the Mediterranean, but had shifted to the shores of
the Atlantic.

England by her geographical position, betwixt the two continents, and
in the very center of the inhabitable portion of the earth, as well as
the indomitable energy of her sons, had rapidly become the foremost
commercial nation of the world.

The great naval armament called the Invincible Armada, was equipped for
the subjugation of England; but in the providence of God she destroyed
the Armada and paralysed the influence of Spain.

In May, 1588, a Spanish fleet of one hundred and thirty ships sailed
from the harbor of Lisbon for the English coast. Some of these ships
were the largest that had yet been built; they carried eight thousand
sailors, and twenty thousand Spanish troops. The pope had blessed the
expedition and offered the sovereignty of England as the conqueror's
prize. The Catholics throughout Europe were so confident of success
{105} that they named the armament "The Invincible Armada." So vast
was the number of ships that, as they sailed along in the form of
an inverted V (thus ^), or in the form of a vast flock of wild geese,
the distance from one extremity of the fleet to the other was more than
seven miles.

But they were destined to realize that

  "God moves in a mysterious way,
  His wonders to perform;
  He plants His footsteps in the sea,
  And rides upon the storm."

Scarcely had the fleet entered the English channel when a storm
arose which lasted more than a week. The wind blew a perfect gale
from the south-west, so that it was impossible for them to return
if they had so desired. The line of battle could no longer be kept
up. They drifted helplessly and in disorder up the straits of Dover.
When nearly opposite Calais, the English loaded several vessels with
gunpowder, set them on fire and sent them into the Spanish fleet.
The explosions caused terrible havoc. The Spanish admiral no longer
thought of victory, but only of escape. But his disasters were not
yet ended. Many of his vessels were wrecked on the shores of Norway
and Scotland. In returning around the north coast of Ireland a second
storm was experienced with almost equal loss. Only a few shattered
vessels of this mighty armament returned to Spain to bring intelligence
of the calamities that had overwhelmed the rest. The defeat of the
Armada was regarded even then as the work of Providence. The Spanish
king, when he heard the news, exclaimed, "I did not expect to fight
the elements!" Thus was the triumph of the Protestant cause secured,
the lovers of freedom throughout Europe were encouraged, and the power
of Spain forever paralysed in the affairs of Europe. Henceforth the
commerce and prosperity of Spain declined. King Philip, who had planned
the Armada, died in 1598, and bequeathed a vast debt to his nation
whose resources were already exhausted, notwithstanding her rich mines
of gold and silver in the new world. In 1589, the next year after the
destruction of the Armada, Henry IV,, the first Protestant king of
France, {106} ascended the throne, and by the Edict of Nantes secured
to the Protestants the free exercise of their religion.

England, at that time the mistress of the seas, held the keys of the
commerce of Europe. Her long conflict with her Catholic sovereigns, and
the Catholic powers of Europe, had taught her self-reliance, and had
educated her people in the principles of self-government. Her laws were
the best the world then new. Henceforth she became the favored land of
the seed of Abraham, and the asylum of the oppressed of every nation.

The foregoing will indicate to some extent the condition of society
in Europe at the beginning of the seventeenth century. It is not
surprising that under such circumstances men began to look toward
America, as the land of refuge, where the institutions of liberty might
be planted and fostered, and political institutions framed which would
insure unto all, life, liberty and religious toleration.



CHAPTER XI.

ANCIENT AMERICAN CIVILIZATION.

COLUMBUS DESTROYED PAPAL DOGMAS--CRUELTY OF SPANIARDS--THEIR
RETRIBUTION--RELICS IN MASSACHUSETTS--NEWPORT TOWER--MOUNDS IN
OHIO--REMAINS FOUND IN IOWA--PLATES FOUND IN ILLINOIS--ANCIENT MEXICAN
PYRAMIDS--HUMAN SACRIFICES--VIEW FROM THE GREAT PYRAMID--ANCIENT
AMERICAN SCULPTURES--MAMMOTHS--MEXICAN CUSTOMS--RELIGIOUS
RITES--COMPUTATION OF TIME--ARTS AND SCIENCES--DESCRIPTION OF PERU--ITS
CIVILIZATION--MASSACRE OF THE INCAS--TESTIMONY OF TRAVELLERS--INDIAN
TRADITIONS.

In ancient times, Rome had taught that the earth was flat; and that
the whole habitable world was comprised in the three divisions of the
eastern continent. To these divisions {107} were assigned respectively
the descendants of Shem, Ham and Japheth, the three sons of Noah.

When America was discovered, these dogmas were obliged to fall. If
indeed Columbus had, as he supposed, reached the Indies by a westward
voyage, then the world was proven to be a vast ball. If on the other
hand America was a separate continent, divided from the eastern by a
wild waste of waters of many thousand miles in extent, as was shown by
the voyage of Magellan, a few years later, then it was found necessary
to account for the origin of the inhabitants.

The teachings of Rome were altogether against their being descended
from Adam, since none such were mentioned in their scriptures. The
protestant sects were too busy in their rivalries, dissensions and
civil wars, to give much attention to the subject. The stupendous event
recorded in Gen. x. 25, seems to have entirely escaped their notice.
Hence they proceeded to act towards the unfortunate inhabitants of
ancient America, as though they did not belong to the human race.

The conquest of Mexico and Peru by the Spaniards will ever remain one
of "the bloodiest pictures in the book of Time." By millions upon
millions, whole races and nations were ruthlessly destroyed. It was one
unspeakable outrage, one unutterable ruin, without discrimination of
age, sex or character. Those who fell not by the sword, died under the
lash in a tropical clime, or perished in the darkness and dampness of
the mines. From the fever-stricken coast of Mexico, and the gloom of
dense forests in Central America; from hiding places in the clefts of
the rocks, and from the eternal snows of the Andes, where there was no
witness but the all-seeing eye of God, there went up to Him a cry of
human despair.

The Bishop of Chiapa affirms that more than fifteen millions were
destroyed in his time. From Mexico and Peru was crushed out a
civilization that might have instructed Europe.

What treasures would now be given for a view of that wonderful
civilization and people that met the gaze of Cortez and his companions!

{108}

[Image: Ancient Peruvian Residence.]

Is it for nothing that Spain has been made a hideous skeleton among
the nations--a warning spectacle to the world? Had not her punishment
overtaken her, men would have surely said: "There is no retribution;
there is no God." She has been the instrument in the hands of Rome of
ruining two civilizations: an eastern and a western: and both of the
{109} seed of Abraham; and in turn she has been ruined thereby herself.

With circumstances of dreadful barbarity, she expelled the Jews and
Saracens who had become the children of her soil by a residence of more
than seven hundred years, and in America destroyed nations, in some
respects more civilized than herself. By expulsion she lost some of her
best citizens; and the wealth of Mexico and Peru, induced habits of
luxury and effeminacy among the remainder. Her great cities have sunk
into insignificance, and towns that once boasted of more than a million
inhabitants can now only show a few scanty thousands. Surely the hand
of God is visible in the degradation of Spain.

It is not alone the massive ruins of Central America, Yucatan, Peru and
Mexico, that astonish the beholder. In almost every part of the western
continent may be found the footprints of a mighty race, now vanished
from the earth.

In the copper mines on the shores of Lake Superior, have been found
the implements of those who worked in those mines many centuries ago.
These instruments are made of copper, yet some of them are of so fine
a temper that they will turn the edge of the best steel instruments of
our times.

A few years ago, in digging down a hill near the town of Fall River,
Massachusetts, a mass of earth slid off uncovering a human skull which
was found to belong to a human skeleton buried in a sitting posture.
When the covering was removed, the astonished workman saw that the
trunk of the skeleton was encased in a breastplate of brass. This
breast plate was oval in form, about thirteen inches long, ten in width
and nearly one-fourth of an inch in thickness. Below the breastplate,
and entirely encircling the body, was a belt composed of brass tubes,
each four and a half inches in length and one-fourth of an inch in
diameter. The poet, Longfellow, has written a poem on this subject with
which, no doubt, many of our readers are familiar. The poem commences:

  "Speak, speak thou fearful guest,
  Who, with thy hollow breast.
  Still in rude armor drest,
   Comest to daunt me."

{110} Not far distant, on the bank of the Taunton river, is the
celebrated Dighton Rock, a huge piece of fine-grained granite covered
with sculptures and hieroglyphic inscriptions. Both the skeleton and
the inscriptions on the rock seem to be of Asiatic origin. The armor
is the same as appears in drawings taken from the sculptures found at
Palanque, Mexico.

[Image: Ancient Tower at Newport.]

Not far from Newport, in the state of Rhode Island, near the sea shore,
is a strange tower, which may have been the base for a beacon or
light-house.

At Marietta, Ohio, are ancient works that cover an area about
three-fourths of a mile long, and half a mile broad. But {111} the most
intricate, and perhaps the most extensive, are those in the Licking
Valley, near Newark, Ohio, extending over an area of two square miles.

These mounds are evidently the remains of ancient fortifications, as
they are invariably situated on a commanding eminence, or by the side
of a stream. Many of these mounds have been found to contain skeletons;
and the appearance of the bones would seem to point to an antiquity of
more than a thousand years.

Curious pottery, known as "coil-made pottery," has been found in the
mounds and caves, and at the ruined "pueblos," or ancient villages,
in Utah. These vessels seem to have been formed without the aid of a
potter's wheel, by coiling bands of clay upon themselves.

Other relics have been discovered in various parts of the continent
which throw some light on the mental and social condition of the
ancient inhabitants of America. In August, 1875, on an island in the
Mississippi river, near the city of Davenport, Iowa, was found a
petrified skeleton. But the most singular part of the find came to
light in the hardened and petrified straps, bronze buckles and wooden
leg which continued the right extremity, that limb having been removed
about midway between the hip and knee. This very interesting discovery
proves that the arts of manufacturing bronze, and artificial limbs,
as well as the art of surgery, were well known among the ancient
Americans. These remains were handed over to the Academy of Sciences,
and a photograph was taken of the inscription contained on a rock in
the vicinity. A copy of this photograph was forwarded to the late Mr.
Barfoot, then curator of the Deseret Museum, in Salt Lake City.

On the 16th of April, 1843, in a mound near Kinderhook, Pike county,
Illinois, were found _six plates of brass_ of a bell shape, each having
a hole near the small end, and a ring through them all. The plates were
so completely covered with rust, as almost to obliterate the characters
inscribed upon each side of them. But after undergoing a chemical
process, the inscriptions were brought out plain and distinct.

There were indications that lead to the belief that this mound was the
tomb of a family or person of distinction, in {112} ages long gone by;
and these plates probably contain the history of a person or people
who existed at a time far beyond the memory of the present race. (_For
further particulars see appendix to O. Pratt's Works_.)

In 1815, near Pittsfield, Mass., at a place called _Indian Hill_, was
found what appeared to be a black strap about six inches in length
and one and a half in breadth, and about the thickness of a leather
trace to a harness. On examination it was found to be formed of two
pieces of thick raw-hide sewed and made water-tight with the sinews
of some animal and gummed over; and in the fold were contained pieces
of parchment, of a dark-yellow hue and on which was some kind of
writing. Three of the pieces were preserved and sent to the University
of Cambridge, Mass., where they were examined and discovered to have
been written with a pen in _Hebrew_, plain and legible. The writing was
quotations from the Old Testament, Deut, vi. 4-9, inclusive, and chap.
xi. 13-21, inclusive, and Exodus xiii, 11-16, inclusive. (_See Voice of
Warning_.)

The ancient Mexican pyramids, "teocallis," or temples of the sun, were
still more remarkable. Two of the most ancient of these, near the city
of Mexico, were each nearly 200 feet high, and the larger of these two,
covers an area of eleven acres, which is nearly equal to that of the
pyramid of Cheops, in Egypt.

But the greatest pyramid was that of Cholula. Each side of its base
was one thousand four hundred and twenty-three feet, twice as long as
the great pyramid of Cheops. It may give some idea of its dimensions
to state that its base covers nearly forty-four acres, and the area on
its summit embraces more than one. On this elevation stood a costly
temple, in which was the image of the mystic deity Quetzalcoatl "god
of the air," wearing a mitre on his head, waving with "plumes of
fire." A resplendent collar of gold hung around his neck: he held a
richly-jeweled scepter of gold in one hand, and a curiously painted
shield, emblematic of his rule over the winds, in the other. This
temple faced the east, and in front of it, and in view of the whole
valley, was the great altar of porphyry on which were offered human
sacrifices.

{113} Each year, one was chosen from the most illustrious captives
taken in war. He was arrayed in costly apparel. He feasted on the most
delicate viands. The people did homage to him as to a king. Whatever
could contribute to his pleasure was freely given. At length the fatal
day arrives. Slowly and by a circuitous route a procession ascends the
pyramid. It is composed of the captive, Mexican priests, and some of
the notables of the government, accompanied by bands of music. As they
ascend the captive throws away his garlands, then his jewels and at
length portions of his dress, as emblematic that death will disrobe us
all. Having arrived at the top, he is stretched upon the huge altar of
stone, and there sacrificed for the sins of the people. Afterwards the
people feast upon his flesh--not as famished cannibals--but at a table
teeming with delicious fruits and fragrant flowers. They who partook of
his flesh were considered to have an especial share in the merits of
the sacrifice. Compare with this, John, vi. chapter, 48 to 55 verse,
III. Nephi, xviii. chapter. Some idea may thus be gained concerning the
origin of these rites and their terrible perversion caused by apostasy.

Nothing can be more grand than the view which meets the eye, from the
area on the summit of the pyramid. Towards the West stretched that bold
barrier of rocks, which nature has reared around the valley of Mexico.
Far away to the East are the barren though beautifully-shaped Sierras,
towering high into the clouds and standing like sentinels to guard the
entrance to the valley. Three of these are volcanoes, higher than the
highest mountain peak in Europe, and shrouded in snows which never
melt under the fierce sun of the tropics. At the feet of the spectator
lay the sacred city of Cholula with its bright towers and pinnacles
sparkling in the sun, reposing amidst gardens and verdant groves.

Such was the magnificent prospect which met the gaze of Cortes and his
companions, and may still with slight change, meet that of the modern
traveller, as from the platform of the great pyramid, his eye wanders
over the fairest portion of the beautiful plateau of Pueblo.

Now the question arises, who built these mounds in the Mississippi
valley, and these pyramids in Mexico? To {114} what race belong the
relics found in Massachusetts, Illinois and Iowa? Surely not to the
Indians who were found in America when the country was discovered; for
these things indicate a greater skill and culture than those tribes
possessed.

Antiquaries have furnished many theories to answer this question which
arises in the mind of every student. Some of these theories are very
ingenious, but all are lacking in that important element, truth.

For more than three hundred years no certain light was thrown upon the
history of that race. But that which man could not find out, with all
his learning and research, God has revealed in His own due time. And
here we see a wonderful manifestation of the hand of God in the history
of this continent. A record, authentic, though brief, has been given
to the world. The writings of some of the ancient worthies of that
race have been preserved in the earth and have now come forth for the
guidance and instruction of living men.

The Book of Mormon contains sketches of their history and the dealings
of God with these peoples in a similar manner, as the Bible teaches
the history and dealings of God with His ancient people, the Jews. It
also contains many incidental references to their mental and social
condition and the extent to which the arts and sciences were cultivated
among them.

It teaches us that when the Lord confounded the languages at Babel, He
led forth a colony from thence to the western continent, now called
America. This colony, after crossing the ocean in eight vessels and
landing in this country, became in process of time a great nation.
They inhabited America about fifteen hundred years but were at length
destroyed for their wickedness, about six hundred years before Christ.
A prophet by the name of Ether wrote their history and an account of
their destruction.

This people is known in modern history by the name of Toltecs, the
ruins of whose edifices are widely scattered in Yucatan and Central
America.

{115}

[Image: Mammoth.]

The sculptures and hieroglyphics on these ruins bear a striking
resemblance to those found in the ruins of Babylon and Nineveh. It also
appears that the mammoth, or American elephant, and mastodon--animals
which are now extinct--then roamed the wilds of the western continent;
for representations of these animals are often found sculptured on the
walls of Toltec ruins. Some persons have tried to throw doubts upon
these statements alleging that no such animals ever existed outside of
tropical regions. However, numerous remains of them have been found in
various parts of America, especially in Kentucky, Ohio, Missouri and
Oregon. In Siberia they have been found frozen in a complete state of
preservation. The illustrious Rufin Piotrowski, a Polish {116} exile,
gives a full account of these animals and the methods employed by the
Russian government in cutting them out of the ice. (_See Souvenirs d'un
Siberien_.)

It is no doubt to these animals that reference is made in the fourth
chapter of the book of Ether.

After this, another colony came from Jerusalem about six hundred
years before Christ and re-peopled America. This last colony grew and
multiplied, and finally gave rise to two mighty nations. One of these
was called Nephites, the other Lamanites.

The Nephites were a civilized and enlightened people. For nearly one
thousand years they were, from time to time, favored with revelations
from God. Prophet after prophet was raised up from among them, and at
length they were blessed with a personal appearance of Jesus Christ,
after His resurrection, from whose mouth they received the doctrine of
the gospel and a knowledge of the future down through all succeeding
ages. But, after all the blessings and privileges conferred upon them,
they fell into great wickedness in the third and fourth centuries of
the Christian era, and finally were destroyed by their enemies, the
Lamanites.

But though the Nephite race has vanished from the earth, still the
grandeur of its ruins attest the greatness of its civilization. Indeed
it seems impossible to understand the character and extent of these
ruins unless we admit the truth of the records given by Mosiah, Alma
and Nephi, concerning the arts, sciences, mode of warfare, religion
and subsequent apostasy and degradation of that people. In fact, as
researches continue it becomes more and more evident that ancient
American civilization was only a transcript of ancient Jewish and
Egyptian architecture, manners, customs and modes of thought. In
matters of government, the pomp of their monarchs, the arbitrary power,
and the obligation of all to military service present a striking
resemblance to the powers and privileges of the kings of ancient
Israel. Likewise their religious state was only a reflection of that
of Asia. Their worship was an imposing ceremonial. Though the common
people had a mythology of many gods, similar to the saint-worship {117}
of Rome, yet the higher-cultured classes acknowledged but one almighty
Creator.

Marriage was celebrated by religious ceremonies and the laws pertaining
thereto bore a striking resemblance to those of ancient Israel.
Polygamy was sanctioned, but in practice was generally confined to the
wealthy.

The priests administered a rite of baptism to infants and proselytes
for the purpose of washing away their sins. They also taught that
there are rewards and punishments in a world to come--a paradise for
the good, and a hell of darkness for the wicked. But the highest glory
and reward was preserved for the noble few who fell in sacrifice or in
battle for the cause of right. They went directly in to the presence
of the sun, whom they accompanied in his bright progress through the
heavens. After a few years these spirits went to animate the clouds
and add luster to the glories of the sunset, or were sent to rule over
and increase the pure and undying light of the stars. Who does not
see in all this the traces of a purer religion, which centuries of
apostasy and degradation had not been able to entirely destroy? This
is all the more manifest when we consider some of their maxims and
forms of prayer. One was: "Bear injuries with humility, God, who sees,
will avenge you." Another was: "Clothe the naked and feed the hungry,
whatever privations it may cost thee; for remember, _their flesh is
like thine and they are men like thee_." Again: "Impart to us, Lord,
out of Thy great mercy Thy gifts which we are not worthy to receive
through our own merits." Also: "O, merciful Lord, _thou who knowest the
secrets of all hearts_, let Thy forgiveness and favor descend." In all
these we find sentiments such as are contained in the scriptures of the
Old Testament.

One of the most important duties of the priesthood was that of
education, to which certain buildings were appropriated. To each of the
principal temples, schools were attached and lands were annexed for
the maintenance of the priests. Their writings were on cotton cloth or
skins, or on papyrus, a kind of paper made from the aloe. At the time
of the Spanish conquest, vast collections of these manuscripts were in
existence; but the first archbishop of Mexico, burned them in the {118}
market-place. Rome was determined that no literature should exist but
her own.

The Mexican year consisted of eighteen months and each month of twenty
days; five days were added to make the number to three hundred and
sixty-five. To provide for the leap years they added twenty-four days
to each century. The Mexican mode of reckoning was then superior
to that of Europe. When the nations of Europe adopted the calendar
discovered and perfected by the Jews and Saracens, then their mode of
reckoning corresponded with that discovered by the seed of Abraham on
this continent and both were true.

The ancient Americans had ascertained the globular form of the earth
previous to their contact with Europeans. Catholic Europe would not
admit that truth till compelled to by the voyages of Columbus and
Magellan.

Their agriculture was in some respects superior to that of Europe.
There was nothing in the old world to compare with the menageries and
botanical gardens of Huax-tepec, Chapultepec and Tezcuco.

They excelled in the arts of the jeweller and enameller. They were
skillful weavers of fine cloth. They were not ignorant of the use of
iron; and understood the manufacture of bronze, of which they also
made use. To them we are indebted for tobacco, snuff, chocolate and
cochineal. From them we learned the use of the potato, which has now
extended to all parts of the civilized world. They, like us, knew the
use of intoxicating drinks; and like us sometimes partook of them to
excess.

This sketch would be incomplete without a reference to the civilization
of Peru. As Egypt was the cradle of civilization in the old world, so
Peru was in the new. Like Egypt also it was in most parts a rainless
region. The ancient Peruvian empire was nearly two thousand four
hundred miles in length, but scarcely sixty miles in width--a narrow
strip hemmed in between the grand Andes mountains and the Pacific ocean.

{119}

[Image: Mummy.]

The sides of this great mountain range might seem altogether unfitted
for agriculture. But the advanced state of Peruvian civilization is
at once demonstrated when it is said that these mountain slopes had
become a garden. Immense terraces were constructed wherever required,
and irrigation was employed on the grandest scale the world has ever
seen. Peru possessed a varied climate. In the lower valleys near the
coast could be raised all the products of tropical regions, at an
elevation of a few thousand feet the climate was adapted for grains of
a temperate zone. On table-lands, at a great elevation above the sea,
there were villages and even cities. Thus the plain on which Quito
stands, under the equator, is nearly ten thousand feet high, and enjoys
a climate of perpetual {120} spring. So great was their industry that
the Peruvians had gardens and orchards above the clouds, and on ranges
still higher flocks of sheep and llamas, in regions bordering on the
limit of perpetual snow.

In Cuzco, the metropolis, was the residence of the _inca_ or emperor,
and the great temple of the sun.

The inca was both temporal prince and ruling priest of their religion.
Though they ostensibly worshiped the sun, yet the higher classes
recognized the existence of one almighty, invisible God.

Like the Egyptians, the Peruvians understood the art of embalming the
dead. The mummies of their incas being placed in the vaults beneath the
temple of the sun, at Cuzco.

This city contained edifices which excited the amazement of the Spanish
adventurers themselves--streets, squares, bridges and fortresses
surrounded by turreted walls. The public walls of Peru as well as
Mexico were superior to those of Spain herself. Two great military
roads extended the whole length of the empire--one along the coast, the
other along the base of the mountains. These highways greatly aided the
Spaniards in their conquest of the country.

Having gained possession of the country and robbed the inhabitants of
their gold, silver and precious stones, they put to death the inca and
nobility, and took possession of their residences.

The enormous crime of Spain in destroying this civilization has never
been fully appreciated. In vain the Spaniards excuse their atrocities,
on the plea that those nations were savages and permitted human
sacrifices. True, the nations of America sank very low when the light
of the gospel was withdrawn; but every candid mind will ask: "Which was
the more degraded, papal Europe or apostate America?" Human sacrifice,
however cruel, has nothing in it degrading to its victim. It may be
rather said to ennoble him by devoting him to the gods. Although so
terrible with the Mexicans, it was sometimes voluntarily embraced by
them as the most glorious death, and one that opened a sure passage
into paradise.

There was no spectacle on the American continent, at which a just man
might so deeply blush for his race as that presented {121} in Western
Europe when the martyr, from whom confession had been wrung by torture,
passed to the stake in a sleeveless garment, with flames of fire and
pictures of devils painted upon it. Let it be remembered that from A.
D. 1481 to 1808, more than three hundred and forty thousand persons had
been tortured, and out of these nearly thirty-two thousand burnt.

[Image: Massacre of the Incas.]

Let it also be remembered that the body of man is of less value than
the immortal soul, for the redemption of which the agony and death
of the Son of God was not too great a price to pay. Let it not be
forgotten that at that period the entire authority of Europe was
directed to the enslaving of the minds and souls of men and making that
noblest creation of heaven a worthless machine.

{122} Everywhere throughout the continent may be found traces of Bible
and Nephite history. Humbolt, in his travels, mentions a multitude of
native books in which were described all the leading circumstances and
history of the deluge, of the fall of man, and the first murder as
perpetrated by Cain.

Clavigero, in his history of Mexico, tells of an ancient native
manuscript, found at Chiapa, which gives a plain and brief account of
the building of the tower of Babel, the confusion of tongues, and the
subsequent migration of Votan, or Jotan, (no doubt a corruption of
Jared) and his companions to the continent of America.

The Indians of Cuba related to Bernal Diaz, a companion and historian
of Columbus, a complete and scarcely corrupted account of the deluge,
the intoxication of Noah and Ham's shameful conduct.

Humboldt mentions numerous traditions existing among the natives of
Yucatan and Central America concerning a great religious teacher, a
wonderful personage, whom they called Quetzalcoatl, and who was a
white and bearded man. "Many things are said of him in their books of
parchment, and among others, that when he left them he gave them wise
laws and maxims, and promised to return and rule over them and renew
their happiness." Compare with this the record of Nephi. (_See III.
Nephi, chap. ii. to xxviii. inclusive_.)

A tradition of the Wyandott Indians, published by Frederick Falley, of
Sandusky, O., in 1823, gives a plain account of the battle of Cumorah.
Both Breckenridge and Humboldt conclude that "a great battle took place
in the region of the great lakes not later than the year 544 of the
Christian era, after which the Aztecs [Lamanites] took possession of
the country southward."

The foregoing will indicate to some extent the workings of the hand of
God, as manifested in the history of this continent. Volumes might be
written on this subject, but enough has been said to awaken inquiry
among the honest-in-heart and indicate the treasures contained in the
Nephite annals, and corroborated by the ruins of

  "This old, old land, which men call new;
  This land as old as time is old."

{123}



CHAPTER XII.

THE COLONIZATION OF ACADIA.

ENGLAND'S DEVELOPMENT--REIGN OF ELIZABETH--INFLUENCE OF THE
BIBLE--TYRANNY OF THE KINGS--JACQUES CARTIER--DISCOVERY OF THE
ST. LAWRENCE--QUEBEC FOUNDED--ACADIA COLONIZED--TRANSFERRED TO
ENGLAND--EXTRACTS FROM LONGFELLOW'S POEM--VIRGINIA SETTLED.

In previous chapters we have traced the instrumentalities which God
used in the unshackling of the minds of men from the superstitions of
the past, and disciplining them for the reception of higher truths.
We have seen how, amidst the rage of tyrants and in spite of the
opposition of the powers of evil, society had gradually climbed to a
loftier intellectual eminence than that to which she had attained in
any previous age. The time had at length arrived, when, far from the
jarring scenes of Europe's strife, a nation was to come into existence,
earnest in its love of human liberty, and vigorous in the execution of
its purposes--a nation, which should accomplish some of the mightiest
achievements of the human race; and where, under the benign influences
of its political institutions, and in the Lord's due time, the gospel
should be again revealed and the Kingdom of God set up among the
children of men.

To rightly understand the history and character of an individual, we
must know something of his parentage and the circumstances of his early
life. Hence to understand the character of the American people, we must
know something of their great national mother, the people of England.

The defeat of the great Spanish armada delivered England from the
control of continental Europe, and marked a critical epoch in her
development. From that hour England's destiny {124} was fixed. She was
to be the great protestant power. Her sphere of action was to be upon
the seas. She was to take a leading part in the new world of the west.
The time was coming when her commerce should surpass all the nations of
ancient or modern times; but, above all, her language and literature
were fast developing, by means of which her laws and influence would
effect the remotest nations of the earth. Hitherto England had lagged
behind in the intellectual development of Europe. In the single
reign of Elizabeth she leaped to the first rank among the nations
of the earth; nay more, she was to become the mother of nations.
An impression, vague and shadowy indeed, but none the less real,
penetrated the minds of the English people, that they were to be the
repository of the divine will, and the executor of His purposes--that
the blessings and prerogatives of ancient Israel, were to be their
inheritance.

Beneath the rough exterior and blunt manners of that age, lay the new
sense of a prophetic power--the sense of a divine commission. And who
will say that they were wrong, or prove that they were not divinely
commissioned to break down the barriers to human progress, and to some
extent prepare society for the "dispensation of the fullness of times?"

The English translation of the Bible, became the great rule of life.
The whole moral effect which is now produced by the newspaper, the
sermon, the lecture and the circulating library was then produced by
the Bible alone; and its effect on the national character was simply
amazing. Religion was no longer confined to the cloister and cathedral,
but became a subject of thought for every individual. The profound
meditations that Shakspeare puts into the mouth of Hamlet were but a
transcript of the thoughts and feelings of the earnest men of that
age, who saw themselves day by day in the theater of a mighty struggle
between the powers of light and the powers of darkness--their souls the
prize of an eternal conflict between heaven and hell.

It was this phase of thought that gave to the world the sublime
conceptions of Milton, the realistic dreams of Bunyan, as well as the
stern and solemn character of Oliver Cromwell and his followers; and
made these liberty-loving peasants more {125} than a match for the
chivalry and iron-clad knights of King Charles I.

Nor was this feeling confined to any one class. It permeated all ranks
and conditions, even to the sovereign. Tradition still points out the
tree in Hatfield Park, beneath which Elizabeth was sitting when she
received the news of her peaceful accession to the throne. She fell
on her knees and exclaimed: "It is the Lord's doing, and marvelous in
our eyes." To the end of her reign these words remained stamped on the
golden coinage of the realm. Through all her long and eventful life,
the feeling seems never to have left her, that her preservation and her
reign were the issues of a direct interposition of God.

The foregoing may help us to understand the character of the English
people at the time they commenced to plant the institutions of liberty
on this continent. Who can read the thrilling narrative of English
history during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries without
acknowledging the hand of God, in moulding the character of the British
people?

It was not a pleasant world which the men and women of Europe had
to live in during the sixteenth century. Fighting was the constant
occupation of the kings of that time; civil wars were also frequent.
In these confused strifes men slew their acquaintances and friends
as the only method they knew of deciding who was to fill the throne.
Feeble commerce was crushed under the iron heel of war. No such thing
as security for life and property was expected. The fields of the
husbandman were trodden down by the
march of armies. Disbanded or deserted soldiers wandered as lawless
men over the country and robbed and murdered at their will. Epidemic
diseases of strange type, the result of insufficient and unwholesome
food, and the poisonous air of undrained lands and filthy streets
destroyed the inhabitants. Under what hardships and miseries the men of
the sixteenth century passed their days, it is scarcely possible for us
now to conceive.

From the persecutions of the old world they fled to the wilds of the
new. The thrilling story of their adventures, though indeed real,
sounds more like romance than reality. Unlike the history of eastern
nations, which frequently loses itself in {126} mists of antiquity, the
history of the American people begins at a comparatively recent date.
It is less than four hundred years since Columbus and his companions
first saw the western continent, and less than two hundred and
seventy-five years since the first colony was planted in the territory
which formed the thirteen original states.

Another peculiarity is, that from the very first this land has been an
asylum for the persecuted and oppressed of every nation.

It was in the beautiful month of May, 1535, that Jacques Cartier, a
bold navigator in the service of the king of France, sailed along
the shores of the gulf of St. Lawrence, stopping here and there to
examine the country and lay out plats for future settlements. In July
he entered the river St. Lawrence and sailed on its broad waters,
amidst picturesque scenery in which was realized all his glowing
expectations and dreams. Leaving his vessel at the present site of
Quebec, he proceeded up the river in a small boat, as far as the Indian
settlement of Hochelaga. This place he named Mount Royal. It is now
the magnificent city of Montreal. However, no permanent settlements
were formed, and it was not till 1604 that De Monts, Champlain and
other explorers began to colonize the country, on the banks of the
gulf of St. Lawrence. Quebec was founded in 1608. The whole region on
the south shore of the gulf was then called Acadia. Its history shows
the wonderful influence kindness exerts, even among the savage tribes
of North America. Poutrincourt, the governor of the colony, caused an
immense banqueting hall to be erected, which was well supplied with
deer, moose, bear and all kinds of wild fowl. He made friends of the
Indians and entertained the chiefs at sumptuous feasts. In the Winter
evenings by the blazing pine logs, Champlain would relate the stories
of his wonderful adventures among the hills, and valleys, and lakes,
and streams, and cataracts, and red men of the west.

At length, by the fortunes of war, this colony was transferred to
England; but its heart was still with France. The English distrusted
its loyalty, and sent an armed force to surprise and attack it, and
carry away the once happy people, and scatter them throughout their
American domains. The Acadians were {127} crowded into transports,
their families were separated, their friendships and attachments broken
up, and they were exiled among strangers, never to see each other
again. The name of Acadia was blotted out. Most people are familiar
with Longfellow's beautiful story of Evangeline. It is now almost the
only memorial that remains of the history of that colony.

As a picture of peace and prosperity, contentment and neighborly love,
worthy of imitation in this selfish age, a few lines from Longfellow's
beautiful poem, may not be out of place:

  "There, in the midst of its farms reposed the Acadian village,
  Strongly built were the houses with frames of oak and of hemlock;
  There, in the tranquil evenings when sunset had faded to twilight,
  Softly the church-bell sounded calling the people to worship.
  Thus dwelt in love these simple Acadian farmers,
  Dwelt in the love of God and of man. Alike they were free from
  Fear that reigns with the tyrant, and envy the vice of republics,
  Neither locks had they to their doors nor bars to their windows,
  But their dwellings were open as day and the hearts of the owners;
  There the richest was poor, and the poorest lived in abundance."

Meanwhile attempts at colonizing were going on farther south. The
settlement at Jamestown, Virginia, was founded in 1607. The adventures
of Captain John Smith, the virtual founder of the colony, are well
known to most readers, as well as the romantic story of Pocahontas, the
Indian princess. Its early history is a narrative of strife and human
suffering. Many of its early inhabitants were scions of nobility, men
unused to toil; in some cases they were mere adventurers, actuated by
a lust for gold or love of plunder. However, it teaches one important
lesson, that noble birth and high-sounding titles are of little account
when compared with the plain virtues of industry, honesty, and trust in
God--that it is not men of wealth, but men of noble character that are
of most importance in founding a commonwealth.

{128}



CHAPTER XIII.

COLONIZATION OF NEW ENGLAND.

CHARACTER OF THE COLONISTS--THEY LEAVE ENGLAND--SOJOURN IN
HOLLAND--BREWSTER'S PRINTING PRESS--PURITANS EMBARK FOR AMERICA--THEIR
TRUST IN GOD--ROBINSON'S PROPHECY--PLYMOUTH FOUNDED--SUFFERINGS OF THE
COLONISTS--CONFLICT IN ENGLAND--PECULIARITIES OF THE PURITANS--HARVARD
COLLEGE FOUNDED--EXTENT OF SETTLEMENTS--FIRST CONFEDERATION.

    "What constitutes a state?
  Not high-raised battlements or labored mound,
    Thick wall or moated gate;
  Not cities proud, with spires and turrets crowned,
    Not bays and broad armed ports
  Where, laughing at the storm, proud navies ride;
    Not starred and spangled courts
  Where low-browed baseness wafts perfume to pride;
    No! Men, high-minded men,
  With powers as far above dull brutes endued,
    In forest, brake or den,
  As beasts excel cold rocks and brambles rude;
    Men, who their duties know,
  But know their rights; and knowing dare maintain."

The mind instinctively turns to the colonizing of New England as one of
the great landmarks of human history. A little more than two centuries
ago this land was covered with forests in which roamed various tribes
of Indians; and the rivers, which now give life to so much cheerful
industry, flowed uselessly to the sea. To-day this same land is covered
with cities, towns and villages, gardens, vineyards and orchards,
schools and palaces--a civilization surpassing, in some respects, that
of any other country on the face of the globe.

Whence came the men who wrought these mighty changes? What were the
circumstances that led them to abandon their {129} country and their
kindred, and all the sacred associations that link man to his native
land, to seek homes beyond the stormy Atlantic, in a wilderness then
inhabited only by savage beasts, and men still more savage; and above
all, that trained them in the principles of self-government and fitted
them to become the founders of a mighty empire?

At that time protestant princes, no more than popish, were willing that
their subjects should think for themselves. James I. had just ascended
the English throne. His was the head of a fool and the heart of a
tyrant. He was determined that every one of his subjects should observe
the rites and ceremonies of the Episcopal church. On the northern
border of Nottinghamshire stands the little town of Scrooby. Here were
some brave and honest people, to whom the ceremonies of the Episcopal
or Established church were an offense. They held their meetings
in secret, at the house of one of their number, a gentleman named
Brewster. They chose Mr. Robinson, a wise and good man, to be their
leader in spiritual things. But their secret meetings were betrayed to
the authorities and their lives were made bitter by the persecutions
that fell upon them. They resolved to leave their own land and seek
among strangers that freedom which was denied them at home.

They embarked with all their goods for Holland. But when the ship
was about to sail, soldiers came upon them, plundered them and drove
them on shore. After some weeks in prison they were suffered to
return home. Next Spring they tried again to escape. This time a good
many were on board, and the others were waiting for the return of
the boat, which would carry them to the ship. Suddenly soldiers on
horseback were seen spurring across the sands. The shipmaster weighed
his anchor and set sail with those whom he had on board. The soldiers
conducted the remainder back to prison. After a time they were set at
liberty. In little groups they made their way to Holland, and thus
they accomplished the first stage of the tedious journey from the old
England to the new. Here they remained for eleven years, and worked
with patient industry at their various trades. They gained a reputation
for honesty and skill in all their undertakings, and thus they found
{130} abundant employment. Mr. Brewster established a printing press
and printed books about liberty, which greatly enraged the foolish King
James. Meanwhile this little band received additions from time to time,
as oppression in England became more intolerable. Still they looked
upon themselves as exiles. The language and manners of the Dutch were
not pleasing to them. They did not wish to lose their identity. Already
their sons and daughters were forming alliances that threatened this
result. They therefore determined to go again on a pilgrimage, and seek
a home in the wilds of America; where they could dwell apart and found
a state, where all should enjoy civil and religious liberty.

They collected their little funds and procured two vessels, the
_Speedwell_, of sixty tons, and the _Mayflower_, of one hundred and
eighty. The _Speedwell_ was found to be unseaworthy and was abandoned.
They had not sufficient funds for all to come at once. Brewster was
placed in command of the company, which was composed of "such of the
youngest and strongest, as freely offered themselves." A solemn fast
was held. "Let us seek God," said they, "a right way for us, and for
our little ones, and for all our substance."

On a sunny morning in July, 1620, the pilgrims knelt upon the seashore
at Delfthaven, while their pastor, Mr. Robinson, prayed for the success
of their journey. Out upon the gleaming sea a little ship lay waiting.
Money was wanting and so only one hundred could depart. They left the
remainder with tears and fond farewells, to follow when they could.
Mr. Robinson dismissed them with counsels which breathed a pure and
high-toned wisdom. Some of the words which he then uttered, seemed to
have a prophetic import. This will be readily seen from the following
extract:

"The Lord has more truth yet to break forth out of His holy word.
Luther and Calvin were great and shining lights in their times, yet
they penetrated not into the whole counsel of God. I beseech of you,
remember it, that you be ready to receive whatever truth shall be made
known to you."

Who will attempt to deny that God, through him, spake words pregnant
with a meaning that men at that age did not understand?

{131} A prosperous wind soon wafted them across the North sea and they
sighted the coast of England. After considerable delay at Southampton,
Dartmouth, and Plymouth, the _Mayflower_ started early in September
on her long and lonely voyage from the old world to the new. After a
boisterous voyage of sixty-three days they espied land, and in two days
more cast anchor in the harbor of Cape Cod.

How truthful the lines,

  "The heavy clouds hung dark
    The woods and waters o'er,
  When a band of exiles moored their bark
    On the wild New England shore!"

It was a bleak-looking and discouraging coast which lay before them.
Nothing met the eye but low sand-hills, covered with stunted trees
down to the margin of the sea. At first no suitable locality for a
settlement could be found; but at length they selected a spot where the
soil appeared to be good, with "delicate springs of water." On December
22, 1620, the pilgrims landed--stepping ashore upon a huge boulder of
granite, which is still preserved as a memorial of that event. The cold
was so excessive that the spray froze upon their clothes till they
resembled men cased in armor. They had been badly fed on board the
ship, which, together with exposure, caused sickness to prevail among
them. Every second day a grave had to be dug in the frozen ground. The
care of the sick and the burying of the dead, sadly hindered their
work; but the building of their little town went on. When Spring
arrived there were only fifty survivors, and these were sadly enfeebled
and dispirited. Upon an eminence beside their town they erected a
structure which served a double purpose. The upper story was used for a
fort, in which were placed six small cannon. The lower story served for
a meeting-house and school-house.

The pilgrims had already drawn up and signed in the cabin of the
_Mayflower_, a document forming themselves into an organized
government, to which they unanimously promised obedience. Under this
constitution they elected John Carver to be their first governor. It is
true they acknowledged King James, but they left no very large place
for his authority.

{132}

[Image: Landing of the Pilgrims.]

{133} They had experienced what despotism was, and they determined from
the first to be a self-governing people. In memory of the hospitalities
which they had received at the last English port from which they had
sailed, this colony took the name of Plymouth.

The years which followed the settlement of Plymouth was a time through
which good men found it bitter to live. Charles I., was upon the throne
of England. William Laud, archbishop of Canterbury, was the king's
right-hand man for dealing out persecution. Whoever refused to perform
the religious ceremonies commanded by Laud was forthwith imprisoned. A
Scotch clergyman named Leighton, was publicly whipped, branded on the
cheek, had one of his ears cut off and his nostrils slit, for calling
Laud's ceremonies the inventions of men. Many others were treated in a
similar manner. Meanwhile John Hampden, the incorruptible patriot, was
arrested for not paying an unlawful tax. A greater than he--his cousin,
Oliver Cromwell--was leading his quiet, rural life at Huntington, not
without many anxious and indignant thoughts about the evils of his
time. He walked over his fields and along the streams,

  "Pondering the solemn miracle of life
  As one who, wandering in a starless night,
  Feels momently the jar of unseen waves,
  And hears the thunder of an unknown sea
  Breaking along an unimagined shore.
  And as he walked he prayed."

The weary victims of this senseless persecution looked to New England
for refuge. The pilgrims wrote to their friends at home; and every
letter was read with interest. They had hardships to tell of at first;
then they had prosperity and comfort; always they had liberty! Every
Summer a few ships were freighted for the settlements. At one time
eight ships lay in the Thames, with their passengers on board, when
the order was issued, that no one should leave without the king's
permission. The soldiers cleared the ships, and the poor emigrants were
driven back in despair to endure the miseries from which they were so
eager to escape. Among these were Hampden and Cromwell. Well would it
have been for the {134} king if he had let them go! But God had a work
for them to do. They were to be the instruments in His hand

  "To hurl down wrong from its high seat,
  To the poor and oppressed, firm friends and true."

The details of the long war between the king and the people we need
not here relate. The result was the death of the unhappy monarch,
and another step forward by the British people in the principles of
self-government.

Meanwhile the settlements in America continued to flourish. The virgin
soil yielded abundant harvests. From the fleece of their sheep, and
the flax of their fields they made a supply of clothing. They felled
the timber of their boundless forests, and built ships and sent away
to foreign countries, the timber, the fish and the furs which were not
required at home.

They were a noble people who had thus begun to strike their roots in
the great forests of the west.

Their peculiarities may indeed amuse us; as for example the strange
names they gave their children. Many of the boys bore names in memory
of some fortunate circumstance, or historical event, as "Rejoice in the
Lord," "Pillar of Fire," "Strength of Israel," "Praise God Barebones,"
etc.; while the girls rejoiced in such names as "Truth," "Temperance,"
"Patience," "Chastity," and "Love the Lord."

We may smile at these things; yet the most wise of all ages will admire
the purity and earnestness of this people. They brought with them the
love of learning. In a very few years schools began to appear. Such
means as could be afforded were freely given. Some tolerably qualified
brother was "entreated to become the schoolmaster." Soon a law was
passed that every township, containing fifty families, must have a
common school. Harvard College was established within fifteen years of
the landing. The founders of New England were men who had known at home
the value of books. Brewster carried with him a library of two hundred
and seventy-five volumes, and his was not the largest collection in
the colony. At that time books were very scarce and twenty times more
costly than they are now.

Twenty-three years after the landing of the pilgrims, the population of
New England had grown to twenty-four thousand. {135} Forty-nine little
wooden towns, with their wooden churches, wooden forts and wooden
ramparts, were dotted here and there over the land. There were then
four separate colonies: Plymouth, Massachusetts, Connecticut and New
Haven. For mutual defense and protection these colonies united together
and thus formed the first confederation of states on the western
continent.



CHAPTER XIV.

THE CONFLICT IN THE NETHERLANDS.

DESCRIPTION OF HOLLAND--A LAND OF REFUGE--TYRANNY OF ALVA--THE STRUGGLE
FOR INDEPENDENCE--SIEGE OF LEYDEN--THE COUNTRY SUBMERGED--FAMINE IN THE
CITY--SPEECH OF THE MAYOR--HEROIC CONDUCT--TRUST IN GOD--STORM RAISES
THE WATERS--SPANIARDS RETREAT--LEYDEN IS SAVED--THANKSGIVING--WATERS
RETIRE.

In a previous chapter have been described the circumstances which led
to the colonization of Acadia and New England.

While these events were transpiring in old England and New England,
others of scarcely less importance were occurring in Holland, or the
Netherlands, as it is frequently called, and in its colony of New
Netherlands. It is a fact too frequently forgotten, that at least three
of the thirteen original states were colonized by Holland. It is true
Pennsylvania and Delaware received a few colonists from Sweden and
Finland, who had settled there to escape religious persecution; but
their dominions in the new world were not of long duration. To Holland
and England belong the chief glory of colonizing the lands embraced in
the United Colonies of 1776. The country now embraced in the states
of New York, New Jersey and {136} Delaware, received the name of New
Netherlands, and like the inhabitants of New England, they were for the
most part a religious people.

During the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries Holland had been the
refuge of exiles from many lands. When John Huss and Jerome of Prague
fell under papal vengeance, many of their followers there found a home.
When the fury of persecution was raging against the Waldenses, many of
them fled to Holland for protection. After the terrible massacre of the
French protestants or Huguenots, as they were called, in 1572, many of
them took refuge in the Netherlands. This liberty-loving population
was the cause of that deadly hatred manifested toward them by the Duke
of Alva. This insatiate monster, during his brief administration,
caused more than eighteen thousand persons to perish by the hand of the
executioner. His cruelties at length aroused the indignation of the
people, and brought about those notable events so well described by the
historian, Motley, in his _Rise of the Dutch Republic_. This contest
was one of the most memorable in the history of the human race, for in
it was clearly shown the wonderful providence of God.

Holland, as is well known, is a low, flat country, so low, in fact,
that the inhabitants have been obliged to build dykes, or embankments
of earth, along the coast, in order to protect the country from the
waters of the ocean during high tides and storms. Were it not for this
precaution, Holland would frequently present the appearance of a vast,
shallow bay or lake, thickly studded with orchards dwellings and cities
half submerged in the water.

At this time Holland was under the dominion of Spain. The tyranny of
Alva, the governor, provoked the people to resistance, and King Philip
sent an army from Spain to enforce submission. Rather than longer
endure this oppression, the brave Hollanders resolved to achieve their
independence or perish in the attempt. The fortifications of their
country were few, but, in one respect, they held the keys of the ocean.
They opened the flood-gates of the dykes and prepared to submerge the
country when the first storm should come. Meanwhile the Spaniards were
besieging Leyden, and if that city fell, the {137} conquest of the
country would inevitably follow. The Hollanders well knew that the
ocean would damage their fields and destroy their growing crops, but
they preferred the chances of starvation to an indiscriminate massacre.

Leyden was situated twenty miles inland. It was impossible to bring
Leyden to the ocean. They prayed that God would aid their efforts to
bring the ocean to Leyden. Meantime the besieged city was at its last
gasp. At the dawn of each day the brave defenders turned their eyes
toward the vanes of the church steeples, that they might ascertain the
direction of the wind. So long as an easterly wind prevailed, they felt
that they must look in vain for the welcome ocean. Yet, while thus
patiently waiting, they were literally starving. Such was the condition
of Leyden on the 11th of September, 1574. The commander of the Dutch
fleet, Admiral Boisot, had constructed a number of flat boats, by which
he hoped to be able to bring provisions and munitions of war to the
besieged city. But a week elapsed after the opening of the dykes, and
no storm nor high tide had come to force the ocean inland. The flotilla
of boats now lay motionless in shallow water, having accomplished less
than two miles. Everything wore a gloomy aspect; still the hearts of
the patriots were lifted to God in prayer. On the 18th the wind shifted
to the north-west, and for three days blew a gale. The waters rose
rapidly, and before the second was closed, the flat boats were again
afloat. Onward the boats flew before the breeze, and soon arrived at
the villages of Zoetermeer and Benthuyzen. A strong force of Spaniards
were stationed at each place, but they were astonished to see these
brave and liberty-loving men, sailing on a sea, where a few hours
before, was dry and solid land. Some of their officers even asked in
amazement, "was it true that God and the elements were going to fight
against them?" Few things are more appalling to the imagination than
the rising ocean tide, when man feels himself within its power. The
Spanish soldiers saw the waters deepening and closing around them,
and, as it were, devouring the earth beneath their feet, while on the
waves rode a flotilla, manned by a liberty-loving and determined race,
whose courage was known throughout the world. No wonder the Spaniards
were seized with a panic and fled precipitately. {138} Behind them came
the roaring tide; and thousands sank beneath the deepening flood. In
a few hours the flotilla had arrived at North Aa, from whence Admiral
Boiset sent, on September 28th, a carrier pigeon with a letter of
encouragement to the famished inhabitants of Leyden.

As time passed on, the mortality in the city became frightful. Mothers
dropped dead in the streets with their dead children in their arms. A
terrible plague, engendered by hardships and famine, was sweeping away
the people like grass before the scythe. From six to eight thousand
human beings sank before this scourge alone, yet the people resolutely
held out--women and men mutually encouraging each other to resist the
entrance of the foreign foe--an evil more horrible than pest or famine.
The heroism of the Hollanders towered to sublimity. True a few of the
faint-hearted one day assailed the mayor of Leyden, the heroic Adrian
Van der Werf, with threats and reproaches as he passed through the
streets. He stepped to one side and mounted the steps of the church
of St. Pancras. There he stood, a tall, haggard, imposing figure,
with dark visage, and a tranquil, but commanding eye. He waved his
broad-brimmed hat for silence, and then exclaimed: "What would ye, my
friends? Why do ye murmur that we do not break our vows and surrender
the city to the Spaniards?--a fate more horrible than the agony which
she now endures. I tell you, I have made an oath to hold the city, and
may God give me strength to keep my oath! I can die but once; whether
by your hands, the enemy's, or by the hand of God. My own fate is
indifferent to me, not so that of the city entrusted to my care. I know
that we shall starve if not soon relieved; but starvation is preferable
to the dishonored death which is our only alternative. Your menaces
move me not; my life is at your disposal, here is my sword, plunge it
into my breast, and divide my flesh among you. Take my body to appease
your hunger, but expect no surrender, so long as I remain alive."

The words of the firm, old mayor, inspired a new courage in the hearts
of those who heard him, and a shout of applause and defiance arose
from the famishing, but enthusiastic crowd. After exchanging new vows
of fidelity with their magistrate, {139} they left the place and again
ascended tower and battlement to watch for the coming fleet.

From the ramparts they hurled renewed defiance at the enemy. "Ye call
us rat-eaters and dog-eaters," they cried, "and it is true. So long
then, as ye hear dog bark, or cat mew, within the walls of the city,
ye may know that it still holds out. And when all has perished but
ourselves, be sure that we will each devour our left arms, retaining
our right to defend our women, our liberty and our religion, against
the foreign tyrant. Should God, in His providence, deny us all relief,
even then will we maintain ourselves against your entrance. When the
last hour has come, with our own hands we will set fire to the city and
perish, men, women and children, together in the flames, rather than
suffer our homes to be polluted and our liberties to be crushed."

The Spaniards shouted back derisively: "As well can the prince of
Orange pluck down the stars from the sky as bring the ocean to the
walls of Leyden for your relief." But they had forgotten that "prayer
moves the arm that moves the world;" that He, whom the winds and seas
obey, and who holds the tempests as in the hollow of his hand, had
heard the cry of that patient and persecuted people, and was sending
the darkness and the storm, to sweep away their enemies as with the
besom of destruction.

When the stoutest hearts began to fail, the tempest came again to
their relief. A violent gale, on the night of the 1st of October, came
storming from the north-west, shifting after a few hours, and then
blowing still more violently from the south-west. The waters of the
North sea were piled in vast masses upon the southern coast, and then
dashed furiously land-ward. The waters rose higher than ever before
known, and swept with unobstructed fury across the ruined dykes. The
fleet of flat-boats at North Aa, was no longer stranded. At midnight,
amidst the storm and darkness, Admiral Boisot gave orders to advance.
A few sentinels challenged them as they swept by the village of
Zoeterwoude. The answer was a flash from Boisot's cannon, lighting the
dark, wild waste of waters. Then came a fierce naval midnight battle.
It was a strange spectacle among the branches of those quiet orchards
and {140} chimney stacks of half submerged farm-houses. Swiftly the
fleet sailed on over the waters between Zoeterwoude and Zwieten. As
they approached shallows the sailors dashed into the sea and literally
shouldered the vessels through. These forts and that of Lammen might
have proved serious obstacles, had not the panic, which had hitherto
driven their foes before the advancing patriots, come again to their
relief.

A long procession of lights was seen to flit across the black face of
the waters, in the dead of night. The Spaniards had fled precipitately
along a road which led in a westerly direction toward the Hague. Their
narrow path was rapidly vanishing in the waves, and hundreds sank in
the constantly deepening flood, to rise no more.

The morning dawned, but all was calm and still around the city of
Leyden. The hand of God which had sent the ocean and the tempest for
her deliverance, had likewise struck her enemies with terror. The
lights which had been seen during the night, were lanterns of the
retreating Spaniards. The succoring fleet sailed victoriously into
the city on the morning of the 3rd of October, 1574. Bread was freely
given to the poor creatures, who for months had tasted no wholesome
human food. When the admiral stepped on shore a procession was formed
consisting of citizens, sailors, soldiers, women and children. They
repaired to the great cathedral; and they who had been firm in their
resistance to an earthly tyrant, now bowed in humble gratitude before
the King of kings. After prayers the whole, vast congregation, joined
in the thanksgiving hymn. Thousands of voices raised the song, but few
were able to carry it to its conclusion, for the universal emotion,
deepened by the music, became too full for utterance. The hymn was
abruptly suspended while the multitude wept like children.

"On the following day, the 4th of October, the wind shifted to the
north-east, and again blew a tempest. It was as if the waters, having
now done their work, had been rolled back to the ocean by an Omnipotent
hand, for in the course of a few days the land was bare again, and the
work of reconstructing the dykes commenced."

{141} From this terrible ordeal came out many illustrious characters.
Its results tended to civil and religious liberty, as well as the
great principle of federal union which has since been carried out to
such a wonderful extent. These principles the Dutch emigrants brought
with them; and when a few years afterwards their settlements fell into
the hands of the English they were already assimilated to the ideas
prevailing in the New England colonies.



CHAPTER XV.

EARLY COLONIAL HISTORY.

RISE OF QUAKERISM--GEORGE FOX--WILLIAM PENN--FOUNDS
PENNSYLVANIA--KINDNESS TO THE INDIANS--PHILADELPHIA FOUNDED--MARYLAND,
CAROLINA AND GEORGIA SETTLED--ROGER WILLIAMS--RHODE ISLAND FOUNDED--ITS
TOLERATION.

The history of Pennsylvania as a distinct colony began in 1682. Its
founder, William Penn, was the son of Admiral Penn, who had gained many
victories for England and enjoyed the favor of the king, as well as of
the great statesmen of his time. At this time there was in England a
numerous sect called Quakers. Some of their principles were true, and
most of them were far in advance of the opinions generally entertained
in that age.

The rise of the people called Quakers is one of the memorable events
in the history of man. It marks the moment when intellectual freedom
was claimed by the people as an inalienable right. The sect had its
birth in a period of intense national activity, when zeal for reform
was invading all ranks of society, and even subverting the throne. Its
creed was summed up in one short phrase, "_The inner light or voice
of God in the soul_." Their leader, George Fox, professed to {142}
have visions from heaven. Having listened to the revelation which had
been made to his soul, he thirsted for a reform in every branch of
learning. The physician and the scientist should quit their strife of
unintelligible words and solve the appearances of nature by an intimate
study of the laws of being. The lawyers should abandon their deceit and
seek to establish justice among men according to the teachings of the
Savior. And the priests should cease to preach for hire, and seek God
in prayer as the oracle of all truth.

[Image: Fox in Discussion.]

{143} No wonder there was a great commotion. In Lancaster, forty
priests appeared against him at once. Nothing could daunt his
enthusiasm. When cast into jail among felons, he claimed of the public
tribunals a release, only to continue his exertions. If cruelly beaten,
or set in the stocks, or ridiculed as mad, he none the less proclaimed
the principles of his faith. When driven from the church, he preached
in the open air; when refused shelter at a private dwelling or humble
tavern, he slept without fear under a haystack.

His fame increased; crowds gathered like flocks of pigeons to hear
him. His voice and frame in prayer are described as the most awful and
reverent ever felt or seen. His clear convictions and glowing thoughts
delivered in plain words made him powerful among the masses and the
terror of the priests in public discussions to which he defied the
world. By degrees "the hypocrites," as the historian Barclay called
them, feared to dispute with him. The simplicity of the truth he
uttered and the plainness of his speech found such ready acceptance
among the people, "that the priests trembled and scud as he drew near,
so that it was a dreadful thing to them when it was told them, 'The man
in leathern breeches is come.'"

Far from rejecting Christianity, the Quakers insisted that they alone
followed its primitive simplicity. They believed in the unity of
truth; that there can be no contradiction between correct reason and
revelation; and that the Holy Spirit is the guide that leads into all
truth. The Quakers read the Bible not with idolatry but with delight,
for in there own souls they had a testimony that it was true. "The
scriptures," says Barclay, "are not religion but a record of it; a
declaration of the fountain, but not the fountain itself." In reading a
record of those times it might appear to one that God was then ready to
restore His Priesthood and set up His kingdom on the earth. But mankind
were not yet ready nor was there a fit place in all the inhabited
countries of the world for its establishment.

{144}

[Image: Penn's Treaty with the Indians.]

The well-known William Penn joined this sect, and by this act greatly
provoked his father's displeasure. Like Moses of old he refused the
favors and honors of the monarch, choosing {145} rather to obey what
he considered to be the truth than to enjoy all the pomp and pleasures
of the world. Space will not permit us to relate the story of his
sufferings while an exile from his father's home; how he traveled to
and fro on the continent of Europe, from the Weser to the Main, from
the Rhine to the Danube, distributing tracts, preaching to princes and
to peasants, and rebuking every attempt to enthrall the mind of man.
Before he had reached the age of twenty-five, he had thrice suffered
unjust imprisonment. To the king's messenger, who asked him to recant,
he heroically replied, "_Club-law may make hypocrites, it never can
make converts_" Single handed and alone he plead his cause before the
highest courts of England. In vain did wicked men endeavor to construe
the laws of England to his injury. After a tedious trial he was at
length acquitted, though the jurymen were fined forty marks apiece for
not bringing in a verdict of guilty. His constancy called forth the
admiration of his father. "Son William," said the dying admiral, "if
you and your friends keep to your plain way of preaching and living,
you will make an end of the priests."

At the admiral's death, William succeeded to his father's possessions.
It deeply grieved him that his Quaker brethren should endure such
wrongs as were continually heaped upon them. He, therefore, formed
the design of leading them forth to America. The king had owed Penn's
father sixteen thousand pounds, nearly equal to eighty thousand
dollars of our money. Penn offered to relinquish this claim for a
grant of land; and the king readily bestowed upon him a vast region,
stretching west from the river Delaware, to which was given the
name of Pennsylvania. Here Penn proposed to found a state, free and
self-governing. He claimed it to be his highest ambition "to make men
as free and happy as they can be." When he arrived, he proclaimed
to the people that he wished them to be governed by laws of their
own making. He was as good as his word. The people elected their own
representatives by whom a constitution was framed, and Penn signed this
charter of their liberties.

Penn also dealt justly and kindly with the Indians, and they showed a
love for him such as they bestowed on no other Englishman. {146} Soon
after his arrival, he invited the chief men of the Indian tribes to a
conference. The meeting took place beneath a huge elm-tree. The ancient
forest had long given way to the houses and streets of Philadelphia;
but a monument still points out to the stranger the scene of this
interview. They met, Penn assured them, "on the broad pathway of good
faith and good will. All was to be openness and love." And Penn meant
what he said. Strong in the power of truth and kindness, he bent the
fierce savages of the Delaware tribe to his will. They vowed to live in
love with William Penn and his children as long as the moon and the sun
should endure. Long years after, aged Indians were accustomed to come
from the distant forests and recount with deep emotion the words that
Penn had spoken to them under the old elm-tree.

The fame of Penn's settlements went abroad in all lands. An asylum
was opened for the good and oppressed of every nation. Grave and
God-fearing men from all the Protestant countries of Europe sought a
home where they might live as conscience taught them.

    "For here the exiles met from every clime,
  And spoke in friendship every distant tongue;
    Men, from the blood of warring Europe sprung,
  Were but divided by the running brook;
    And happy where no Rhenish trumpet sung,
  The blue-eyed German changed his sword to pruning-hook."

The new colony grew apace. During the first year twenty-two vessels
arrived, bringing two thousand persons. In three years Philadelphia was
a town of six hundred houses.

Thus did Penn prove himself a benefactor to his race. May we not also
consider him an instrument in the hands of God for the execution of His
purposes?

Meanwhile Maryland had been colonized by Catholics under Lord
Baltimore, in 1634. The first colonists were exiles who fled here to
escape persecution in their native land. Let it also be said to their
credit that they were the first who embodied in their laws complete
religious toleration.

A few scattering colonists had settled within the boundaries of the
Carolinas as early as 1653, and these colonies also became a refuge for
the Huguenots of France.

{147} Lastly Georgia was colonized, in 1732, by the English
philanthropist James Oglethorpe; and it also became an asylum and a
refuge for the deserving poor.

Had these states been colonized immediately after the discovery of
America, they must inevitably have brought with them the institutions
of Catholic Europe. Such, for example, as still characterize the
civilization of Mexico. Even had they been colonized a century earlier,
the colonists would not have been disciplined sufficiently in the
principles of civil liberty to have built up free and self-governing
states.

Who does not see a divine providence--a marvelous wisdom in all this?

Though the pilgrims had left their native lands, that they might enjoy
the liberty to worship God in the way which they deemed right; yet they
had not discovered that people who differed from them were as well
entitled to be tolerated as they themselves were. Simple as it seems
there are many to this day who have not found out that every one is
entitled to think for himself.

One day there stepped ashore at Boston, a young man named Roger
Williams. He was a man of culture and refinement, a lover of truth
and justice, a man of rare virtue and power. He had been an intimate
friend of Cromwell and Milton, in the bright days of the poet's youth.
Williams brought to America what was then considered strange opinions.
Long thought had satisfied him that "in regard to religious belief and
worship man is responsible to God alone."

New England society was not sufficiently advanced to receive such
sentiments. Williams had become minister at Salem where he was held in
high esteem. In time his opinions drew upon him the unfavorable notice
of the authorities; and he was brought to trial before the general
court of Massachusetts. His townsmen and congregation deserted him.
His poor wife reproached him bitterly for the evil he was bringing on
his family. Still he was firm and continued to testify against the
soul-oppression he saw around him. At length the court declared him
guilty and pronounced against him the sentence of banishment. All honor
to this brave and good man! He, of all the men of his time, saw most
clearly the beauty of {148} absolute freedom in matters of conscience.
He cheerfully left his home and wandered in the wilderness. During
the part of one winter he lived with Massasoit, the Indian chief, who
befriended him and gave him a grant of land, now included in the state
of Rhode Island. Here he laid out a city which he called Providence, in
grateful recognition of the power which had guided his steps. To-day it
is one of the most beautiful and thrifty cities in the United States.

Roger Williams cherished a very forgiving spirit towards those who sent
him into exile. Learning that the Indians were planning the destruction
of the Massachusetts colony, he boldly went among the Indians and
dissuaded them from their purpose. Thus did this good man put his life
in peril for his enemies.

Providence Plantation, as it was called, became a shelter for all who
were distressed for conscience sake; and so it has continued to the
present time. Rhode Island has no record of persecution in her history.
Massachusetts continued to drive out misbelievers. Rhode Island took
them in. When Massachusetts was convulsed with supposed witchcraft
and the horrors of witch-burning, Rhode Island gave no heed to such
delusions. In after years, Roger Williams became the president of the
colony which he had founded.

The neighboring states were at that time severely punishing the Quakers
with the lash, branding-iron and imprisonment; and they invited Rhode
Island to join in the persecution. Mr. Williams replied that he "had no
law to punish any man for his belief." He was opposed to the doctrines
of the Quakers. In his seventy-third year he rowed thirty miles in an
open boat to wage a public debate against them. In this manner, and
this only, would he resist the progress of opinions which he deemed
pernicious. Thus to the end of his life stood forth this good man's
loyalty to the absolute liberty of the human conscience. From the
foregoing, we may get some idea of the moral and social condition of
England and her colonies during the latter part of the seventeenth
century.

{149}



CHAPTER XVI.

MODERN ENGLAND AND HER COLONIES.

CONDITION OF ENGLISH SOCIETY--MANUFACTURE OF GIN AND RUM--ORIGIN OF
METHODISM--ELOQUENCE OF WHITFIELD--JOHN AND CHARLES WESLEY--REMARKABLE
TEACHINGS--ROBERT RAIKES--JOHN HOWARD--WILLIAM WILBERFORCE--MECHANICAL
INVENTIONS--GROWTH OF AMERICAN FREEDOM--THREE GREAT BATTLES--COOK'S
VOYAGES--EXTENSION OF THE ENGLISH LANGUAGE--GREATNESS OF
PITT--WASHINGTON'S EARLY LIFE--BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.

  "Westward the course of empire takes its way."

From the first settling of the North American colonies, the relations
between Europe and America were such that every great revolution
occurring in the parent country had its due effect in the colonies.

In 1688, just sixty-eight years after the sailing of the pilgrims,
another famous departure took place from the coast of Holland. It was
that of William, prince of Orange, coming to deliver England from
tyranny, and give a new course to English history. A powerful fleet and
army sailed with the prince, the wicked and foolish King James fled
from the people he had so long misruled, and William, prince of Orange,
with Mary his wife, were proclaimed joint king and queen of England.

With the revolution of 1688, a new spirit appears in England. Hitherto
English philosophy and literature were almost unknown upon the
continent. It was only after the revolution that we hear of foreigners
visiting England, learning English and seeking to understand English
life and character. Thus on the eve of the eighteenth century English
ideas took a {150} great stride forward. The people instead of the king
became the virtual rulers of the nation.

The preceding age had done its work. It had given to the world the
philosophy of Newton, the literature of Shakspeare, and Addison, Pope
and Swift, the political agitation of Cromwell, and the colonization
of America. The avenues of knowledge were thus opened to the masses.
Even the dullest and most backward minds began to have notions of
literature and the discoveries of science. The ancient forms of royalty
and chivalry had lost their prestige and stood in the shady background
of the past. A new world of citizens henceforth occupies the ground,
attracts the gaze, imposes its ideas on the public manners and stamps
its image on the minds of men. In 1709 appeared the first newspaper,
a sheet as big as a man's hand which the editor did not know how to
fill. At the present time there are more than 1,000,000,000 copies of
newspapers published in the English language annually, many of which
contain more reading matter in a single number than the whole New
Testament scriptures. With the increase of intelligence the power of
the people began to be felt.

Increased intelligence brought political reforms, and these in turn
were followed by a reform in morals and manners. During the reign of
the Stuarts the morals of the people had been extremely low. As an
illustration might be mentioned the disrespect shown to the clergy. A
parish priest was only permitted to dine at the second table, after his
superiors (?) had been served. He might fill himself with the beef and
cabbage, but did not dare to touch the better dishes until invited to
do so by the hostess. A law had been passed during the reign of Charles
II., that no clergyman should marry a servant-girl without the consent
of her mistress. Most of the prominent statesmen during the previous
half century were unbelievers in any form of religion. Such were the
irreligious tendencies of the age, that drunkenness and foul talk were
considered no reproach to Robert Walpole, prime minister of England.
Purity of life was sneered at by the nobility as "out of fashion."
For example, Lord Chesterfield, in his letters to his son (which were
designed for publication), {151} instructs him in the art of seduction,
as part of a polite education.

At the lower end of the social scale lay the masses of the extremely
poor. They were ignorant and brutal to a degree which it is hard to
conceive. The manufacture of gin and rum had been discovered in 1684;
and intemperance overran the nation as a plague. Tavern-keepers, on
their sign-boards, invited the people to come and get drunk for a
penny. For two pence they might get dead drunk, and have "a place to
lie down with no charge for straw." Much of this social degradation was
due, without doubt, to the apathy and sloth of the religious teachers.

Such was the condition of society when a remarkable religious revival
began in a small knot of Oxford students whose revolt against the
wickedness of the times expressed itself in enthusiastic religious
worship and an austere and methodical regularity of life, that gave
them the nickname of "Methodists."

Of these students, three soon attracted special attention by their
religious fervor and even extravagance. One of these, George Whitfield,
became the greatest orator. His voice was soon heard in the wildest
and most barbarous corners of the land, among the bleak moors of
Northumberland, in the dens of London, and in the dark and gloomy mines
of Cornwall. Whitfield's preaching was such as England had never heard
before, theatrical, extravagant, sometimes common-place, but winning
favor by its earnestness and deep tremulous sympathy for the sins and
sorrows of mankind.

He was no common enthusiast who could so eloquently plead the cause of
the erring and unfortunate as to draw out the last cent from the cool
and calculating Franklin, and command admiration from the fastidious
and skeptical Horace Walpole; or who could look down, from the top of
a green knoll at Kingswood, on twenty thousand colliers, grimy from
the Bristol coal-pits, and see as he preached, the tears making white
channels down their blackened cheeks.

On the rough and ignorant masses to whom they spoke, the effects of
Whitfield and his co-workers were mighty both for good and ill. Their
preaching stirred a passionate hatred in {152} the hearts of their
opponents. Their lives were often in danger; they were mobbed, ducked,
stoned and smothered with filth; but the enthusiasm they aroused among
their followers was equally intense.

Very important to the cause was Charles Wesley, a student at Oxford,
who came as the sweet singer of the movement. His hymns expressed the
fiery zeal of its converts, in lines so chaste and beautiful that
many of the cultured classes were numbered among the adherents of the
movement.

But most important of all was the elder brother, John Wesley, an
ordained minister of the Church of England, who by his learning, energy
and power of organization gave stability to the movement. No man of
that age surpassed him in self-denial and trust in God. With all his
extravagance and superstition, Wesley's mind was essentially practical
and orderly. He, beyond most men of his age, saw that he lacked divine
authority to found a church. Hence to the last he clung passionately to
the Church of England, and looked upon the sect he had formed as only a
lay society or branch in full communication with the parent church.

For a long time he would not permit his co-workers to administer the
sacrament of the Lord's supper; as he considered they did not possess
the requisite authority. Wesley saw with wonderful clearness a fact
that no one of that age perceived or, if he did, had not the moral
courage to declare. He perceived the universal as well as the total
apostasy of the so-called Christian church. In his 94th sermon he says;
"The real cause why the extraordinary gifts of the Holy Ghost were no
longer to be found in the Christian church was _because the Christians
were turned heathens again, and had only a dead form left_." In another
place he says: "A string of opinions is no more Christian faith, than
a string of beads is Christian holiness." The justifying faith which
he considered so essential and taught so earnestly, implied a personal
revelation--an inward evidence of Christianity. Thus he unconsciously yet
logically taught the insufficiency of the ancient scriptures as a guide
to salvation. It also implied the need of new and continuous revelation
as necessary for the vitality and growth of the church. Wesley
continued his labors for upwards of fifty-two {153} years, traveling
and preaching until within a short time of his death, which occurred
in his eighty-eighth year. At the time of his death, his followers
numbered more than one hundred thousand. Now they are estimated at
nearly eight millions.

[Image: John Wesley.]

It was the teachings and practices of the Puritans, the Quakers and
the Methodists that gave to England that great moral impulse which led
to the establishment of Sunday schools by Robert Raikes of Gloucester,
the reforming of prisons by John Howard, and the abolition of the
slave trade by William Wilberforce. The ardor and perseverance which
these men showed in behalf of the poor, the wronged and the afflicted,
excited a wave of human sympathy throughout the length and breadth
of the civilized world. It is from this time that may be dated the
commencement of charity schools, foundling hospitals, insane asylums
and other institutions {154} of benevolence for which English-speaking
people are now so famous.

While the moral and religious movements were in progress, others of
a political or scientific nature, were pressing forward with rapid
strides. Amid the tumult of these times, James Brindley was quietly
making England a net work of canals. Watt was silently perfecting his
invention of the steam-engine and Adam Smith was working out the great
problem of political and industrial economy, which has made England and
her colonies the leading commercial and manufacturing countries of the
world.

Meanwhile John Hargreaves, Richard Arkwright and Samuel Crompton, by
their inventions were revolutionizing the art of spinning and weaving.
However, these ingenious devices would have done but little had it not
been for the new and inexhaustible labor force of the steam-engine
which had then come into general use. One of the first effects was to
develop the iron manufactures of England. Previous to 1750, England and
her colonies imported four-fifths of their iron goods from Sweden; now
they produce more than four-fifths of all the iron used in the world.

The influence of the steam-engine and spinning jenny on the
civilization of England is beyond human calculation. Mines were
developed, manufactories established and the whole national industry
so increased that the population of England was twice doubled in less
than fifty years. At the same time agriculture was so improved that
one-sixth of the people raised food for the remainder.

While these events were transpiring in England they had their due
influence in the colonies. Europe saw for the first time a state
growing up amidst the forests of the west, where religious freedom had
become complete. Religious tolerance had been brought about by strange
circumstances--a medley of religious sects such as the world had never
seen before. New England was the stronghold of the Puritans. In some
of the southern colonies the Episcopal church was established by law
and the bulk of the settlers clung to it. The Roman Catholics formed
a large majority in Maryland. Pennsylvania was a state of Quakers.
Presbyterians and Baptists fled from {155} persecution to colonize
New Jersey; Lutherans and Moravians from Germany abounded among the
settlers of Georgia, and the persecuted Huguenots of France had fled
from their native land to the forests of Carolina. In such a chaos of
creeds, religious persecution was well nigh impossible.

As there were but few large fortunes among the colonists, so nearly all
had the same social standing and privileges. Education was general. It
was the proud boast of many of the colonies that every man and woman
could read and write.

Such was the condition of the colonies in 1748, when Montesquieu, the
wisest and most reflecting statesman of France, declared that a free,
prosperous and great people were forming in the forests of America.
The hereditary dynasties of the old world were all unconscious of the
rapid growth of this power, which was soon to involve them in its new
and prevailing influence. The hour of revolution was at hand, promising
freedom to conscience and dominion to intelligence. From the fragments
of European society--fragments that in some instances had been
considered worthless--humanity in the providence of God was building up
a self-governing and democratic dominion.

About the middle of the eighteenth century occurred three famous
battles which did much to determine the destinies of men for ages to
come. The first of these, was the great victory achieved by the English
arms on the plains of Plassey, June 23, 1757, which laid the foundation
of the empire of British India, an empire which comprises more than
one hundred and twenty millions of people. The second was the victory
of Rossbach, which determined the re-union of the German states and
laid the foundation of the present German empire. The third was the
triumph of Wolfe on the plains of Abraham, September 13, 1759, for with
it virtually began the history of the United States. France had ever
been an enemy whose dread had knit the colonists together and to the
mother country, England. By wresting Canada from her grasp and breaking
through the line with which France had barred the British colonists
from the basin of the Mississippi, Pitt laid the foundation of the
great republic of the West. {156} Hitherto the possessions of France
in North America had been twenty times as vast as those of England;
henceforth they were destined to dwindle into insignificance and
eventually become extinct.

The close of the seven years' war, which ended at the peace of Paris,
1763, was a turning point in the history of the world. England was no
longer a mere European power. Her future action lay in a wider sphere
than that of Europe. Mistress of North America, the future mistress of
India, claiming as her own the empire of the seas, Britain suddenly
towered high above rival nations whose interest and position, being on
a single continent, doomed them to comparative insignificance in the
after history of mankind.

It is this that gives William Pitt so peculiar a position among the
statesmen of the world. It was his faith, his daring--shall we not say
his inspiration?--that called the English people to a sense of the
destiny that lay before them.

With England on one side and her American colonies on the other, the
Atlantic was dwindling into a mere strait within the British realms;
but beyond it to the westward lay a vast ocean where the British flag
was almost unknown. True the Pacific ocean had been discovered by
Balboa in 1513, and crossed by Magellan in 1521. Dutch voyagers had
discovered that "Great Southern Land," which they had named New Holland
and also the northern extremity of New Zealand. But the discoveries had
remained unheeded for more than a century.

It was not till 1778 that, under Pitt's direction, Captain Cook was
sent into the Pacific ocean on a voyage of discovery. He discovered the
Sandwich Islands circumnavigated New Zealand and took possession of
Australia, or New Holland, in the name of the English king. The reports
which he published of that vast ocean and those far-off islands, of
their coral reefs, and palms, and bread-fruit, and gum trees, and
kangaroos, and tattooed warriors, awoke an interest in the minds of
the English concerning this world of wonders. They saw in all this a
vast realm opened for the expansion of the English race, and English
civilization.

{157} The extension of the English language over vast territories and
populations is without a parallel in the history of the world. Fully
one-fifth of the surface of the globe and one-fourth of its population
are under the dominion of England and the United States. The English
language is now spoken, and English and American literature is read in
every zone.

  "They spread where Winter piles deep snows on bleak Canadian plains,
  And where on green Pacific isles eternal summer reigns.
  They glad Acadia's misty coasts, Jamaica's glowing isle,
  And bide where gay with early flowers green Texan prairies smile.

  "They dwell where Californian brooks wash down their sands of gold,
  And track the Frazier's swelling flood thro' sunset valleys rolled;
  They're found in Borneo's camphor groves, on shores of fierce Malay,
  In valleys washed by Ganges' flood where Ceylon's zephyrs stray.

  "Old Albions laws, Columbia's songs rejoice the captive's limbs;
  The dark Liberian soothes her child with English cradle hymns,
  Tasmanian maids are wooed and won, in gentle Saxon speech.
  Australian boys read Crusoe's life, by Sidney's sheltered beach.

  "They speak to men so far apart, that while this praise we sing,
  Some may rejoice with autumn fruits, others with flowers of spring,
  They speak with Shakspeare's searching thoughts and Bryant's lofty mind,
  With Alfred's laws and Franklin's lore, to cheer and bless mankind."

Who does not see a marvelous wisdom in all this? The language thus
widely spread was destined to be the medium by which the gospel is to
be spread in all the nations of the earth. Who does not perceive that
the statesmanship of Pitt was one of the great instrumentalities for
the execution of the divine purposes? Like all great men, Pitt was in
advance of the age in which he lived. But England could not forget the
eminent services of him, who had done so much to promote her greatness.
The ashes of Pitt (now best known as the earl of Chatham) repose in
Westminster Abbey, the burial place of {158} the kings of England.
History will declare that among statesmen, few have left a more
stainless, none a more splendid name.

While these leading events were transpiring around them two remarkable
persons were developing in the American colonies. One of these was
George Washington, the other, Benjamin Franklin.

Washington was born in 1732. His father, a gentleman of good fortune,
died when his future illustrious son was only eleven years of age.
Upon Washington's mother devolved the care of his early education.
She was a devout woman, of excellent sense and deep affections, yet
of a temper which could brook no shadow of insubordination. Under her
rule--gentle and yet strong, George learned obedience and self-control.
In boyhood he gave remarkable promise of those excellencies which
distinguished his mature years. His person was large and powerful. He
was accustomed to labor, which gave him endurance to perform the work
that lay before him. His education was limited to the common English
branches, mathematics and land surveying. In his eighteenth year he was
employed by the government as surveyor of public lands. Many of his
measurements are still on record, and long experience has established
their unvarying accuracy. A massive intellect and an iron strength of
will were given to him, with a gentle, loving heart, dauntless courage,
and loftiness of purpose. He possessed, in a wonderful degree, clear
perceptions of his duty, and a deep insight into the wants of his time.

While Washington's boyhood was being passed on the banks of the
Potomac, Benjamin Franklin was toiling hard in the city of Philadelphia
to earn an honest livelihood. He edited a newspaper, bound books, made
ink, sold rags, soap and coffee. He also published the first American
almanac. A _facsimile_ of the title page is given on the next page.

{159}

[Image: A Facsimile of the Title Page for Poor Richard, 1773 Almanac.]

{160}

[Image: Benjamin Franklin.]

He was a thriving man, but he was not ashamed to convey along the
streets in a wheelbarrow the paper which he bought for the purpose of
his trade. As a boy, he had been studious and thoughtful. As a man, he
was prudent, sagacious and trustworthy. When he had earned a moderate
competency he {161} ceased to labor at his business. Henceforth he
labored to serve his fellow-men. Philadelphia owes to Franklin her
university, her hospital, and her first and greatest library. It was he
who discovered the identity of lightning and electricity. Before the
revolution he was sent to England to plead the cause of the colonists.
During the war he was sent as ambassador to the court of France. At the
close of the war he was appointed one of the commissioners to negotiate
a treaty of peace between the United States and Great Britain. The last
great work of his life was to aid in the forming of the constitution of
the United States. He continued in public office till within six months
of his death and in public service till within twenty-four days of it.



CHAPTER XVII.

THE EVE OF REVOLUTION.

GATHERING OF POLITICAL FORCES--GENERAL REVOLUTION--CIVIL REFORMS--DECAY
OF OLD INSTITUTIONS--ROSSEAU AND HIS WRITINGS--VOLTAIRE--HOLLAND, A
POLITICAL REFUGE--AMERICAN SETTLERS--LINES OF ALBERT B. STREET--GROWTH
OF THE COLONIES--LOVE FOR ENGLAND--CAUSES OF REVOLUTION--MANUFACTURES
FORBIDDEN--STAMP ACT--TAX ON TEA--PHILADELPHIA CONVENTION--ADDRESS TO
THE KING--APPEAL TO ENGLAND--TO CANADA--INCIDENT IN OLD SOUTH CHURCH,
BOSTON--PAUL REVERE'S RIDE.

      "Freedom, thy brow,
  Glorious in beauty though it be, is scarred
  With tokens of old wars; thy massive limbs
  Are strong with struggling. Power at thee has launched
  His bolts, and with his lightnings smitten thee.
  They could not quench the light thou hast from heaven."

Who has failed to observe on a calm summer day the elements of a storm
collecting silently, and gradually, until the whole heavens grew dark,
and the light of the sun was hid? The calm was changed into a tempest,
the lightning flashed, the thunder roared, the clouds piled up {162}
thicker and heavier until at length the storm burst, the rain fell in
torrents deluging the earth and in some cases uprooting the plants it
was designed to nourish and strengthen.

So, too, in the political world the forces gather gradually, until they
have attained sufficient power, and then burst upon the affrighted
nations in all the tumult of a terrible revolution.

There are few intelligent people in this age but what have a general
idea of the history of the world; yet how comparatively few are there
who realize the fact, that in the seventy-five years which elapsed
between 1775 and 1850 the great majority of civilized nations passed
through a great social and political change. Among the nations so
affected may be mentioned the United States, France, Spain, Portugal,
Italy, Greece, Belgium, Poland, Hungary, Turkey, Mexico, Central
America and nearly all the South American states. To this may be added
the great commotions in Russia, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Holland,
Switzerland and the states of the German empire caused by the wars of
Napoleon. In England, Ireland and Canada, wars were only averted by
civil reforms and concessions to popular rights.

For Europe this epoch was the result of the struggles of generations.
At the close of the seven years' war in 1763 the representatives of
even the Catholic powers admitted the decay of old institutions. The
Catholic monarchies headed by the pope, in their struggle against
Protestantism and free thought had encountered defeat. From this
great struggle came forth a principle of all-pervading energy. The
life-giving truth of the Reformation was the right of private judgment.
The world was rising up against superstition; the oppression of
industry was passing away. The use of reason was no longer considered
a crime, but was on the other hand, considered a duty. Ideas of the
brotherhood of man were flashing across the minds of leading men.

At this juncture a remarkable political writer made his appearance.
From the discipleship of Calvin, from the republic of Geneva, from
the abodes of poverty, Jean Jacques Rosseau came as the advocate of
the poor and the oppressed. Through him the "sons of toil" breathed
out their wrongs, {163} and a new class gained a voice in the world
of published thought. Though full of weaknesses and jealousies and
betrayed by poverty into shameful deeds, he possessed a deep and real
feeling for humanity. In an age of skepticism he solaced the ills
of life by trust in God. Fearlessly questioning all the grandeurs
of the world, he breathed the spirit of revolution into words of
flame. What though the church of Rome cursed his writings with her
ban; and parliaments burned them at the gibbet by the hangman's hand!
What though France drove him from her soil, and the republic of his
birth disowned her son! What though the wise and noble hooted at his
wildness! Yet from the woes of the world in which he had suffered,
from the wrongs of the down-trodden which he had shared, he derived an
eloquence that went to the heart of the masses of Europe. Beyond most
men of his time he saw the hand of Providence in the history of men.

  "Nor God alone in the still calm we find,
  He mounts the storm and rides upon the wind."

Institutions may crumble and governments fall, but it is only that
they may renew a better youth; the petals of the flower wither that
fruit may form. On the banks of the stream of time not a great deed
has been done by a hero, or monument raised by a nation, but tells
the story of human progress. Each people that has disappeared, every
great institution that has passed away, has been but a step in the
ladder by which humanity ascends to a higher plane. The generations
that handed the truth, from rank to rank down the ages, have themselves
become dust; but the light still increases its ever-burning flame. From
the intelligence that had been slowly ripening sprang the American
revolution. While Rosseau was putting his burning thoughts in print,
and Voltaire, the prince of scoffers, was hurling his venomed shafts
of sarcasm at the priesthood of the Roman church, farther north was
the little country, Holland, which had already gained a large share
of civil and religious liberty. Here thought ranged through the
wide domain of speculative reason; here the literary fugitive found
an asylum, and the boldest writings, which in other countries were
circulated by stealth, were openly published to the world.

{164} While the learned and thoughtful men of Europe were thinking,
the pioneers of America were acting. Nothing could restrain them from
peopling the wilderness. To be a land-owner was the ruling passion
of the New England man. In general, marriages were early and very
fruitful. The sons, as they grew up skilled in the use of the ax and
the rifle, would, one after another, move from the old homestead; and,
with a wife, a yoke of oxen, a cow and a few necessary implements,
build a small hut in the forest and by dint of industry soon win for
themselves plenty and independence. The beautiful lines of Albert B.
Street well describe the circumstances as well as the character of
the men who founded American institutions and moulded the national
character:

  "His echoing ax the settler swung
    Amid the sea-like solitude,
  And rushing, thundering down were flung
    The Titans of the wood.
  Loud shrieked the eagle as he dashed
  From out his mossy nest, which crashed
    With its supporting bough,
  And the first sunlight leaping flashed
    On the wolf's haunt below.

  "Rude was the garb, and strong the frame
    Of him who plied his ceaseless toil:
  To form the garb, the wild-wood game
    Contributed their spoil;
  The soul that warmed that frame disdained
  The tinsel gaud and glare, that reigned
    Where men their crowds collect;
  The simple fur untrimmed, unstained,
    This forest tamer decked.

  "His roof adorned a pleasant spot,
    'Mid the black logs, green glowed the grain,
  And fruits and plants the woods knew not
    Bloomed in the sun and rain.
  The smoke-wreath curling o'er the dell,
  The lowing herds--the tinkling bell,
    All made a landscape strange.
  Which was the living chronicle
    Of deeds that wrought the change.

  {165} "Humble the lot, yet his the race,
    When liberty sent forth her cry,
  Who thronged in conflict's deadliest place
    To fight--to bleed--to die;
  Who cumbered Bunker's hight of red.
  By hope through weary years were led
    And witnessed Yorktown's sun
  Blaze on a nations banner spread--
    A nation's freedom won."

A century and a half had now passed since the first colony had been
planted on American soil. The colonists were fast ripening into fitness
for independence. They had increased with marvelous rapidity. Europe
never ceased to send forth her needy thousands. America opened wide her
hospitable doors and gave assurance of liberty and comfort to all who
came. The thirteen colonies now contained a population of about three
millions.

Up to the year 1764, the Americans cherished a deep reverence and
affection for the mother country. They were proud to be considered
British subjects, and of the lofty place England held among the
nations of the earth. They gloried in the splendor of her military
achievements. They copied her manners and her fashions. Her language,
laws and literature were as fondly cherished by the colonists as by the
English themselves.

Why was it then that such a marvelous change should take place in
the minds of the American people, during the next twelve years? In
1764 the colonists loved England as their mother country. In 1776
they had learned to despise her authority. They bound themselves, by
solemn oaths, to use no article of English manufacture. They publicly
burned the Acts of the English Parliament. They even killed the king's
soldiers and cast from them forever his authority. By what terrible
magic was this change wrought so swiftly: that three millions of people
should be taught to abhor the country they once loved?

To answer this question rightly we must remember that the cause of the
colonists was one of popular rights against royal prerogative, that the
best and wisest men in England were in favor of the colonists; that
even William Pitt, the {166} greatest statesman England had ever seen,
declared openly in Parliament, "I rejoice that America has resisted."

We must also bear in mind that for many years England had governed her
American colonies harshly; and in a spirit of undisguised selfishness,
America was ruled not for her own good but for the good of English
commerce. The colonists were not allowed to export their products
except to England. No foreign ships were permitted to enter colonial
ports. Whatever were the exorbitant demands of English manufacturers or
merchants, still the colonists were not permitted to buy at a cheaper
market. Still more, certain goods, woolen for example, were not allowed
to be sent from one colony to another. The manufacture of hats was
forbidden, and even the Bible was not allowed to be printed in America.

The colonists had long borne the cost of their own government and
defense. But in that age of profuse expenditure on useless wars, the
king and nobility of England thought to gather from America's toiling
sons the means to pay for their own misrule. The Parliament of England
passed a law to tax America. The colonists replied they were willing to
vote what moneys the king required of them; but they vehemently denied
the right of any assembly, in which they were not represented, to take
from them any portion of their property. Another law was also passed
requiring a royal stamp to be placed on every legal document. Benjamin
Franklin had been sent to England by the colonists. He went to plead
their cause before the British government. He told them plainly that
the colonists could not submit to such taxation. The act was to come
in force on the first of November, 1763. On that day the church bells
were tolled, and the people wore the aspect of those on whom some heavy
calamity had fallen. Not one of the stamps was ever sold in America.
Without stamps mercantile transactions ceased to be binding, notes were
not legal, marriages were null. Yet the business of life went on. Men
married; they bought; they sold--illegally, because without stamps; but
no harm came of it.

England heard with amazement that America refused to obey the law. The
great statesman, Pitt, denounced the act, {167} and, at length, it was
repealed. The repeal of the stamp act only delayed for a little the
fast-coming crisis.

It was during this agitation that the colonists first felt the need of
a commercial and political union. The idea of a general congress of the
states was suggested, which soon afterwards met in the city of New York.

The king of England was still determined to tax America, and soon
levied a tax on tea. The people determined they would drink no more tea
rather than pay the tax. One day ships loaded with taxed tea arrived
in Boston harbor. There was a great commotion; the men ran together to
hold council. It was Sunday, and the people of Boston were very strict,
yet here was an emergency in the presence of which all ordinary rules
were suspended. The crisis had come at length. If that tea was landed,
it would be sold; it would be used, and American liberty would become a
by-word upon the earth.

The brave and liberty-loving Samuel Adams was the leading man of Boston
at that time. He was a man in middle life just forty-two years of age,
of cultivated mind and stainless reputation, a powerful speaker and
writer, and a man in whose sagacity and moderation all men trusted. He
resembled Cromwell in some particulars--his love of liberty, undaunted
courage and trust in God. He was among the first to see that there was
no resting place short of independence. He said: "Our forefathers were
driven from the land of their birth in the cause of religious liberty.
They made themselves homes in the wilds of America. We have earned a
competence and are self-sustaining. We are free and need no king but
God." The men of Boston felt the power of his resolute spirit and
manfully followed where Samuel Adams led. Several days of excitement
and discussion followed. People flocked in from the neighboring towns.
The time was spent mainly in political meetings. At Fanueil Hall, in
the churches and at the market place, the rights of the people were
discussed. One day a meeting was held and the excited people continued
in hot debate till the shades of evening fell. At length Samuel Adams
stood up in the dimly lighted church and announced: "This meeting can
do nothing more to save the country." With a stern shout the meeting
broke up. Fifty men disguised {168} as Indians hurried down to the
wharf, each man with a hatchet in his hand. The crowd followed, and
stood on the shore in silence while the so-called Indians went on
board the ship, broke open the chests of tea and threw them and their
contents into the sea. No wonder King George was in a rage. No wonder
that he demanded that the guilty parties, if they could be found,
should be sent to England for trial. The great statesman, William Pitt,
also called the Earl of Chatham, pleaded for measures of conciliation;
but all in vain. General Gage with four regiments was sent to Boston.
He threw up fortifications and lay as in a hostile city. The colonists
appointed a day of fasting and prayer. They knew that their cause was
just. They looked to Him for protection, who "holds the nations in the
hollow of His hand." They knew that He, who had guided them across
the rolling deep and had preserved them in the wilderness, could also
protect them from the rage and avarice of wicked men. They also formed
themselves into military companies. They occupied themselves with
drill. They laid up stores of ammunition. Most of them had muskets and
could use them. He who had no musket, now got one. They hoped that
civil war might be averted, but there was no harm in being ready.
While these things were going on in Boston, a congress of delegates
had met in Philadelphia and were busy discussing measures in regard
to the troubles that were thickening around them. Twelve colonies
were represented but Georgia, the youngest and feeblest colony, still
paused timidly on the brink of the perilous enterprise. Some of the
truly great men of America met in that congress. Of it the great Earl
of Chatham said: "For genuine sagacity, for singular moderation, for
solid wisdom the congress of Philadelphia shines unrivalled." That
quaint old building where they met became one of the spots ever dear
to the patriot's heart. Among the famous men assembled there were
George Washington whose massive sense and copious knowledge attracted
attention, and made him a guiding power, and Patrick Henry, then a
young man. He brought to the council a wisdom beyond his years, and
a fiery eloquence, which, to some of his hearers, seemed almost more
than human. He had already shown that he was {169} unfitted for farming
or merchandising. He was now to prove that he could utter words which
would sweep over a continent, thrill men's hearts like the most sublime
strains of music, and rouse them up to high and noble deeds. There also
was Richard Henry Lee, with his bewitching voice, his ripe scholarship,
and rich stores of historical and political knowledge, which would have
graced the highest assemblies of the old world. Nor should we forget
to mention the noble-minded farmer, John Dickinson, whose published
letters had done so much to form the public sentiment. His enthusiastic
love of England was now overborne by a sense of wrong. And last, but by
no means least, we may place on the list the name of Benjamin Franklin,
the sage philosopher, the practical scientist, the shrewd diplomatist,
the incorruptible patriot, the wise philanthropist. Such were some of
the men whom God raised up to mould the character of the infant nation.

Still they did not wish for separation. They wished to have their
wrongs redressed and continue British subjects. They drew up a
narrative of their wrongs. They implored King George to remove those
grievances. They even addressed the people of Great Britain, as
subjects of the same empire, as men possessing common sympathies and
common interests; yet they added that "they would not be 'hewers of
wood and drawers of water' to any nation in the world." Had all the
colonists been Englishmen or descendants of Englishmen no more could
have been expected. When we recollect that they had been gathered from
many nations and different climes, their subserviency to the interests
of the British empire is remarkable. The colonists even appealed to
their fellow-colonists in Canada for aid and sympathy. But Canada,
newly conquered from France, was peopled almost wholly by Frenchmen.
They were strangers to the religious struggles through which the
more southern colonists had passed. And so from Canada there came no
response of sympathy or help.

King George now determined to reduce the colonists to obedience. All
trade with the colonies was forbidden. No ship of any nation was
permitted to enter American ports or bring supplies to the settlers in
America. In justice to the {170} English people it should be said, that
in those days they had no control over the government of their country.
All this was managed for them by a few great families. Their allotted
part was to toil hard, pay their taxes, and be silent. If they had been
permitted to speak, their voice would have been on the side of popular
rights. They would have vindicated the men who asserted the right of
self-government--a right which the great mass of Englishmen were not to
enjoy for many a long year after.

Two incidents occurred about this time which well illustrate the
spirit of the people. It was the Sabbath morning before the battle of
Lexington. The scene of the first is the Old South Church, itself rich
with the mementos of the past. Its walls are lined with monuments. The
burying-ground around the church is a picturesque spot and was first
used about 1660. The trees interweave their branches above the tombs,
and only pencil-rays of sunlight break the broad, cool shadows of the
spot. The Boston branch of the Winslow family rests here, and here also
sleeps the famous Mary Chilson, who is said to have been the first
to step on shore from the Mayflower. She died in 1679. Here lie the
remains of Governor John Winthrop; Hon. John Philips, the first mayor
of the city; Robert Treat Paine, one of the signers of the Declaration
of Independence; and many others among which should not be forgotten
the name of Paul Revere.

At this church the governor of the colony and other British government
officials usually attended. On this beautiful April Sabbath morning
they had come as usual; and the happy yet determined people were
quietly talking and loitering among the graves of their ancestors. At
length the pastor came, and they followed him into the church. The hymn
they sang is known as the ninety-fourth psalm. It commences:

  "O Lord our God, to whom alone, all vengeance doth belong;
  O mighty God, who vengeance ownest, shine forth avenging wrong,
  Thy folk they break in pieces, Lord, thine heritage oppress,
  The widow they and stranger slay, and kill the fatherless."

The pastor's text was Psalms xlvi., 1: "God is our refuge and strength,
a very present help in trouble.

{171} He spoke of the wrongs the colonists had endured, the position
they held in regard to posterity, and the responsibility which rested
upon them to plant the institutions of liberty for the benefit of
future generations. Warming with his theme, he uttered sentences which
caused the hearts of foes to quake and the hearts of friends to glow
and burn within them. Standing on the platform of truth and right, he
dared to hurl defiance at a tyrant king.

The governor, Berkley, interrupted the speaker, and, calling him a
traitor, demanded that he should cease.

Some of the militia of Boston foreseeing the danger of the daring
speaker had followed him to the church, and already stood in the
vestibule. Just at that moment the trumpet sounded, the drums beat and
the great church-bell rang out its clarion notes calling the citizens
to arms. Such was the spirit of the people that the governor sought in
vain to stay their indignation which swept like a flood over the land.
With the Puritans liberty was a part of their religion.

The other incident occurred on the eve of the battle of Lexington.

Early in April 1775, General Gage learned that considerable stores of
ammunition were collected at the village of Concord, eighteen miles
from Boston, and he determined to capture them. Late on the night of
April 18th, eight hundred soldiers set out on this errand. The patriots
observed that there was something more than ordinary in progress.
Companies of soldiers were massed on Boston common under pretense of
learning a new military exercise.

Doctor, afterwards General, Joseph Warren, who fell at Bunker Hill,
received notice of the design of the troops, and at once sent Paul
Revere to arouse the country. It was agreed that a signal light should
be placed in the tower of the Old North Church to notify the watchers
of the direction the troops had taken--one if by land, two if by sea.
Paul Revere then rowed across the stream to Charlestown. He was not a
moment too soon. General Gage heard that his plans were discovered, and
orders were at once given that no person should be allowed to leave
Boston. Had these orders been given five minutes sooner, the whole
course of the revolution {172} might have been changed. As it was
Revere reached the other side in safety. Having obtained a fleet and
sure-footed steed he stood impatiently watching the belfry tower of the
Old North Church. Meanwhile Warren, in disguise, wandered through the
darkness and listened with eager ears till he heard the measured tread
of the grenadiers marching down to the boats. Then with lantern in
hand he climbed up into the belfry and a gleam of light shone over the
dark and silent city. Paul Revere sprang into the saddle, but paused
a moment and gazed until a second light gleamed out distinctly and
clearly. Then

  "A hurry of hoofs in a village street,
  A shape in the moonlight, a bulk in the dark,
  And beneath from the pebbles in passing, a spark
  Struck out by the steed that flies fearless and fleet;
  That was all! And yet thro' the darkness and gloom
  The fate of a nation was riding that night,
  And the spark struck out by the steed in his flight
  Kindled the land into flame with its heat.
  It was twelve by the village clock
  When he crossed the bridge into Medford town.
  It was one by the village clock
  When he rode into Lexington.
  He saw the gilded weathercock swim
  In the moonlight as he passed,
  And the meeting-house windows blank and bare
  Gaze at him with a spectral glare
  As if they already stood aghast,
  At the bloody work they would look upon.
  You know the rest. In the books you have read
  How the British regulars fired and fled,
  How the farmers gave them ball for ball,
  From behind each fence and farm-yard wall,
  Chasing the red-coats down the lane,
  Then crossing the fields to emerge again
  Under the trees, at the turn of the road,
  And only pausing to fire and load.
  So through the night rode Paul Revere;
  And so through the night went his cry of alarm
  To every Middlesex village and farm--
  A cry of defiance and not of fear--
  A voice in the darkness, a knock at the door,
  {173} A word that shall echo for evermore!
  For, borne on the night wind of the past
  Through human history to the last
  The good shall pray and by faith shall hear
  A delivering foot-fall as of that steed
  And a midnight message as of Paul Revere."



CHAPTER XVIII.

THE BOYS OF '76.

BATTLE OF LEXINGTON--OFFICERS CHOSEN--A YEAR OF DISCUSSION--DECLARATION
OF INDEPENDENCE--SPIRIT OF ENGLISH NOBILITY--DEFEAT OF AMERICAN
FORCES--SUCCESS AT TRENTON AND PRINCETON--SUFFERINGS AT VALLEY
FORGE--WASHINGTON'S PRAYER--BURGOYNE'S CAMPAIGN--ARRIVAL OF LA
FAYETTE--ARNOLD'S TREASON--ANDRE'S DEATH--SIEGE OF YORKTOWN--CLOSE
OF THE WAR--TREATY OF PEACE--ARMY DISBANDED--WASHINGTON RESIGNS
HIS COMMISSION--CONSTITUTIONAL CONVENTION--WASHINGTON ELECTED
PRESIDENT--HIS DEATH--HIS TOMB.

With the battle of Lexington the war of the Revolution may be said
to commence. Henceforth the colonies were united. Georgia no longer
hesitated, but sent her delegates to the continental Congress.
Resolutions were unanimously passed to provide for the defense of
the country. But it was not till after the battle of Bunker Hill
that the people favored independence. When the tidings of the battle
arrived, Patrick Henry exclaimed: "This was needed to rouse the country
to action." On the same day Congress appointed George Washington
commander-in-chief of the colonial forces. On the day following it
elected its four major-generals. {174} From deference to Massachusetts,
for the noble part she had taken, the first of these was Artemas
Ward. The second was Charles Lee, the son of an English officer, the
third was Philip Schuyler, of New York; the fourth was Israel Putnam,
of Connecticut. Thus the country took up arms with only one general
officer, who drew to himself the trust and love of the country.

Washington immediately accepted the position and wrote to his brother:
"I bid adieu to every kind and domestic ease, and embark on a wide
ocean, boundless in its prospect, and in which, perhaps, no safe harbor
is to be found."

[Image: George Washington.]

Trumbull, the governor of Connecticut, wrote to him: "Now be strong and
very courageous; may the God of the armies of Israel give you wisdom
and fortitude and cover your head in the day of battle and danger." To
this Washington replied: "The cause of our common country calls us both
to an active and dangerous duty; divine Providence, which wisely orders
the affairs of men, will enable us to discharge it with fidelity and
success."

Such were the sentiments which animated the colonists in June, 1775.
A year of discussion and anxiety followed, during {175} which a
remarkable pamphlet was published, entitled, "Common Sense." The
writer, who embodied in words the vague longing of the people, mixed
with crude notions of his own, was Thomas Paine, the son of an English
Quaker, and, at that time, a little under forty years of age. In after
years he became a profligate and a reviler of the scriptures, yet, at
that time, his writings did much to prepare the American people for
self-government.

However, it was not until June, 1776, that the colonists gave up the
hope of reconciliation. At that time the Assembly of Virginia issued a
famous circular entitled, "The Rights of Man." The leading principles
which it taught were, that "government ought to be instituted for the
benefit of the people; that freedom of speech and of the press should
never be interfered with; and that religion can be directed only by
reason and conviction, not by fraud or violence." A month later,
July 4th, 1776, the continental Congress issued THE DECLARATION OF
INDEPENDENCE. And for the support of this declaration they added: "With
a firm reliance on the protection of DIVINE PROVIDENCE, we mutually
pledge to each other, our lives, our fortunes and our sacred honor."

Thus the youthful nation, as it took its place among the powers
of the world, proclaimed its faith in the truth and reality and
unchangeableness of freedom, virtue and right. The heart of Jefferson,
in writing the declaration, and of Congress in adopting it, beat for
all humanity. The assertion of right was made for all nations and
for all coming generations. It was addressed to all mankind and was
destined to make the circuit of the world. As it passed by the despotic
countries of Europe, and the astonished people read with mingled
surprise and joy, that "all men are created equal," and have an equal
right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, they started as
from the sleep of years; like those, who have been exiles from their
native land from childhood, start up when they suddenly hear the dimly
remembered accents of their mother tongue.

When the news of the declaration of independence reached England the
spirit of the nobility was vehement against the Americans. Had the
decision of the conflict hung on the {176} strength of armies alone,
the colonists could not have gained the victory; but it involved the
interests of Europe's toiling millions, and brought into action ideas
which had hitherto no opportunity for expression, and forces which
until then had no sphere of action. The principles that gave life to
the new institutions pervaded history like a prophecy, and seemed
like the realizing of the golden age of which the poets dreamed. The
most profound thinkers and most intense lovers of the race saw in
America's future an opportunity for man's higher development; the
spiritual-minded saw in the history and circumstances of America the
wonder-working and controlling hand of Providence.

The history of the military campaigns of 1776 and 1777, are too well
known to need repetition here. The Americans were beaten in every
attack made upon them, from the battle of Bunker Hill, June 17, 1775,
to the battle of Fort Mifflin, October 22, 1777. At Cambridge they
had no powder, yet their courage and perseverance held out. They lost
Long Island, New York, Fort Washington and more than three thousand
men. They fled through New Jersey followed by the victorious English.
The American army kept on dwindling and shrinking till it comprised
scarcely seven thousand men, ill armed, unpaid, ill clad and unfed.

During those two years and four months the only battles, that were
precursors of success and gave renewed hope and vigor to the patriot
cause, were the brilliant successes at Trenton and Princeton.

{177}

[Image: Washington Crossing the Delaware.]

It was the night before Christmas. The British lay waiting fur the
Delaware river to freeze over, that they might again pursue Washington
and his little band. Meanwhile the Americans collected all the boats
up and down the river for seventy miles. After dark they commenced to
cross the river. The night was dark and tempestuous, and the weather
so intensely cold that two of the soldiers were frozen to death. Yet
amidst the floating ice and gusts of wind they fearlessly rowed across
the river. At day-break Christmas morning they attacked the astonished
royalists. Three times as many prisoners were taken as the number of
the American troops engaged. The Americans then recrossed the river
taking the {178} prisoners with them. A week later, Washington made
another night march and surprised the British at Princeton, capturing
prisoners and making good his escape.

These exploits, inconsiderable as they may seem, greatly raised the
spirits of the American people. When triumphs like these were possible,
under circumstances so discouraging, there was no need to despair.

Though the British advanced on Philadelphia and took possession of it,
still there was a feeling of insecurity in the British army. They knew
not what moment they might be attacked.

Notwithstanding these successes many of the American officers left
the army in disgust. The nation could not pay her soldiers and made
no promise of future indemnity. The British had full possession of
New York, and were rioting and feasting at Philadelphia. Meanwhile
Washington with his little army had retreated to a secluded place among
the Pennsylvania hills, which was known by the name of Valley Forge.

As the men moved toward the spot selected for their winter
resting-place, they had no clothes to cover their nakedness, blankets
to lie on, nor tents to sleep under. For the want of shoes, their
marches through frost and snow might be traced by the blood from their
feet, and they were almost as often without provisions as with them.

An extract from one of Washington's letters to Congress may not be out
of place: "We have this day no less than two thousand eight hundred and
ninety-eight men unfit for duty, because they are barefoot or otherwise
naked. Our whole strength in continental troops amounts to no more than
eight thousand two hundred men. Since the fourth instant, owing to
hardships and exposures, our numbers have decreased nearly two thousand
men. Numbers are obliged to sit all night by the fires; or sleep on a
cold, bleak hill, under frost and snow, without clothes or blankets."

All this time the British soldiers in Philadelphia were well
provided for; the officers were living in luxury at the expense
of the inhabitants. The days were spent in pastime, the nights in
entertainments.

{179} It was at this period of the war--the darkest through which
the nation ever passed--that the following incident occurred. It was
observed that each day after Washington had visited the hospital
tents and administered to the sick whatever necessities or comforts
he had in his power to bestow, he retired into the forest at some
distance from the camp. Curiosity prompted an individual, named Isaac
Pitts, to follow him. There, at the foot of a large tree, with head
uncovered, kneeling in the snow, was seen the commander-in-chief of
the American armies, engaged in prayer before God. With an anxious
and burdened mind--a mind conscious of its need of divine support and
consolation--Washington went and rolled those mighty burdens--too heavy
for him to bear unaided--upon the arm of Omnipotence. Isaac Pitts
related what he had seen and heard, and on a subsequent day at least
three persons beheld the venerated "father of his country," at prayer
before his God.

It is recorded in Matthew vi., 6: "But thou, when thou prayest, enter
into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father
which is in secret; and thy Father, which seeth in secret shall reward
thee openly." May we not believe that the high moral courage which
dared greater perils than the whistling of bullets; that will of
mighty strength which having chosen the right, though unpopular, never
deviated from it; that calm self-command, which bore up under the
greatest reverses and still preserved its equanimity amidst the taunts
of enemies and censure of friends--may we not believe that these things
were among the open rewards of secret prayer?

From that time forward success seems to have attended the American
arms. Meanwhile the tidings of American heroism and suffering had
reached the old world and thrilled the hearts of the lovers of liberty
in Europe. Prominent among these was the Marquis de la Fayette, a young
French nobleman, then scarcely nineteen years of age, who offered to
serve in the American army, without pension or allowance. The king of
France dreaded the growth of civil and political liberty; yet he could
not withstand the temptation to wreak a terrible vengeance on England
for having wrested Canada from his {180} grasp. He sent a fleet and
army to America, which greatly aided the cause of Independence. Thus
did the rage of wicked men further the designs of Providence.

While Washington was still hemmed in among the hills of Pennsylvania,
the British general, Burgoyne, had marched from Canada into the heart
of New England. At his approach every man took down his musket from
the wall and hurried to the front. Little discipline had they, but a
resolute purpose and a sure aim. Difficulties thickened around the
fated army.

[Image: Scene of Burgoyne's Surrender.]

At length, Burgoyne found himself at Saratoga. It was now October.
Heavy rains fell. Provisions were growing scanty. Gradually it became
evident that the British were surrounded. Night and day a circle of
fire encompassed them. Burgoyne called his officers together. There
was but one thing to do and it was done. The British army surrendered.
Nearly six thousand brave men, in sorrow and in shame, laid down their
arms. The men who took them were mere peasants. No two of them were
dressed alike. These grotesque American {181} warriors behaved towards
their conquered enemies with true nobility. General Gates, the American
commander, kept his men strictly within their lines, that they might
not witness the piling of the British arms. No taunt was offered, no
look of disrespect was directed against the fallen. All were mute in
astonishment and pity.

[Image: Meeting Place of Andre and Arnold.]

One of the saddest incidents of the war, was the tragic fate of Major
Andre. The Americans had a strong fortress at West Point, on the
Hudson river. The English desired to {182} obtain this place, as its
possession would give them command of the Hudson river, up which their
ships might sail more than a hundred miles. But that fort, sitting
impregnably on rocks, two hundred feet above the river, was hard to
win. Benedict Arnold, a proud and ambitious American officer, was in
command of this post. Loving money more than duty, he determined to
sell this fortress to the English. He opened negotiations with Sir
Henry Clinton, then in command of the English at New York, who sent
Major Andre to arrange the terms of the transfer.

At midnight Major Andre landed from a British ship at a lonely place,
where Arnold awaited him. Their conference lasted so long, that it
was deemed unsafe for Andre to return to the ship. It was determined
that the next night he should attempt, in disguise, to reach New York
by land. The pass given to him by Arnold, permitted him to go through
the American lines. His danger might now be considered at an end, and,
under cover of the darkness, he rode cheerfully on his lonely journey,
till he came to a small stream. Thick woods on each side made the
darkness still more gloomy. Suddenly three men stepped from among the
trees and ordered him to halt. Thinking them to be friends, he told
them he was a British officer on very important business. Alas for
Andre! they were Americans. Andre was searched, and in his boots were
discovered Arnold's drawings of West Point. The men knew then that he
was a spy. He vainly offered them a large sum of money, but the men
nobly refused to sell their liberty and their country for gold. Andre
was tried, condemned, and, ten days after, executed.

His death caused deep sensation throughout the army and England. Men in
England began to inquire into the causes of this terrible, fratricidal
war.

While the British general, Clinton, was holding New York, Lord
Cornwallis was fortifying himself in Yorktown, Virginia. The French
fleet sailed for the Chesapeake bay, and Washington decided to act in
concert with the French, and lay siege to Yorktown. The bombarding
was carried on with extraordinary energy. In a few days the defenses
lay in utter ruins. Cornwallis determined to evacuate Yorktown and
join Clinton {183} at New York. One night he began to embark his men
in order to cross the York river and set out on his desperate march.
A violent storm arose and scattered his boats. All hope was now at an
end. In about a fortnight from the opening of the siege, the British
army, eight thousand strong, laid down its arms.

Well might the colonists rejoice for their long and bitter struggle was
about to close. Eight years had passed since the first blood was shed
at Lexington. The representatives of the English people had learned
the causes of the American revolution, and refused to continue the
fratricidal war. The independence of the United States was acknowledged
and the British forces were withdrawn.

On the 30th of November, 1782, a treaty of peace was signed at
Versailles, between the commissioners, Benjamin Franklin, John Adams
and John Jay, appointed by the Congress of the United States and those
of Great Britain. The treaty was not a compact imposed by force, but
a perpetual settlement of all that had been called in question. By
doing this act of justice to her former colonies, England rescued her
own liberties from imminent danger, and gave a pledge of liberty to
her other dependencies. That selfish colonial policy, which had led to
the cruel and unnatural war, was laid aside forever. Great Britain was
henceforth the mother of nations--the great colonizing power--destined
to found colonies in every quarter of the globe, and sow the islands of
the ocean with the seeds of freedom.

For the United States, the war which began on Lexington Green, ended
with the independence and possession of a country, which has increased
till it is now thirty times larger than the parent state.

"The boys of '76" had fought their last battle. December 4th, 1783,
Washington came to disband the army. Many of the soldiers had
been home by permission. They now came to bid farewell to their
commander-in-chief, and then return to their great work of building
a nation. Washington and his soldiers met for the last time. No more
beating of drums or roar of cannon; no more weary marches or the clash
of arms. They had fought side by side, and the memories of {184} those
conflicts could never be effaced. Washington said: "With a heart full
of love and gratitude, I now take leave of you, most devoutly wishing,
that your latter days may be as prosperous and happy, as your former
ones have been glorious and honorable."

The officers then took his hand. There were tears upon his cheek, and
the officers felt a choking in their throats. They passed out of doors
down to the ferry. Washington stepped into a boat, took off his hat and
waved a farewell. The oars of the rowers soon bore him from New York to
the New Jersey side.

At noon on the 20th of December, he stood in the old hall of the state
house at Annapolis, in the presence of the Congress, which had called
him from his quiet home eight years before, to take command of the
armies of the United States. Now he was to resign it.

He said: "I commend the interests of our country to the protection
of Almighty God, and those who have the superintendence of them to
His holy keeping. Having finished the work assigned me, and bidding
an affectionate farewell to this august body, under whose order I
have so long acted, I here offer my commission and take leave of all
employments of public life."

Thus did Washington gladly return to his home on the Potomac.
The simple grandeur of his character was now revealed beyond the
possibility of misconception. Afterwards he was twice elected
president; yet never abused the trust reposed in him. There were many
who would have made him king. He trampled on their offer, and went back
to his fields of corn and quiet haunts at Mount Vernon. The grandest
act of his public life was to give up power; the most magnanimous deed
of his private life, was to liberate his slaves.

During the Revolution most of the states had adopted written codes
or constitutions on which all their civil laws were based. They were
virtually, at that time, thirteen independent states. Congress had but
little authority; could not enforce laws or collect taxes. A general
constitution was needed, which would fuse them into one nationality,
and control their conflicting interests.

{185}

[Image: Mount Vernon.]

In 1787, fifty-five delegates met in Philadelphia. They came together
to devise means for perpetuating the liberty they had so dearly won.
Washington was appointed to preside over the Convention; Thomas
Jefferson, Patrick Henry, Alexander Hamilton and many other wise
men were there. Benjamin Franklin brought to this--his latest and
greatest task--the ripe experience of eighty-two years. There were
many perplexing questions to be settled. Some of the states were
large, others small: ought the small ones to have equal voice in the
government with the large ones? They decided that Congress should
consist of a Senate and House of Representatives--two senators from
each state, no matter what its size or number of population; but the
representatives were to be elected according to population. For four
months the delegates discussed the momentous issues that came before
them. They sat with closed doors; the world will never know how wise
or foolish, how eloquent or angry were their words. At {186} one time
it seemed impossible to reconcile their differences. Benjamin Franklin
proposed that the blessing of God should be asked upon their labors.
From that time forward, prayer was offered each morning, and greater
unanimity prevailed in counsel. A spirit of concession was manifest,
and a willingness to give up their private interests for the general
good. {187} Thus did the Spirit of God act on the hearts of the
founders of this nation.

[Image: The Tomb of Washington.]

At length they embodied their labors in a written constitution, which,
by a vote of the people, became, in 1789, the supreme law of the land.
With few amendments the original constitution remains in full force
now, receiving, as it increases in age, the growing reverence of right
minded people.

Washington was the first president. He took the oath of office April
30th, 1789, in the presence of a vast multitude. He served eight
years, and then retired again to Mount Vernon, where he died in the
sixty-eighth year of his age, December 15, 1799. His countrymen mourned
him with a sorrow, sincere and deep. Their reverence for him has not
diminished with the progress of the years. To this day the steamers,
which ply upon the Potomac, strike mournful notes as they sweep past
Mount Vernon, where Washington spent the happiest years of his life,
and where he now reposes.



CHAPTER XIX.

PROGRESS OF LIBERTY IN EUROPE.

INFLUENCE OF LA FAYETTE--DESPOTISM IN FRANCE--THE BASTILE--CORRUPTIONS
OF THE CHURCH--COMMENCEMENT OF THE REVOLUTION--THE MARSEILLAISE--ITS
WONDERFUL INFLUENCE--REIGN OF TERROR--NAPOLEON BONAPARTE--HIS WONDERFUL
CAREER--JEWISH SANHEDRIM--FALL OF NAPOLEON--HIS DEATH--PROGRESS OF
LIBERTY.

When the war of independence was over La Fayette returned to France.
He was the lightning-rod by which the current of republican sentiments
flashed from America to Europe. He was the hero of the hour. A man
{188} who had helped to set up a republic in America, was a dangerous
element for old despotic France to receive into her bosom. With the
charm of a great name, immense wealth and boundless popularity to aid
him, he everywhere urged that men should be free and self-governing.
The influence of La Fayette was soon apparent.

The people of France were living under a government which had come
down from the feudal ages. They wished to follow the example of the
United States, but how could this be accomplished? The king could do
as he pleased--make war, build fleets, tax the people, even send men
to prison when charged with no crime, keeping them in prison till they
became old and gray-haired, or until death set them free. Of all the
gloomy prisons of France, the Bastile was the most horrible. Its dark,
deep dungeons were ever dripping with water and alive with vermin. No
straggling ray of light ever entered them The floor was covered with
mud and slime and the bones of victims who had died of starvation.

Louis XV., king of France was accustomed to sign his name to blank
letters and give them to his friends to fill in as they pleased the
names of those they wished to punish. One day, the king wanted money,
and demanded $120,000 of M. Massot. "I cannot pay it," he replied.
"Into the Bastile with him," cried the king, and ordered his goods to
be seized. M. Catalan was very rich. The king cast him into the Bastile
and he did not get out till he handed over $1,200,000! Madame de
Pompadour, the mistress of the king, ruled France, and woe to him who
provoked her displeasure! M. Latude, twenty years old, offended her,
and the great door of the Bastile closed upon him. The years rolled on,
Madame de Pompadour and the king went down to the grave, yet M. Latude
was still a prisoner in the Bastile. Thus for sixty years did Louis
XV., plunder and imprison the people of France.

The nobility, the priests and the officers of the government paid no
taxes, but, on the other hand, received great revenues from the people.
They had nothing to do except to eat, drink, attend balls or hunting
parties and play cards. They lived in fine castles, and had beautiful
parks, gardens and hunting-grounds. The tax collectors came several
times a year to {189} the poor man's home, but never to the castle.
Of every sixteen dollars produced from the land by the hard-working
peasants, the king took four, the priests took four, and the nobleman
who owned the land took five, leaving only three for the poor man and
his family. Meanwhile Louis XVI. succeeded to the throne.

The church was as corrupt as the king. The priests lived luxuriously
on the revenue wrung from the toiling people. They charged the people
enormous fees for every service, for baptism, marriage, burial, and
masses for the dead. From the cradle to the grave it was one continual
extortion.

Such was the condition of the people when La Fayette presented to the
National Assembly a Declaration of Rights. It resembled the Declaration
of Independence in many particulars, and declared that all men are
free and equal. It was on Saturday, July 11th, 1789, that La Fayette
presented the Declaration of Rights. Sunday came, and the troops were
marching. The king had resolved to disperse the National Assembly, and
if the people resisted to mow them down with cannon balls. A great
crowd assembled in the Palais Royal Garden. They eagerly asked "What is
to be done?" A young man named Camille Desmoulins, sprang upon a table,
with a pistol in each hand to defend himself. "To arms! to arms!" he
cried, "we must defend ourselves!" He plucked a green leaf and put it
in his hat-band, for a plume. The people followed his example. They had
no arms, but there were muskets in the great arsenal, called the Hotel
des Invalides. They broke it open and armed themselves. The cry rung
through the streets, "Down with the Bastile!" They rushed to the gloomy
prison and planted their cannon to batter down the gates. The guards in
the Bastile were heart and soul with the people. They hung out a white
flag, and the prison was surrendered. Then came forth to the light of
day the emaciated victims who had been so long immured in its filthy
dungeons.

A duke rode to the king's palace at Versailles to tell the news. "It is
a revolt," exclaimed the king. The duke replied, "Nay, sire, it is a
revolution." The deluge of blood had come. Revengeful men were roaming
the streets of Paris murdering the nobles and the clergy. The National
Assembly ordered {190} the Bastile to be torn down, and the people
leveled it to the ground.

In Strasburg, was a young man named Rouget de l'Isle. One day he
was dining with his friend Dietrich, and they talked of liberty and
equal rights. After dinner, he went to his chamber, sat down to the
clavichord and began to play and sing. His soul was on fire for liberty
for France. He seemed to be wrought upon by a higher power. Words came,
and with them a strange, wild melody. He did not know which came first.
He sang and played, and played and sang, and felt a strange delight. At
length his head fell upon his breast: he was asleep. The morning sun
was shining in his face when he awoke and the song was still stirring
in his heart. He called in his friend Dietrich to hear it, he liked it
well, and other friends were called in to hear it. A young lady sat
down to the clavichord and played while Rouget de l'Isle sang:

  "Ye sons of freedom, wake to glory!
    Hark! hark! what myriads bid you rise!
  Your children, wives and grand-sires hoary,
    Behold their tears and hear their cries!

  "Shall hateful tyrants, mischief breeding,
    With hireling host, a ruffian band,
  While peace and liberty lie bleeding,
    Affright and desolate the land?

  "Do you not hear the prisoners moaning?
    Arise ye brave, the sword unsheath,
  'Neath tyrants yoke no longer groaning,
    Resolved on liberty or death."

The peculiar genius of the French language, as well as the strange
versification of the song, will not permit of an exact translation.

For the benefit of those of our readers who understand the French
language we give one of the stanzas as originally written:

  "_Quoi! des cohortes etrangeres,
     Feraient la loi dans nos foyers,
  Quoi! ces phalanges mercenaires
     Terrasseraient nos fiers gueriers. {191}
  Grand Dieu! par des mains enchainees,
     Nos fronts sous le joug se plieraient,
     De vils despotes deviendraient,
  Les maitres de nos destinees_.

In a few hours all Strasburg was singing it. It went from village to
village, from city to city, from province to province, and became
known as the _Marseillaise_, or national song of France, which above
all other songs ever written has stirred the hearts of men. Great
events took place. The king of France and his beautiful queen, Maria
Antoinette, were beheaded. A republic was started, but was soon
overthrown, and the government seized by blood-thirsty villains. More
than a million people perished by the guillotine, war, famine and
starvation.

The nation waded through a sea of blood. Old things passed away never
to return. The internal history of France during a period of two years
from the fall of the monarchy, is perhaps the most appalling record,
which the annals of the human family present.

Why did not France succeed in establishing a free government? Because
all such must be founded on intelligence, virtue, and faith in God and
immortality. Out of the revolution came the one man who could restore
order to France--Napoleon Bonaparte.

It does not come within the limits of this work to relate the
various wars of Napoleon. The French revolution--abortive as it
seemed--rendered forever impossible the continuance of the despotism
which had heretofore governed Europe. Napoleon, though one of the worst
despots, sowed revolutionary principles broad-cast over Europe. His
judicial code taught the equality of man before the law. His overthrow
of so many princes taught the people to place a lower estimate on
the sanctity of crowned heads. His consolidation of the petty German
states, awakened the desire for a united Germany and paved the way for
its accomplishment. He introduced constitutional government to Italy,
Westphalia and Spain. He weakened the temporal power of the pope, and
dealt fatal blows at the feudal nobility. His rude assaults shook to
its foundations the whole fabric of European despotism, and led the
lower orders of the people to entertain new ideas regarding their own
rights. {192} Never before had influences so powerful been brought so
widely into operation over vast multitudes of men.

[Image: Napoleon Bonaparte.]

Napoleon, with the exception of Oliver Cromwell, was the first great
statesman in Europe to engage in designs for the advantage of the Jews.
In 1806, the world heard with amazement that Napoleon had summoned a
grand Sanhedrim of the Jews to assemble at Paris. The twelve great
questions which Napoleon submitted to the Jewish Rabbis thus assembled
and the answers which they gave to him, did much to dispel popular
prejudice against that people, and prepare the way for their social
and material advancement. Some of these questions and answers were of
peculiar importance in a religious point of view. From these we learn,
that in 1806, among the Jewish people, and among some of the advanced
thinkers of that age, marriage was considered null and void unless the
ceremony was {193} performed by a person possessing divine authority.
Further, that polygamy is taught in the Jewish scriptures, but had been
discontinued by the Jews by virtue of a decree of the Synod of Worms,
in A. D. 1030. (_For further particulars see "Journal des Debats" pour
1807. Milman's History of the Jews, page 592_.)

The influence which Napoleon exerted upon the course of human affairs
is without parallel in history. In comparison with these, the conquest
of Caesar and Alexander dwindle into insignificance. Never before had
any man inflicted upon his fellows, miseries so appalling; yet did
never one man's hand scatter seeds destined to produce a harvest of
political change, so vast and so beneficent. To the despots of Europe
he was the dreaded apostle of democracy. The amazing events which
followed each other in so swift succession in France were watched with
profound interest in other lands. The results were quickly apparent.
When Napoleon fell, the desire for self-government had silently spread
over Europe. The anxiety, which the dethroned monarchs evinced to
please their subjects, began to disclose to the people the secret of
their own strength.

A congress of delegates from the great powers met in Vienna, in 1814,
to restore the thrones to the kings who had been exiled during the
wars of Napoleon. They were blind to the lesson which the revolution
had taught. They dreamed not of the new forces which had been silently
growing strong underneath the tumult and confusion of universal war.
Napoleon was at length banished to St. Helena, a rocky island in the
South Atlantic, far from any other inhabited land, where he died, May
5th, 1821. Thus darkly closed a career the most brilliant, the most
influential, and the most remarkable of modern times.

The power of the people now began to be everywhere felt. In 1820, the
American possessions of Spain rose against the despotism under which
they had long suffered, and successfully asserted their independence.
Insurrections broke out in Spain, Portugal, Naples and Piedmont, and
only ended when they obtained constitutional government.

{194} Across the Adriatic, Greece took encouragement from the energy
of her neighbors to assert the liberty of which Turkish oppression
defrauded her. Helped by Europe, she succeeded.

[Image: The City of Athens.]

Athens, once the seat of learning and philosophy, the home of
poets, painters and sculptors, the city that once led the world in
civilization and art, became the capital of the modern kingdom of
Greece.

{195} The influence continued to spread until it effected all the
states of western Europe. It turned men's minds everywhere to political
thought and discussion. It quickened the hardy mountaineers of
Switzerland to reorganize their republican institutions, on the basis
of equal rights. The little republic of the mountains founded so long
ago, in the days of William Tell, started on a new era of prosperity.
France, in 1830, once more attempted to throw off the yoke of her
ancient kings.

[Image: Scene in Switzerland.]

These events may be said to mark the complete political awakening of
Europe. Western Europe was now free and {196} self-governing. The long
and painful transition from despotism to responsible government was at
length accomplished. One hundred and eighty millions of Europeans had
risen from a degraded vassalage to the rank and condition of freemen.



CHAPTER XX.

FORCES OF CIVILIZATION IN THE NINETEENTH CENTURY.

THE GENIUS OF THE AGE--EUROPEAN WARS--AMERICA
TRANQUIL--DECLARATION OF WAR--DIVISIONS OF NORTH AMERICA--UNITED
STATES--CANADA--MEXICO--AMERICAN COMMON SCHOOLS--THEIR
INFLUENCE--PROGRESS OF INVENTION--FIRST STEAMBOAT--FIRST
LOCOMOTIVE--ELECTRIC TELEGRAPH--IMPROVEMENTS IN PRINTING--SPIRITUAL
DARKNESS--THE KINGDOM OF GOD--WANTS OF THE PRESENT AGE--JOSEPH
SMITH--HIS TRAGIC DEATH--CONCLUSION.

Human history should be a record of progress--a record of accumulating
knowledge and increasing wisdom, of continual advancement from a lower
to a higher platform of intelligence and well-being. Each generation
should pass on to the next the treasures which it has inherited,
beneficially modified by its own experience, and enlarged by the
acquisitions which itself has gained.

Sometimes the stream of human development seems to pause and the years
seem to roll on without change. Yet this is only apparent. All the
while there is a silent accumulation of forces, which at length burst
forth in the violent overthrow of evils, which had been endured for
generations.

The nineteenth century, has witnessed progress beyond all precedent,
for it has beheld the overthrow of the barriers that prevented
progress. It has vindicated for all succeeding ages, {197} the right of
man to his own unimpeded development. The genius of the age has tended
to the abolition of serfdom and slavery, and the up-lifting of the
poor, the down-trodden and oppressed. More than at all previous times
it has seen the removal of artificial obstacles placed in the path of
human progress by the selfishness and ignorance of the strong.

At the opening of the nineteenth century, all Europe was occupied
with war. From the North to the shores of the Mediterranean, from the
confines of Asia to the Atlantic, men toiled to burn each other's
cities, to waste each other's fields, and destroy each other's lives.
In some places there was heard the shout of victory, in some the wail
of defeat. The first twelve years of the century were spent by America
in profound tranquility. She looked from afar with a serene neutrality
upon the furious efforts which the European nations were making to
compass the ruin of each other.

In process of time, England and France, eagerly bent on mutual harm,
adopted measures which nearly destroyed trans-Atlantic commerce.
American ships lay in unprofitable idleness; grass grew upon the
untrodden wharfs of New York and Philadelphia. Moreover the high-handed
British enforced a hateful claim to search American ships and take away
any sailors suspected of being British subjects.

These grievances might have been peacefully redressed; but America and
England were too angry to be reasonable. James Madison was president
at that time. He did not want to go to war, but he desired to be
elected president a second time. His friends who were eager for war
informed him that unless he declared war he could not be re-elected.
With closed doors the bill proposing war was discussed. It was passed
in secret session, and on June 19th, 1812, President Madison affixed
his signature, and issued a proclamation declaring war against Great
Britain. The principal European powers, including England, were
then engaged in a mighty struggle against Napoleon. England could
spare scarcely three thousand men for the defense of her colonies.
The British forces in America were principally composed of Canadian
voluntiers and militia.

{198} Then came a war of mingled success and disaster. The surrender
of Detroit, the disaster at Queenston Heights, the victory of Perry,
the midnight struggle at Lundy's Lane, the capture of Washington,
the terrible havoc at New Orleans--all these are too well known to
need repetition here. After two years and a half of mutual injuries,
a treaty of peace was signed in which nothing was said about the
imprisonment of seamen; but from that day to the present no American
citizen has been imprisoned on board a British vessel.

Then came an era of peaceful industrial progress without parallel in
the annals of the human family. The forces of modern civilization began
to work.

North America was now divided into three great divisions, the United
States, Canada and Mexico. For obvious reasons the United States has
developed the most rapidly. The dominion of Canada is destined in
process of years to become a powerful empire. Its area is more than
three million five hundred thousand square miles, which is more than
that of the United States, and nearly equal to the whole of Europe.
Most of this enormous region proves to be of marvelous fertility,
producing in abundance nearly all the grains of temperate regions.
Millions of acres are added annually to the area under cultivation. The
vast and magnificent region watered by the Saskatchewan and Assiniboine
seems destined to become one of the granaries of the world. Quietly and
peacefully, the dominion is growing in power and influence. The area
of cultivated land is fast extending. Manufactures of all kinds are
rapidly multiplying, and in ship-building and commerce she has already
outstripped the great republic. In these respects, if considered
separate from England, Canada now ranks the fourth power in the world.

Recent developments indicate that Mexico has an important work to do
in the economy of God. In the last few years she has made astonishing
progress in the arts, sciences and social condition of her people.
As an illustration one of her sons, the late President Juarez showed
himself to be one of the most remarkable men that has lived on this
continent during the present century. The population of North America
in 1800, was scarcely more than ten millions, now it approaches seventy
{199} millions and increases in a ratio that defies calculation.
Already it is the theater of some of the most important events in the
world's history, and greater events still await the coming years.

At the time that America commenced to be governed by the first written
constitution that the world had ever seen, one of the great questions
that was asked by the leading minds of the age as well as by the
toiling millions of Europe was: "What will be the future of America,
what the forces that will mould and fashion it?" One of these was the
common school. Here the future citizens met upon a level. Money and
position in society counted nothing; merit won. A boy with a patch on
each knee, his jacket in rags, who lived in a cabin, whose breakfast
was potato and salt, and whose supper was mush, and milk, quite likely
stood at the head of the class; while the boy who wore good clothes and
whose father was rich, possibly found himself at the foot of the long
line of spellers.

From these schools many of the boys made their way through college,
became teachers, ministers, lawyers, legislators and governors. The
lessons there learned together, with the instructions of honest
God-fearing parents, laid the foundation of character and made them the
pioneers of a new civilization.

The education of the masses multiplied the number thinkers. As a
consequence, mechanical skill and invention is the peculiar growth of
the present century and the United States in this regard ranks among
the foremost nations of the world.

From the creation of the world down to the middle of the last century,
nearly all the work of the world had been done by the muscular labor of
men or animals.

But in England and America men were discovering that machinery might be
made to do work of human hands. It was not until 1764, that James Watt
commenced his wonderful inventions, and ten years more elapsed before
his engine was of any practical use.

Meanwhile Hargreaves, Arkwright and Crompton had invented machines for
the manufacture of cloth. In America there were lands well adapted
for raising cotton, but owing to {200} the difficulty of extricating
the seeds from the cotton, but little was used and that little was
very expensive. In 1784, only eight bagfuls of cotton were exported
from Savannah to England but when Eli Whitney invented the cotton-gin
in 1792, a great change took place. It was seen immediately that the
machine would do the work of hundreds of men and a new industry and new
product was given to the world. Inconsiderable as these inventions may
seem, they changed the clothing material of the English-speaking people
throughout the world. In a few years their costume so changed that they
might be looked upon as belonging to a different race and a different
civilization.

On August 27th, 1787, while the National convention was at work at
Philadelphia framing the constitution they were invited to behold a
sight that the world had never seen. It was John Fitch gliding up
stream in the first practical steamboat ever constructed. In July,
1788, the boat made its first trip from Philadelphia up the river to
Burlington--amid the cheering of crowds and the salvos of artillery.
It continued to make trips during part of two years but never exceeded
three miles an hour. As the machinery was imperfect and the running
expensive, it was at length abandoned.

Genius is far-sighted and prophetic. John Fitch looking into the future
saw that the time would come when steamships would traverse the ocean,
and glide to and fro upon the great rivers of the West. He went to Ohio
to spend his last days, and when the shadow of death was upon him,
he made this request, "Bury me on the banks of the Ohio that I may
be where the song of the boatmen and the music of the engines shall
enliven the stillness of my resting place." Twenty years passed away
before Fitch's idea was realized. At length Robert Fulton built the
Clermont in 1807 and started up the Hudson river. The country people
knew not what to make of it. A Dutchman shouted to his wife, "The
devil is on his way up the river with a sawmill in a boat." Fulton had
succeeded where others had failed. It was the beginning of a new era in
navigation. In 1819, the _Savannah_ was the first steamboat to cross
the Atlantic ocean. John Stevens of Hoboken, New Jersey appeared in
1812 before Congress with a plan for a railroad.

{201}

[Image: An Ocean Steamer.]

{202} Two years later, July 25th, 1814, George Stevenson of England
completed and ran the Rocket, the first practical locomotive in the
world.

But it was not till September, 1825, that the first railway for
passengers was opened in England. Six years later railway trains were
running in America. The improved facilities for traveling by means of
steam, have had a wonderful influence upon society. A century ago human
society was composed of a multitude of little communities, dwelling
apart, mutually ignorant, and therefore, cherishing mutual antipathies.
Facilities of travel brought together men of different towns and
different countries. They learned how little there was, on either side,
to hate, how much to love. Thus ancient prejudice was broken up by the
fuller knowledge gained by this extended acquaintance. Peculiarities
of dialect and manners grew indistinct, and errors of opinion were
corrected by friendly conflict of mind.

In 1832, Samuel F. B. Morse, conceived the idea of the electric
telegraph, and in 1837, Congress granted him thirty thousand dollars
to aid his great enterprise. In 1844, Professor Morse sent his first
message over the world's first electric telegraph. The words were,
"What hath God wrought!" Thus it was found that the same mysterious
and terrible power which flashes out in the midnight storm was ready
to convey across continents and seas the messages of man. This use of
electricity is of peculiar interest. It is the first invention which
is apparently final. In the race of improvement all other inventions
and instrumentalities may be superceded. But what agency for conveying
intelligence can ever excel that which is instantaneous? It would seem
that here, for the first time, the human mind has reached the utmost
limits of its progress.

From the time of its first invention to the year 1814, scarcely any
improvement had been made on the printing press. A rude machine,
printing at its best scarcely 150 copies per hour, was still
universally in use. Now we have machines that print 25,000 copies per
hour; books and papers have greatly cheapened in consequence. Such were
some of the forces at work upon society during the first half of the
nineteenth century.

{203} But while mankind had progressed in science they had remained
stationary in religion; and how could it be otherwise? Invention and
discovery are but the unfolding of the laws, attributes and objects of
nature to man's limited understanding--the action of the divine will
on the minds of men. When God revealed nature's laws, man progressed
scientifically: until God revealed religious truth man groped in
spiritual darkness. The intellectual light of that age only made to
observing minds, their spiritual night more palpable; even as a candle
shining in the night only intensifies the surrounding gloom. Many
leading minds perceived somewhat, the errors of the times, and sought
to bring about reform in various ways. These attempts brought forth
discussion and division. The disintegration which had commenced in
the days of Luther, now worked with unexampled rapidity, until the
various so-called Christian sects numbered more than six hundred, each
tenacious of its own ideas, and bitterly denouncing all the others.

None of these jarring sects ever had divine authority; in fact, they
denied the possibility of revelation from God. Even admitting their
claims, their creeds are only the crystallized ideas of the leading men
of the age that gave them birth. For example, Rome depended not upon
revelation, nor even upon the letter of the scriptures, but upon the
tradition of the fathers. In other words, the rule of faith, in the
church of Rome was the conflicting opinions of men--often ill-informed
and superstitious--who lived between the great apostasy and the time of
Luther.

So again, the creed of Lutherism is only the best ideas of men who
lived in Central Europe three hundred and fifty years ago. In like
manner, Presbyterianism is the reflex of the stern and rugged character
of the Scotch in the 17th century. So also Methodism and Quakerism
are the products of zealous English reformers in the 17th and 18th
centuries. All of the religions that existed in America at the
beginning of this century, were the outgrowth of European thought. They
were systems that had been transplanted from foreign lands, by no means
adapted to the progressive ideas that prevail on this continent.

{204} Humanly speaking, it was time to establish a religion, which
should harmonize with the circumstances and age in which we live.
Divinely speaking, man had become so developed and disciplined that he
could receive the gospel. It was the Lord's due time to again reveal
His will and set up His kingdom upon the earth.

Not only was the age peculiar, but likewise the land in which this work
was to be accomplished. The governments of European countries were all
committed to some particular creed, some peculiar form of religious
worship. But in America there was no established religion. All were
free to accept or reject the truth untrammelled by the arbitrary
requirements of the civil law.

The instrumentalities used for the establishment of this work were
very peculiar. No hoary-headed philosopher, full of worldly wisdom;
no crafty politician, zealous for a party or sect; no profound doctor
of divinity, deeply versed in antiquarian lore, was appointed to do
this work. No! A pure and ingenuous youth, who had spent the few
years of his mortal life in the quiet and peaceful avocations of
agricultural life--a youth who had not yet drunk in the poison of
man's theology--such was the instrument chosen by the Almighty for the
execution of His purposes.

The sublime and tragic history of Joseph Smith is too well known to
need repetition here. A few leading facts will suffice. Joseph Smith
was born December 23rd, 1805, at Sharon, Windsor Co., Vt. He received
his first vision on the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in
the Spring of 1820. Joseph was then a little more than fourteen years
of age. Three years and a half passed away, when he received his
second vision. It was September 21st, 1823; he had retired to rest
when the divine messenger made his appearance. During the night the
angel appeared three times to Joseph, and immediately after, the dawn
approached; so that their interviews must have occupied the whole of
that night. Thrice had the angel descended, and thrice had he ascended,
with all the circumstances of reality. There is something grand in the
very simplicity of the narrative of Joseph and all the more impressive
when we consider his mental and physical {205} characteristics--a
man of lofty stature and giant mind. He dwelt in the very glare and
illumination of a spiritual existence, and yet was the founder,
organizer and leader of a latter-day Israel. Not more real was Jacob's
angel with whom he wrestled all night, than were the angels of our
times to Joseph. Then he commenced a life of toil and persecution--toil
in the service of his divine Master, persecution from the enemy of all
good.

We can only understand the life and character of Joseph Smith, when
we consider the peculiar wants of the present age. Never was there a
time in the history of the race when learning and general intelligence
were so well diffused as at the present. The press is throwing
off continually its millions of printed pages which are scattered
broadcast, as the leaves of autumn.

Never was there a time of more intense activity. Who can pass through
the crowded streets of our cities, listen to the throbbing of the steam
engine, the hum of machinery, gaze at the vast trains that are driven
with fire and vapor along our railways, or view those magnificent
structures that cross the mighty deep without feeling that this is an
earnest age?

Now this earnest, active, thinking age, demands a religion that has
life and power in it. Not a religion of cold formality and narrow
sectarianism, but a religion that will satisfy the intelligent with
its truths, and touch the heart with its love, and sway the will with
its persuasiveness, and gratify the taste with its beauties, and fill
the imagination with its sublimities. A religion is wanted that will
enlist upon its side the whole nature of man and command his willing
and devoted homage; a religion, that, bearing the full impress of its
Author's image, shall carry its own credentials with it, and which,
clothed with all the elements of truth and righteousness, beauty and
grandeur, of love and power, shall be revered by all those who love the
truth, and dreaded by all who love it not.

It is evident to every thinking mind that the strife and confusion and
babel of the six hundred jarring sects of Christendom can not do this.
Their half-deserted cathedrals and cold, formal ceremonies, as well as
the triumphant march of infidelity {206} and crime, attest the fact,
that they have lost their hold on the masses of men.

As in the days of old the Lord renewed his communications with man
through the dutiful and obedient Samuel; so in this age he spake to
the youthful Joseph. And how did Joseph accomplish so much in so short
a time? Simply because he entered into his work with his whole heart.
He allowed no inferior object to weaken his interest or divide his
attention, and he continually sought the inspiration of the Almighty,
who came to his aid and enabled him to accomplish in the short space
of a few years the mightiest work that any man has wrought since the
Savior was upon the earth. After an active and self-sacrificing life of
nearly thirty-nine years, he was brutally murdered by a mob June 27th,
1844.

Thus lived, suffered, toiled, and died, the martyr-prophet of the
nineteenth century. Thus flashed athwart the spiritual darkness of
his age, the light of the latter days. Even as in days of old the
light shone in the darkness and the darkness comprehended it not.
Contemplating his death the mind instinctively reverts to that scene,
when the Savior suffered on Calvary, eighteen hundred years ago. Across
the ages stride the footprints of the self-same spirit. Unconsciously
are associated the death of the Redeemer and the martyrdom of His
servant. Already the principles enunciated by Joseph Smith, have shaken
the religious world from center to circumference. The ignorant may
effect to scorn, yet the day is nigh, when America will be proud of her
prophet son.

{207}



List of Illustrations

  Mount Calvary - Frontispiece
  Jerusalem - 10
  Coliseum - 14
  Fakir - 16
  Damascus - 29
  Interior of a Saracen Palace - 41
  Eruption of Mount Vesuvius - 46
  Constantinople - 49
  Church of the Holy Sepulchre - 55
  Ancient Vessels - 62
  Dungeon of the Inquisition - 69
  Christopher Columbus - 79
  Ships of Columbus - 82
  Landing of Columbus - 83
  The Straits of Magellan - 90
  The Rack - 93
  Ancient Peruvian Residence - 108
  Ancient Tower at Newport - 110
  Mammoth - 115
  Mummy - 119
  Massacre of the Incas - 151
  Landing of the Pilgrims - 132
  Fox in Discussion - 142
  Penn's Treaty with the Indians - 144
  John Wesley - 153
  First American Almanac - 159
  Benjamin Franklin - 160
  George Washington - 174 {208}
  Washington Crossing the Delaware - 177
  Scene of Burgoyne's Surrender - 180
  Meeting Place of Andre and Arnold - 181
  Mount Vernon - 185
  The Tomb of Washington - 186
  Napoleon Bonaparte - 192
  The City of Athens - 194
  Scene in Switzerland - 195
  An Ocean Steamer - 201



{209}

INDEX.

  Abou-Beker 28
  Adam Smith 71, 154
  Alhazin 37
  Andalusia 31, 40
  America Discovered 84
  American Antiquities 109-112
  Africa, First Map of 89
  Apostasy of Primitive Church 13
  Arabia, Description of 20
  Arabic Notation 36
  Ayesha 28
  Armada, Invincible 104, 105
  Ancient American Races 114, 117
  Acadia, Colonization of 126, 127
  Almanac, First American 158, 159
  Adams, Samuel 167
  Antimony, Why so Called 73
  Arnold's Treason 182
  Andre, Major 181
  American Revolution 173
  Al Mamun Measures the Earth 37
  Andalusia, Conquest of 31
  Atmospheric Refraction 38
  Arabian Astronomy 36
  Arnold of Brescia 67, 68

  Bacon, Roger 73
  Bastile 188,189
  Bozrah 22,28
  Bagdad, University of 35
  Boheim, Hans 94
  Balboa Discovers Pacific Ocean 89
  Bruno, Death of 104
  {210}
  Barbarism of Europe 42
  Boniface IX. 76
  Byzantium 48, 50
  Bible First Printed 78
  Brewster 129, 130
    "  Library 134
  Brindley, James 154
  British India 155, 156
  Burgoyne's Surrender 180
  Bonaparte 180
  Bible, Influence of 124

  Caaba 21
  Cadijah 24
  Caliphate 27
  Caliphs Patronize Learning 35
  Chivalry, Rise of 65, 66
  Canada 198
    "  First Settlements in 126
  Common Schools, Effect of 199
  Christians Persecuted 13
  Christian, Early Sects 23
  Columbus 78
    "  Vessels of 81
  Compass, Mariner's 37
  Constantine, Crimes of 47
  Constantinople 48
    "  View of 49
    "  Siege of 50, 51
  Cholula, Pyramid of 112
  Cotton-Gin, Invention of 200
  Copernicus 103, 104
  Constitutional Convention 185
  Coliseum 14
  Crusades 59
    "  of Children 61
    "  Results of 63
  Culture of Women Among Saracens 42
  Cyril of Alexandria 44
    "  the Priest 71 {211}
  Civilization of Mexico 117, 118
    "  of Peru 118, 120
  Champlain's Voyages 126
  Chatham, Earl of 168
  Cromwell 133
  Confederation, First American 135
  Colonizing of New England 128
  Charles I. 133, 134
  Chemistry, Origin of 36
  Carver, John 131
  Cartier, Jacques 126

  Damascus, Capture of 29
  Destruction of Jerusalem 11, 12
  Destruction of Herculaneum and Pompeii 45
  Dominicans 67
  Discovery of America 84
  Declaration of Independence 175
  Delaware Crossed by Washington 176
  Diet of Worms 95

  Earth Proved to be Round 37
    "  Circumnavigated 89, 92
  Earl of Chatham 168
  Extent of Primitive Church 9
  Extension of English Language 157
  Europe Assumes Modern Form 74
  Everlasting Gospel, The 71, 72
  Everlasting Gospel, Its Teachings 72
  Everlasting Gospel, Its Influence 73
  Esdras, Account of 87
  English Revolution 149
  Electric Telegraph 202
  England's Dominion 156
  Ebn Junis Invents the Pendulum 38

  Franciscans 67
  Frederick II. of Italy 70
    "  His Liberal Policy 71
  Fox, George 141-143
  Fitch, John 200
  French Revolution 189 {212}
  Fall River Skeleton 109
  Franklin, Benjamin 158, 161
  Female Physicians 43

  Gregorian Calendar 37
  Gutenberg 77
  Gin First Made 151
  General Gates 181
  General Revolution 162
  Galileo, His Degradation 104
  Globes First Used by Arabs 34, 43
  Greece, Kingdom of 194

  Hampden, John 133
  Harvard College Founded 133
  Holland, Description of 136
  Henry, Patrick 168
  Heraclius, Emperor 30
  Haroun al Raschid 36
  Herculaneum Destroyed 45
  Huss Burned 92
  Hypatia 44
  Huguenots, Massacre of 136
    "  Flee to America 146, 155
  Howard, John 153
  Henry IV. of Germany, a Penitent 55
  Human Sacrifices 113

  Incas, Massacre of 120, 121
  India, British 155, 156
  Indians, Penn's Treaty with 146
  Indian Races Destroyed 107
  Inquisition Established 70
  Innocent III. 67, 68, 70
  Influence of Minstrels 66
  Invention of Printing 77
  Invention of Steelyards 38

  Jamestown Founded 127
  Jerusalem destroyed by Romans 12
    "  Captured by Saracens 29
    "  Taken by Crusaders 60
  Joss Fritz 94 {213}
  Juarez 198
  Judaism, Golden Age of 39
  Jews Expelled from Spain 109

  Koran 23
  Khaled 28

  La Fayette 187
  Leyden, Siege of 137-140
  Luther, Martin 95,96
  Locomotive, First 202
  Levaur, Massacre of 70

  Massacre in Southern France 68
  Mahomet 21-26
  Mahometan Schools 38
  Marco Polo, Travels of 73, 74
  Magellan's Voyage 89-92
  Monasteries, Rise of 18
  Munzer's Proclamation 98
  Mexican Pyramids 112
    "  Year 119
    "  Arts and Sciences 118
  Mammoth, Remains of 115
  Maryland Colonized 146
  Methodists, Rise of 151
  Montesquieu 155
  Marseillaise 191
  Morse, Samuel F. B. 202

  Nestorians 22
  Newport Tower 110
  Newspaper, First 150
  Napoleon Bonaparte 192
    "  his Influence 193
    "  his Death 193
  Netherlands, Independence of 136

  Omar Caliph 29
  Ottoman Turks 33
  Oliver Cromwell 133
  Old South Church Incident 170

  Peter Waldo 67
  Peter the Hermit 58 {214}
  Pompeii Destroyed 45
  Peasant's War 97
  Printing, Invention of 77
  Persecution of Christians 13
    "  of Quakers 148
  Peru, Description of 118, 120
  Penn, William 143-146
  Pennsylvania Founded 145
  Pitt, William 155, 157
  Paine, Thomas 175
  Pilgrim Fathers 129, 133
  Pyramids of Mexico 112

  Quebec Founded 126
  Quetzalcoatl 112, 122
  Quakerism, Rise of 141
  Queen Isabella 81

  Raymond, Earl of Toulouse 68
  Relic-Worship 54
  Richard the Lion-Hearted 61-63
  Rise of Chivalry 65, 66
  Reformation 95-99
  Religion of Mexico 116, 117
  Roger Williams 147
  Rum, First Made 151
  Revolutions General 162
  Rosseau 163
  Revere, Paul 172
  Rouget de l'Isle 190
  Revolution, French 189
  Railroad, First 202
  Robinson's Prophecy 130

  Saracen, Conquest of 30
    "  Discoveries 36
    "  Expelled from Spain 109
    "  Cities 40
    "  Schools 42
  Ships of Columbus 81
  Servetus, Death of 103
  Smith, Adam 154 {215}
  Stamp Act 166
  Steamboat, First 200
  Smith, Joseph 204
    "      "  His Birth 204
    "      "  His Death 206
  Spain, Degradation of 109
  Spanish-American Revolution 193
  Skeleton, Fall River 109

  Ten Tribes 87
  Treaty of Peace 183
  Telegraph Invented 202
  Twilight, Reason of 138

  Valley Forge 178
  Vasco de Gama 89
  Vesuvius, Eruption of 46
  Van der Werf, Speech of 139
  Voltaire 163

  Worms, Diet of 95
    "  Synod of 192
  Worship, Corrupted 17
  Waldenses, Rise of 67
  Waldo, Peter 67
  Witchcraft 100, 101
  Williams, Roger 147
  Whitfield, George 151
  Wesley, Charles 152
  Wesley, John 152
  Wilberforce, William 153
  Watt, James 154
  Washington's Boyhood 158
  Washington Chosen General 174
    "  as President 184
  Washington's Death 187
  Woman, Condition of, Among the Saracens 42, 43
  Wyandotts, Tradition of 122

  Ziska, John 94



Transcriber's Note:

Some obvious printer's errors have been corrected as seemed reasonable,
such as certain punctuation errors (like omitted periods, periods
to commas or semi-colons to commas, and some mismatched quotation
marks, etc.). Some inconsistent or obvious spelling errors or typos
within the text were also corrected (e. g., make to made, begining
to beginning, conviced to convinced, satisfiy to satisfy, immedite to
immediate, successsful to successful, maratime to maritime, gunpower
to gunpowder, bowlder to boulder, asend to ascend, degardation to
degradation, forgivness to forgiveness, en to ten, myrtyr to martyr,
continet to continent, gratitute to gratitude, loyality to loyalty,
philanthrophist to philanthropist, extavagant to extravagant,
justifiying to justifying, weakend to weakened, Fich's to Fitch's,
Reedemer to Redeemer, matyrdom to martyrdom, etc., etc.).

The book used as a reference for this e-book transcription originally
belonged to O. N. Toomey, and was digitized by the Harold B. Lee
Library at Brigham Young University. It can be viewed or downloaded
free at https://archive.org/details/handofprovidence00award.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Hand of Providence, by J. H. Ward

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HAND OF PROVIDENCE ***

***** This file should be named 48276.txt or 48276.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/2/7/48276/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(MormonTextsProject.org), with thanks to Paul Freebairn
and Cheryl Jennings for proofreading.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

