The Project Gutenberg EBook The Rise of the Dutch Republic, 1582-84
#34 in our series by John Lothrop Motley

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**eBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These eBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Rise of the Dutch Republic, 1582-84

Author: John Lothrop Motley

Release Date: January, 2004  [EBook #4834]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on March 26, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII





*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DUTCH REPUBLIC, 1582-84 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





MOTLEY'S HISTORY OF THE NETHERLANDS, Project Gutenberg Edition, Vol. 34

THE RISE OF THE DUTCH REPUBLIC, 1582-1584

By John Lothrop Motley

1855



CHAPTER VI.

     Parma recals the foreign troops--Siege of Oudenarde--Coolness of
     Alexander--Capture of the city and of Nineve--Inauguration of Anjou
     at Ghent--Attempt upon his life and that of Orange--Lamoral Egmont's
     implication in the plot--Parma's unsuccessful attack upon Ghent--
     Secret plans of Anjou--Dunkirk, Ostend, and other towns surprised by
     his adherents--Failure at Bruges--Suspicions at Antwerp--Duplicity
     of Anjou--The "French Fury"--Details of that transaction--
     Discomfiture and disgrace of the Duke--His subsequent effrontery--
     His letters to the magistracy of Antwerp, to, the Estates, and to
     Orange--Extensive correspondence between Anjou and the, French Court
     with Orange and the Estates--Difficult position of the Prince--His
     policy--Remarkable letter to the States-general--Provisional
     arrangement with Anjou--Marriage of the Archbishop of Cologne--
     Marriage of Orange with Louisa de Coligny--Movements in Holland,
     Brabant, Flanders, and other provinces, to induce the Prince to
     accept sovereignty over the whole country--His steady refusal--
     Treason of Van den Berg in Gueldres--Intrigues of Prince Chimay and
     Imbize in Flanders--Counter efforts of Orange and the patriot party
     --Fate of Imbize--Reconciliation of Bruges--Death of Anjou

During the course of the year 1582, the military operations on both sides
had been languid and desultory, the Prince of Parma, not having a large
force at his command, being comparatively inactive.  In consequence,
however, of the treaty concluded between the United states and Anjou,
Parma had persuaded the Walloon provinces that it had now become
absolutely necessary for them to permit the entrance of fresh Italian and
Spanish troops.  This, then, was the end of the famous provision against
foreign soldiery in the Walloon treaty of reconciliation.  The Abbot of
Saint Vaast was immediately despatched on a special mission to Spain, and
the troops, by midsummer, had already begun to pour, into the
Netherlands.

In the meantime, Farnese, while awaiting these reinforcements, had not
been idle, but had been quietly picking up several important cities.
Early in the spring he had laid siege to Oudenarde, a place of
considerable importance upon the Scheld, and celebrated as the birthplace
of his grandmother, Margaret van Geest.  The burghers were obstinate; the
defence was protracted; the sorties were bold; the skirmishes frequent
and sanguinary: Alexander commanded personally in the trenches,
encouraging his men by his example, and often working with the mattock,
or handling a spear in the assault, Like a private pioneer or soldier.
Towards the end of the siege, he scarcely ever left the scene of
operation, and he took his meals near the outer defences, that he might
lose no opportunity of superintending the labors of his troops.  One day
his dinner was laid for himself and staff in the open air, close to the
entrenchment.  He was himself engaged in planting a battery against a
weak point in the city wall, and would on no account withdraw for all
instant.  The tablecloth was stretched over a number of drum-heads,
placed close together, and several, nobles of distinction--Aremberg,
Montigny, Richebourg, La Motte, and others, were his guests at dinner.
Hardly had the repast commenced, when a ball came flying over the table,
taking off the head of a, young Walloon officer who was sitting near
Parma, and, who was earnestly requesting a foremost place in the.
morrow's assault.  A portion of his skull struck out the eye of another
gentleman present.  A second ball from the town fortifications, equally
well directed, destroyed two more of the guests as they sat at the
banquet--one a German captain, the other the Judge-Advocate-General.
The blood and brains of these unfortunate individuals were strewn over
the festive board, and the others all started to their feet, having
little appetite left for their dinner.  Alexander alone remained in his
seat, manifesting no discomposure.  Quietly ordering the attendants to
remove the dead bodies, and to bring a clean tablecloth, he insisted
that his guests should resume their places at the banquet which had been
interrupted in such ghastly fashion.  He stated with very determined
aspect that he could not allow the heretic burghers of Oudenarde the
triumph of frightening him from his dinner, or from the post of danger.
The other gentlemen could, of course, do no less than imitate the
impassibility of their chief, and the repast was accordingly concluded
without further interruption.  Not long afterwards, the city, close
pressed by so determined a commander, accepted terms, which were more
favorable by reason of the respect which Alexander chose to render to his
mother's birthplace.  The pillage was commuted for thirty thousand,
crowns, and on the 5th of July the place was surrendered to Parma almost
under the very eyes of Anjou, who was making a demonstration of relieving
the siege.

Ninove, a citadel then belonging to the Egmont family, was next reduced.
Here, too, the defence was more obstinate than could have been expected
from the importance of the place, and as the autumn advanced, Parma's
troops were nearly starved in their trenches, from the insufficient
supplies furnished them.  They had eaten no meat but horseflesh for
weeks, and even that was gone.  The cavalry horses were all consumed, and
even the chargers of the officers were not respected.  An aid-de-camp of
Parma fastened his steed one day at the door of the Prince's tent, while
he entered to receive his commander's instructions.  When he came out
again, a few minutes afterwards, he found nothing but the saddle and
bridle hanging where he had fastened the horse.  Remonstrance was
useless, for the animal had already been cut into quarters, and the only
satisfaction offered to the aid-de-camp was in the shape of a steak.  The
famine was long familiarly known as the "Ninove starvation," but
notwithstanding this obstacle, the place was eventually surrendered.

An attempt upon Lochum, an important city, in Gelderland, was
unsuccessful, the place being relieved by the Duke of Anjou's forces, and
Parma's troops forced to abandon the siege.  At Steenwyk, the royal arms
were more successful, Colonel Tassis, conducted by a treacherous Frisian
peasant, having surprised the city which had so, long and so manfully
sustained itself against Renneberg during the preceding winter.  With
this event the active operations under Parma closed for the year.  By the
end of the autumn, however, he had the satisfaction of numbering, under
his command, full sixty thousand well-appointed and disciplined troops,
including the large reinforcements recently despatched: from Spain and
Italy.  The monthly expense of this army-half of which was required for
garrison duty, leaving only the other moiety for field Operations--was
estimated at six hundred and fifty thousand florins.  The forces under
Anjou and the united provinces were also largely increased, so that the
marrow of the land was again in fair way of being thoroughly exhausted by
its defenders and its foes.

The incidents of Anjou's administration, meantime, during the year 1582,
had been few and of no great importance.  After the pompous and elaborate
"homage-making" at Antwerp, he had, in the month of July, been formally
accepted, by writing, as Duke of Guelders and Lord of Friesland.  In the
same month he had been ceremoniously, inaugurated at Bruges as Count of
Flanders--an occasion upon which the Prince of Orange had been present.
In that ancient and stately city there had been, accordingly, much
marching about under triumphal arches, much cannonading and haranguing,
much symbol work of suns dispelling fogs, with other cheerful emblems,
much decoration of ducal shoulders with velvet robes lined with weasel
skin, much blazing of tar-barrels and torches.  In the midst of this
event, an attempt was made upon the lives both of Orange and Anjou.  An
Italian, named Basa, and a Spaniard, called Salseda, were detected in a
scheme to administer poison to both princes, and when arrested, confessed
that they had been hired by the Prince of Parma to compass this double
assassination.  Basa destroyed himself in prison.  His body was, however,
gibbeted, with an inscription that he had attempted, at the instigation
of Parma, to take the lives of Orange and Anjou.  Salseda, less
fortunate, was sent to Paris, where he was found guilty, and executed.
by being torn to pieces by four horses.  Sad to relate, Lamoral Egmont,
younger son and namesake of the great general, was intimate with Salseda,
and implicated in this base design.  His mother, on her death-bed, had
especially recommended the youth to the kindly care of Orange.  The
Prince had ever recognized the claim, manifesting uniform tenderness for
the son of his ill-started friend; and now the youthful Lamoral--as if
the name of Egmont had not been sufficiently contaminated by the elder
brother's treason at Brussels--had become the comrade of hired
conspirators against his guardian's life.  The affair was hushed up,
but the story was current and generally believed that Egmont had himself
undertaken to destroy the Prince at his own table by means of poison
which he kept concealed in a ring.  Saint Aldegonde was to have been
taken off in the same way, and a hollow ring filled with poison was said
to have been found in Egmont's lodgings.

The young noble was imprisoned; his guilt was far from doubtful; but the
powerful intercessions of Orange himself, combined with Egmont's near
relationship to the French Queen saved his life, and he was permitted,
after a brief captivity, to take his departure for France.

The Duke of Anjou, a month later, was received with equal pomp, in the
city of Ghent.  Here the ceremonies were interrupted in another manner.
The Prince of Parma, at the head of a few regiments of Walloons, making
an attack on a body of troops by which Anjou had been escorted into
Flanders, the troops retreated in good order, and without much loss,
under the walls of Ghent, where a long and sharp action took place, much
to the disadvantage of Parma, The Prince, of Orange and the Duke; of
Anjou were on the city walls during the whole skirmish giving orders and
superintending the movements of their troops, and at nightfall Parma was
forced, to retire, leaving a large number of dead behind him.

The 15th day of December, in this year was celebrated according to the
new ordinance of Gregory the Thirteenth--as Christmas.  It was the
occasion of more than usual merry-making among the Catholics of Antwerp,
who had procured, during the preceding summer, a renewed right of public
worship from Anjou and the estates.  Many nobles of high rank came from
France, to pay their homage to the new Duke of Brabant.  They secretly
expressed their disgust, however, at the close constitutional bonds in
which they found their own future sovereign imprisoned by the provinces.
They thought it far beneath the dignity of the "Son of France" to play
the secondary part of titular Duke of Brabant, Count of Flanders, Lord of
Friesland, and the like, while the whole power of government was lodged
with the states.  They whispered that it was time to take measures for
the incorporation of the Netherlands into France, and they persuaded the
false and fickle Anjou that there would never be any hope of his royal
brother's assistance, except upon the understanding that the blood and
treasure of Frenchmen were to be spent to increase the power, not of
upstart and independent provinces, but of the French crown.

They struck the basest chords of the Duke's base nature by awakening his
jealousy of Orange.  His whole soul vibrated to the appeal.  He already
hated the man by whose superior intellect he was overawed, and by whose
pure character he was shamed.  He stoutly but secretly swore that he
would assert his own rights; and that he would no longer serve as a
shadow, a statue, a zero, a Matthias.  It is needless to add, that
neither in his own judgment nor in that of his mignons, were the
constitutional articles which he had recently sworn to support, or the
solemn treaty which he had signed and sealed at Bordeaux, to furnish any
obstacles to his seizure of unlimited power, whenever the design could be
cleverly accomplished.  He rested not, day or night, in the elaboration
of his plan.

Early in January, 1583, he sent one night for several of his intimate
associates, to consult with him after he had retired to bed.  He
complained of the insolence of the states, of the importunity of the
council which they had forced upon him, of the insufficient sums which
they furnished both for him and his troops, of the daily insults offered
to the Catholic religion.  He protested that he should consider himself
disgraced in the eyes of all Christendom, should he longer consent to
occupy his present ignoble position.  But two ways were open to him, he
observed; either to retire altogether from the Nether lands, or to
maintain his authority with the strong hand, as became a prince.  The
first course would cover him with disgrace.  It was therefore necessary
for him to adopt the other. He then unfolded his plan to his confidential
friends, La Fougere, De Fazy, Palette, the sons of Marechal Biron, and
others.  Upon the same day, if possible, he was determined to take
possession, with his own troops, of the principal cities in Flanders.
Dunkirk, Dixmuyde, Denremonde, Bruges, Ghent, Vilvoorde, Alost, and other
important places, were to be simultaneously invaded, under pretext of
quieting tumults artfully created and encouraged between the burghers and
the garrisons, while Antwerp was reserved for his own especial
enterprise.  That important capital he would carry by surprise at the
same moment in which the other cities were to be secured by his
lieutenants.

The plot was pronounced an excellent one by the friends around his bed--
all of them eager for Catholic supremacy, for the establishment of the
right divine on the part of France to the Netherlands, and for their
share in the sacking of so many wealthy cities at once.  These worthless
mignons applauded their weak master to the echo; whereupon the Duke
leaped from his bed, and kneeling on the floor in his night-gown, raised
his eyes and his clasped hands to heaven, and piously invoked the
blessing of the Almighty upon the project which he had thus announced.
He added the solemn assurance that; if favored with success in his
undertaking, he would abstain in future from all unchastity, and forego
the irregular habits by which his youth had been stained.  Having thus
bribed the Deity, and received the encouragement of his flatterers, the
Duke got into bed again.  His next care was to remove the Seigneur du
Plessis, whom he had observed to be often in colloquy with the Prince of
Orange, his suspicious and guilty imagination finding nothing but
mischief to himself in the conjunction of two such natures.  He therefore
dismissed Du Plessis, under pretext of a special mission to his sister,
Margaret of Navarre; but in reality, that he might rid himself of the
presence of an intelligent and honorable countryman.

On the a 15th January, 1583, the day fixed for the execution of the plot,
the French commandant of Dunkirk, Captain Chamois, skillfully took
advantage of a slight quarrel between the citizens and the garrison,
to secure that important frontier town.  The same means were employed
simultaneously, with similar results, at Ostend, Dixmuyde, Denremonde,
Alost, and Vilvoorde, but there was a fatal delay at one important city.
La Fougere, who had been with Chamois at Dunkirk, was arrested on his way
to Bruges by some patriotic citizens who had got wind of what had just
been occurring in the other cities, so that when Palette, the provost of
Anjou, and Colonel la Rebours, at the head of fifteen hundred French
troops, appeared before the gates, entrance was flatly refused.  De
Grijse, burgomaster of Bruges, encouraged his fellow townsmen by words
and stout action, to resist the nefarious project then on foot against
religious liberty and free government, in favor of a new foreign tyranny.
He spoke to men who could sympathize with, and second his courageous
resolution, and the delay of twenty-four hours, during which the burghers
had time to take the alarm, saved the city.  The whole population was on
the alert, and the baffled Frenchmen were forced to retire from the
gates, to avoid being torn to pieces by the citizens whom they had
intended to surprise.

At Antwerp, meanwhile, the Duke of Anjou had been rapidly maturing his
plan, under pretext of a contemplated enterprise against the city of
Endhoven, having concentrated what he esteemed a sufficient number of
French troops at Borgerhout, a village close to the walls of Antwerp.

On the 16th of January, suspicion was aroused in the city.  A man in a
mask entered the main guard-house in the night, mysteriously gave warning
that a great crime was in contemplation, and vanished before he could be
arrested.  His accent proved him to be a Frenchman.  Strange rumors flew
about the streets.  A vague uneasiness pervaded the whole population as
to the intention of their new master, but nothing was definitely known,
for of course there was entire ignorance of the events which were just
occurring in other cities.  The colonels and captains of the burgher
guard came to consult the Prince of Orange.  He avowed the most entire
confidence in the Duke of Anjou, but, at the same time; recommended that
the chains should be drawn, the lanterns hung out, and the drawbridge
raised an hour earlier than usual, and that other precautions; customary
in the expectation of an attack, should be duly taken.  He likewise sent
the Burgomaster of the interior, Dr. Alostanus, to the Duke of Anjou, in
order to communicate the suspicions created in the minds of the city
authorities by the recent movements of troops.

Anjou, thus addressed, protested in the most solemn manner that nothing
was farther from his thoughts than any secret enterprise against Antwerp.
He was willing, according to the figure of speech which he had always
ready upon every emergency, "to shed every drop of his blood in her
defence."  He swore that he would signally punish all those who had dared
to invent such calumnies against himself and his faithful Frenchmen,
declaring earnestly, at the same time, that the troops had only been
assembled in the regular course of their duty.  As the Duke was so loud
and so fervent; as he, moreover, made no objections to the precautionary
measures which had been taken; as the burgomaster thought, moreover, that
the public attention thus aroused would render all evil designs futile,
even if any had been entertained; it was thought that the city might
sleep in security for that night at least.

On the following, morning, as vague suspicions were still entertained by
many influential persons, a deputation of magistrates and militia
officers waited upon the Duke, the Prince of Orange--although himself
still feeling a confidence which seems now almost inexplicable--
consenting to accompany them.  The Duke was more vehement than ever in
his protestations of loyalty to his recent oaths, as well as of deep
affection for the Netherlands--for Brabant in particular, and for Antwerp
most of all, and he made use of all his vivacity to persuade the Prince,
the burgomasters, and the colonels, that they had deeply wronged him by
such unjust suspicions.  His assertions were accepted as sincere, and the
deputation withdrew, Anjou having first solemnly promised--at the
suggestion of Orange--not to leave the city during the whole day, in
order that unnecessary suspicion might be prevented.

This pledge the Duke proceeded to violate almost as soon as made.
Orange returned with confidence to his own house, which was close to the
citadel, and therefore far removed from the proposed point of attack, but
he had hardly arrived there when he received a visit from the Duke's
private secretary, Quinsay, who invited him to accompany his Highness on
a visit to the camp.  Orange declined the request, and sent an earnest
prayer to the Duke not to leave the city that morning.  The Duke dined as
usual at noon.  While at dinner he received a letter; was observed to
turn pale on reading it, and to conceal it hastily in a muff which he
wore on his left arm.  The repast finished, the Duke ordered his horse.
The animal was restive, and so, strenuously resisted being mounted that,
although it was his usual charger; it was exchanged for another.  This
second horse started in such a flurry that the Duke lost his cloak, and
almost his seat.  He maintained his self-possession, however, and placing
himself at the head of his bodyguard and some troopers, numbering in all
three hundred mounted men, rode out of the palace-yard towards the
Kipdorp gate.

This portal opened on the road towards Borgerhout, where his troops were
stationed, and at the present day bears the name of that village: It is
on the side of the city farthest removed from and exactly opposite the
river.  The town was very quiet, the streets almost deserted; for it was
one o'clock, the universal dinner-hour, and all suspicion had been
disarmed by the energetic protestations of the Duke.  The guard at the
gate looked listlessly upon the cavalcade as it approached, but as soon
as Anjou had crossed the first drawbridge, he rose in his stirrups and
waved his hand.  "There is your city, my lads," said he to the troopers
behind him; "go and take possession of it!"

At the same time he set spurs to his horse, and galloped off towards the
camp at Borgerhout.  Instantly afterwards; a gentleman of his suite,
Count Bochepot, affected to have broken his leg through the plunging of
his horse, a circumstance by which he had been violently pressed, against
the wall as he entered the gate.  Kaiser, the commanding officer at the
guard-house, stepped kindly forward to render him assistance, and his
reward was a desperate thrust from the Frenchman's rapier.  As he wore a
steel cuirass, he fortunately escaped with a slight wound.

The expression, "broken leg," was the watch-word, for at one and the same
instant, the troopers and guardsmen of Anjou set upon the burgher watch
at the gate, and butchered every man.  A sufficient force was left to
protect the entrance thus easily mastered, while the rest of the
Frenchmen entered the town at full gallop, shrieking "Ville gaignee,
ville gaignee!  vive la messe!  vive le Due d'Anjou!"  They were followed
by their comrades from the camp outside, who now poured into the town at
the preconcerted signal, at least six hundred cavalry and three thousand
musketeers, all perfectly appointed, entering Antwerp at once.  From the
Kipdorp gate two main arteries--the streets called the Kipdorp and the
Meer--led quite through the heart of the city, towards the townhouse and
the river beyond.  Along these great thoroughfares the French soldiers
advanced at a rapid pace; the cavalry clattering furiously in the van,
shouting "Ville gaignee, ville gaignee!  vive la messe, vive la messe!
tue, tue, tue!"

The burghers coming to door and window to look for the cause of all this
disturbance, were saluted with volleys of musketry.  They were for a
moment astonished, but not appalled, for at first they believed it to be
merely an accidental tumult.  Observing, however, that the soldiers,
meeting with but little effective resistance, were dispersing into
dwellings and warehouses, particularly into the shops of the goldsmiths
and lapidaries, the citizens remembered the dark suspicions which had
been so rife, and many recalled to mind that distinguished French
officers had during, the last few days been carefully examining the
treasures of the jewellers, under pretext of purchasing, but, as it now
appeared, with intent to rob intelligently.

The burghers, taking this rapid view of their position, flew instantly to
arms.  Chains and barricades were stretched across the streets; the
trumpets sounded through the city; the municipal guards swarmed to the
rescue.  An effective rally was made, as usual, at the Bourse, whither a
large detachment of the invaders had forced their way.  Inhabitants of
all classes and conditions, noble and simple, Catholic and Protestant,
gave each other the hand, and swore to die at each other's side in
defence of the city against the treacherous strangers.  The gathering was
rapid and enthusiastic.  Gentlemen came with lance and cuirass, burghers
with musket and bandoleer, artisans with axe, mallet, and other
implements of their trade.  A bold baker, standing by his oven-stark
naked, according to the custom of bakers at that day--rushed to the
street as the sound of the tumult reached his ear.  With his heavy bread
shovel, which he still held in his hand, he dealt a French cavalry,
officer, just riding and screaming by, such a hearty blow that he fell
dead from his horse.  The baker seized the officer's sword, sprang all
unattired as he was, upon his steed, and careered furiously through the
streets, encouraging his countrymen everywhere to the attack, and dealing
dismay through the ranks of the enemy.  His services in that eventful
hour were so signal that he was publicly thanked afterwards by the
magistrates for his services, and rewarded with a pension of three
hundred florins for life.

The invaders had been forced from the Bourse, while another portion of
them had penetrated as far as the Market-place.  The resistance which
they encountered became every instant more formidable, and Fervacques,
a leading French officer, who was captured on the occasion, acknowledged
that no regular troops could have fought more bravely than did these
stalwart burghers.  Women and children mounted to roof and window, whence
they hurled, not only tiles and chimney pots, but tables, ponderous
chairs, and other bulky articles, upon the heads of the assailants, while
such citizens as had used all their bullets, loaded their pieces with the
silver buttons from their doublets, or twisted gold and silver coins with
their teeth into ammunition.  With a population so resolute, the four
thousand invaders, however audacious, soon found themselves swallowed up.
The city had closed over them like water, and within an hour nearly a
third of their whole number had been slain.  Very few of the burghers had
perished, and fresh numbers were constantly advancing to the attack.  The
Frenchmen, blinded, staggering, beaten, attempted to retreat.  Many threw
themselves from the fortifications into the moat.  The rest of the
survivors struggled through the streets--falling in large numbers at
every step-towards the point at which they had so lately entered the
city.  Here at the Kipdorp gate was a ghastly spectacle, the slain being
piled up in the narrow passage full ten feet high, while some of the
heap, not quite dead, were striving to extricate a hand or foot, and
others feebly thrust forth their heads to gain a mouthful of air.

From the outside, some of Anjou's officers were attempting to climb over
this mass of bodies in order to enter the city; from the interior, the
baffled and fugitive remnant of their comrades were attempting to force
their passage through the same horrible barrier; while many dropped at,
every instant upon the heap of slain, under the blows of the unrelenting
burghers.  On the other hand, Count Rochepot himself, to whom the
principal command of the enterprise had been entrusted by Anjou, stood
directly in the path of his fugitive soldiers, not only bitterly
upbraiding them with their cowardice, but actually slaying ten or twelve
of them with his own hands, as the most effectual mode of preventing
their retreat.  Hardly an hour had elapsed from the time when the Duke of
Anjou first rode out of the Kipdorp gate, before nearly the whole of the
force which he had sent to accomplish his base design was either dead or
captive.  Two hundred and fifty nobles of high rank and illustrious name
were killed; recognized at once as they lay in the streets by their
magnificent costume.  A larger number of the gallant chivalry of France
had been sacrificed--as Anjou confessed--in this treacherous and most
shameful enterprise, than had often fallen upon noble and honorable
fields.  Nearly two thousand of the rank and file had perished, and the
rest were prisoners.  It was at first asserted that exactly fifteen
hundred and eighty-three Frenchmen had fallen, but this was only because
this number happened to be the date of the year, to which the lovers of
marvellous coincidences struggled very hard to make the returns of the
dead correspond.  Less than one hundred burghers lost their lives.

Anjou, as he looked on at a distance, was bitterly reproached for his
treason by several of the high-minded gentlemen about his person, to whom
he had not dared to confide his plot.  The Duke of Montpensier protested
vehemently that he washed his hands of the whole transaction, whatever
might be the issue.  He was responsible for the honor of an illustrious
house, which should never be stained, he said, if he could prevent it,
with such foul deeds.  The same language was held by Laval, by
Rochefoucauld, and by the Marechal de Biron, the last gentleman, whose
two sons were engaged in the vile enterprise, bitterly cursing the Duke
to his face, as he rode through the gate after revealing his secret
undertaking.

Meanwhile, Anjou, in addition to the punishment of hearing these
reproaches from men of honor, was the victim of a rapid and violent
fluctuation of feeling.  Hope, fear, triumph, doubt, remorse, alternately
swayed him.  As he saw the fugitives leaping from the walls, he shouted
exultingly, without accurately discerning what manner of men they were,
that the city was his, that four thousand of his brave soldiers were
there, and were hurling the burghers from the battlements.  On being made
afterwards aware of his error, he was proportionably depressed; and when
it was obvious at last that the result of the enterprise was an absolute
and disgraceful failure, together with a complete exposure of his
treachery, he fairly mounted his horse, and fled conscience-stricken from
the scene.

The attack had been so unexpected, in consequence of the credence
that had been rendered by Orange and the magistracy to the solemn
protestations of the Duke, that it had been naturally out of any one's
power to prevent the catastrophe.  The Prince was lodged in apart of the
town remote from the original scene of action, and it does not appear
that information had reached him that anything unusual was occurring,
until the affair was approaching its termination.  Then there was little
for him to do.  He hastened, however, to the scene, and mounting the
ramparts, persuaded the citizens to cease cannonading the discomfited
and retiring foe.  He felt the full gravity of the situation, and the
necessity of diminishing the rancor of the inhabitants against their
treacherous allies, if such a result were yet possible.  The burghers
had done their duty, and it certainly would have been neither in his
power nor his inclination to protect the French marauders from
expulsion and castigation.

Such was the termination of the French Fury, and it seems sufficiently
strange that it should have been so much less disastrous to Antwerp than
was the Spanish Fury of 1576, to which men could still scarcely allude
without a shudder.  One would have thought the French more likely to
prove successful in their enterprise than the Spaniards in theirs.  The
Spaniards were enemies against whom the city had long been on its guard.
The French were friends in whose sincerity a somewhat shaken confidence
had just been restored.  When the Spanish attack was made, a large force
of defenders was drawn up in battle array behind freshly strengthened
fortifications.  When the French entered at leisure through a scarcely
guarded gate, the whole population and garrison of the town were quietly
eating their dinners.  The numbers of the invading forces on the two
occasions did not materially differ; but at the time of the French Fury
there was not a large force of regular troops under veteran generals to
resist the attack.  Perhaps this was the main reason for the result,
which seems at first almost inexplicable.  For protection against the
Spanish invasion, the burghers relied on mercenaries, some of whom proved
treacherous, while the rest became panic-struck.  On the present occasion
the burghers relied on themselves.  Moreover, the French committed the
great error of despising their enemy.  Recollecting the ease with which
the Spaniards had ravished the city, they believed that they had nothing
to do but to enter and take possession.  Instead of repressing their
greediness, as the Spaniards had done, until they had overcome
resistance, they dispersed almost immediately into by-streets, and
entered warehouses to search for plunder.  They seemed actuated by a fear
that they should not have time to rifle the city before additional troops
should be sent by Anjou to share in the spoil.  They were less used to
the sacking of Netherland cities than were the Spaniards, whom long
practice had made perfect in the art of methodically butchering a
population at first, before attention should be diverted to plundering,
and supplementary outrages.  At any rate, whatever the causes, it is
certain that the panic, which upon such occasions generally decides the
fate of the day, seized upon the invaders and not upon the invaded,
almost from the very first.  As soon as the marauders faltered in their
purpose and wished to retreat, it was all over with them.  Returning was
worse than advance, and it was the almost inevitable result that hardly
a man escaped death or capture.

The Duke retreated the same day in the direction of Denremonde, and on
his way met with another misfortune, by which an additional number of his
troops lost their lives.  A dyke was cut by the Mechlin citizens to
impede his march, and the swollen waters of the Dill, liberated and
flowing across the country which he was to traverse, produced such an
inundation, that at least a thousand of his followers were drowned.

As soon as he had established himself in a camp near Berghem, he opened
a correspondence with the Prince of Orange, and with the authorities of
Antwerp.  His language was marked by wonderful effrontery.  He found
himself and soldiers suffering for want of food; he remembered that he
had left much plate and valuable furniture in Antwerp; and he was
therefore desirous that the citizens, whom he had so basely outraged,
should at once send him supplies and restore his property.  He also
reclaimed the prisoners who still remained in the city, and to obtain all
this he applied to the man whom he had bitterly deceived, and whose life
would have been sacrificed by the Duke, had the enterprise succeeded.

It had been his intention to sack the city, to re-establish exclusively
the Roman Catholic worship, to trample upon the constitution which he had
so recently sworn to maintain, to deprive Orange, by force, of the
Renversal by which the Duke recognized the Prince as sovereign of
Holland; Zealand; and Utrecht, yet notwithstanding that his treason had-
been enacted in broad daylight, and in a most deliberate manner, he had
the audacity to ascribe the recent tragic occurrences to chance.  He had
the farther originality to speak of himself as an aggrieved person, who
had rendered great services to the Netherlands, and who had only met with
ingratitude in return.  His envoys, Messieurs Landmater and Escolieres,
despatched on the very day of the French Fury to the burgomasters and
senate of Antwerp, were instructed to remind those magistrates that the
Duke had repeatedly exposed his life in the cause of the Netherlands.
The affronts, they were to add, which he had received, and the
approaching ruin of the country, which he foresaw, had so altered his
excellent nature, as to engender the present calamity, which he
infinitely regretted.  Nevertheless, the senate was to be assured that
his affection for the commonwealth was still so strong, as to induce a
desire on his part to be informed what course was now to be pursued with,
regard to him.  Information upon that important point was therefore to be
requested, while at the same time the liberation of the prisoners at
Antwerp, and the restaration of the Duke's furniture and papers, were to
be urgently demanded.

Letters of similar, import were also despatched by the Duke to the states
of the Union, while to the Prince of Orange; his application was brief
but brazen.  "You know well,--my cousin," said he "the just and frequent
causes of offence which this people has given me.  The insults which I,
this morning experienced cut me so deeply to the heart that they are the
only reasons of the misfortune which has happened today.  Nevertheless,
to those who desire my friendship I shall show equal friendship and
affection.  Herein I shall follow the counsel you have uniformly given
me, since I know it comes from one who has always loved me.  Therefore I
beg that you will kindly bring it to pass, that I may obtain some
decision, and that no injury may be inflicted upon my people.  Otherwise
the land shall pay for it dearly."

To these appeals, neither the Prince nor the authorities of Antwerp
answered immediately in their own names.  A general consultation was,
however, immediately held with the estates-general, and an answer
forthwith despatched to the Duke by the hands of his envoys.  It was
agreed to liberate the prisoners, to restore the furniture, and to send
a special deputation for the purpose of making further arrangements with
the Duke by word of mouth, and for this deputation his Highness was
requested to furnish a safe conduct.

Anjou was overjoyed when he received this amicable communication.
Relieved for a time from his fears as to the result of his crime, he
already assumed a higher ground.  He not only spoke to the states in a
paternal tone, which was sufficiently ludicrous, but he had actually the
coolness to assure them of his forgiveness.  "He felt hurt," he said,
"that they should deem a safe conduct necessary for the deputation which
they proposed to send.  If they thought that he had reason on account of
the past, to feel offended, he begged them to believe that he had
forgotten it all, and that he had buried the past in its ashes, even as
if it had never been."  He furthermore begged them--and this seemed the
greatest insult of all--"in future to trust to his word, and to believe
that if any thing should be attempted to their disadvantage, he would be
the very first to offer himself for their protection."

It will be observed that in his first letters the Duke had not affected
to deny his agency in the outrage--an agency so flagrant that all
subterfuge seemed superfluous.  He in fact avowed that the attempt had
been made by his command, but sought to palliate the crime on the ground
that it had been the result of the ill-treatment which he had experienced
from the states.  "The affronts which I have received," said he, both to
the magistrates of Antwerp and to Orange, "have engendered the present
calamity."  So also, in a letter written at the same time to his brother,
Henry the Third, he observed that "the indignities which were put upon
him, and the manifest intention of the states to make a Matthias of him,
had been the cause of the catastrophe."

He now, however, ventured a step farther.  Presuming upon the indulgence
which he had already experienced; and bravely assuming the tone of
injured innocence, he ascribed the enterprise partly to accident, and
partly to the insubordination of his troops.  This was the ground which
he adopted in his interviews with the states' commissioners.  So also,
in a letter addressed to Van der Tympel, commandant of Brussels, in which
he begged for supplies for his troops, he described the recent invasion
of Antwerp as entirely unexpected by himself, and beyond his control.
He had been intending, he said, to leave the city and to join his army.
A tumult had accidentally arisen between his soldiers and the guard at
the gate.  Other troops rushing in from without, had joined in the
affray, so that to, his great sorrow, an extensive disorder had arisen.
He manifested the same Christian inclination to forgive, however, which
he had before exhibited.  He observed that "good men would never grow
cold in his regard, or find his affection diminished."  He assured Van
der Tympel, in particular, of his ancient goodwill, as he knew him to be
a lover of the common weal.

In his original communications he had been both cringing and threatening
but, at least, he had not denied truths which were plain as daylight.
His new position considerably damaged his cause.  This forgiving spirit
on the part of the malefactor was a little more than the states could
bear, disposed as they felt, from policy, to be indulgent, and to smooth
over the crime as gently as possible.  The negotiations were interrupted,
and the authorities of Antwerp published a brief and spirited defence of
their own conduct.  They denied that any affront or want of respect on
their part could have provoked the outrage of which the Duke had been
guilty.  They severely handled his self-contradiction, in ascribing
originally the recent attempt to his just vengeance for past injuries,
and in afterwards imputing it to accident or sudden mutiny, while they
cited the simultaneous attempts at Bruges, Denremonde, Alost, Digmuyde,
Newport, Ostend, Vilvoorde, and Dunkirk, as a series of damning proofs of
a deliberate design.

The publication of such plain facts did not advance the negotiations when
resumed.  High and harsh words were interchanged between his Highness and
the commissioners, Anjou complaining, as usual, of affronts and
indignities, but when pushed home for particulars, taking refuge in
equivocation.  "He did not wish," he said, "to re-open wounds which had
been partially healed."  He also affected benignity, and wishing to
forgive and to forget, he offered some articles as the basis of a fresh
agreement.  Of these it is sufficient to state that they were entirely
different from the terms of the Bordeaux treaty, and that they were
rejected as quite inadmissible.

He wrote again to the Prince of Orange, invoking his influence to bring
about an arrangement.  The Prince, justly indignant at the recent
treachery and the present insolence of the man whom he had so profoundly
trusted, but feeling certain that the welfare of the country depended at
present upon avoiding, if possible, a political catastrophe, answered the
Duke in plain, firm, mournful, and appropriate language.  He had ever
manifested to his Highness, he said, the most uniform and sincere
friendship.  He had, therefore, the right to tell him that affairs were
now so changed that his greatness and glory had departed.  Those men in
the Netherlands, who, but yesterday, had been willing to die at the feet
of his Highness, were now so exasperated that they avowedly preferred an
open enemy to a treacherous protector.  He had hoped, he said, that after
what had happened in so many cities at the same moment, his Highness
would have been pleased to give the deputies a different and a more
becoming answer.  He had hoped for some response which might lead to an
arrangement.  He, however, stated frankly, that the articles transmitted
by his Highness were so unreasonable that no man in the land would dare
open his mouth to recommend them.  His Highness, by this proceeding, had
much deepened the distrust.  He warned the Duke accordingly, that he was
not taking the right course to reinstate himself in a position of honor
and glory, and he begged him, therefore, to adopt more appropriate means.
Such a step was now demanded of him, not only by the country, but by all
Christendom.

This moderate but heartfelt appeal to the better nature of the Duke, if
he had a better nature, met with no immediate response.

While matters were in this condition, a special envoy arrived out of
France, despatched by the King and Queen-mother, on the first reception
of the recent intelligence from Antwerp.  M. de Mirambeau, the
ambassador, whose son had been killed in the Fury, brought letters of
credence to the states of the; Union and to the Prince of Orange.  He
delivered also a short confidential note, written in her own hand, from
Catherine de Medici to the Prince, to the following effect:

"My COUSIN,--The King, my son, and myself, send you Monsieur de
Mirambeau, to prove to you that we do not believe--for we esteem you an
honorable man--that you would manifest ingratitude to my son, and to
those who have followed him for the welfare of your country.  We feel
that you have too much affection for one who has the support of so
powerful a prince as the King of France, as to play him so base a trick.
Until I learn the truth, I shall not renounce the good hope which I have
always indulged--that you would never have invited my son to your
country, without intending to serve him faithfully.  As long as you do
this, you may ever reckon on the support of all who belong to him.

                              "Your good Cousin,

                                             "CATHERINE."

It would have been very difficult to extract much information or much
comfort from this wily epistle.  The menace was sufficiently plain, the
promise disagreeably vague.  Moreover, a letter from the same Catherine
de Medici, had been recently found in a casket at the Duke's lodgings in
Antwerp.  In that communication, she had distinctly advised her son to
re-establish the Roman Catholic religion, assuring him that by so doing,
he would be enabled to marry the Infanta of Spain.  Nevertheless, the
Prince, convinced that it was his duty to bridge over the deep and fatal
chasm which had opened between the French Prince and the provinces,
if an honorable reconciliation were possible, did not attach an undue
importance either to the stimulating or to the upbraiding portion of the
communication from Catherine.  He was most anxious to avert the chaos
which he saw returning.  He knew that while the tempers of Rudolph,
of the English Queen, and of the Protestant princes of Germany, and the
internal condition of the Netherlands remained the same, it were madness
to provoke the government of France, and thus gain an additional enemy,
while losing their only friend.  He did not renounce the hope of forming
all the Netherlands--excepting of course the Walloon provinces already
reconciled to Philip--into one independent commonwealth, freed for ever
from Spanish tyranny.  A dynasty from a foreign house he was willing to
accept, but only on condition that the new royal line should become
naturalized in the Netherlands, should, conform itself to the strict
constitutional compact established, and should employ only natives in the
administration of Netherland affairs.  Notwithstanding, therefore, the
recent treachery of Anjou, he was willing to treat with him upon the
ancient basis.  The dilemma was a very desperate one, for whatever might
be his course, it was impossible that it should escape censure.  Even at
this day, it is difficult to decide what might have been the result of
openly braving the French government, and expelling Anjou.  The Prince of
Parma--subtle, vigilant, prompt with word and blow--was waiting most
anxiously to take advantage of every false step of his adversary.  The
provinces had been already summoned in most eloquent language, to take
warning by the recent fate of Antwerp, and to learn by the manifestation
just made by Anjou, of his real intentions; that their only salvation lay
in a return to the King's arms.  Anjou himself, as devoid of shame as of
honor, was secretly holding interviews with Parma's agents, Acosta and
Flaminio Carnero, at the very moment when he was alternately expressing
to the states his resentment that they dared to doubt his truth, or
magnanimously extending to them his pardon for their suspicions.  He was
writing letters full of injured innocence to Orange and to the states,
while secretly cavilling over the terms of the treaty by which he was to
sell himself to Spain.  Scruples as to enacting so base a part did not
trouble the "Son of France."  He did not hesitate at playing this doubly
and trebly false game with the provinces, but he was anxious to drive the
best possible bargain for himself with Parma.  He, offered to restore
Dunkirk, Dixmuyde, and the other cities which be had so recently filched
from the states, and to enter into a strict alliance with Philip; but he
claimed that certain Netherland cities on the French frontier, should be
made over to him in exchange.  He required; likewise; ample protection
for his retreat from a country which was likely to be sufficiently
exasperated.  Parma and his agents smiled, of course, at such exorbitant
terms.   Nevertheless, it was necessary to deal cautiously with a man
who, although but a poor baffled rogue to-day, might to-morrow be seated
on the throne of France.  While they were all secretly haggling over the
terms of the bargain, the Prince of Orange discovered the intrigue.  It
convinced him of the necessity of closing with a man whose baseness was
so profound, but whose position made his enmity, on the whole, more
dangerous than his friendship.  Anjou, backed by so astute and
unscrupulous a politician as Parma, was not to be trifled with.  The
feeling of doubt and anxiety was spreading daily through the country:
many men, hitherto firm, were already wavering, while at the same time
the Prince had no confidence in the power of any of the states, save
those of Holland and Utrecht; to maintain a resolute attitude of
defiance, if not assisted from without.

He therefore endeavored to repair the breach, if possible, and thus save
the Union.  Mirambeau, in his conferences with the estates, suggested, on
his part, all that words could effect.  He expressed the hope that the
estates would use their discretion "in compounding some sweet and
friendly medicine" for the present disorder; and that they would not
judge the Duke too harshly for a fault which he assured them did not come
from his natural disposition.  He warned them that the enemy would be
quick to take advantage of the present occasion to bring about, if
possible, their destruction, and he added that he was commissioned to
wait upon the Duke of Anjou, in order to assure him that, however
alienated he might then be from the Netherlands, his Majesty was
determined to effect an entire reconciliation.

The envoy conferred also with the Prince of Orange, and urged him most
earnestly to use his efforts to heal the rupture.  The Prince, inspired
by the sentiments already indicated, spoke with perfect sincerity.  His
Highness, he said, had never known a more faithful and zealous friend
than himself, He had begun to lose his own credit with the people by
reason of the earnestness with which he had ever advocated the Duke's
cause, and he could not flatter himself that his recommendation would now
be of any advantage to his Highness.  It would be more injurious than his
silence.  Nevertheless, he was willing to make use of all the influence
which was left to him for the purpose of bringing about a reconciliation,
provided that the Duke were acting in good faith.  If his Highness were
now sincerely desirous of conforming to the original treaty, and willing
to atone for the faults committed by him on the same day in so many
cities--offences which could not be excused upon the ground of any
affronts which he might have received from the citizens of Antwerp--
it might even now be possible to find a remedy for the past.  He very
bluntly told the envoy, however, that the frivolous excuses offered by
the Duke caused more bitterness than if he had openly acknowledged his
fault.  It were better, he said, to express contrition, than to excuse
himself by laying blame on those to whom no blame belonged, but who, on
the contrary, had ever shown themselves faithful servants of his
Highness.

The estates of the Union, being in great perplexity as to their proper
course, now applied formally, as they always did in times of danger and
doubt, to the Prince, for a public expression of his views.  Somewhat
reluctantly, he complied with their wishes in one of the most admirable
of his state papers.

He told the states-that he felt some hesitation in expressing his views.
The blame of the general ill success was always laid upon his shoulders;
as if the chances of war could be controlled even by a great potentate
with ample means at his disposal.  As for himself, with so little actual
power that he could never have a single city provided with what he
thought a sufficient garrison, it could not be expected that he could
command fortune.  His advice, he said, was always asked, but ever judged
good or evil according to the result, as if the issue were in any hands
but God's.  It did not seem advisable for a man of his condition and
years, who had so often felt the barb of calumny's tongue, to place his
honor, again in the judgment scale of mankind, particularly as he was
likely to incur fresh censure for another man's crime.  Nevertheless,
he was willing, for the love he bore the land, once more to encounter
this danger.

He then rapidly reviewed the circumstances which had led to the election
of Anjou, and reminded the estates that they had employed sufficient time
to deliberate concerning that transaction.  He recalled to their
remembrance his frequent assurances of support and sympathy if they would
provide any other means of self-protection than the treaty with the
French Prince.  He thought it, therefore, unjust, now that calamity had
sprung from the measure, to ascribe the blame entirely to him, even had
the injury been greater than the one actually sustained.  He was far from
palliating the crime, or from denying that the Duke's rights under the
Treaty of Bordeaux had been utterly forfeited.  He was now asked what was
to be done.  Of three courses, be said, one must be taken: they must make
their peace with the King, or consent to a reconciliation with Anjou, or
use all the strength which God had given them to resist, single-handed,
the enemy.  With regard to the first point, he resumed the argument as to
the hopelessness of a satisfactory arrangement with the monarch of Spain.
The recent reconciliation of the Walloon provinces and its shameful
infraction by Parma in the immediate recal of large masses of Spanish and
Italian troops, showed too plainly the value of all solemn stipulations
with his Catholic Majesty.  Moreover, the time was unpropitious.  It was
idle to look, after what had recently occurred, for even fair promises.
It was madness then to incur the enmity of two such powers at once.  The
French could do the Netherlands more harm as enemies than the Spaniards.
The Spaniards would be more dangerous as friends, for in cases of a
treaty with Philip the Inquisition would be established in the place of a
religious peace.  For these reasons the Prince declared himself entirely
opposed to any negotiations with the Crown of Spain.

As to the second point, he admitted that Anjou had gained little honor
by his recent course; and that it would be a mistake on their part to
stumble a second time over the same stone.  He foresaw, nevertheless,
that the Duke--irritated as he was by the loss of so many of his nobles,
and by the downfall of all his hopes in the Netherlands--would be likely
to inflict great injuries upon their cause.  Two powerful nations like
France and Spain would be too much to have on their hands at once.  How
much danger, too, would be incurred by braving at once the open wrath of
the French King, and, the secret displeasure of the English Queen.  She
had warmly recommended the Duke of Anjou.  She had said--that honors to
him were rendered to herself; and she was now entirely opposed to their
keeping the present quarrel alive.  If France became their enemy, the
road was at once opened through that kingdom for Spain.  The estates were
to ponder well whether they possessed the means to carry on such a double
war without assistance.  They were likewise to remember how many cities
still remained in the hands of Anjou, and their possible fate if the Duke
were pushed to extremity.

The third point was then handled with vigor.  He reminded the states of
the perpetual difficulty of raising armies, of collecting money to pay
for troops, of inducing cities to accept proper garrisons, of
establishing a council which could make itself respected.  He alluded
briefly and bitterly to the perpetual quarrels of the states among
themselves; to their mutual jealousy; to their obstinate parsimony; to
their jealousy of the general government; to their apathy and inertness
before impending ruin.  He would not calumniate those, he said, who
counselled trust in God.  That was his sentiment also: To attempt great
affairs, however, and, through avarice, to-withhold sufficient means, was
not trusting, but tempting God.--On the contrary, it was trusting God to
use the means which He offered to their hands.

With regard, then, to the three points, he rejected the first.
Reconciliation with the King of Spain was impossible.  For his own part,
he would much prefer the third course.  He had always been in favor of
their maintaining independence by their own means and the assistance of
the Almighty.  He was obliged, however, in sadness; to confess that the
narrow feeling of individual state rights, the general tendency to
disunion, and the constant wrangling, had made this course a hopeless
one.  There remained, therefore, only the second, and they must effect an
honorable reconciliation with Anjou.  Whatever might be their decision,
however, it was meet that it should be a speedy one.  Not an hour was to
be lost.  Many fair churches of God, in Anjou's power, were trembling on
the issue, and religious and political liberty was more at stake than
ever.  In conclusion, the Prince again expressed his determination,
whatever might be their decision, to devote the rest of his days to the
services of his country.

The result of these representations by the Prince--of frequent letters
from Queen Elizabeth, urging a reconciliation--and of the professions
made by the Duke and the French envoys, was a provisional arrangement,
signed on the 26th and 28th of March.  According to the terms of this
accord, the Duke was to receive thirty thousand florins for his troops,
and to surrender the cities still in his power.  The French prisoners
were to be liberated, the Duke's property at Antwerp was to be restored,
and the Duke himself was to await at Dunkirk the arrival of
plenipotentiaries to treat with him as to a new and perpetual
arrangement.

The negotiations, however, were languid.  The quarrel was healed on the
surface, but confidence so recently and violently uprooted was slow to
revive.  On the 28th of June, the Duke of Anjou left Dunkirk for Paris,
never to return to the Netherlands, but he exchanged on his departure
affectionate letters with the Prince and the estates.  M. des Pruneaux
remained as his representative, and it was understood that the
arrangements for re-installing him as soon as possible in the sovereignty
which he had so basely forfeited, were to be pushed forward with
earnestness.

In the spring of the same year, Gerard Truchses, Archbishop of Cologne,
who had lost his see for the love of Agnes Mansfeld, whom he had espoused
in defiance of the Pope; took refuge with the Prince of Orange at Delft.
A civil war in Germany broke forth, the Protestant princes undertaking to
support the Archbishop, in opposition to Ernest of Bavaria, who had been
appointed in his place.  The Palatine, John Casimir, thought it necessary
to mount and ride as usual.  Making his appearance at the head of a
hastily collected force, and prepared for another plunge into chaos, he
suddenly heard, however, of his elder brother's death at Heidelberg.
Leaving his men, as was his habit, to shift for themselves, and Baron
Truchses, the Archbishop's brother, to fall into the hands of the enemy,
he disappeared from the scene with great rapidity, in order that his own
interests in the palatinate and in the guardianship of the young
palatines might not suffer by his absence.

At this time, too, on the 12th of April, the Prince of Orange was
married, for the fourth time, to Louisa, widow of the Seigneur de
Teligny, and daughter of the illustrious Coligny.

In the course of the summer, the states of Holland and Zealand, always
bitterly opposed to the connection with Anjou, and more than ever
dissatisfied with the resumption of negotiations since the Antwerp
catastrophe, sent a committee to the Prince in order to persuade him to
set his face against the whole proceedings.  They delivered at the same
time a formal remonstrance, in writing (25th of August, 1583), in which
they explained how odious the arrangement with the Duke had ever been to
them.  They expressed the opinion that even the wisest might be sometimes
mistaken, and that the Prince had been bitterly deceived by Anjou and by
the French court.  They besought him to rely upon the assistance of the
Almighty, and upon the exertions of the nation, and they again hinted at
the propriety of his accepting that supreme sovereignty over all the
united provinces which would be so gladly conferred, while, for their own
parts, they voluntarily offered largely to increase the sums annually
contributed to the common defence.

Very soon afterwards, in August, 1583, the states of the united provinces
assembled at Middelburg formally offered the general government--which
under the circumstances was the general sovereignty--to the Prince,
warmly urging his acceptance of the dignity.  He manifested, however, the
same reluctance which he had always expressed, demanding that the project
should beforehand be laid before the councils of all the large cities,
and before the estates of certain provinces which had not been
represented at the Middelburg diet.  He also made use of the occasion to
urge the necessity of providing more generously for the army expenses and
other general disbursements.  As to ambitious views, he was a stranger to
them, and his language at this moment was as patriotic and self-denying
as at any previous period.  He expressed his thanks to the estates for
this renewed proof of their confidence in his character, and this
additional approbation of his course,--a sentiment which he was always
ready "as a good patriot to justify by his most faithful service."  He
reminded them, however, that he was no great monarch, having in his own
hands the means to help and the power to liberate them; and that even
were he in possession of all which God had once given him, he should be
far from strong enough to resist, single-handed, their powerful enemy.
All that was left to him, he said, was an "honest and moderate experience
in affairs."  With this he was ever ready to serve them to the utmost;
but they knew very well that the means to make that experience available
were to be drawn from the country itself.  With modest simplicity, he
observed that he had been at work fifteen or sixteen years, doing his
best, with the grace of God, to secure the freedom of the fatherland and
to resist tyranny of conscience; that he alone--assisted by his brothers
and some friends and relatives--had borne the whole burthen in the
beginning, and that he had afterwards been helped by the states of
Holland and Zealand, so that he could not but render thanks to God for
His great mercy in thus granting His blessing to so humble an instrument,
and thus restoring so many beautiful provinces to their ancient freedom
and to the true religion.  The Prince protested that this result was
already a sufficient reward for his labors--a great consolation in his
sufferings.  He had hoped, he said, that the estates, "taking into
consideration his long-continued labors, would have been willing to
excuse him from a new load of cares, and would have granted him some
little rest in his already advanced age;" that they would have selected
"some other person more fitted for the labor, whom he would himself
faithfully promise to assist to the best of his abilities, rendering him
willing obedience proportionate to the authority conferred upon him."

Like all other attempts to induce the acceptance, by the Prince, of
supreme authority, this effort proved ineffectual, from the obstinate
unwillingness of his hand to receive the proffered sceptre.

In connection with this movement, and at about the same epoch, Jacob
Swerius, member of the Brabant Council, with other deputies, waited upon
Orange, and formally tendered him the sovereign dukedom of Brabant,
forfeited and vacant by the late crime of Anjou.  The Prince, however,
resolutely refused to accept the dignity, assuring the committee that he
had not the means to afford the country as much protection as they had a
right to expect from their sovereign.  He added that "he would never give
the King of Spain the right-to say that the Prince of Orange had been
actuated by no other motives in his career than the hope of self-
aggrandizement, and the desire to deprive his Majesty of the provinces
in order to appropriate them to himself."

Accordingly, firmly refusing to heed the overtures of the United
States, and of Holland in particular, he continued to further the re-
establishment of Anjou--a measure in which, as he deliberately believed,
lay the only chance of union and in dependence.

The Prince of Parma, meantime, had not been idle.  He had been unable to
induce the provinces to listen to his wiles, and to rush to the embrace
of the monarch whose arms he described as ever open to the repentant.
He had, however, been busily occupied in the course of the summer in
taking up many of the towns which the treason of Anjou had laid open to
his attacks.

Eindhoven, Diest, Dunkirk, Newport, and other places, were successively
surrendered to royalist generals.  On the 22nd of September, 1583, the
city of Zutfen, too, was surprised by Colonel Tassis, on the fall of
which most important place, the treason of Orange's brother-in-law, Count
Van den Berg, governor of Gueldres, was revealed.  His fidelity had been
long suspected, particularly by Count John of Nassau, but always
earnestly vouched for by his wife and by his sons.  On the capture of
Zutfen, however, a document was found and made public, by which Van den
Berg bound himself to deliver the principal cities of Gueldres and
Zutfen, beginning with Zutfen itself, into the hands of Parma, on
condition of receiving the pardon and friendship of the King.

Not much better could have been expected of Van den Berg.  His
pusillanimous retreat from his post in Alva's time will be recollected;
and it is certain that the Prince had never placed implicit confidence
in his character.  Nevertheless, it was the fate of this great man to
be often deceived by the friends whom he trusted, although never to be
outwitted by his enemies.  Van den Berg was arrested, on the 15th of
November, carried to the Hague, examined and imprisoned for a time in
Delftshaven.  After a time he was, however, liberated, when he instantly,
with all his sons, took service under the King.

While treason was thus favoring the royal arms in the north, the same
powerful element, to which so much of the Netherland misfortunes had
always been owing was busy in Flanders.

Towards the end of the year 1583, the Prince of Chimay, eldest son of the
Duke of Aerschot, had been elected governor of that province.  This noble
was as unstable in character, as vain, as unscrupulous, and as ambitious
as his father and uncle.  He had been originally desirous of espousing
the eldest daughter of the Prince of Orange, afterwards the Countess of
Hohenlo, but the Duchess of Aerschot was too strict a Catholic to
consent to the marriage, and her son was afterwards united to the
Countess of Meghem, widow of Lan celot Berlaymont.

As affairs seemed going on prosperously for the states in the beginning,
of this year, the Prince of Chimay had affected a strong inclination for
the Reformed religion, and as governor of Bruges, he had appointed many
members of that Church to important offices, to the exclusion of
Catholics.  By so decided a course, he acquired the confidence of the
patriot party and at the end of the year he became governor of Flanders.
No sooner was he installed in this post, than he opened a private
correspondence with Parma, for it was his intention to make his peace
with the King, and to purchase pardon and advancement by the brilliant
service which he now undertook, of restoring this important province to
the royal authority.  In the arrangement of his plans he was assisted by
Champagny, who, as will be recollected, had long been a prisoner in
Ghent, but whose confinement was not so strict as to prevent frequent
intercourse with his friends without.  Champagny was indeed believed to
be the life of the whole intrigue.  The plot was, however, forwarded by
Imbize, the roaring demagogue whose republicanism could never reconcile
itself with what he esteemed the aristocratic policy of Orange, and whose
stern puritanism could be satisfied with nothing short of a general
extermination of Catholics.  This man, after having been allowed to
depart, infamous and contemptible, from the city which he had endangered,
now ventured after five years, to return, and to engage in fresh schemes
which were even more criminal than his previous enterprises.  The
uncompromising foe to Romanism, the advocate of Grecian and Genevan
democracy, now allied himself with Champagny and with Chimay, to effect a
surrender of Flanders to Philip and to the Inquisition.  He succeeded in
getting himself elected chief senator in Ghent, and forthwith began to
use all his influence to further the secret plot.  The joint efforts and
intrigues of Parma, Champagny, Chimay, and Imbize, were near being
successful.  Early, in the spring of 1584 a formal resolution was passed
by the government of Ghent, to open negotiations with Parma.  Hostages
were accordingly exchanged, and a truce of three weeks was agreed upon,
during which an animated correspondence was maintained between the
authorities of Ghent and the Prince of Chimay on the one side, and the
United States-general, the magistracy of Antwerp, the states of Brabant,
and other important bodies on the other.

The friends of the Union and of liberty used all their eloquence to
arrest the city of Ghent in its course, and to save the province of
Flanders from accepting the proposed arrangement with Parma.  The people
of Ghent were reminded that the chief promoter of this new negotiation
was Champagny, a man who owed a deep debt of hatred to their city, for
the long, and as he believed, the unjust confinement which he had endured
within its walls.  Moreover, he was the brother of Granvelle, source of
all their woes.  To take counsel with Champagny, was to come within reach
of a deadly foe, for "he who confesses himself to a wolf," said the
burgomasters of Antwerp, "will get wolf's absolution."  The Flemings were
warned by all their correspondents that it was puerile to hope for faith
in Philip; a monarch whose first principle was, that promises to heretics
were void.  They were entreated to pay no heed to the "sweet singing of
the royalists," who just then affected to disapprove of the practice
adopted by the Spanish Inquisition, that they might more surely separate
them from their friends.  "Imitate not," said the magistrates of
Brussels, "the foolish sheep who made with the wolves a treaty of
perpetual amity, from which the faithful dogs were to be excluded."
It was affirmed--and the truth was certainly beyond peradventure--that
religious liberty was dead at the moment when the treaty with Parma
should be signed.  "To look for political privilege or evangelical
liberty," said the Antwerp authorities, "in any arrangement with the
Spaniards, is to look for light in darkness, for fire in water."  "Philip
is himself the slave of the Inquisition," said the states-general, "and
has but one great purpose in life--to cherish the institution everywhere,
and particularly in the Netherlands.  Before Margaret of Parma's time,
one hundred thousand Netherlanders had been burned or strangled, and Alva
had spent seven years in butchering and torturing many thousands more."
The magistrates of Brussells used similar expressions.  "The King of
Spain," said they to their brethren of Ghent, "is fastened to the
Inquisition.  Yea, he is so much in its power, that even if he desired,
he is unable to maintain his promises."  The Prince of Orange too,
was indefatigable in public and private efforts to counteract the
machinations of Parma and the Spanish party in Ghent.  He saw with horror
the progress which the political decomposition of that most important
commonwealth was making, for he considered the city the keystone to the
union of the provinces, for he felt with a prophetic instinct that its
loss would entail that of all the southern provinces, and make a united
and independent Netherland state impossible.  Already in the summer of
1583, he addressed a letter full of wisdom and of warning to the
authorities of Ghent, a letter in which he set fully before them the
iniquity and stupidity of their proceedings, while at the same time he
expressed himself with so much dexterity and caution as to avoid giving
offence, by accusations which he made, as it were, hypothetically, when,
in truth, they were real ones.

These remonstrances were not fruitless, and the authorities and citizens
of Ghent once more paused ere they stepped from the precipice.  While
they were thus wavering, the whole negotiation with Parma was abruptly
brought to a close by a new incident, the demagogue Imbize having been
discovered in a secret attempt to obtain possession of the city of
Denremonde, and deliver it to Parma.  The old acquaintance, ally, and
enemy of Imbize, the Seigneur de Ryhove, was commandant of the city, and
information was privately conveyed to him of the design, before there had
been time for its accomplishment.  Ryhove, being thoroughly on his guard,
arrested his old comrade, who was shortly afterwards brought to trial,
and executed at Ghent.  John van Imbize had returned to the city from
which the contemptuous mercy of Orange had permitted him formerly to
depart, only to expiate fresh turbulence and fresh treason by a felon's
death.  Meanwhile the citizens: of Ghent; thus warned by word and deed,
passed an earnest resolution to have no more intercourse with Parma, but
to abide faithfully by the union.  Their example was followed by the
other Flemish cities, excepting, unfortunately, Bruges, for that
important town, being entirely in the power of Chimay, was now
surrendered by him to the royal government.  On the 20th of May, 1584,
Baron Montigny, on the part of Parma, signed an accord with the Prince of
Chimay, by which the city was restored to his Majesty, and by which all
inhabitants not willing to abide by the Roman Catholic religion were
permitted to leave the land.  The Prince was received with favor by
Parma, on conclusion of the transaction, and subsequently met with
advancement from the King, while the Princess, who had embraced the
Reformed religion, retired to Holland.

The only other city of importance gained on this occasion by the
government was Ypres, which had been long besieged, and was, soon
afterwards forced to yield.  The new Bishop, on taking possession,
resorted to instant measures for cleansing a place which had been so
long in the hands of the infidels, and as the first step in this
purification, the bodies of many heretics who had been buried for years
were taken from their graves, and publicly hanged in their coffins.  All
living adherents to the Reformed religion were instantly expelled from
the place.

Ghent and the rest of Flanders were, for the time, saved from the power
of Spain, the inhabitants being confirmed in their resolution of
sustaining their union with the other provinces by the news from France.
Early in the spring the negotiations between Anjou and the states-general
had been earnestly renewed, and Junius, Mouillerie, and.  Asseliers, had
been despatched on a special mission to France, for the purpose of
arranging a treaty with the Duke.  On the 19th of April, 1584, they
arrived in Delft, on their return, bringing warm letters from the French
court, full of promises to assist the Netherlands; and it was understood
that a constitution, upon the basis of the original arrangement of
Bordeaux, would be accepted by the Duke.  These arrangements were,
however, for ever terminated by the death of Anjou, who had been ill
during the whole course of the negotiations.  On the 10th of June, 1584,
he expired at Chateau Thierry, in great torture, sweating blood from
every pore, and under circumstances which, as usual, suggested strong
suspicions of poison.




CHAPTER VII.

     Various attempts upon the life of Orange--Delft--Mansion of the
     Prince described--Francis Guion or Balthazar Girard--His
     antecedents--His correspondence and interviews with Parma and with
     d'Assonleville--His employment in France--His return to Delft and
     interview with Orange--The crime--The confession--The punishment--
     The consequences--Concluding remarks.

It has been seen that the Ban against the Prince of Orange had not been
hitherto without fruits, for although unsuccessful, the efforts to take
his life and earn the promised guerdon had been incessant.  The attempt
of Jaureguy, at Antwerp, of Salseda and Baza at Bruges, have been
related, and in March, 1583, moreover, one Pietro Dordogno was executed
in Antwerp for endeavoring to assassinate the Prince.  Before his death,
he confessed that he had come from Spain solely for the purpose, and that
he had conferred with La Motte, governor of Gravelines, as to the best
means of accomplishing his design.  In April, 1584, Hans Hanzoon, a
merchant of Flushing, had been executed for attempting to destroy the
Prince by means of gunpowder, concealed under his house in that city,
and under his seat in the church.  He confessed that he had deliberately
formed the intention of performing the deed, and that he had discussed
the details of the enterprise with the Spanish ambassador in Paris.  At
about the same time, one Le Goth, a captive French officer, had been
applied to by the Marquis de Richebourg, on the part of Alexander of
Parma, to attempt the murder of the Prince.  Le Goth had consented,
saying that nothing could be more easily done; and that he would
undertake to poison him in a dish of eels, of which he knew him to be
particularly fond.  The Frenchman was liberated with this understanding;
but being very much the friend of Orange, straightway told him the whole
story, and remained ever afterwards a faithful servant of the states.
It is to be presumed that he excused the treachery to which he owed his
escape from prison on the ground that faith was no more to be kept with
murderers than with heretics.  Thus within two years there had been five
distinct attempts to assassinate the Prince, all of them, with the
privity of the Spanish government.  A sixth was soon to follow.

In the summer of 1584, William of Orange was residing at Delft, where his
wife, Louisa de Coligny, had given birth, in the preceding winter, to a
son, afterwards the celebrated stadholder, Frederic Henry.  The child had
received these names from his two godfathers, the Kings of Denmark and of
Navarre, and his baptism had been celebrated with much rejoicing on the
12th of June, in the place of his birth.

It was a quiet, cheerful, yet somewhat drowsy little city, that ancient
burgh of Delft.  The placid canals by which it was intersected in every
direction were all planted with whispering, umbrageous rows of limes and
poplars, and along these watery highways the traffic of the place glided
so noiselessly that the town seemed the abode of silence and
tranquillity.  The streets were clean and airy, the houses well built,
the whole aspect of the place thriving.

One of the principal thoroughfares was called the old Delftstreet.  It
was shaded on both sides by lime trees, which in that midsummer season
covered the surface of the canal which flowed between them with their
light and fragrant blossoms.  On one side of this street was the "old
kirk," a plain, antique structure of brick, with lancet windows, and with
a tall, slender tower, which inclined, at a very considerable angle,
towards a house upon the other side of the canal.  That house was the
mansion of William the Silent.  It stood directly opposite the church,
being separated by a spacious courtyard from the street, while the
stables and other offices in the rear extended to the city wall.  A
narrow lane, opening out of Delft-street, ran along the side of the house
and court, in the direction of the ramparts.  The house was a plain, two-
storied edifice of brick, with red-tiled roof, and had formerly been a
cloister dedicated to Saint Agatha, the last prior of which had been
hanged by the furious Lumey de la Merck.

The news of Anjou's death had been brought to Delft by a special
messenger from the French court.  On Sunday morning, the 8th of July,
1584, the Prince of Orange, having read the despatches before leaving his
bed, caused the man who had brought them to be summoned, that he might
give some particular details by word of mouth concerning the last illness
of the Duke.  The courier was accordingly admitted to the Prince's bed-
chamber, and proved to be one Francis Guion, as he called himself.  This
man had, early in the spring, claimed and received the protection of
Orange, on the ground of being the son of a Protestant at Besancon, who
had suffered death for--his religion, and of his own ardent attachment to
the Reformed faith.  A pious, psalm-singing, thoroughly Calvinistic youth
he seemed to be having a bible or a hymn-book under his arm whenever he
walked the street, and most exemplary in his attendance at sermon and
lecture.  For, the rest, a singularly unobtrusive personage, twenty-seven
years of age, low of stature, meagre, mean-visaged, muddy complexioned,
and altogether a man of no account--quite insignificant in the eyes of
all who looked upon him.  If there were one opinion in which the few who
had taken the trouble to think of the puny, somewhat shambling stranger
from Burgundy at all coincided, it was that he was inoffensive but quite
incapable of any important business.  He seemed well educated, claimed to
be of respectable parentage and had considerable facility of speech, when
any person could be found who thought it worth while to listen to him;
but on the whole he attracted little attention.

Nevertheless, this insignificant frame locked up a desperate and daring
character; this mild and inoffensive nature had gone pregnant seven years
with a terrible crime, whose birth could not much longer be retarded.
Francis Guion, the Calvinist, son of a martyred Calvinist, was in reality
Balthazar Gerard, a fanatical Catholic, whose father and mother were
still living at Villefans in Burgundy.  Before reaching man's estate, he
had formed the design of murdering the Prince of Orange, "who, so long as
he lived, seemed like to remain a rebel against the Catholic King, and to
make every effort to disturb the repose of the Roman Catholic Apostolic
religion."

When but twenty years of age, he had struck his dagger with all his might
into a door, exclaiming, as he did so, "Would that the blow had been in
the heart of Orange!"  For this he was rebuked by a bystander, who told
him it was not for him to kill princes, and that it was not desirable to
destroy so good a captain as the Prince, who, after all, might one day
reconcile himself with the King.

As soon as the Ban against Orange was published, Balthazar, more anxious
than ever to execute his long-cherished design, left Dole and came to
Luxemburg.  Here he learned that the deed had already been done by John
Jaureguy.  He received this intelligence at first with a sensation of
relief, was glad to be excused from putting himself in danger, and
believing the Prince dead, took service as clerk with one John Duprel,
secretary to Count Mansfeld, governor of Luxemburg.  Ere long, the ill
success of Jaureguy's attempt becoming known, the "inveterate
determination" of Gerard aroused itself more fiercely than ever.  He
accordingly took models of Mansfeld's official seals in wax, in order
that he might make use of them as an acceptable offering to the Orange
party, whose confidence he meant to gain.

Various circumstances detained him, however.  A sum of money was stolen,
and he was forced to stay till it was found, for fear of being arrested
as the thief.  Then his cousin and employer fell sick, and Gerard was
obliged to wait for his recovery.  At last, in March, 1584, "the weather,
as he said, appearing to be fine," Balthazar left Luxemburg and came to
Treves.  While there, he confided his scheme to the regent of the Jesuit
college--a "red-haired man" whose name has not been preserved.  That
dignitary expressed high approbation of the plan, gave Gerard his
blessing, and promised him that, if his life should be sacrificed in
achieving his purpose, he should be enrolled among the martyrs.  Another
Jesuit, however, in the same college, with whom he likewise communicated,
held very different language, making great efforts to turn the young man
from his design, on the ground of the inconveniences which might arise
from the forging of Mansfeld's seals--adding, that neither he nor any of
the Jesuits liked to meddle with such affairs, but advising that the
whole matter should be laid before the Prince of Parma.  It does not
appear that this personage, "an excellent man and a learned," attempted
to dissuade the young man from his project by arguments, drawn from any
supposed criminality in the assassination itself, or from any danger,
temporal or eternal, to which the perpetrator might expose himself.

Not influenced, as it appears, except on one point, by the advice of this
second ghostly confessor, Balthazar came to Tournay, and held council
with a third--the celebrated Franciscan, Father Gery--by whom he was much
comforted and strengthened in his determination.  His next step was to
lay the project before Parma, as the "excellent and learned" Jesuit at
Treves had advised.  This he did by a letter, drawn up with much care,
and which he evidently thought well of as a composition.  One copy of
this letter he deposited with the guardian of the Franciscan convent at
Tournay; the other he presented with his own hand to the Prince of Parma.
"The vassal," said he, "ought always to prefer justice and the will of
the king to his own life."  That being the case, he expressed his
astonishment that no man had yet been found to execute the sentence
against William of Nassau, "except the gentle Biscayan, since defunct."
To accomplish the task, Balthazar observed, very judiciously, that it was
necessary to have access, to the person of the Prince--wherein consisted
the difficulty.  Those who had that advantage, he continued, were
therefore bound to extirpate the pest at once, without obliging his
Majesty to send to Rome for a chevalier, because not one of them was
willing to precipitate himself into the venomous gulf, which by its
contagion infected and killed the souls and bodies, of all poor abused
subjects, exposed to its influence.  Gerard avowed himself to have been
so long goaded and stimulated by these considerations--so extremely
nettled with displeasure and bitterness at seeing the obstinate wretch
still escaping his just judgment--as to have formed the design of baiting
a trap for the fox, hoping thus to gain access to him, and to take him
unawares.  He added--without explaining the nature of the trap and the
bait--that he deemed it his duty to lay the subject before the most
serene Prince of Parma, protesting at the same time that he did not
contemplate the exploit for the sake of the reward mentioned in the
sentence, and that he preferred trusting in that regard to the immense
liberality of his Majesty.

Parma had long been looking for a good man to murder Orange, feeling--as
Philip, Granvelle, and all former governors of the Netherlands had felt--
that this was the only means of saving the royal authority in any part of
the provinces.  Many unsatisfactory assassins had presented themselves
from time to time, and Alexander had paid money in hand to various
individuals--Italians, Spaniards, Lorrainers; Scotchmen, Englishmen, who
had generally spent the sums received without attempting the job.  Others
were supposed to be still engaged in the enterprise; and at that moment
there were four persons--each unknown to the others, and of different
nations--in the city of Delft, seeking to compass the death of William
the Silent.  Shag-eared, military, hirsute ruffians--ex-captains of free
companies and such marauders--were daily offering their services; there
was no lack of them, and they had done but little.  How should Parma,
seeing this obscures undersized, thin-bearded, runaway clerk before him,
expect pith and energy from him?  He thought him quite unfit for an
enterprise of moment, and declared as much to his secret councillors and
to the King.

He soon dismissed him, after receiving his letters; and it may be
supposed that the bombastic style of that epistle would not efface
the unfavorable impression produced by Balthazar's exterior.  The
representations of Haultepenne and others induced him so far to modify
his views as to send his confidential councillor, d'Assonleville, to the
stranger, in order to learn the details of the scheme.  Assonleville had
accordingly an interview with Gerard, in which he requested the young man
to draw up a statement of his plan in writing, ani this was done upon the
11th of April, 1584.

In this letter Gerard explained his plan of introducing himself to the
notice of Orange, at Delft, as the son of an executed Calvinist; as
himself warmly, though secretly, devoted to the Reformed faith, and as
desirous, therefore, of placing himself in the Prince's service, in order
to avoid the insolence of the Papists.  Having gained the confidence of
those about the Prince, he would suggest to them the great use which
might be made of Mansfeld's signet in forging passports for spies and
other persons whom it might be desirous to send into the territory of the
royalists.  "With these or similar feints and frivolities," continued
Gerard, "he should soon obtain access to the person of the said Nassau,"
repeating his protestation that nothing had moved him to his enterprise
"save the good zeal which he bore to the faith and true religion guarded
by the Holy Mother Church Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman, and to the
service of his Majesty."  He begged pardon for having purloined the
impressions of the seals--a turpitude which he would never have
committed, but would sooner have suffered a thousand deaths, except for
the great end in view.  He particularly wished forgiveness for that crime
before going to his task, "in order that he might confess, and receive
the holy communion at the coming Easter, without scruples of conscience."
He likewise begged the Prince of Parma to obtain for him absolution from
his Holiness for this crime of pilfering--the more so "as he was about to
keep company for some time with heretics and atheists, and in some sort
to conform himself to their customs."

From the general tone of the letters of Gerard, he might be set down at
once as a simple, religious fanatic, who felt sure that, in executing the
command of Philip publicly issued to all the murderers of Europe, he was
meriting well of God and his King.  There is no doubt that he was an
exalted enthusiast, but not purely an enthusiast.  The man's character
offers more than one point of interest, as a psychological phenomenon.
He had convinced himself that the work which he had in hand was eminently
meritorious, and he was utterly without fear of consequences.  He was,
however, by no means so disinterested as he chose to represent himself in
letters which, as he instinctively felt, were to be of perennial
interest.  On the contrary, in his interviews with Assonleville, he urged
that he was a poor fellow, and that he had undertaken this enterprise in
order to acquire property--to make himself rich--and that he depended
upon the Prince of Parma's influence in obtaining the reward promised by
the Ban to the individual who should put Orange to death.

This second letter decided Parma so far that he authorized Assonleville
to encourage the young man in his attempt, and to promise that the reward
should be given to him in case of success, and to his heirs in the event
of his death.  Assonleville, in the second interview, accordingly made
known these assurances in the strongest manner to Gerard, warning him, at
the same time, on no account; if arrested, to inculpate the Prince of
Parma.  The councillor, while thus exhorting the stranger, according to
Alexander's commands, confined himself, however, to generalities,
refusing even to advance fifty crowns, which Balthazar had begged from
the Governor-General in order to provide for the necessary expenses of
his project.  Parma had made similar advances too often to men who had
promised to assassinate the Prince and had then done little, and he was
resolute in his refusal to this new adventurer, of whom he expected
absolutely nothing.  Gerard, notwithstanding this rebuff, was not
disheartened.  "I will provide myself out of my own purse," said he to
Assonleville, "and within six weeks you will hear of me."--"Go forth, my
son," said Assonleville, paternally, upon this spirited reply, "and if
you succeed in your enterprise, the King will fulfil all his promises,
and you will gain an immortal name beside."

The "inveterate deliberation," thus thoroughly matured, Gerard now
proceeded to carry into effect.  He came to Delft; obtained a hearing of
Millers, the clergyman and intimate friend of Orange, showed him the
Mansfeld seals, and was, somewhat against his will, sent to France, to
exhibit them to Marechal Biron, who, it was thought, was soon to be
appointed governor of Cambray.  Through Orange's recommendation, the
Burgundian was received into the suite of Noel de Caron, Seigneur de
Schoneval, then setting forth on a special mission to the Duke of Anjou.
While in France, Gerard could rest neither by day nor night, so tormented
was he by the desire of accomplishing his project, and at length he
obtained permission, upon the death of the Duke, to carry this important
intelligence to the Prince of Orange.  The despatches having been
entrusted to him, he travelled posthaste to Delft, and, to his
astonishment, the letters had hardly been delivered before he was
summoned in person to the chamber of the Prince.  Here was an opportunity
such as he had never dared to hope for.  The arch-enemy to the Church and
to the human race, whose death, would confer upon his destroyer wealth
and nobility in this world, besides a crown of glory in the next, lay
unarmed, alone, in bed, before the man who had thirsted seven long years
for his blood.

Balthazar could scarcely control his emotions sufficiently to answer
the questions which the Prince addressed to him concerning the death of
Anjou, but Orange, deeply engaged with the despatches, and with the
reflections which their deeply-important contents suggested, did not
observe the countenance of the humble Calvinist exile, who had been
recently recommended to his patronage by Millers.  Gerard, had, moreover,
made no preparation for an interview so entirely unexpected, had come
unarmed, and had formed no plan for escape.  He was obliged to forego
his prey when most within his reach, and after communicating all the
information which the Prince required, he was dismissed from the chamber.

It was Sunday morning, and the bells were tolling for church.  Upon
leaving the house he loitered about the courtyard, furtively examining
the premises, so that a sergeant of halberdiers asked him why he was
waiting there.  Balthazar meekly replied that he was desirous of
attending divine worship in the church opposite, but added, pointing to,
his shabby and travel-stained attire, that, without at least a new pair
of shoes and stockings, he was unfit to join the congregation.
Insignificant as ever, the small, pious, dusty stranger excited no
suspicion in the mind of the good-natured sergeant.  He forthwith spoke
of the wants of Gerard to an officer, by whom they were communicated to
Orange himself, and the Prince instantly ordered a sum of money to be
given him.  Thus Balthazar obtained from William's charity what Parma's
thrift had denied--a fund for carrying out his purpose.

Next morning, with the money thus procured he purchased a pair of
pistols, or small carabines, from a soldier, chaffering long about the
price because the vender could not supply a particular kind of chopped
bullets or slugs which he desired.  Before the sunset of the following
day that soldier had stabbed himself to the heart, and died despairing,
on hearing for what purpose the pistols had been bought.

On Tuesday, the 10th of July, 1584, at about half-past twelve, the
Prince, with his wife on his arm, and followed by the ladies and
gentlemen of his family, was going to the dining-room.  William the
Silent was dressed upon that day, according to his usual custom, in very
plain fashion.  He wore a wide-leaved, loosely-shaped hat of dark felt;
with a silken cord round the crown-such as had been worn by the Beggars
in the early days of the revolt.  A high ruff encircled his neck, from
which also depended one of the Beggar's medals, with the motto, "Fideles
au roy jusqu'a la besace," while a loose surcoat of grey frieze cloth,
over a tawny leather doublet, with wide, slashed underclothes completed
his costume.  Gerard presented himself at the doorway, and demanded a
passport.  The Princess, struck with the pale and agitated countenance of
the man, anxiously questioned her husband concerning the stranger.  The
Prince carelessly observed that "it was merely a person who came for a
passport," ordering, at the same time, a secretary forthwith to prepare
one.  The Princess, still not relieved, observed in an under-tone that
"she had never seen so villainous a countenance."  Orange, however, not
at all impressed with the appearance of Gerard, conducted himself at
table with his usual cheerfulness, conversing much with the burgomaster
of Leewarden, the only guest present at the family dinner, concerning the
political and religious aspects of Friesland.  At two o'clock the company
rose from table.  The Prince led the way, intending to pass to his
private apartments above.  The dining-room, which was on the ground
floor, opened into a little square vestibule, which communicated, through
an arched passageway, with the main entrance into the court-yard.  This
vestibule was also directly at the foot of the wooden staircase leading
to the next floor, and was scarcely six feet in width.  Upon its left
side, as one approached the stairway, was an, obscure arch, sunk deep in
the wall, and completely in the shadow of the door.  Behind this arch a
portal opened to the narrow lane at the side of the house.  The stairs
themselves were completely lighted by a large window, half way up the
flight.  The Prince came from the dining-room, and began leisurely to
ascend.  He had only reached the second stair, when a man emerged from
the sunken arch, and, standing within a foot or two of him, discharged
a pistol full at his heart.  Three balls entered his body, one of which,
passing quite through him, struck with violence against the wall beyond.
The Prince exclaimed in French, as he felt the wound, "O my God; have
mercy upon my soul!  O my God, have mercy upon this poor people."

These were the last words he ever spoke, save that when his sister,
Catherine of Schwartzburg, immediately afterwards asked him if he
commended his soul to Jesus Christ, he faintly answered, "Yes."  His
master of the horse, Jacob van Maldere, had caught him in his arms as the
fatal shot was fired.  The Prince was then placed on the stairs for an
instant, when he immediately began to swoon.  He was afterwards laid upon
a couch in the dining-room, where in a few minutes, he breathed his last
in the arms of his wife and sister.

The murderer succeeded in making his escape through the side door, and
sped swiftly up the narrow lane.  He had almost reached the ramparts,
from which he intended to spring into the moat, when he stumbled over a
heap of rubbish.  As he rose, he was seized by several pages and
halberdiers, who had pursued him from the house.  He had dropped his
pistols upon the spot where he had committed the crime, and upon his
person were found a couple, of bladders, provided with apiece of pipe
with which he had intended to assist himself across the moat, beyond
which a horse was waiting for him.  He made no effort to deny his
identity, but boldly avowed himself and his deed.  He was brought back to
the house, where he immediately underwent a preliminary examination
before the city magistrates.  He was afterwards subjected to excruciating
tortures; for the fury against the wretch who had destroyed the Father of
the country was uncontrollable, and William the Silent was no longer
alive to intercede--as he had often done before--in behalf of those who
assailed his life.

The organization of Balthazar Gerard would furnish a subject of profound
study, both for the physiologist and the metaphysician.  Neither wholly a
fanatic, nor entirely a ruffian, he combined the most dangerous elements
of both characters.  In his puny body and mean exterior were enclosed
considerable mental powers and accomplishments, a daring ambition, and a
courage almost superhuman.  Yet those qualities led him only to form upon
the threshold of life a deliberate determination to achieve greatness by
the assassin's trade.  The rewards held out by the Ban, combining with
his religious bigotry and his passion for distinction, fixed all his
energies with patient concentration upon the one great purpose for which
he seemed to have been born, and after seven years' preparation, he had
at last fulfilled his design.

Upon being interrogated by the magistrates, he manifested neither despair
nor contrition, but rather a quiet exultation."  Like David," he said,
"he had slain Goliath of Gath."

When falsely informed that his victim was not dead, he showed no
credulity or disappointment.  He had discharged three poisoned balls into
the Prince's stomach, and he knew that death must have already ensued.
He expressed regret, however, that the resistance of the halberdiers had
prevented him from using his second pistol, and avowed that if he were a
thousand leagues away he would return in order to do the deed again, if
possible.  He deliberately wrote a detailed confession of his crime, and
of the motives and manner of its commission, taking care, however, not to
implicate Parma in the transaction.  After sustaining day after day the
most horrible tortures, he subsequently related his interviews with
Assonleville and with the president of the Jesuit college at Treves
adding that he had been influenced in his work by the assurance of
obtaining the rewards promised by the Ban.  During the intervals of
repose from the rack he conversed with ease, and even eloquence,
answering all questions addressed to him with apparent sincerity.  His
constancy in suffering so astounded his judges that they believed him
supported by witchcraft.  "Ecce homo!"  he exclaimed, from time to time,
with insane blasphemy, as he raised his blood-streaming head from the
bench.  In order to destroy the charm which seemed to render him
insensible to pain, they sent for the shirt of a hospital patient,
supposed to be a sorcerer.  When clothed in this garment, however,
Balthazar was none the less superior to the arts of the tormentors,
enduring all their inflictions, according to an eye-witness, "without
once exclaiming, Ah me!"  and avowing that he would repeat his
enterprise, if possible, were he to die a thousand deaths in consequence.
Some of those present refused to believe that he was a man at all.
Others asked him how long since he had sold himself to the Devil? to
which he replied, mildly, that he had no acquaintance whatever with the
Devil.  He thanked the judges politely for the food which he received in
prison, and promised to recompense them for the favor.  Upon being asked
how that was possible, he replied; that he would serve as their advocate
in Paradise.

The sentence pronounced against the assassin was execrable--a crime
against the memory of the great man whom it professed to avenge.  It was
decreed that the right hand of Gerard should be burned off with a red-hot
iron, that his flesh should be torn from his bones with pincers in six
different places, that he should be quartered and disembowelled alive,
that his heart should be torn from his bosom and flung in his face, and
that, finally, his head should be taken off.  Not even his horrible
crime, with its endless consequences, nor the natural frenzy of
indignation which it had excited, could justify this savage decree,
to rebuke which the murdered hero might have almost risen from the sleep
of death.  The sentence was literally executed on the 14th of July, the
criminal supporting its horrors with the same astonishing fortitude. So
calm were his nerves, crippled and half roasted as he was ere he mounted
the scaffold, that when one of the executioners was slightly injured in
the ear by the flying from the handle of the hammer with which he was
breaking the fatal pistol in pieces, as the first step in the execution
--a circumstance which produced a general laugh in the crowd--a smile was
observed upon Balthazar's face in sympathy with the general hilarity.
His lips were seen to move up to the moment when his heart was thrown in
his face--"Then," said a looker-on, "he gave up the ghost."

The reward promised by Philip to the man who should murder Orange was
paid to the heirs of Gerard.  Parma informed his sovereign that the "poor
man" had been executed, but that his father and mother were still living;
to whom he recommended the payment of that "merced" which "the laudable
and generous deed had so well deserved."  This was accordingly done, and
the excellent parents, ennobled and enriched by the crime of their son,
received instead of the twenty-five thousand crowns promised in the Ban,
the three seignories of Lievremont, Hostal, and Dampmartin in the Franche
Comte, and took their place at once among the landed aristocracy.  Thus
the bounty of the Prince had furnished the weapon by which his life was
destroyed, and his estates supplied the fund out of which the assassin's
family received the price of blood.  At a later day, when the unfortunate
eldest son of Orange returned from Spain after twenty-seven years'
absence, a changeling and a Spaniard, the restoration of those very
estates was offered to him by Philip the Second, provided he would
continue to pay a fixed proportion of their rents to the family of his
father's murderer.  The education which Philip William had received,
under the King's auspices, had however, not entirely destroyed all his
human feelings, and he rejected the proposal with scorn.  The estates
remained with the Gerard family, and the patents of nobility which they
had received were used to justify their exemption from certain taxes,
until the union of Franche Comte, with France, when a French governor
tore the documents in pieces and trampled them under foot.

William of Orange, at the period of his death, was aged fifty-one years
and sixteen days.  He left twelve children.  By his first wife, Anne of
Egmont, he had one son, Philip, and one daughter, Mary, afterwards
married to Count Hohenlo.  By his second wife, Anna of Saxony; he had one
son, the celebrated Maurice of Nassau, and two daughters, Anna, married
afterwards to her cousin, Count William Louis, and Emilie, who espoused
the Pretender of Portugal, Prince Emanuel.  By Charlotte of Bourbon, his
third wife, he had six daughters; and by his fourth, Louisa de Coligny,
one son, Frederic William, afterwards stadholder of the Republic in
her most palmy days.  The Prince was entombed on the 3rd of August,
at Delft, amid the tears of a whole nation.  Never was a more extensive,
unaffected, and legitimate sorrow felt at the death of any human being.



The life and labors of Orange had established the emancipated common-
wealth upon a secure foundation, but his death rendered the union of all
the Netherlands into one republic hopeless.  The efforts of the
Malcontent nobles, the religious discord, the consummate ability, both
political and military, of Parma, all combined with the lamentable loss
of William the Silent to separate for ever the southern and Catholic
provinces from the northern confederacy.  So long as the Prince remained
alive, he was the Father of the whole country; the Netherlands--saving
only the two Walloon provinces--constituting a whole.  Notwithstanding
the spirit of faction and the blight of the long civil war, there was at
least one country; or the hope of a country, one strong heart, one
guiding head, for the patriotic party throughout the land.  Philip and
Granvelle were right in their estimate of the advantage to be derived
from the Prince's death, in believing that an assassin's hand could
achieve more than all the wiles which Spanish or Italian statesmanship
could teach, or all the armies which Spain or Italy could muster.  The
pistol of the insignificant Gerard destroyed the possibility of a united
Netherland state, while during the life of William there was union in the
policy, unity in the history of the country.

In the following year, Antwerp, hitherto the centre around which all the
national interests and historical events group themselves, fell before
the scientific efforts of Parma.  The city which had so long been the
freest, as well as the most opulent, capital in Europe, sank for ever to
the position of a provincial town.  With its fall, combined with other
circumstances, which it is not necessary to narrate in anticipation,
the final separation of the Netherlands was completed.  On the other
hand, at the death of Orange, whose formal inauguration as sovereign
Count had not yet taken place, the states of Holland and Zealand
reassumed the Sovereignty.  The commonwealth which William had liberated
for ever from Spanish tyranny continued to exist as a great and
flourishing republic during, more than two centuries, under the
successive stadholderates of his sons and descendants.

His life gave existence to an independent country--his death defined its
limits.  Had he lived twenty years longer, it is probable that the seven
provinces would have been seventeen; and that the Spanish title would
have been for ever extinguished both in Nether Germany and Celtic Gaul.
Although there was to be the length of two human generations more of
warfare ere Spain acknowledged the new government, yet before the
termination of that period the United States had become the first naval
power and one of the most considerable commonwealths in the world; while
the civil and religious liberty, the political independence of the land,
together with the total expulsion of the ancient foreign tyranny from the
soil, had been achieved ere the eyes of William were closed.  The
republic existed, in fact, from the moment of the abjuration in 1581.

The most important features of the polity which thus assumed a prominent
organization have been already indicated.  There was no revolution, no
radical change.  The ancient rugged tree of Netherland liberty--with its
moss-grown trunk, gnarled branches, and deep-reaching roots--which had
been slowly growing for ages, was still full of sap, and was to deposit
for centuries longer its annual rings of consolidated and concentric
strength.  Though lopped of some luxuriant boughs, it was sound at the
core, and destined for a still larger life than even in the healthiest
moments of its mediveval existence.

The history of the rise of the Netherland Republic has been at the same
time the biography of William the Silent.  This, while it gives unity to
the narrative, renders an elaborate description of his character
superfluous.  That life was a noble Christian epic; inspired with one
great purpose from its commencement to its close; the stream flowing ever
from one fountain with expanding fulness, but retaining all its original
pity.  A few general observations are all which are necessary by way of
conclusion.

In person, Orange was above the middle height, perfectly well made and
sinewy, but rather spare than stout.  His eyes, hair, beard, and
complexion were brown.  His head was small, symmetrically-shaped,
combining the alertness and compactness characteristic of the soldier;
with the capacious brow furrowed prematurely with the horizontal lines of
thought, denoting the statesman and the sage.  His physical appearance
was, therefore, in harmony, with his organization, which was of antique
model.  Of his moral qualities, the most prominent was his piety.  He was
more than anything else a religious man.  From his trust in God, he ever
derived support and consolation in the darkest hours.  Implicitly relying
upon Almighty wisdom and goodness, he looked danger in the face with a
constant smile, and endured incessant labors and trials with a serenity
which seemed more than human.  While, however, his soul was full of
piety, it was tolerant of error.  Sincerely and deliberately himself a
convert to the Reformed Church, he was ready to extend freedom of worship
to Catholics on the one hand, and to Anabaptists on the other, for no man
ever felt more keenly than he, that the Reformer who becomes in his turn
a bigot is doubly odious.

His firmness was allied to his piety.  His constancy in bearing the whole
weight of struggle as unequal as men have ever undertaken, was the theme
of admiration even to his enemies.  The rock in the ocean, "tranquil amid
raging billows," was the favorite emblem by which his friends expressed,
their sense of his firmness.  From the time when, as a hostage in France,
he first discovered the plan of Philip to plant the Inquisition in the
Netherlands, up to the last moment of his life, he never faltered in his
determination to resist that iniquitous scheme.  This resistance was the
labor of his life.  To exclude the Inquisition; to maintain the ancient
liberties.  of his country, was the task which he appointed to himself
when a youth of three-and-twenty.  Never speaking a word concerning a
heavenly mission, never deluding himself or others with the usual
phraseology of enthusiasts, he accomplished the task, through danger,
amid toils, and with sacrifices such as few men have ever been able to
make on their country's altar; for the disinterested benevolence of the
man was as prominent as his fortitude.  A prince of high rank, and, with
royal revenues, he stripped himself of station, wealth, almost at times
of the common necessaries of life, and became, in his country's cause,
nearly a beggar as well as an outlaw.  Nor was he forced into his career
by an accidental impulse from which there was no recovery.  Retreat was
ever open to him.  Not only pardon but advancement was urged upon him
again and again.  Officially and privately, directly and circuitously,
his confiscated estates, together with indefinite and boundless favors in
addition, were offered to him on every great occasion.  On the arrival of
Don John, at the Breda negotiations, at the Cologne conferences, we have
seen how calmly these offers were waved aside, as if their rejection was
so simple that it hardly required many words for its signification, yet
he had mortgaged his estates so deeply that his heirs hesitated at
accepting their inheritance, for fear it should involve them in debt.
Ten years after his death, the account between his executors and his
brother John amounted to one million four hundred thousand florins--due
to the Count, secured by various pledges of real and personal property;
and it was finally settled upon this basis.  He was besides largely
indebted to every one of his powerful relatives, so that the payment of
the incumbrances upon his estate very nearly justified the fears of his
children.  While on the one hand, therefore, he poured out these enormous
sums like water, and firmly refused a hearing to the tempting offers of
the royal government, upon the other hand he proved the disinterested
nature of his services by declining, year after year, the sovereignty
over the provinces; and by only accepting, in the last days of his life,
when refusal had become almost impossible, the limited, constitutional
supremacy over that portion of them which now makes the realm of his
descendants.  He lived and died, not for himself, but for his country:
"God pity this poor people!"  were his dying words.

His intellectual faculties were various and of the highest order.  He had
the exact, practical, and combining qualities which make the great
commander, and his friends claimed that, in military genius, he was
second to no captain in Europe.  This was, no doubt, an exaggeration
of partial attachment, but it is certain that the Emperor Charles had
an exalted opinion of his capacity for the field.  His fortification of
Philippeville and Charlemont, in the face of the enemy his passage of the
Meuse in Alva's sight--his unfortunate but well-ordered campaign against
that general--his sublime plan of relief, projected and successfully
directed at last from his sick bed, for the besieged city of Leyden--
will always remain monuments of his practical military skill.

Of the soldier's great virtues--constancy in disaster, devotion to duty,
hopefulness in defeat--no man ever possessed a larger share.  He arrived,
through a series of reverses, at a perfect victory.  He planted a free
commonwealth under the very battery of the Inquisition, in defiance of
the most powerful empire existing.  He was therefore a conqueror in the
loftiest sense, for he conquered liberty and a national existence for a
whole people.  The contest was long, and he fell in the struggle, but the
victory was to the dead hero, not to the living monarch.  It is to be
remembered, too, that he always wrought with inferior instruments.  His
troops were usually mercenaries, who were but too apt to mutiny upon the
eve of battle, while he was opposed by the most formidable veterans of
Europe, commanded successively by the first captains of the age.  That,
with no lieutenant of eminent valor or experience, save only his brother
Louis, and with none at all after that chieftain's death, William of
Orange should succeed in baffling the efforts of Alva, Requesens, Don
John of Austria, and Alexander Farnese--men whose names are among the
most brilliant in the military annals of the world--is in itself,
sufficient evidence of his warlike ability.  At the period of his death
he had reduced the number of obedient provinces to two; only Artois and
Hainault acknowledging Philip, while the other fifteen were in open
revolt, the greater part having solemnly forsworn their sovereign.

The supremacy of his political genius was entirely beyond question.  He
was the first statesman of the age.  The quickness of his perception was
only equalled by the caution which enabled him to mature the results of
his observations.  His knowledge of human nature was profound.  He
governed the passions and sentiments of a great nation as if they had
been but the keys and chords of one vast instrument; and his hand rarely
failed to evoke harmony even out of the wildest storms.  The turbulent
city of Ghent, which could obey no other master, which even the haughty
Emperor could only crush without controlling, was ever responsive to the
master-hand of Orange.  His presence scared away Imbize and his bat-like
crew, confounded the schemes of John Casimir, frustrated the wiles of
Prince Chimay, and while he lived, Ghent was what it ought always to have
remained, the bulwark, as it had been the cradle, of popular liberty.
After his death it became its tomb.

Ghent, saved thrice by the policy, the eloquence, the self-sacrifices of
Orange, fell within three months of his murder into the hands of Parma.
The loss of this most important city, followed in the next year by the
downfall of Antwerp, sealed the fate of the Southern Netherlands.
Had the Prince lived, how different might have been the country's fate!
If seven provinces could dilate, in so brief a space, into the powerful
commonwealth which the Republic soon became, what might not have been
achieved by the united seventeen; a confederacy which would have united
the adamantine vigor of the Batavian and Frisian races with the subtler,
more delicate, and more graceful national elements in which the genius of
the Frank, the Roman, and the Romanized Celt were so intimately blended.
As long as the Father of the country lived, such a union was possible.
His power of managing men was so unquestionable, that there was always a
hope, even in the darkest hour, for men felt implicit reliance, as well
on his intellectual resources as on his integrity.

This power of dealing with his fellow-men he manifested in the various
ways in which it has been usually exhibited by statesmen.  He possessed a
ready eloquence--sometimes impassioned, oftener argumentative, always
rational.  His influence over his audience was unexampled in the annals
of that country or age; yet he never condescended to flatter the people.
He never followed the nation, but always led her in the path of duty and
of honor, and was much more prone to rebuke the vices than to pander to
the passions of his hearers.  He never failed to administer ample
chastisement to parsimony, to jealousy, to insubordination, to
intolerance, to infidelity, wherever it was due, nor feared to confront
the states or the people in their most angry hours, and to tell them the
truth to their faces.  This commanding position he alone could stand
upon, for his countrymen knew the generosity which had sacrificed his
all for them, the self-denial which had eluded rather than sought
political advancement, whether from king or people, and the untiring
devotion which had consecrated a whole life to toil and danger in the
cause of their emancipation.  While, therefore, he was ever ready to
rebuke, and always too honest to flatter, he at the same time possessed
the eloquence which could convince or persuade.  He knew how to reach
both the mind and the heart of his hearers.  His orations, whether
extemporaneous or prepared--his written messages to the states-general,
to the provincial authorities, to the municipal bodies--his private
correspondence with men of all ranks, from emperors and kings down to
secretaries, and even children--all show an easy flow of language, a
fulness of thought, a power of expression rare in that age, a fund of
historical allusion, a considerable power of imagination, a warmth of
sentiment, a breadth of view, a directness of purpose--a range of
qualities, in short, which would in themselves have stamped him as one of
the master-minds of his century, had there been no other monument to his
memory than the remains of his spoken or written eloquence.  The bulk of
his performances in this department was prodigious.  Not even Philip was
more industrious in the cabinet.  Not even Granvelle held a more facile
pen.  He wrote and spoke equally well in French German, or Flemish; and
he possessed, besides; Spanish, Italian, Latin.  The weight of his
correspondence alone would have almost sufficed for the common industry
of a lifetime, and although many volumes of his speeches and, letters
have been published, there remain in the various archives of the
Netherlands and Germany many documents from his hand which will probably
never see the light.  If the capacity for unremitted intellectual labor
in an honorable cause be the measure of human greatness, few minds could
be compared to the "large composition" of this man.  The efforts made to
destroy the Netherlands by the most laborious and painstaking of tyrants
were counteracted by the industry of the most indefatigable of patriots.

Thus his eloquence, oral or written, gave him almost boundless power
over his countrymen.  He possessed, also, a rare perception of human
character, together with an iron memory which never lost a face, a place,
or an event, once seen or known.  He read the minds even the faces of
men, like printed books.  No man could overreach him, excepting only
those to whom he gave his heart.  He might be mistaken where he had
confided, never where he had been distrustful or indifferent.  He was
deceived by Renneberg, by his brother-in-law Van den Berg, by the Duke of
Anjou.  Had it been possible for his brother Louis or his brother John to
have proved false, he might have been deceived by them.  He was never
outwitted by Philip, or Granvelle, or Don John, or Alexander of Parma.
Anna of Saxony was false to him; and entered into correspondence with the
royal governors and with the King of Spain; Charlotte of Bourbon or
Louisa de Coligny might have done the same had it been possible for their
natures also to descend to such depths of guile.

As for the Aerschots, the Havres, the Chimays, he was never influenced
either by their blandishments or their plots.  He was willing to use them
when their interest made them friendly, or to crush them when their
intrigues against his policy rendered them dangerous.  The adroitness
with which he converted their schemes in behalf of Matthias, of Don John,
of Anjou, into so many additional weapons for his own cause, can never be
too often studied.  It is instructive to observe the wiles of the
Macchiavelian school employed by a master of the craft, to frustrate,
not to advance, a knavish purpose.  This character, in a great measure,
marked his whole policy.  He was profoundly skilled in the subtleties of
Italian statesmanship, which he had learned as a youth at the Imperial
court, and which he employed in his manhood in the service, not of
tyranny, but of liberty.  He fought the Inquisition with its own weapons.
He dealt with Philip on his own ground.  He excavated the earth beneath
the King's feet by a more subtle process than that practised by the most
fraudulent monarch that ever governed the Spanish empire, and Philip,
chain-mailed as he was in complicated wiles, was pierced to the quick by
a keener policy than his own.

Ten years long the King placed daily his most secret letters in hands
which regularly transmitted copies of the correspondence to the Prince of
Orange, together with a key to the ciphers and every other illustration
which might be required.  Thus the secrets of the King were always as
well known to Orange as to himself; and the Prince being as prompt as
Philip was hesitating, the schemes could often be frustrated before their
execution had been commenced.  The crime of the unfortunate clerk, John
de Castillo, was discovered in the autumn of the year 1581, and he was
torn to pieces by four horses.  Perhaps his treason to the monarch whose
bread he was eating, while he received a regular salary from the King's
most determined foe, deserved even this horrible punishment, but casuists
must determine how much guilt attaches to the Prince for his share in the
transaction.  This history is not the eulogy of Orange, although, in
discussing his character, it is difficult to avoid the monotony of
panegyric.  Judged by a severe moral standard, it cannot be called
virtuous or honorable to suborn treachery or any other crime, even to
accomplish a lofty purpose; yet the universal practice of mankind in all
ages has tolerated the artifices of war, and no people has ever engaged
in a holier or more mortal contest than did the Netherlands in their
great struggle with Spain.  Orange possessed the rare quality of caution,
a characteristic by which he was distinguished from his youth.  At
fifteen he was the confidential counsellor, as at twenty-one he became
the general-in-chief, to the most politic, as well as the most warlike
potentate of his age, and if he at times indulged in wiles which modern
statesmanship, even while it practises, condemns, he ever held in his
hand the clue of an honorable purpose to guide him through the tortuous
labyrinth.

It is difficult to find any other characteristic deserving of grave
censure, but his enemies have adopted a simpler process.  They have been
able to find few flaws in his nature, and therefore have denounced it in
gross.  It is not that his character was here and there defective, but
that the eternal jewel was false.  The patriotism was counterfeit; the
self-abnegation and the generosity were counterfeit.  He was governed
only by ambition--by a desire of personal advancement.  They never
attempted to deny his talents, his industry, his vast sacrifices of
wealth and station; but they ridiculed the idea that he could have been
inspired by any but unworthy motives.  God alone knows the heart of man.
He alone can unweave the tangled skein of human motives, and detect the
hidden springs of human action, but as far as can be judged by a careful
observation of undisputed facts, and by a diligent collation of public
and private documents, it would seem that no man--not even Washington--
has ever been inspired by a purer patriotism.  At any rate, the charge of
ambition and self-seeking can only be answered by a reference to the
whole picture which these volumes have attempted to portray.  The words,
the deeds of the man are there.  As much as possible, his inmost soul is
revealed in his confidential letters, and he who looks in a right spirit
will hardly fail to find what he desires.

Whether originally of a timid temperament or not, he was certainly
possessed of perfect courage at last.  In siege and battle--in the deadly
air of pestilential cities--in the long exhaustion of mind and body which
comes from unduly protracted labor and anxiety--amid the countless
conspiracies of assassins--he was daily exposed to death in every shape.
Within two years, five different attempts against his life had been
discovered.  Rank and fortune were offered to any malefactor who would
compass the murder.  He had already been shot through the head, and
almost mortally wounded.  Under such circumstances even a brave man might
have seen a pitfall at every step, a dagger in every hand, and poison in
every cup.  On the contrary, he was ever cheerful, and hardly took more
precaution than usual.  "God in his mercy," said he, with unaffected
simplicity, "will maintain my innocence and my honor during my life and
in future ages.  As to my fortune and my life, I have dedicated both,
long since, to His service.  He will do therewith what pleases Him for
His glory and my salvation."  Thus his suspicions were not even excited
by the ominous face of Gerard, when he first presented himself at the
dining-room door.  The Prince laughed off his wife's prophetic
apprehension at the sight of his murderer, and was as cheerful
as usual to the last.

He possessed, too, that which to the heathen philosopher seemed the
greatest good--the sound mind in the sound body.  His physical frame was
after death found so perfect that a long life might have been in store
for him, notwithstanding all which he had endured.  The desperate illness
of 1574, the frightful gunshot wound inflicted by Jaureguy in 1582, had
left no traces.  The physicians pronounced that his body presented an
aspect of perfect health.  His temperament was cheerful.  At table,
the pleasures of which, in moderation, were his only relaxation, he was
always animated and merry, and this jocoseness was partly natural, partly
intentional.  In the darkest hours of his country's trial, he affected a
serenity which he was far from feeling, so that his apparent gaiety at
momentous epochs was even censured by dullards, who could not comprehend
its philosophy, nor applaud the flippancy of William the Silent.

He went through life bearing the load of a people's sorrows upon his
shoulders with a smiling face.  Their name was the last word upon his
lips, save the simple affirmative, with which the soldier who had been
battling for the right all his lifetime, commended his soul in dying
"to his great captain, Christ."  The people were grateful and
affectionate, for they trusted the character of their "Father William,"
and not all the clouds which calumny could collect ever dimmed to their
eyes the radiance of that lofty mind to which they were accustomed, in
their darkest calamities, to look for light.  As long as he lived, he was
the guiding-star of a whole brave nation, and when he died the little
children cried in the streets.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Bribed the Deity
Forgiving spirit on the part of the malefactor
Great error of despising their enemy
Mistake to stumble a second time over the same stone
Modern statesmanship, even while it practises, condemns
Preferred an open enemy to a treacherous protector
Reformer who becomes in his turn a bigot is doubly odious
Unremitted intellectual labor in an honorable cause
Usual phraseology of enthusiasts
Writing letters full of injured innocence





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DUTCH REPUBLIC, 1582-84 ***

******** This file should be named 4834.txt or 4834.zip ********

This eBook was produced by David Widger

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*

