The Project Gutenberg EBook of Supplement to Commerce Reports Daily
Consular and Trade Reports, by Leslie A. Davis

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Supplement to Commerce Reports Daily Consular and Trade Reports
       Turkey, Harput

Author: Leslie A. Davis

Release Date: March 7, 2015 [EBook #48427]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUPPLEMENT TO COMMERCE REPORTS ***




Produced by Turgut Dincer (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)






  ----------------------------------------------------
  Transcriber's note:

  Words in bold typeface are surrounded by plus signs.
  ----------------------------------------------------




  SUPPLEMENT TO

  COMMERCE REPORTS
  DAILY CONSULAR AND TRADE REPORTS

  ISSUED BY THE BUREAU OF FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC COMMERCE
  DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE, WASHINGTON, D. C.

  Annual Series No. 18a March 15, 1915

  +TURKEY,+

  +HARPUT.+

  +By Consul Leslie A. Davis.+

The limited trade of the Harput consular district has almost entirely
ceased since the outbreak of the European War. Under normal conditions
the trade is small and confined to the merest necessaries of life.
Stoves, bedsteads, dining tables, table linen, individual tableware,
and many other articles usually regarded as indispensable in domestic
life are not to be found even in the homes of the better classes.


+Limited Business Opportunities--Population.+

There are no manufacturing establishments or industrial enterprises
of any importance and no business houses of any size in the entire
district. The only stores are small shops or booths of one room, seldom
more than 10 or 15 feet square and usually even smaller than that. The
business of any one merchant is necessarily small, and the quantity of
goods that he can handle limited. The goods are usually obtained by him
through business connections in Constantinople or Aleppo. The district
is essentially agricultural, and the products of the soil supply nearly
all the needs of its inhabitants.

The Vilayet of Mamouret-ul-Aziz, in which Harput is situated, is
said to contain about 500,000 inhabitants, of whom 250,000 reside
in the Sandjak of Mamouret-ul-Aziz, 180,000 in the Sandjak of Malatia,
and 70,000 in the Sandjak of Dersim. Of the total number, about
90,000 are Christians and the remainder Mohammedans. There are nearly
3,000 villages in the Vilayet but no large cities. In addition to
the Vilayet of Mamouret-ul-Aziz, four other Vilayets depend on this
consulate--Sivas, Diarbekir, Bitlis, and Van. This comprises the
greater part of the interior of Asia Minor, a region as large as all
New England and New York combined, with a total population of about
3,000,000.


+Lack of Transportation and Other Facilities--Trade Routes.+

There are no railroads, tramways, electric light or gas plants, public
telephones, places of amusement, automobiles, or newspapers in the
entire district. The lack of means of transportation is the greatest
hindrance to the development of the country. There are not even any
navigable rivers in the district. The distance to any seaport is 200
to 400 miles, and all goods have to be brought here over extremely
rough, mountainous roads, which are never kept in repair. In times
of peace some goods are transported in crude carts, but at all
times the greater part is carried on the backs of camels or donkeys.
Transportation is thus always a matter of many weeks and often of
months, especially in the winter, when the roads are frequently blocked
by snow for two or three months.

The principal trade route in the district begins at Samsun on the Black
Sea and runs southeast to Bagdad, passing through Sivas, Harput, and
Diarbekir. Goods destined for this Vilayet usually come via Samsun,
which is about 372 miles from Harput. This port being inaccessible
at the present time, the few articles that come here are brought
overland from Constantinople via Angora and Sivas or by mule trail from
Alexandretta. Little merchandise has been received during the last few
months. Freight rates are, of course, extremely high at all times,
being many times greater than the rate from the country of export to
the port of arrival in Turkey and often amounting to much more than the
original cost of the goods. This region can never make much progress
commercially until transportation conditions are remedied by the
building of railroads, and this is not likely to be done except with
foreign capital and assistance.


+Housing Conditions--Military Exoneration Tax.+

Owing to the lack of building stone and almost total lack of wood of
any kind in this part of Turkey, all houses in both town and country
are built of mud bricks called "kerpitch," which is a mixture of mud and
straw. The houses are not large and part of them is always used for the
stable, one or two rooms only being reserved for the use of the family,
which lives in the simplest and most primitive manner. Every one sleeps
rolled up in a blanket on the earth floor. The only fuel used by the
majority of the population is manure dried in the sun. Among people
accustomed to this manner of living it can not be expected that there
will be much market for foreign goods. The lot of the people is made
worse by uncertain economic conditions and recent political unrest. The
exoneration tax of 43 Turkish pounds gold ($189.20) levied on those who
have been excused from military service in the present war represents
the life savings of the majority of the people who have paid it.

Yet a certain amount of progress is to be noted. Many of the
inhabitants have been to the United States. They have naturally brought
back some new ideas, and as a result there is a slowly growing demand
for certain articles. Most conspicuous is the increase in the sale of
cheap ready-made and second-hand clothing. A large portion of these
goods now comes from the United States. The total imports in 1914
amounted to about $25,000, as compared with $6,500 in the previous
year. There is also a slight demand for metal roofing, the imports of
which amounted to $8,800 in 1914, as compared with $750 in 1913.


+Business Situation During the Early Part of Last Year.+

Trade in this district was not especially good at the beginning of
1914. It is allways dull in the interior of Turkey during the winter
months. The depression was greater than usual, however, as the country
had not recovered financially from its two recent wars.

After the French loan was negotiated and the first payment received the
prospects were brighter. Concessions were granted in connection with
this loan for the construction of a railroad between Samsun, on the
Black Sea coast, and various points in the interior of Asia Minor, and
work was actually begun at Samsun. As much of the region between Samsun
and Harput is very fertile and at the present time it is impossible
to export the crops because of lack of means of transportation to the
coast, the people were looking forward to a new era. The telegraph and
mail services had already been greatly improved. During the spring
and early summer there was much building activity at Harput and many
new houses were in process of erection. In July the streets here were
publicly lighted for the first time. At Sivas plans were made to
establish an electric-light plant. Crops everywhere were unusually
good and after the trade depression of the first half of the year
a revival of business was anticipated for the autumn. The building
activity resulted in an increased demand for some building materials.
Shopkeepers and merchants were on their way to Constantinople to
replenish their stocks, when suddenly a general mobilization of the
Turkish Army was declared.

Trade ceased, as many merchants and tradesmen had to join the
army. Harvesting was left largely to the women and children and a
considerable portion of the crops was lost. Grain, animals, and goods
of all kinds were requisitioned by the Government. Money was withdrawn
from circulation and the banks refused to make payments.


+Large Decrease in Import Trade.+

The import and export trade of this region in 1914 was therefore
practically limited to the first seven months of the year. The imports,
however, during that period were greater than usual, due largely to the
fact that this city has recently been made the headquarters of an army
corps and increased business was anticipated. The total value of the
imports in 1914 was $1,525,720, as compared with $2,194,450 in 1913. Of
the imports in 1914, goods from abroad amounted to $1,038,660 and goods
from other parts of Turkey to $487,060.

The values of the principal imports from foreign countries into the
Vilayet of Mamouret-ul-Aziz for 1913 and 1914 and the principal
countries of origin for 1914 are shown in the following table (United
States, U. S.; Austria, Aus.; Belgium, Bel.; France, Fr.; Germany,
Ger.; Greece, Gr.; Italy, It.; Netherlands, Neth.; Russia, Rus.;
Sweden, Sw.; Switzerland, Switz.; United Kingdom, U. K.):

  --------------------+---------+---------+------------------------------------
  Articles.           |  1913   |  1914   |   Countries of origin, 1914.
  --------------------+---------+---------+------------------------------------
  Arms and ammunition |  $4.000 |  $1,000 | Bel., U. S., Ger., Fr., Aus.
  Books               |   1,800 |   1,100 | Fr., U. K., U. S., Ger.
  Candles             |   3,500 |   3,000 | Aus., Ger., Fr.
  Chemicals, dyes,    |         |         |
    etc.:             |         |         |
    Alizarin, anilin, |         |         |
      and artificial  |         |         |
      indigo          |  18,000 |   5,000 | Ger., Aus.
    Indigo            |   1,200 |   3,500 | India.
  Clocks and watches  |   4,000 |   3,000 | Aus., Ger., Fr., Switz., U. S.
  Clothing            |   6,500 |  25,000 | U. S., Fr.
  Coffee              |   9,000 |   3,500 | Brazil, Arabia
  Copper, sheet       |  10,000 |   5,000 | U. K.
  Cotton goods:       |         |         |
    Cabots            |   6,100 |  66,000 | U. K., It., Ger., Aus., U. S.
    Calicoes          |  50,000 |  44,000 | U. K., It., Ger., Aus., Rus.
    Flannel           |  35,000 |  11,000 | It., Aus., Bel., Neth., U. K.
    Handkerchiefs     |  10,000 |   2,200 | U. K., Aus., Ger.
    Prints            |  13,000 |  35,000 | U. K., It., Rus.
    Sheetings         |  71,000 |  80,000 | U. K., It., Neth.
    Yarn              | 165,000 | 110,000 | U. K., India.
    Other             |  80,000 |  88,000 | U. K., It., Aus., Ger., Bel.
  Crockery            |   1,800 |   3,500 | Aus., Ger., It., Fr.
  Drugs               |   3,800 |   7,000 | U. K., Fr., U. S., Ger.
  Enameled ware       |   2,400 |  11,000 | Aus., Ger.
  Fezzes              |  45,000 |  15,000 | Aus.
  Glass and glassware |   6,200 |   8,800 | Aus., Ger., U. S.
  Grammaphones and    |         |         |
    supplies          |     400 |         |
  Hides, buffalo      |  65,000 |  88,000 | India, China.
  Iron and steel,     |         |         |
    manufactures of:  |         |         |
    Agricultural      |         |         |
      implements      |   2,500 |   2,200 | U. S., U. K., Ger., Aus.
    Hardware          |   9,000 |   4,400 | Ger., Aus., U. S.
    Machinery--       |         |         |
      Ginning         |   1,000 |         |
      Printing        |     500 |         |
      Other           |   8,900 |   2,000 | U. K., U. S.
    Nails             |   7,000 |  17,600 | U. K., Aus., Bel.
    Roofing, metal    |     750 |   8,800 | Fr., U. S.
    Sheet iron        |   5,000 |   8,800 | Fr., U. K.
    Shovels           |   1,500 |   4,400 |    Do.
    Tools             |   1,700 |     880 | U. S., Ger.
    Water pipes       |     500 |         |
    Other             |  14,600 |   8,500 | Bel., Aus., Ger., Sw., Neth., U. S.
  Jewelry             |   6,500 |   5,000 | Aus., It., Ger.
  Leather             |  11,000 |   8,800 | Fr., Ger., Gr.
  Matches             |  20,000 |  15,000 | Aus., It.
  Mercer's goods      |  44,000 |  13,200 | Aus., U. K., It.
  Paper               |         |         |
    Cigarette         |   9,000 |  15,000 | Aus., Fr., Ger.
    Other             |  12,500 |  10,000 | Aus., Ger., U. K., Bel.
  Perfumes            |   1,000 |     300 | Fr., Ger.
  Petroleum           |  61,000 |  25,000 | Rus., Roumania, U. S.
  Rubber overshoes    |         |         |
    and goods         |   5,000 |   4,400 | U. S.
  Sacks and sacking   |   6,000 |   5,000 | U. K.
  Spices              |   5,000 |   5,000 | India.
  Sugar               |  52,000 |  25,000 | Aus., Rus., Egypt.
  Tea                 |   2,000 |     880 | U. K., Rus.
  Tin                 |         |   6,600 | U. K.
  Velvet              |  14,000 |   4,400 | U. K., It.
  Woolen goods:       |         |         |
    Underwear         |   5,500 |   6,600 | Ger., Aus.
    Other             | 380,000 | 175,000 | U. K., Fr., Ger., Aus., Bel.
  All other articles  |  60,000 |  42,000 |
                      ---------------------
  Total               1,360,750 1,038,000
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

The imports into the Vilayet of Mamouret-ul-Aziz from other parts of
Turkey during 1014 were valued at $487,060, compared with $833,700
for 1013. The imported articles and their value for two years were as
follows:

  -------------------------+---------+---------
  Articles.                |  1913   |  1914
  -------------------------+---------+---------
  Aniseed                  |  $3,500 |  $3,500
  Butter                   | 150,000 | 132,000
  Copperware               |  45,000 |   5,000
  Flour                    |   2,000 |   1,760
  Henna                    |   1,500 |   2,200
  Horseshoes               |   4,000 |   3,500
  Ornaments, gold and      |         |
    silver                 |   4,800 |   3,500
  Rice                     |  17,000 |  26,400
  Salt                     | 145,000 |  30,000
  Shares, plow             |         |
   (native make)           |   1,500 |     880
  School supplies          |   5,000 |   2,500
  Sheetings                |   4,400 |   4,400
  Sheep and goats          | 280,000 | 180,000
  Soap                     |  85,000 |  17,600
  Timber                   |   5,000 |   5,000
  Tobacco                  |  34,500 |  26,400
  Towels                   |   3,500 |   1,760
  All other articles       |  42,000 |  40,660
                           -------------------
  Total                      833,700   487,060
  --------------------------------------------

+Effect of War on Export Trade.+

The effect of the disturbed conditions on the export trade was much
worse, as most of the articles exported from here are agricultural
products and are not shipped until the latter part of the year. By that
time all animals that could be used for transport were requisitioned
for the army and shipments either abroad or to other parts of Turkey
were impossible. Consequently, the export trade to foreign countries
from this Vilayet in 1914 amounted to only $137,100, as compared with
$494,390 in 1913, and the value of shipments to other Provinces of
Turkey to $139,600, as compared with $599,740 in 1913--a total of
only $276,700 in 1914, whereas the total exports in 1913 amounted to
$1,094,130. These exports were as follows:

  ------------------+---------+-----------
  Articles.         |  1913   |  1914
  ------------------+---------+-----------
       TO FOREIGN COUNTRIES.  |
  Apricot stones:   |         |
    Bitter          |  $6,000 |
    Sweet           |   8,000 |
  Cocoons           |   8,500 |
  Cotton            |  47,300 |  $60,000
  Embroideries      |  20,000 |    1,000
  Fruits, dried     |  16,000 |
  Furs              |  19,000 |
  Goatskins         |  22,000 |
  Leather, morocco  |  39,000 |
  Nuts:             |         |
    Pistachio       |  12,000 |
    Other           |  12,000 |
  Opium             | 190,740 |  75,000
  Raisins           |  35,000 |
  Rugs and kilims   |  20,000 |
  Sausage casings   |   9,300 |   1,100
  Silkworm eggs     |  19,800 |
  Other articles    |   9,750 |
                    -------------------
  Total               494,390   137,100
  -------------------------------------
       TO TURKISH PROVINCES.  |
  Almonds           |  $6,500 |
  Apricots, dried   |  42,000 |    $440
  Butter            |   6,500 |
  Cotton prints     |   3,000 |  26,400
  Cotton            |  96,000 |  20,000
  Cord and ropes    |   8,000 |     660
  Fruits            |  25,000 |  22,000
  Goatskins         |  75,000 |   2,000
  Hides             |   7,000 |   5,000
  Leather, morocco  |  18,000 |   2,200
  Manoosa           |         |
    (cotton cloth)  | 180,000 |  30,000
  Raisins           |  39,000 |   2,500
  Silk cloth        |   8,000 |   3,500
  Silk, raw         |   6,000 |
  All other articles|  79,740 |  24,900
                    -------------------
  Total               599,740   139,600
  -------------------------------------

The foregoing figures are estimates made after interviewing all the
leading merchants and shopkeepers in this region. No official trade
statistics are kept in the interior of Turkey.

The only declared exports from this consular district to the United
States during 1914 was a shipment of household goods and personal
effects, valued at $92, made by a missionary, who was returning home.


+Advance in Prices of Necessaries.+

The greatest decrease in imports was in the necessaries of life, such
as petroleum, soap, sugar, coffee, tea, and woolen goods. The prices
of these commodities have consequently increased considerably and
are continuing to rise. The Government has endeavored to remedy this
condition by ordering merchants to sell their wares at reasonable
prices.

The prices of kerosene has advanced from 80 to 200 piasters a box (two
tins), soap from 9 to 10 piasters an oke (a piaster is equivalent to
4.4 cents and an oke to 2.82 pounds), sugar from 4 to 10 piasters
an oke, coffee from 15 to 36 piasters an oke, and tea from 5 to 10
piasters a box, while the prices of clothes, shoes, and other articles
of wearing apparel have increased on an average about 50 per cent.


+Trade Opportunities Along Certain Lines.+

Notwithstanding the limited means of the people of this district and
its small trade, there is a slight market here for some kinds of goods.
These opportunities are undoubtedly increased to some extent by the
present situation, which has cut off many of the former sources of
supply, and when means of transportation are again available tradesmen
will have to replenish their stocks.

Among articles formerly obtained from European countries that might
be supplied by the United States are candles, cigarette paper, copper
(sheet), enameled iron and steel ware, fezzes, matches, nails, sheet
iron, shovels, and sugar. The market for sugar is especially good,
and there is also a considerable demand for enameled ware, the sale
of which is increasing rapidly, and for nails and shovels.


+Demand for Cotton Goods.+

The sale of many articles now imported in limited quantities from the
United States may readily be increased. Most important are cotton
goods, especially cabots. On investigation it was found that these are
sold in this district in much greater quantities than was previously
supposed. It is believed that if proper arrangements could be made,
American cabots might take the place, to a great extent, of those
now imported from other countries. The American cabot "A" is well
known in Turkey and is extensively used both in the army and among the
people. Any cabot to be sold here must be cheap and durable. There is
also a good market for calicoes and prints. Calicoes must be unstarched
and prints must be of fast colors. Bright colors with large flower
designs are preferred; prints having animal designs would not sell
here. Large quantities of yarn are used, especially in the region of
Arabkir, in the manufacture of a cotton cloth called "manoosa," which
is made and worn throughout Asia Minor. In the past practically all
the yarn has come from England and India. Care should be taken about
sizes, as only certain numbers are used, and only English numbers are
understood. Remnants of ginghams, calicoes, ribbons, or any other
textile articles would have a good sale here.


+Increased Market for Second-Hand Clothing, Shoes, Knit Underwear, etc.+

Other articles of wearing apparel that are now imported from the
United States in small quantities might be sold more extensively. The
rapid increase in the sale of second-hand clothing is an indication
of the possibilities in this line. The dealers in these goods have no
difficulty in selling all they can get and report a growing demand for
them, due largely to the return of many Armenians who have lived in the
United States. The men in this region are gradually discarding their
native "entari" (a union waist and skirt, in appearance like a woman's
dress) for modern clothes, which they find more convenient. Style is
of less consideration than cheapness. One frequently sees men wearing
second-hand women's jackets.

American shoes are worn here to some extent, and there is a fair market
for shoes that sell for not more than $2 or $8. There is also a growing
demand for rubber overshoes, nearly all of which now come from the
United States. Owing to the present lack of transportation facilities
they are being imported by post.

Knit underwear is beginning to be worn, but only by the better classes.
As they comprise only a small portion of the population, the market for
this line of goods is limited.

Parasols are always carried by the higher-class Turkish and Armenian
women, principally for the purpose of concealing their faces. Bright
colors are always chosen.

Some improvement is to be noted in the styles of women's dresses.
Woolen dress goods are now sold here. Medium qualities of durable
material sell best. This is not as important a market for other woollen
goods as might appear from the import statistics, as only the cheapest
kinds can be sold.

Among other articles for which there is some market might be mentioned
buttons, celluloid collars, suspenders, and thread.


+Government Encouraging the Use of Improved Agricultural Implements.+

There is a great need of certain kinds of agricultural implements
in this district. Agriculture is practically its only industry, but
it is carried on in the most primitive manner with crude wooden and
iron plows and other implements of local manufacture. The Government
has been making some effort, however, to introduce modern farming
implements, and maintains in all the principal cities in the interior
of Asia Minor supply stations where they are sold at cost and free
instruction given in their use. Only the cheapest and simplest kinds of
implements can be sold. Much of the land is rough and stony, and oxen
are used instead of horses.

There is a limited market for hardware and for simple carpenters'
and blacksmiths' tools, such as axes, hammers, hatchets, drills, files,
planes, screw drivers, saws, hinges, locks, latches, staples, chains,
wire, wire nails, knives, forks, spoons, pocketknives, scissors, clippers,
currycombs, small coffee mills, and meat choppers. The last are used
by nearly every one in preparing a favorite native dish of chopped
meat called "kufte". Until recently nearly all the above-mentioned
articles used here have been of local make, but foreign-made goods
are gradually taking their places. American sewing machines have a
good sale. There has also been some demand for American metal
roofing.


+Other Articles that Might Find a Market.+

Among other articles for which there is some market in this
district, only a small portion of which now comes from the United
States, are bicycles, canned fish, clocks and watches, drugs, glass and
glassware, lamps, lanterns, needles and pins, petroleum, second-hand
saddles, shoe polish, soap, stationery, toys, and wooden shoe
pegs. The sale of drugs is rapidly increasing, due partly to the
many Armenians here who have become accustomed to their use in
the United States, and also to the American hospitals in the district,
all of which maintain public dispensaries. The sale of American
petroleum has recently begun in this region; formerly nearly all
came from Russia and Roumania.

There is no market worth seeking in this district for such articles as
automobiles, electrical or other machinery, engines, motor boats, musical
instruments, or office furniture, though there is an occasional
isolated purchase. One automobile was ordered last June through
this consulate, but owing to the outbreak of war its shipment has been
indefinitely delayed.

Plans were being made for the installation of an electric-light
plant at Sivas, but the undertaking has been stopped by the war.
This would have been the first one in the interior of Asia Minor.

+Effect of Emigration on Business--Money Sent from United States.+

One advantage that American firms have in doing business here
is that a large number of Armenians from this district have been to
the United States. They have become familiar with articles of
American manufacture and are useful agents in advertising their
merits. Most of them understand English. Some of them buy small
shops in the market and start in business for themselves. They
naturally favor American goods. Others engage in some trade in
which they employ American tools.

Local bankers estimate that nearly $1,000,000, or $10 per family,
comes into this one Vilayet annually from emigrants who have settled
in the United States. The importance of this revenue to the
poor people here can be appreciated from the fact that the average
family lives on about $150 a year. Many are wholly dependent on
money sent them by relatives in the United States. Great hardship
is being caused, therefore, by the present situation, as it is practically
impossible to send money here.

The only industry of importance in this district is agriculture,
and the prosperity of the region depends on the success of the crops.
The farmers, who constitute a large part of the population, realized
but little on the crops, owing partly to the abundance of yield, the
decreased demand on account of the departure of large numbers of
men for the army, and the scarcity of money. These conditions,
however, benefited those living in the towns and cities.

Wheat sold in 1013 for 50 or 60 piasters per kile (a piaster is
equivalent to 4.4 cents and a kile to about 170 pounds) and barley for
35 piasters per kile. Last year wheat sold as low as 35 piasters per
kile and barley as low as 25 piasters per kile.


+Increased Yield of Cotton.+

Considerable cotton of an inferior quality is raised in this Vilayet.
The bolls are about the size of a walnut, the fiber short, and the
plants small. Other varieties do not thrive here on account of the
shortness of the season. The method of cultivation is primitive, most
of the work being performed by women, and little effort is made to
secure good crops.

It is estimated that last year's yield will amount to between 1,400,000
and 1,600,000 pounds, which is greater than it was in 1013; but as the
ginning is done very slowly with small machines, not more than 40,000
or 50,000 pounds had actually been brought to the market by the end
of the year. None arrived until December and it is probable that the
full crop will not be received before May or June. No cotton is being
exported at the present time, but last year about $60,000 worth of the
1913 crop went to Russia, and about $20,000 worth to other Provinces of
Turkey. About 250,000 pounds of cotton are sold in this Vilayet each
year to be used in making rough cotton cloth and native prints. This
year, however, owing to the impossibility of exportation and to the
difficulty of importing cotton goods, much more than that amount will
probably be used in making native cloth. The price of last season's
cotton when it was first received was 20 piasters a batman (about 5
cents a pound). By the end of December it had advanced to 30 piasters a
batman (7 cents a pound). The average price here is 35 or 40 piasters a
batman (84 to 91 cents a pound).


+Production of Silk, Opium, and Fruit.+

The cultivation of silkworms is carried on in nearly every village
of the district. There are a number of small silk factories and most
of the production of this industry is used locally, but usually some
cocoons are exported each year to Marseille and some silkworm eggs to
Russia, Persia, and Roumania, while raw silk goes to several of the
other Provinces of Turkey. Last year there were no exports abroad in
this line and very little, if anything, sent to other Provinces. The
production of cocoons in this Vilayet was only about half what it was
in 1913, amounting to about 100,000 pounds (making 10,000 or 11,000
pounds of raw silk). One-fourth of this amount was used by one factory,
the only one of any size in the district, but this is now closed
because there is no market for its goods. A small amount was used by a
few other small factories and the remainder is on hand. The amount of
eggs last season was 30,000 ounces, the same as in 1913, of which 5,000
ounces were used here and the remainder is on hand.

The yield of opium last year was practically the same as in 1913,
amounting to about 17,000 okes (47,000 pounds), all of it being produced
in Malatia. Only about half of this amount, valued at $75,000,
has been exported. The price fluctuated considerably last season,
varying from $1.50 to $5 per pound. The average price here is about $4
per pound.

The fruit crop last year was much less than usual, as the trees were
badly damaged by hailstorms in May and much of the fruit destroyed
before it was ripe. There was only about half an average crop of
almonds, grapes, apples, pears, and plums. The price of almonds,
however, is only 9 piasters an oke (13 cents a pound), about half the
usual price, because none were exported. The crop of apricots was about
average, and the peach crop only a little below the average.


+Lack of Fuel--Machinery for Artesian Well.+

The lack of fuel is one of the greatest problems of this region. The
only wood obtainable is scrub oak sapplings, all of which has to be
brought here on the backs of donkeys from a distance of two or three
or even four days' journey. The price is advancing each year as the
supply is getting scarcer and the wood brought from greater distances.
There is no way by which coal or wood could be brought here from other
places. The recent discovery of a deposit of coal in the Paloo region,
two days' journey from Harput, aroused hopes that this problem might be
partially solved, but the coal has proved to be of inferior quality and
hardly worth bringing here.

The machinery for the artesian well mentioned in the last two annual
reports from this consulate was recently set up and drilling has begun
under the direction of a native engineer, but as yet without results.

  WASHINGTON : GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE : 1915





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Supplement to Commerce Reports Daily
Consular and Trade Reports, by Leslie A. Davis

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SUPPLEMENT TO COMMERCE REPORTS ***

***** This file should be named 48427.txt or 48427.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/4/2/48427/

Produced by Turgut Dincer (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

