The Project Gutenberg EBook of Three Years in the Service, by D. McCall

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Three Years in the Service
       A Record of the Doings of the 11th Reg. Missouri Vols.

Author: D. McCall

Release Date: April 29, 2015 [EBook #48822]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE YEARS IN THE SERVICE ***




Produced by MWS and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)









 THREE YEARS
 IN THE SERVICE.

 A RECORD OF THE DOINGS
 OF THE 11TH REG. MISSOURI VOLS.

 BY D. McCALL,
 A PRIVATE OF CO. B.

 SPRINGFIELD:
 STEAM PRESS OF BAKER & PHILLIPS.

 1864.




RECORD OF THE DOINGS

OF THE

11TH REG. OF MISSOURI VOLUNTEERS.


Being anxious to serve my country, I walked to Springfield, Illinois,
a distance of twenty-five miles. I arrived there early in the evening,
and took up lodging with a German that night, which was on the 14th
day of July, 1861. There were several recruiting officers enlisting
men for cavalry or infantry. Andrew J. Weber was enlisting a company
for an infantry regiment, which I joined. There were then about thirty
members. After remaining here, for a few days, boarding at the Owen
House, we got on board the cars, which were in waiting, to carry us to
our destination.

Sorrowful were the scenes at parting from friends to go from their
homes to defend their rights and liberty, many to fall victims of this
unholy rebellion. As I was a stranger to the company, I had no regrets
at leaving, as my friends were far away. The cars blowed their whistle,
and amid the cheers of the people, and waving of handkerchiefs, we left
Springfield. Our destination being Missouri, we arrived at night at a
place called Illinoistown, opposite St. Louis, and here we remained
all night, and next morning we all went down to the river and washed.
We were then ordered to fall in to go across the river. Company C
accompanied us, commanded by Captain Moses Warner. The two companies
fell in and formed in four ranks, and the command was given, and we
started to the river; we soon arrived on the bank. There was a ferry
boat in waiting to carry us across, we marched board, and the boat soon
landed us below St. Louis, where the command was formed in line, and
it was soon on its way to the arsenal. We arrived there early in the
day. The day was warm, and the streets were dusty, which made it quite
disagreeable marching. We were not molested on the way. Most of us were
without arms. The people lined the sidewalks as we passed.

When we arrived at the arsenal rations were issued to us, and we eat
what we got with a good relish, as we had eat nothing since leaving
Springfield the day before. Most of the boys were without money. After
staying here for a few hours, the command was ordered to fall in and
we were went from here to Marine Hospital, where we remained several
weeks. It was here we experienced the duties of a soldier. We quartered
in a long low building, with straw and plank to lay on. Provisions were
good enough, such as they were, and as we had no conveniences prepared,
we labored under difficulties to get enough to eat.

Commenced drilling, and drilled eight hours a day. Our progress was
very slow at first, as our commanders were not very proficient in
drill. But we soon learned to keep step and the other changes. This
continued until one day we marched down to the arsenal, were sworn in
as a regiment, and drew our arms. We had previously no arms but some
old flint lock muskets, most of them without bayonets. After drawing
our equipments we returned to quarters, and in a few days the order
came to prepare for marching.

The regiment marched to the bank of the river, stacked arms, and there
we remained until evening, awaiting the boat, which arrived at last,
and the bugle sounded, and the order came to go on board the boat. We
fell in and marched about a mile, when we got on board of the boat
awaiting us at the landing. Everything being ready, the boat soon left
the landing, and she headed down the river. Next day we landed at
Cape Girardeau, Missouri, August 7th, 1861. The regiment soon landed,
stacked arms, and men were detailed out of each company to unload the
boat. It was hard work, as we had to roll the barrels and hogsheads up
a very high hill. But we were strong and healthy, soon put every thing
on shore.

We carried our things into an old mill, which was deserted. This was
to be our quarters for a while--company B on one side of the room,
company C the other, in the second story. The regiment was under
command of Col. David A. Bayles, a captain in three months' service.
He was severe on us. We had to drill eight hours a day, and there was
a great deal of fatigue duty to do. The situation of Cape Girardeau
when we arrived:--The city is built on the bank of the Mississippi
river, and back of it was very high bluffs, and it was defended by the
8th Missouri and 20th Illinois regiments, some Missouri home guards,
cavalry and infantry. There was one small fort, partly finished, no
guns mounted, every street was strongly guarded, sentinels standing on
every corner, and no person allowed to pass without a written permit
from headquarters. Patrols patrolled the town night and day. The
citizens treated us quite civilly as long as we remained here.

We were here but a short time when the report was brought to
headquarters that a rebel force was marching on us with a heavy siege
piece. The report we found to be true, as a deserter informed us
afterwards. The alarm soon spread through the camps, and all was in
commotion. Every man was ordered under arms, and three companies of
the 11th Missouri regiment were ordered to go out and act as picket.
Company B was one of the companies detailed. It was early in the
evening when we buckled on our belts, order was given fall into line,
and our three companies formed in column and marched three miles, where
was a heavy piece of timber. Here we deployed as skirmishers along
the fence, which was built very high, and awaited the rebels until
morning. Woods were on each side of the road. There was nothing worth
mentioning occurred to us during our stay there, but the evening being
far advanced, every one was roused to his feet; some were fast asleep,
while others preferred walking up and down to sleeping, a shot was
fired, and then several followed in quick succession. The sound came
from camp. After a volley was fired, everything became silent, and all
was still again, and we returned to camp, when we were informed that
they were ordered out on the top of a high hill, a short time after
the three companies left, and there they remained in line of battle,
on the ground, with their arms by their side; as the night was quite
dark, they could not distinguish friend from foe; they were attacked
and had a skirmish, after several volleys were fired on each side,
and three men were badly wounded. If there were rebels they had all
disappeared in the morning. Plenty of tracks were visible of men and
horses near where the firing was, and the supposition was that there
was a considerable force there.

Men were busy all that evening throwing up entrenchments and placing
guns in position, and thus continued night and day for some time.

One evening the order came to prepare for marching. We were soon in
line, the command was given, forward, and off we started. Took the
Jackson road and marched quite close to it, and the command halted
to examine the front, and we were soon ordered forward, the town was
quickly surrounded, cannon placed on both ends of the street, and a
sentinel guarded every door and window, and the citizens when they
arose in the morning, found themselves prisoners in the hands of the
federal soldiers. All the stores were shut. It is a very good place
for a town, and was at one time a smart place for business. There were
several stores and groceries, a saddler's shop, and a fine place for
fruit, and the soldiers fared well for a while on peaches and apples.
The merchants would not sell goods to the Union boys, and they helped
themselves. There were but few men in town, as they left when they
heard of our coming, and did not wait for us to make our appearance, as
this was their place of resort a short time before. After getting what
apples and peaches we wanted, and frightening the citizens by firing
several salutes and breaking some windows, we left.

A great many of the citizens of the surrounding country came in to see
the soldiers, and were detained until we left next morning. When the
regiment was ready to return to camp, the report came that General
Prentiss was coming into town with a brigade of infantry, and the
regiments were formed in open order, and at length the expected visitor
arrived with his staff. He rode down through the lines, and back again
to the head, and made a short speech to us. He said never take a word
of insult from a rebel; if any one offered you any insult, shoot him
down, for that was the way to end the rebellion. With a few more
remarks, of not much import, he closed his speech, and the column was
soon in motion, and we arrived at quarters early in the evening, much
pleased with our trip.

Then commenced the work of building forts. Spades, shovels and
wheelbarrows came into requisition, and all men fit for duty were
compelled to work, throwing up breastworks until four strong forts were
completed and mounted with heavy siege guns, 24-pounders; the timber
was cut down all around within a mile of the fort. All kinds of reports
were flying through camp.

One evening we were ordered to fall in, and without much ceremony some
few companies were marched up through the town, until they reached an
old two story building on the corner of a street. Halt, was heard along
the line, and they stopped for a short time waiting for further orders.
They were soon ordered forward, and marched into the house, up into
the first story, and a lookout was placed at each window. I was one
detailed for duty. The night was beautiful, and I could discern objects
for some distance, but nothing disturbed the quiet of that still
evening but the heavy snoring of the soldiers as they lay in deep sleep
all around me. Some, perhaps, were thinking or dreaming of loved ones
at home, of friends that were far away; so the night passed off without
an enemy disturbing us, and in the morning we returned to camp. Several
parties of soldiers were sent out to search for rebels, but they never
encountered any, as they always evaded our scouts.

A man from Perryville, Perry county, came to the Cape asking Bayles to
send a force to meet the rebels said to be advancing on it. About 300
men was ordered on board the old Illinois steamboat, and company B was
chosen and parts of other companies volunteered to go. After getting on
board, the old ark began to recede from shore. After numerous delays we
found ourselves at Sandford's Landing, fifteen miles from Perryville,
and this must be reached as quick as possible. After ascending a very
high hill with the utmost difficulty, we started on our way. Two
citizens took the oath of allegiance on the road, and were let go where
they pleased. Company B was detailed to skirmish through that broken
country, and we were put in advance, and was made to halt if we got too
far ahead, and wait until the rear came up. In the evening company B
was made the advance guard, and they encamped near a large spring of
cold water, which was very acceptable to us, as we did not get much
good water after leaving the river. Here a citizen of Perryville was
made a prisoner. He was lurking near this spring, was well armed, but
made no resistance, and he was soon disarmed. We found him quite an
influential man among the citizens, and was then captain of a rebel
company. He was owner of a hotel in town. We arrived within sight of
the town, and were ordered to divide off into small squads and advance
from all sides, and take the town by surprise. The order was quickly
obeyed, and the band struck up the tune of Yankee Doodle, with drums
beating and colors flying, marched into the court yard before the
citizens could get away. There was a German ball in progress, but it
was soon stopped and the people returned to their homes. Whisky flowed
quite freely, and the officers and men had a good time generally with
the ladies of the town. Beef was furnished to us by the people, and it
was quite a treat to us to get to eat at a table. There were plenty of
apples and peaches, also sweet potatoes, we found in great abundance.
There was plenty to eat here, and the people would invite the soldiers
to dine with them.

Next morning we drew our uniforms, and one of the men by the name of
Ford, was drowned while in the river washing himself before changing
his clothes. This was the first death in the company. A whole brigade
followed this young man to his lonely resting place. The next death was
one of Grant's staff, and the next was a John Headly.

About the middle of October we were ordered to prepare for marching,
as we were to go out to meet Jeff. Thompson's forces, said to be at
Fredericksburg. When we started the rain was falling sufficient to
make it pleasant marching, during the whole of the trip. A brigade
of infantry was encamped near the town, which informed us that Jeff.
Thompson had left; so our brigade started in pursuit, consisting of
the 17th Illinois, 5th Indiana cavalry, and one battalion. We met the
rebels and repulsed them after a fight which lasted about twenty-four
hours, which resulted in a loss to the rebels of about 600 in killed,
wounded and prisoners. We came very near being surprised and our force
taken. We were marching as if it were to our destruction, when an old
negro warned us of our danger. He informed Plummer where the rebels
were posted. They had planted two batteries so that when we got close
enough they could rake our ranks. Plummer ordered up a battery and
opened on them where we supposed the rebels were. Blank cartridges were
fired from our side, and they replied with shot and shell, doing no
damage, as they shot over us. The 17th Illinois and part of the 11th
Missouri were ordered forward, and they advanced and poured in a heavy
volley of Musketry, and the enemy could not stand it and fled, and
left us masters of the field. The 1st Indiana cavalry made a charge,
and Major Gavitt was killed with 250 men either killed or wounded.
Infantry loss was slight. The 17th and 20th Illinois charged and took
a battery. Col. Lowe was killed on the rebel side, and Thompson's army
all dispersed. We followed them 12 miles, and they burned a bridge,
so we could not follow them any farther. That was the death-blow to
Jeff. Thompson's forces. There were about 3,000 rebels engaged. On our
side about 1,700. The battle lasted six hours, and the rebels were
completely routed.

The battle was fought on the 21st day of October, 1861. Nothing worth
mentioning occurred to us until the 25th day of February, 1862, when
we were ordered to prepare for leaving Cape Girardeau, where we had
been encamped for over six months; where we had spent many days on
fatigue duty in throwing up breastworks, and when we left there were
four forts, strongly fortified, mounted with siege guns, and no force
the rebels could send against it could take it, and I think we left it
secure from invasion.

On the 26th the regiment got on board the steamer Empress, we landed
at Commerce, and after staying there a short time we took up our line
of march in pursuit of the enemy, said to be retreating from before
us. Our advance had a short skirmish with part of Jeff's forces. Our
cavalry routed them, and took four small cannon, with a few prisoners.
The skirmish was a short distance from Sikestown. Jeff. escaped, but
lost his horse and a white feather out of his hat. The next morning we
resumed our march. Rain fell that day, and made it hard marching for
us, and at length we found ourselves opposite New Madrid. We formed our
line of battle and advanced within two miles of the rebel's stronghold,
and they commenced shelling us with their heavy guns, but there was
little damage done our side, and after remaining under fire for some
time, we moved back and bivouacked for the night, as we did not think
it advisable to storm the works then, as the rebels were protected by
gunboats, and we could not hold them if we should gain possession of
them. The weather was quite cold and some snow fell.

After staying here a short time we were ordered to move, and we were
soon in motion again. We marched nearly all night, and at last came
to a halt, and were ordered to lay down without any fire and make
ourselves as comfortable as possible, and there we remained until
morning. Such a night as we passed there will long be remembered by me.
Some of us had no blankets, and we left our knapsacks at Sikestown.
There was some snow on the ground; we waded through water over our
shoes, and had to sleep with wet feet; but very little sleep we had
that long night. We were four miles from a place called Point Pleasant,
and at daylight were on the march for this place. We double-quicked
about two miles. There were a few boats tied up at the landing, which
our sharpshooters soon drove from there, and they all escaped. Some of
the crews were killed.

After Plummer's men drove the rebels from the town, they took
possession, and then commenced the work of plunder. Stores were broken
into and everything of value was taken. One warehouse was filled with
corn, sugar and molasses. Whisky and medicines in abundance, as there
were several drug stores, and the boys helped themselves to what they
wanted. Our camp was about a mile from the town, and most everything
of value was carried off. It was in a low swampy piece of ground, we
had no tents, and had to lay on the ground in water, at times the rain
pouring in torrents upon us. A detail was made to go and dig rifle
pits. The enemy had a gunboat, and they tried to drive Captain Weber
and his working party away, but were unable to make the workers desist,
and they soon had sufficient protection from the shot and shell that
was continually falling around them. Batteries were planted, and they
got a siege gun in operation, the enemy's gunboats found it not good
policy to venture within reach of our guns; but they planted batteries
on the opposite side of the river, and then could not make us leave. We
had come to stay for a while, and we were determined on it. New Madrid
was soon stormed and taken, and gunboat ran the blockade, and came down
the river puffing and blowing, dismounting all the enemies batteries
and scattering them in every direction, as if they were nothing but
chaff.

After dismounting all the rebel batteries, we were ordered to get ready
to move, and soon were in motion again. Mud was over our shoe tops, and
it was very hard marching. After a while we arrived at New Madrid. I
must mention an occurrence that transpired while at Point Pleasant. One
night there was a heavy thunder shower, accompanied with wind and rain,
and a good many trees were blown down, and several of the 7th Illinois
cavalry men killed and wounded.

One evening a detail of men was made to go and haul a siege gun and
plant it below camp about four miles at a place called Tiptonville. The
work was performed by morning, the boys having hauled it through mud
and mire by hand, and in the morning was ready to go into operation,
and that one gun whipped five boats, and made them get out of reach of
its shot, and no boats could pass there then, so they had to remain
above. When we arrived at New Madrid boats were busy transporting
troops across the river, the object being to attack Island No. 10; but
while this was being done they evacuated, and about 4,000 prisoners
were taken near Tiptonville. As they were trying to escape a floating
battery came down the river and created quite an excitement amongst the
men until they discovered what it was. Some men boarded with a skiff
and found that there was no danger.

Several steamboats floated down passed our camp, and the rebels tried
to sink them by cutting holes in them, but still they floated down to
us, and our men soon put them in working order. The floating battery
sunk near Tiptonville. We took possession of Island No. 10, and got
all the heavy siege guns and an immense quantity of provisions, plenty
of small arms and ammunition. After remaining at New Madrid for a few
days, we took steamboats, steering our course down the river. Gen.
Pope was in command at this time. Plummer was our Colonel. We passed
several small towns on the way, and arrived at a place called Mosquito
Landing, in Arkansas. It was well worth the name, for a worse place for
mosquitos I never saw. There was no peace for us--a continual singing
in our ears by these torments.

We were within about three miles of Fort Wright, and our mortars and
gunboats commenced throwing shot and shell into the rebel works. We
could plainly see the smoke and hear the report of our guns as they
exploded. After remaining here for a short time we were ordered back up
river to opposite Hamburg Landing, where we disembarked, and took up
our line of march towards Corinth, where the rebels were making a stand
to dispute our progress into the State of Mississippi. Our advance had
a fight almost every day, but they drove the rebels before them at
every skirmish. They could make but a poor resistance to our advance,
and we gained very rapidly on the rebels, and drove them back step by
step, until they arrived within about four miles of Corinth. Here a
long line of rifle pits were dug, and heavy siege pieces were got into
position. We encamped within about six miles of Corinth, and had our
grand guard line established to within about three miles of Corinth.
Pickets were shooting at one another most of the time, until the 8th
of May, 1862, when a brigade of Infantry and some cavalry were ordered
out to reconnoitre, when the rebels were drove inside their works.
After the day had drawn to a close, and the dew was falling heavily,
we retraced our steps, and rested for the night a short distance from
Farmington.

Early the next morning our ears were saluted with the heavy boom of
cannon. The rebels had planted several batteries during the night, and
the 22d and 50th Illinois had barely time to throw off their knapsacks,
for the rebels were pouring the shot and shell into them, and they
had to take the cover of a heavy piece of timber. The rebels tried to
dislodge them, but were unable to do so. The brigade was ordered to
take a position on the left, and it was done as soon as possible. We
could see the rebels as they charged in heavy masses on our men. They
advanced with a yell and a rush, but were obliged to fall back from the
heavy fire of our men, who were pouring heavy volleys of musketry into
their columns. As their regiments were thrown into confusion the 2d
Iowa cavalry made a charge, and drove the rebels back, but there were
too many of them and they had to fall back with heavy loss. Their was
but little artillery used on our side, as the object was not to bring
on a general engagement. It was on this day that the Lieut. Colonel of
the 47th Illinois was killed. He was very well liked by the regiment,
and they suffered a great loss in his death.

The 11th Missouri regiment was formed in line of battle within a short
distance of a rebel battery which was shelling our men with pretty good
effect, but they never fired a shot at us. Their object was to flank us
and take all prisoners. Our Colonel at this time was Joseph A. Mowers.
Plummer was promoted to a Brigadier General, and he recommended Mower
for our Colonel, and he was accepted by the regiment as a fit man to
command it. He was riding up and down the lines surveying with an eagle
eye the operations of the enemy, when he perceived their intention
was to flank us, and he ordered us to about face in retreat, and we
double-quicked about two miles, came to a halt, and formed our line,
waiting to receive the rebels if they made their appearance. But they
did not think it advisable to venture into the timber where we were
posted. We remained there until evening, and then returned to camp.
An advance was made along our whole line, and that night we planted
several batteries, and next day dug rifle pits at Farmington. Our line
of rifle pits extended along the whole line, a distance of fourteen
miles. Two companies had to lay in the pits in case of an attack, but
we were not molested.

On the 24th of May five companies of the 11th Missouri and some
artillery were ordered out to drive in the rebel grand guard, and our
gunners shelled the rebel camp awhile. They had to leave and go inside
their works; we made a charge, and the rebels fled before us about half
a mile. Companies H and F were thrown out as skirmishers. We passed
through some heavy timber, and when we came out into view the rebels
poured a heavy volley into us, but it passed over our heads and done
us no injury. Company H was skirmishing in advance a short distance,
when three of them were wounded, the whole regiment was ordered to
fire. We fired one round and the rebels fell back. One man came in and
give himself up. But few prisoners were taken. One rebel was carried
from the field by our men, and he died before they could get him to the
hospital.

Our General did not think it good policy to venture too close at this
time, so we returned to camp.

It was in front of Corinth that Col. Worthington was killed. He was
doing duty on guard, and the orders were very strict. The sentinels
were ordered to allow no one outside of the lines after night. He gave
the order himself, and that night he was killed by one of his own men.
He belonged to the 5th Iowa infantry.

On the 28th another advance was made, and this day company B lay in
between the fire of two batteries--ours and the rebels'--for two hours,
as they had to fire right over them. They had skirmished to within 200
yards of the rebel works, and there they were ordered to lay down, and
the shot and shell flew all around them, but not a man of company B
was injured. A long line of rifle pits were dug and our men soon had
protection from the enemy's shot and shell, as they were doing their
best to drive them back, they held their position and could not get
the federals to leave. They made several charges on our batteries, but
were repulsed at every point, and were obliged to retire and leave us
masters of the field. We lay in the pits all of the 29th, and on this
night the rebels evacuated.

The attack was to be made along the whole line on the 30th. Everything
being ready, the ball was to be opened on the morrow by Gens. Halleck
and Pope, when the rebels evacuated, and we took possession. Our ears
were startled by hearing a sound like the report of a hundred cannon
being fired at once. It was the rebels blowing up their magazine before
leaving. Our men took possession on the morning of the 30th, and
started in pursuit of the retreating rebels. We followed them about
twenty-five miles, to a place called Booneville. About 20,000 prisoners
were taken altogether.

Col. Ellett, with a strong force of cavalry intercepted the cars at
Booneville with about 2,000 men on board, and an immense amount of arms
and ammunition, which was burned and the railroad destroyed.

When the rebel magazine was burning a heavy smoke arose, and the sky
was dark with dense columns of smoke as it curled upwards from the
burning timbers, and at last came the explosion. We thought that our
men had made the attack--but no, the birds had flown, and left us
nothing but their cage.

After remaining at Booneville several days, we returned to Corinth,
and took our camp on Clear Creek, about four miles from that place.
There we formed a camp of instruction. It was a very hard march from
Booneville to our present camp. Our brigade was commanded by the
Colonel of the 8th Wisconsin regiment of volunteers. Our Colonel
drilled us in the battalion drill in the morning, brigade drill in the
afternoon. We had our drills for several weeks.

At last we received marching orders, and all was bustle until we were
on the move again. We marched from Clear Creek to Burnville, and from
Burnville, we went to Iuka, where there are several fine springs of
water, and was, in times of peace, a great resort for the aristocracy
of the South, to spend their summer. From there we went to Tuscumbia,
where we remained for some time. Tuscumbia was a flourishing town a
short distance from the Tennessee River. Our gunboats threw a few shell
into it and raised quite an excitement in town. There was no business
carried on, only by a few sutlers. There was a fine spring and we had
plenty of water, apples and peaches in great abundance; also sweet
potatoes and corn. The negroes brought into camp watermelons, and we
had a good supply of them for some time.

From here we were ordered back to Iuka, having received information
that a force of rebel cavalry was in Russelville. We took up our
line of march with two pieces of artillery, to go into the mountains
in search of these marauders. We traveled all over the hills of
Tuscumbia, but did not encounter an enemy, as the 3d Michigan cavalry
met them and defeated them before we could get to their assistance,
near Russelville. We passed through Russelville and Frankfort, and
here rebel cavalry cut off some of our stragglers, and two were taken
prisoners. At length we arrived at Iuka. After remaining there a
short time we moved out about eight miles from there and throwed up
breastworks. Several of the boys were out about one mile from the camp
gathering watermelons, and six of them were taken prisoners. Our men
went out in pursuit but they fled before them.

One evening six companies of the 11th Missouri went out to reconnoitre,
and went out ten miles when we got intimation that the rebels were
in strong force in our front, and came to a halt, and were ordered
to lay down and rest our weary limbs. We remained here until about
two o'clock, when we were ordered back to camp, where we arrived at
day-light and found everything ready to move. When we returned we
encamped at Burnville one night, and next day we returned to Camp Clear
Creek, and we did not get rested before we were ordered back again
to Burnville. We marched all night and at length we arrived again at
Burnville, where we encamped for the night. Next day the 8th Wisconsin,
11th Missouri, 16th Iowa, and a battery of artillery and a battalion
of cavalry, Berges' sharpshooters, acted as skirmishers, going in
advance. We arrived to within about two miles of Iuka, we formed our
line of battle and the command was given forward, guide centre, and
the 11th moved forward, Colonel Mower at their head. He was in command
of the expedition. We advanced to within a mile of Iuka. They disputed
our advance, but we steadily moved on. Several shots were fired at the
rebel cavalry, but they did not offer us battle, they did not know our
numbers. After maneuvering around for several hours we started back,
as we supposed, to Burnville, and got about two miles when we were
ordered back again, to attack the pursuing rebels who intended to cut
us off, but in this they were foiled by the Generalship of Col. Joseph
A. Mower, and we drove the rebels into their stronghold. We could hear
their bugle sound quite distinctly, and their intention was to send a
force of cavalry and cut us off from Burnville. They burned a train of
cars, killed several of our cavalry and tore up the road, but did not
venture into Burnville. After going quite close to Iuka we retraced our
steps, and after kindling numerous fires to deceive the enemy, we left,
and they supposed that we were encamped close to them, and great must
have been their chagrine and mortification when they surrounded the
fires in the morning, to find the bird had flown. After building the
fires we returned to camp at Boonville without molestation, where we
stayed all of one day and next day until in the afternoon, when we were
ordered to march again, and that night we encamped a short distance
from Jacinto. It was here that we first saw Rosecrans. He had taken
command of our division.

We were on the move again early next morning, and came to a halt at
our old camping ground, about eight miles from Iuka, where we got our
dinner. Skirmishing commenced with the enemy's pickets here, and two
of our cavalry were killed at a white house a mile from our camp. The
property was owned by a widow woman, and was burned by the infantry.
We skirmished with the rebels to within two miles of Iuka, where we
came to a halt, and what was it broke the stillness of this pleasant
afternoon, the 19th of September, 1862? It was the heavy roar of
cannon and musketry. The rebels occupied a strong position in front of
Iuka, the 5th Iowa infantry was attacked by the rebels, as they were
a support to the 11th Ohio battery; the rebels charged upon them and
in spite of the heavy fire of artillery and musketry they drove our
men from their guns and took possession of them. The 5th contested
the ground bravely, as their thinned ranks could testify. Their loss
was about two hundred killed and wounded. About this time our brigade
came up and our regiment was ordered to the front. We formed in
four columns. After loading our guns we marched to the regiment in
double-quick; distant from a piece of timber about half a mile, and
here we right-flanked and marched in line of battle until we gained
the cover of the timber, and a heavy growth of underbrush. The rebels
were advancing to meet us, and said they were our friends and begged
us not to fire on them, and we labored under this mistake for some
time, but company C, commanded by Capt. Warner, being in advance of
the regiment, saw the rebels coming and charged bayonets, and took
eleven prisoners, including a Lieutenant. They were sent to the rear.
The rebels approached so close that they used their revolvers, as
the smoke of powder made it quite dark where we were, they did no
damage but scorched some of the boys' faces with the powder. When we
discovered the rebels in such close proximity to us we were ordered to
fire, which order was obeyed with alacrity, and volley after volley was
poured into their advancing columns. They throwed column after column
against our lines to break them and cut their way out, but were unable
to break our ranks. They tried three times and were as often driven
back, as our fire was undiminished until our ammunition was expended,
when we were ordered to fall back. After enduring the fire of the enemy
for an hour and a half we fell back, by order of commander, and the
10th Missouri took our place. During this time our men charged the
rebels and retook our battery and two more guns. We lay on our arms
all night; after getting ammunition and filling our cartridge-boxes we
laid down to get some rest for our weary limbs; having no blankets,
and as the air became quite cold, we had to keep ourselves in motion
to keep from freezing. Our shirts were wet from the sweat, and when
we laid down we expected every moment to renew the attack. A heavy
volley was fired and every man sprung to his gun, but as there was no
more firing we lay down again and tried to get some sleep, but that
was out of the question, the air was too cold for that. That night
General Price left. The attack was to have been made next morning, and
an order to that effect was sent to General Rosecrans from Grant, but
it was intercepted.--We were sent by the way of Jacinto, and General
Grant had to go straight to Iuka, which was not half as far as we had
to go, and if it were not for that accident General Price, with all of
his force, would have been captured; as it was, they discovered we were
too strong for them, and thought it the best policy to get away as soon
as possible; so that night they left and next morning we started in
pursuit. General Grant threw out his skirmishers and made his advance
into the town, but they soon found the rebels had fled, and they went
into town with their colors flying. When we passed through the town
almost every house was filled with sick or wounded soldiers, which they
left behind in their haste to get away. We followed them all day but
they had too much the start of us, and at night we encamped, and in the
morning were on our way back again. After marching night and day we
arrived at Jacinto, where we rested for a short time; but we did not
remain here long. We were soon ordered to move again, as there was not
much rest for us. From Jacinto we went to Rienzi, and there encamped
for some time, and got pretty well rested.

One evening when we were thinking of laying down and having a good
night's sleep, we were ordered to prepare for marching, so, early in
the evening we got started, and after marching until the night was far
advanced, the command was ordered to halt, and here we remained until
next morning. There we made our coffee and got plenty of good apples.
After getting our breakfast we started again and came to a halt at
the Hatchie River, where we remained until nearly night, when we were
ordered to fall in and were soon on our way back. After following this
road for some time we turned to the left, in the direction of Corinth.
We marched all night until we came to a place called Cossouth, near
which place we encamped one night, and next morning started again, and
went within a mile of Corinth, and were ordered to meet the advancing
enemy, who were said to be driving our men before them. We came to a
halt, stacked our arms and supposed we were to have a rest, when the
order in stern command came along our lines to fall in. We suffered
greatly for want of water. We marched in quick time and could hear the
heavy roar of cannon as we advanced. All at once we came to a halt,
and formed our line of battle. What was it that made it so still? all
at once everything seemed quiet. It was a calm before an approaching
storm, for the rebels were advancing in solid column, and poured a
heavy volley of musketry into our ranks, and one hundred of the 8th
Wisconsin was either killed or wounded. Our loss was slight, one noble
young man in company B, was killed. He was shot in the head and died
without a struggle; and we had to leave him on the field. They shot at
us at long range, but some of their skirmishers advanced quite close
to us, and some of the 11th went out to meet them, and the firing was
quite brisk for some time. The rebels did not advance any farther
at this time. They got a cross fire on the 8th Wisconsin, and they
suffered most in the brigade. The rebels had the advantage of position
and numbers. Their intention was to outflank us but they were unable
to do so, as we could fall back under the heavy siege guns, commanded
by McWilliams. After holding the rebels in check for some time we fell
back, the 11th went inside of Fort Robinette and there lay down, and
made ourselves as comfortable as possible.

About two o'clock in the morning, the boys having built a number of
fires along the line, the rebels advanced a battery to within five
hundred yards of us and commenced shelling with grape and canister.
The order was given to put out the fires, as the rebels were getting
the range of us pretty well, and we had to lay close to the ground
for fear of being hit. Several guns were injured as they stood in the
stacks, and one of company A, was slightly injured. One man in the
27th Ohio was killed by the bursting of a shell, as the whole Ohio
brigade lay right in front of us and we were behind them as support.
They shelled us and most every shot went over us, and went crashing
through the town, a building being a poor protection from balls. Some
of them wasted their strength against the trees in the timber, whilst
others exploded above us, and we could hear the grape shot as it
fell all around us. It was singular that no more were injured as two
brigades lay inside the works of Fort Robinette. Our gunners replied
at intervals, until at length day began to dawn, when our artillerists
could see where to direct their fire, and they soon stopped the rebels'
guns.--They killed most all the rebels' horses and one gun was taken as
a prize, and the Captain taken prisoner. There was eight brass field
pieces, and it was almost impossible to get away with their battery.
After the rebels' battery was silenced everything became silent except
the occasional shot from the rebel sharpshooters. Their bullets would
whistle over us and sometimes strike an officer or private and wound
him, but not dangerously, as they were at too great a range to do us
much damage, the strength of the balls being spent before they reached
us. Sleep did not visit General Rosecrans that night. He was busy
planning and placing batteries in position to give the rebels a warm
reception if they made their appearance, as it was their intention to
make a desperate effort to recover Corinth and drive Rosecrans out, and
he was planning how he could best draw them on so he could bring all
his guns to bear upon them. We were laying down in the rear of the Ohio
brigade as a support to them, and the rebels could use no artillery
upon us as they could not get a suitable position to use it. The timber
was all cut down in front of us for a quarter of a mile, and the rebels
had taken possession of a heavy piece of timber in our front, but on
the right of us was an open space of ground where we had a battery
planted.--Some of the rebel sharpshooters stationed themselves in
trees, the better to see our skirmishers and pick them off. Our men
soon discovered where they were, and many a rebel paid the penalty of
climbing a tree, being picked off by our sharpshooters. Several were
shot out of the tops of trees by the cannon. Our batteries were so
fixed that they could rake any part of the field, our artillerists
kept up a continual fire from their heavy siege pieces shelling the
woods where the rebels in strong force were supposed to be preparing
to attack us. At length we saw the long lines of the rebels advancing
upon us. Col. Mowers selected two companies of the 11th Missouri to act
as skirmishers. Mowers was riding a very fretful horse when he started
out, he having his beloved Rock shot under him the day before, a horse
that had carried him many a mile and never appeared tired, and that
horse would go without flinching wherever his master required him,
but he was killed at last, and he had to take another horse.--When
we saw him riding at the head of the skirmishers we thought he would
be killed or taken prisoner. He galloped on regardless of the many
bullets aimed at him, until he was wounded and taken prisoner, but he
gave warning to his men and they went back inside the fort, and the
rebels came on in solid column. As they emerged from the woods their
colors were thrown to the breeze and proudly waved o'er these sons
of the South. They steadily advanced to take a battery on our right,
and our men were waiting in line of battle to receive them. There was
nothing to cover them, and volley after volley of musketry was poured
into their advancing columns. As one man fell another took his place,
and still they went on, tiring as they went, reached the battery,
drove our men from their guns and turned them on our men. But they did
not enjoy their triumph long, for a shell from a 64-pounder exploded
right amongst them, spread death and destruction all around when they
were thrown into confusion, our men rallied and drove them from the
guns at the point of the bayonet. Some of the rebels went into town
and began to plunder everything they could lay their hands upon. Three
were killed in the Provost Marshal's office. It was here that the 5th
Minnesota did good service. Many a rebel was made to bite the dust from
the deadly aim of the 5th Minnesota rifles, and they were at length
compelled to yield and fly before the impetuous valor of our men. All
this passed much quicker than I can write.

How was it with the rebels? They were creeping upon us like snakes in
the grass, firing as they came, led on by the brave Col. Rogers, of the
2d Texas cavalry. The 63d Ohio, also the 27th, was doing its best to
keep them back, but still they came on and planted their colors on the
fort, when the 11th was ordered to charge. They rose and fired a volley
into their ranks and charged bayonets, but the rebels could not stand
the cold steel. They broke and fled in all directions. Col. Rogers was
ordered to surrender as prisoner of war, but he would not, but kept
shooting with his revolver and giving command to his men, when one of
the regulars shot him in the side with a revolver, and one of company B
shot him through the breast. He reeled from his horse and fell to the
ground within a short distance of the outer edge of the ditch. Several
other officers were killed and lay close to him. A horse was laying
dead and a man by his side; another laid a little in the rear; he had
been struck by a shell in the head, and lay with his hand grasping some
hair and brains; his head was nothing but a shell, the brains were
scattered all over the ground. But few ever reached the woods that made
the charge, and their loss must have been terrible. A good many came
in and gave themselves up, as it was dangerous business to attempt
reaching the timber. They would start up every little while from where
they lay concealed, but few could escape our bullets. Many would rise
up and cry for quarters; these would come in and be sent to the rear as
prisoners. You can judge for yourself how bloody now was the conflict
here and along the whole line. Twenty-five dead lay in the ditch, and
we had to remove them in order to take their place, so that if the
rebels returned we would be prepared for them, as we had gathered up
the rebels' guns, we were well supplied. Two of the boys had fifteen
guns, and most of them had two.

The battle was over by 12 o'clock. Our loss was slight compared to the
enemy's. Their loss was about 4,000 killed, wounded and prisoners.
Whole ranks were cut down by the cannon shot, every gun that could be
brought to bare was used; the rebels could not stand such a decimating
fire, they broke and fled in confusion. We laid in the ditches all
night waiting the rebels' return, but they never made their appearance.

After the battle was over General Rosecrans came through the lines, and
was cheered most heartily, as he had proved himself more than a match
for Price and his staff. Defeated 40,000 rebel troops under Price with
half that number, and gained a decisive victory over them.

While they were engaging us Gen. Hurlbut was marching with a strong
force to get in the rear of the rebels, and they met at the Hatchie
river, where a severe engagement ensued, and our men were victorious,
drove them back, and we marched to intercept them. As we started in
pursuit on the 5th, they were turned back and had to retrace their
steps until they came to another crossing that was not occupied by
federals. The rout became general, and all along the whole road was
strewn guns, tents, &c. Caissons and cannon were captured, wagon loads
of ammunition and wagons of every description. Flour was scattered all
along the road, and cooking utensils of all kinds in their haste to
get away; our men were close upon them all the time. They would turn
and give battle, and then retreat, as our men would overtake them as
they would get a pretty good start of them again. Almost every house
contained either dead or sick soldiers. Stragglers became plenty, and
came in by dozens, as the woods were full of them. They were paroled.
The 2d brigade followed them to Ripley. The 11th went to within a
short distance of Ripley and came to a halt, and stacked arms in a
piece of timber, expecting to remain for some time. Some of the 11th
were detailed as grand guard, company B being part of the detail, we
went out in advance and deployed out the same as skirmishers, between
a cornfield and a swamp. We stood on guard about two hours when we
received orders to return to camp. On our return we were informed that
we would remain here until evening, when we would go out and establish
a grand guard line. At length we started through almost impassable
roads, sometimes nothing but a path to guide us. Where we established
our line was an old wheat field, and it was the intention of our
commanders to cover our whole line with a strong guard; and here we
supposed we would remain until next day. But no, there was no such
good fortune awaiting us, as the order came for us to return to the
regiment, as we were to march that night. We returned to camp again,
and were informed that we were to march at 2 o'clock that night. We
had sweet potatoes and fresh meat in great plenty, and after eating a
good meal we lay down, and were roused from our slumbers by hearing
the command to fall in. As we were rear guard to the wagon train, we
were the last to get started. Such a march as that was; it was enough
to wear out any man's patience. We had to stop every five minutes for
the train to proceed. Some of the teams would refuse to pull, and this
would stop the whole train. We lingered along this way all night; our
progress being very slow and tedious; so next day we went ahead of the
train, and did not stop much until we arrived at Corinth, where we
established a camp about one mile from the town, and here we remained
for some time, had our brigade and battalion drills under Colonel
Loomis, of the 26th Illinois, who was acting as brigadier at this time.
Every regiment was ordered to report with spade and shovel for fatigue
duty, and we had to work from day to day until we considered Corinth
impregnable, as there were strong earthworks all around the city. Most
of the inhabitants had left, and the town was occupied by soldiers.
After completing this work we received orders to prepare to march with
two day's rations in our haversacks, also knapsacks with blankets.
After every thing was got ready, the command was given along the whole
line, and off they moved, one regiment after another. At length came
a long line of wagons, extending as far as the eye could reach, and a
strong guard was left to guard these trains. So we moved on from day to
day, sometimes marching all night. We were not disturbed by an enemy,
but the advance skirmished almost every day with the rebels, and at
length the rebels were driven back to the Tallahatchie river, where
they were in strong position, and had thrown up strong earthworks,
and here they would have given us a warm reception if Sherman had not
marched with a strong force to get in their rear. We could hear the
heavy roar of artillery as our men advanced to the attack, as we had
just reached the place where the brigade was establishing camp. Being
rear guard we did not arrive at camp until 2 o'clock in the morning.
Rations were distributed to us, and we lay down on our blankets and
were soon fast asleep. We awoke much refreshed after our tedious march
of the day before. Next morning we went about a mile from here, and
pitched our tents, and remained several days. There was a grist mill
near here, and the soldiers used it and ground corn as long as we
remained. There was some ammunition captured here. A very good spring
of water was near our camp, which was a rare thing to us.

The rebels did not wait long enough to see what Sherman's intentions
were, but as soon as they got an intimation that there was a force to
get in their rear, they left their stronghold and fled, but Sherman
took a good many prisoners, and pursued them for some time. The rebels
did not halt until they reached Grenada. After remaining several days
here we moved to Cold Water, and remained a short time. There was a
small town on the railroad. The next place we went to was Oxford,
Mississippi, where we went into camp and remained for some time.

Here the report came into camp that the rebels had made a raid on
Holly Springs, and taken all the soldiers stationed there prisoners
and paroled them, also the commander of the post. Three weeks'
provisions for Grant's whole army and an immense quantity of army
clothing, several thousand pairs of cavalry boots were also captured,
and an immense amount of cotton was burned, together with a train of
cars just ready to start out. The raid was made by Van Dorn and about
7,000 mounted infantry, at the break of day. Report says that Murphy
had knowledge of the intended raid on Holly Springs, but of that we
have no certain information, but he did not prove himself true to
the Government at first, as he was entrusted with removing all the
commissary stores along the railroad from Corinth to Tuscumbia, as the
rebels were said to be advancing in force. Tuscumbia valley is a very
fine country, with an abundance of corn for forage for their cavalry.

Their advance soon arrived at Tuscumbia and took possession. Everything
was removed to Corinth, and their cavalry followed the valley right
up to Iuka, surrounded the pickets and took them prisoners. The 8th
Wisconsin was scattered all over town, and there were few to resist
the attack of the rebels. They returned to camp as soon as possible,
but a large number were taken prisoners. Everything that could not be
removed was ordered to be destroyed, and it was entrusted to an officer
in the 7th Illinois cavalry to do the burning, but for some reason it
was neglected, and an immense quantity of flour and commissary stores,
which came very acceptable to them, fell into their hands. There were
several sutler stores there, and the cavalry took almost everything,
clothing, tobacco, and some good liquors. You may ask, where was Murphy
all this time? He was retreating with his regiment towards Burnville.
The rebels pursued them several miles, as there were a great many
negroes following the regiment, the rebels would come up and shoot them
down without mercy. After traveling several miles the rebels gave up
the pursuit. Murphy was put under arrest for this and tried by court
martial, but for some reason got clear, and was restored to confidence
again, and entrusted with the post at Holly Springs, but abusing the
confidence reposed in him, he was arrested, tried again, cashiered, and
dishonorably discharged the service without any pay.

That stopped our forward movement, and we were ordered back to Corinth.
We returned to Davis' Mills, where part of the 25th Indiana had a
desperate engagement with the raiders, as it was their intention to
surprise the guard and take them prisoners, but in this they failed
in every attempt. A great many of them were killed and wounded. Their
intention was to burn the mills and tear up the railroad here, and stop
the cars from running, but Col. Morgan with his little band resisted
all their attacks, as he was in a strong position near the mill.
Earthworks were thrown up and our men were on the inside; some cotton
bales were placed around the top as a protection to sharpshooters. Some
of the men defended themselves from the mill, several were shot and
fell in the water as they were attempting to cross over. After trying
in vain to dislodge the federals, they gave it up and left without
doing the Indiana boys any damage. But this was not the only place
they visited. They went to Bolivar, Tennessee, and there met with as
warm a reception as they got at the mills, and they very soon left,
leaving some of their number either killed, wounded or prisoners, in
the hands of our men. They tried several places along the railroad
from Holly Springs, but met with no better success, as the guards
were on the alert. They attacked a small force belonging to the 12th
Michigan, numbering 115 men, in a small fort, and Van Dorn demanded
their surrender, they refused, and informed him if he wanted them he
must take them, while we were getting a warm meal they would get a
cold bite. Alter receiving this answer to his demand, he made ready
for the attack; 500 of the men dismounted and advanced from all sides
to surround this little band of brave men; on they came, expecting an
easy prize, they approached to within a short distance of the fort
when the order was given to fire, and the rebels were met by a shower
of bullets, and after trying in vain to get inside of the fort, they
left and took their wounded with them, leaving about 30 dead around the
fort. There was no artillery used on either side.

Such was the success of Van Dorn's raid along the railroad, they cut
a few telegraph poles, and the wire in one or two places, and had to
leave suddenly as our cavalry had got on their track and were but a
short distance behind them, when they left the 12th Michigan infantry.
Only one man of the brave little garrison lost his life, and that was
by the accidental discharge of his gun. Our cavalry soon drove them
inside of their lines, and here we will leave them for awhile.

You will return with me to camp again and leave the pursuit of the
rebels. Our camp is situated on a rise of ground 100 yards from water,
either way, and we did not suffer for that article while we remained
there, which was several weeks. Grant's army had to subsist on the
citizens of the country; army stores were quite scarce, and it became
the duty of our Generals to look out for the welfare of their men, and
long trains of wagons were sent with orders to take a certain amount of
forage, when it arrived in camp it was distributed to each regiment.
This forage consisted of fresh pork, newly packed coffee, sugar,
molasses, cattle and hogs were also drove into camp, and we fared
pretty well, as there were plenty of provisions in the country. We
had plenty of everything but bread. One cracker was allowed us a day.
Several thousand army overcoats were discovered concealed in a cellar,
and the coffee we got belonged to us. It was stolen at the time of the
raid, as the citizens participated in it.

They said they had just received it from Memphis, but our men were not
to be deceived by such stories, and would take most all of it from
them. Some of them had protection papers but this did not save them, as
the soldiers had got tired of listening to such professions of Unionism
and loyalty as these men made, which was only in vain, as there was
but little friendship for the Yankees existing amongst them at this
time. We lived on the country for more than two weeks. Everything
was taken for miles from camp, and on New-Year's day we were ordered
to prepare for marching, taking nothing but two day's rations in our
haversacks, and blankets and arms, with forty rounds of ammunition in
our cartridge boxes. We ascertained our destination was La Grange. The
rebels were expected to make a dash on that place. We arrived in sight
of the town about the middle of the afternoon, came to a halt, and
remained until nearly evening, when we received orders to return to
camp, and were soon treading our way back, as there was no use for us
here. We arrived at camp early in the evening, broke ranks and went to
our respective tents. As they were made to hold four men each, we lay
down and soon were fast asleep. So passed the first day of 1863. But we
were not destined to remain here much longer, as we received marching
orders to return to Corinth, as a brigade came to take our place from
Holly Springs, and they informed us that Oxford was destroyed by fire,
also Holly Springs, in retaliation for shooting of our soldiers by the
citizens of the town at the time of the raid. It was here that Col.
Mowers returned to the regiment, having recovered from the wound which
he received before being taken a prisoner by the rebels. He was taken
back to their lines, and as he had nothing on him to denote his rank,
dressed in a common blouse without any shoulder straps, he was not very
closely guarded, and he managed to escape the same day by mounting one
of the rebels horses and riding it into camp, or into the lines, as we
had no camp at this time. He was cheered by the whole brigade as he
rode through the lines without any hat. His wound was quite severe and
he had to go to the hospital to receive proper attendance and care,
and there he remained until he came here ready to take command of his
regiment. General call was sounded and we were ordered to prepare for
marching. The tents were soon struck and rolled up and loaded on the
wagons, everything being ready we strapped on our knapsacks, fell into
line waiting for the command forward, which at last we received, and
are again on the tramp.

On our march to Corinth, by the way of Bolivar, we passed through
several towns, La Grange and Grand Junction, near where the 11th was
a guard for ten days, as they were moving towards Holly Springs. Our
rations were scarce here as we drew nothing but flour, and as we had
no means of cooking it we might as well have had none. We were well
supplied with fresh meat as we found plenty of fat hogs in the country
which we killed. We managed to get some of the flour baked by the
negroes.

At length the order came for us to move, and we were glad to leave
here, and then we went to Oxford from there. Grand Junction was a
railroad station where two roads crossed, between Holly Springs and
Corinth. We left it to our right and took the road to Bolivar, where we
halted for the night, and the next morning was pleasant, and remained
so until we arrived at Bolivar, when the rain commenced falling in
torrents upon us, and it became very difficult to march. It rained
without intermission most all night, and the brigade was urged forward
until at length the men refused to proceed any farther, and fell out of
ranks and commenced building fires.

There we remained until morning. The roads had become almost
impassable. Teams had as much as they wanted to do to haul their loads.
The rain ceased towards morning and the sun came out and the roads
commenced drying as we proceeded.

After days of wearied marching we arrived at Corinth. That evening rain
commenced falling, from rain it turned to snow, and after freezing the
ground was covered with a crust of ice. After remaining here a few days
when we had received our two months' pay, the regiment was ordered to
strike tents and get ready for marching. Everything being packed the
regiment was ordered to fall in, the rain was coming quite steady, and
we arrived at Corinth wet through.--After waiting a short time the snow
and ice was fast disappearing from the ground, it had all left the
hills. When part of the 11th Missouri went on board, the iron horse
began to puff and blow her steam from her pipes, the cars were soon in
motion, and Corinth was soon left far behind. We passed through several
small towns on our way, stopped at Jackson, Tennessee, for a short
time, and was soon on our way again until we arrived at what was once a
small town called Germantown, where we remained all night. Some of the
boys found quarters in some old deserted buildings, but I chose to stay
on the cars as the night was very dark and muddy. I slept soundly until
morning. I arose, got off the cars and made me some coffee, and after
eating my breakfast took a stroll through the town. It is not much of a
town, about fifteen miles from Memphis, on the Memphis and Charleston
Railroad.

The brigade remained several weeks here to guard the Memphis and
Charleston Railroad. After we established camp the rest of the regiment
came, and guards were stationed all around the camp as protection, and
there was another line out near a mile. In time of peace this place was
a great resort for sporting men from Memphis, but there was nothing
but a few old houses now, and most of them deserted. Some people were
living there then, but most of the men were in the rebel army, and
most all of the corn was taken for forage, and there was very little
of anything left for the people to subsist on. Hogs were killed until
there were scarcely any left, all the fences were burned for fuel,
every board that could be found was used to make bunks. Water was
plenty and of good quality. The weather became quite pleasant and the
roads soon dried up, and we had our daily battalion drill, and spade
and shovel came again into requisition, and men were detailed to go and
build a fort, as it was considered necessary. After working from day
to day with the assistance of the 8th Wisconsin regiment, there was a
fort built and a battery planted on the inside. The battery was manned
by the 2d Iowa artillerists. After finishing this fort we were ordered
to prepare for marching. It was shortly after moving our camp. We had
the tent called the Cybley tent, and we could put fire in them and
make them quite comfortable, as there was an aperture for the smoke to
go out.--There was room enough for fifteen men in one of these tents.
They were placed up about three feet from the ground and banked up with
earth all around, and a door was made for an entrance.

At last our brigade was ordered to move, and we had to pull down our
tents and leave our comfortable quarters and try the field again. The
brigade moved to within two miles of Memphis, and there they encamped
for the night, and men were detailed to go and load the boats, and
passed one day loading the boats. The brigade marched down to the
landing and were soon on board, as most everything was on board. Each
regiment loaded their own things and it was done in short order, and
the 11th Missouri was soon ready to go down the river. At last the boat
got under way and stopped at Helena for a short time. General Prentiss
was commander of this post at this time. Several of the boys got off
the boat and got a little the worse of liquor and became quite noisy,
and General Prentiss ordered his men to arrest them, but they were
unable to do so, owing to the resistence made. Revolvers were drawn and
missiles were thrown, and the guard was driven from the ground, and
they soon returned with reinforcements, and Mowers went on shore to
get the men to go on board their boats, and they soon went on board.
The guards formed in line in front of the boats and loaded their guns.
Chunks of coal were showered upon them and several of the officers
and men were hit. General Prentiss came to give some orders to his men
when he was struck in the head, and this so enraged him that he sent
for a brigade of infantry and a battery of artillery, and they were
coming on double-quick when the boats moved out for fear of a general
outbreak, as there was one of the 47th Illinois shot through his leg,
and when the sergeant shot he ran, pursued by several of the 47th, but
I never learned the particulars as the pursuers had not returned when
the boat left. We crossed the river and the boat was tied up to the
shore and the regiment got off and then commenced the work of preparing
our meals. We landed on a small island, there was plenty of wood for
fuel and soon numerous fires were kindled and the work of cooking was
soon over, and our meal was ready for eating, which was coffee, fried
bacon and crackers, that constituted our bill-of-fare, also sugar to
sweeten our coffee. After remaining here several hours the bell rang,
and we were ordered on board, the boat was loosed from her mooring
and we left this place and went down the river about six miles, and
stopped and remained all night on the boats, and in the morning the
brigade went on shore. Then commenced the work of clearing ground for a
camp. The cane stood thick on the ground and all this was cut down and
carried into piles to be burned. Here we got new tents, and there was a
place soon cleared off to put them up. The tents were made to hold four
men, and there was but little room, as the water was all around us;
there was nothing but sand after the cane was carried off. The division
was all camped here commanded by General Tuttle, and Joseph A. Mowers
commanded the brigade. He received his promotion a short time before.
The division remained here for nearly a month awaiting a boat to carry
us away. At length the boats arrived, and we were glad to see the tall
smoke stacks appear in sight, as we knew that we would soon leave this
dull place. We were ordered on board the boats, and under a heavy fall
of rain we struck our tents and stayed all night and next day until
about four o'clock. The wind was blowing a very strong breeze, the rain
had ceased and the weather became cool enough for overcoats. At length,
after many hours impatient waiting, the boats got under way, and
nothing occurred worthy of notice until we arrived at a place called
Duckport, and there the division landed, and then commenced the work of
unloading the boats. Provisions and army stores were soon carried from
the boat on shore, and our camping ground was soon staked out. Tents
were soon pitched and the soldiers were soon enjoying themselves. The
division encamped near the Vicksburg canal, it had just been commenced
and some soldiers and negroes were at work with spades and shovels, and
some were using wheel-barrows to remove the earth from the middle of
the ditch, as it was forty feet wide. The object was to turn the course
of the father of waters into this canal. There were dredge boats at
work at the mouth of it. Each regiment had to take their turn working
on this great ditch, and some days there were over two thousand men
engaged at once, as they came from Young's Point to assist in carrying
on this great work. After three week's hard labor the water was let
into it, and some barges and one small steamboat went down through to
New Carthage, and then the water commenced falling and the dredge boats
had to stop digging. There were three of them in operation deepening
the canal at this time.

About the middle of April several transports and gunboats ran the
blockade, passed all the batteries, and the rebels tried in vain to
stop their progress, but still they kept on until they got out of reach
of the enemy's guns. There was but few of the boats damaged and they
ran the gauntlet several times. Orders came for the division to move
camp, and General Mowers' brigade moved their camp about a mile and
then commenced the work of leveling off the ground, which was once a
cotton field, and a few days after moving camp, orders came to prepare
for marching, take nothing but our haversacks and canteens, two days
rations, one blanket, forty rounds of cartridges in our boxes and our
guns in perfect order.

On the 2d day of May we left the mouth of this canal as it had proved
of but little use and all our work was to no purpose, and we gave up
the project as no use. The division left their camps, and owing to
delays, the roads being bad, they had to stop to repair them, so teams
could pass as we had to transport our provisions on wagons. They did
not get but a short distance from camp the first day and the next day
they marched about fifteen miles. They followed the course of the
canal all the next day, and at last we arrived at Richmond, Louisiana,
where we encamped for one night, and next morning resumed our march
and camped as before, and the division kept marching from day to day
until they arrived at Hard Times Landing. The water was getting low in
the canal and a number of barges could be seen all along the route.
Our forces followed the course of the canal until they came to a lake
or bayou, and they followed this thirty miles below Vicksburg. A
bridge had to be constructed for our forces to cross, and here we were
delayed part of a day, and we remained all night waiting to cross a
bayou that ran into Black Bayou. At length we arrived at Grand Gulf, on
the opposite side of the river, where we were delayed in crossing for
several hours. Several boats were busily engaged in transporting troops
across the river, landing them on the shore. Our turn came at last, and
the 11th Missouri soon got on board and were landed on the opposite
shore, and here they remained over night, the weather being pleasant we
enjoyed a good night's sleep, and awoke quite refreshed from our weary
marches.

On the march from Duckport through the State of Louisiana, there were
several fine plantations passed, and corn was growing finely, and
indications of a good crop. Some splendid dwellings and gardens, and
every convenience to make a person comfortable. Before this war broke
out the owners of these plantations were living in luxurious ease,
nothing to do, slaves to do their bidding and obey their commands,
and they became so wealthy that they did not know what to do with
their gold, they hardly knew the value of money, they had nothing to
do but to get rich, and when this rebellion broke out they were ripe
for anything that tended to mischief. They had all left their homes
and engaged with their hearts and hands carrying on this unjust war,
the almighty negro was the cause. Many valuable lives are lost on both
sides, and many more will be lost before this unholy rebellion is
crushed. All of these splendid dwellings were destroyed with fire by
the soldiers. I will fail in describing the splendor of these dwellings
and gardens. All were destroyed, costly furniture and pianos shared the
same fate of the other things, nothing was left but smouldering ruins.
Many thousand dollars worth of valuable property was destroyed, every
deserted dwelling of any value was destroyed on this march, but we
were not destined to remain at this place long. There was once a town
here but there was nothing but the brick chimneys standing to mark the
place, as it had been destroyed by a force of our men before the rebels
were driven from this stronghold, as it was a very strong natural
position, but a force of our men got in the rear of them and they left
everything and fled. Tuttle's division did not arrive in time to take
any part. A small force of our men were there to hold this position, as
it was situated on a very high bluff it did not require a strong force
to hold it.

Everything being in readiness for a forward movement the order was
given and the division was soon on the move towards Jackson, the
capital of Mississippi. We had to march up a very high hill and kept
going from one hill up another until we had gone about two miles, and
then it became easier marching.

We did not suffer for want of bacon, hams, sugar or molasses. Some of
it was found hid away in the brush. This was taken by the soldiers and
very little was left for the owners to use after our forces had passed.

Our advance had a short skirmish with the enemy on the march to
Raymond, and five men were killed and wounded on our side. They met
with no more opposition until they arrived near Raymond, when Greggs'
brigade encountered our advance, and after a desperate resistance they
were forced to give way and leave us in possession of the ground.
The loss was about equal as they occupied a ditch. The 20th Ohio
and 20th Illinois charged upon them and drove them from the ditch
at the point of the bayonet. They fired a volley into our advance
as they were marching past a heavy piece of timber and took our men
partly by surprise, but they soon recovered and drove the enemy from
the timber. They could not stand cold steel, as our men rushed with
impetuosity right forward, and drove the rebels wherever they tried
to make any resistance to our advancing columns; they were bayoneted
in the ditch without mercy. Our division did not arrive in time to
participate in this battle as the rebels had torn up a bridge we
had to cross and burned it, and here we were delayed several hours
waiting for the bridge to be repaired. At length the division got
started again but the battle was over before we could get to our men's
assistance. After passing through Raymond there were indications of an
enemy being in advance, when the 5th Minnesota regiment was ordered
in front to examine the timber. A line of battle was formed and the
advance commenced, the 11th Missouri following the skirmishers. They
soon gained a heavy growth of timber. It was with difficulty we could
proceed. We had advanced but a short distance into this timber when the
order was given to halt, and it being evening, the regiment remained
here all night. Some rain fell during the early part of the evening,
but it did not last long. As most of us had rubber blankets we did not
suffer from the rain, and after preparing our coffee we lay down and
slept until morning. Next morning very early the brigade was ordered
to fall in, and we were soon on the way towards Jackson. We expected
the rebels would dispute our possession of a certain spring, but they
did not interfere with us here, as there was a force of cavalry here
when the brigade passed in the morning. We halted here long enough to
fill our canteens with good cool water. The roads were quite good for
marching, as the rain had settled the dust. The bugle was sounded for
the command to move forward, and every regiment was soon in motion.
On to Jackson, was the word, where the rebels were supposed to be in
strong force.

May 14th, the morning was cloudy, and had every appearance of a
storm--Our forces had proceeded within about six miles of Jackson,
when the rain commenced falling in torrents, and the roads soon became
almost impassable, but still they moved onward until they arrived
within about two miles of Jackson, when the 5th Minnesota regiment
was ordered to halt, and the 11th Missouri was put in advance, and
company B and F were sent in front to act as skirmishers, and some
of the 47th Illinois. Company F, commanded by Captain Clealand, and
company B, Lieutenant Weber. They deployed as skirmishers and Clealand
ordered them to advance. The rebels had opened from one of their
batteries and were getting the range pretty well, when the 2d Iowa
battery was ordered forward, and they opened with shot and shell and
soon silenced the rebel's guns at this place, and killed the Lieutenant
of the battery. They were shooting at our men at a long range and the
order was given to advance, and they had to cross an open field, when
a volley was fired from the rebel skirmishers and the balls whistled
pretty close to us, but did no injury to any of the company. As fast
as the skirmishers advanced the rebels fell back until they reached
a very deep ditch in front of the rebel's works, and here they had
a pretty good position, when the order came to fall back to the
reserve, which was steadily advancing. A sharp fire by artillery was
kept up on both sides, but their shots passed over our heads, doing
but little injury to us. The order was given for the skirmishers to
advance again, and they moved forward again and held their position
until the 95th Ohio regiment flanked the rebels and found but few men
inside the rebel works, and the rebels had fled. There were but few
prisoners taken. The citizens of the town engaged in the defense of
their capital. There were about one hundred prisoners taken and several
pieces of cannon, with all the equipments belonging to them. Our loss
on the left was severe, and it was here that the rebels had advantage
of position.--Logan's division charged a battery and in spite of the
heavy fire from the rebel guns drove them from their guns at the point
of the bayonet, and for fear of being surrounded they left everything
and fled, leaving nothing but a few artillerists to defend their works.
The ground where Logan's men charged across was quite level, and the
enemy's batteries was placed to take any part of it, and it was in
crossing this that our forces met with the heaviest loss. Mowers'
brigade marched to the court house and stacked arms. It rained most of
the time and tents were discovered in a warehouse, and they were soon
appropriated to our use. Every regiment was supplied. This was a place
of great importance to the rebels, the capital of Mississippi, and in
time of peace contained nearly five thousand inhabitants, and a great
deal of business was done.

There were mills for the manufacture of cotton goods, an arsenal for
the making of arms, and everything requisite to carry on this cruel
war. Tobacco, whisky, sugar, molasses, and flour were found in great
abundance. Confederate scrip would pass for full value with the
inhabitants of the town. As soon as the soldiers gained possession
of the town commenced the work of plunder, breaking open stores,
everything of value was taken, and most every soldier in the brigade
was dressed in citizens' clothes. Whisky was plenty, and a good many
of the boys got tight. Guards were placed over the town, but they were
of no avail, and the soldiers distributed shoes to the citizens, and
almost every thing that could be got was given to them, as these things
were owned by speculators, and were sold to the people of the town
at the highest prices. But the soldiers did not long enjoy their new
suits, for the order came to wash and dry their uniforms, as they could
not wear citizens' clothes any longer than was necessary. They came
very acceptable, as our clothes were wet and muddy, having been in the
rain all day.

The brigade remained two nights and one day here, and I was detailed
to go as a guard to protect some citizens. One was a preacher, and
he treated the guard quite kindly; one was a retired merchant from
Massachusetts. He said if he was only able to handle a musket and bear
the fatigue of marching, he would be in the rebel army, and four of us
were protecting him from insult and his property from being destroyed;
The town was being illuminated, and there was a great deal of it on
fire, and many public buildings were being destroyed. The soldiers had
received marching orders to leave the next day, and the object was to
leave no building standing, but they were restrained by the guards.
When morning came we returned to our regiment, and the order was given
to burn the tents and break every gun not in use.

After everything was prepared the order came to leave the town, as the
rebels were advancing in strong force to drive us out. The railroad was
all torn up, and burned to the bridge at Black Water, by our forces.
We soon left the town with the bands playing Dixie. The Confederate
House, which had but recently been built, was burned down. The people
were glad to see us leave. A good many of the boys remained behind,
and the division had got but a short distance from town when a rebel
force of cavalry entered it, and all that had remained behind were made
prisoners and paroled or taken to Richmond to be exchanged. A Colonel
of the 47th Illinois went back to town on some business connected
with his men, when he was ordered to surrender, whereupon he drew
his revolver and commenced shooting, when he was shot dead. He was a
prisoner once, and said he never would be taken again.

The division marched until evening, when they were allowed a short
time to prepare some coffee; had barely time to finish drinking coffee
when the bugle sounded. The advance had to fall in, take arms, and
the command was soon on the move again. They came to a halt late in
the evening, and next morning were on the move again. By some mistake
we missed the right road, and after marching two miles the command
was halted. The heavy thundering of cannon and small arms could be
distinctly heard. The news came that our forces had driven the rebels
from the railroad bridge across the Black Water after an obstinate
resistence.

After halting here for a short time, the order was given to forward,
march, file right, and we had to retrace our steps until we got back to
where we stopped over night. There we turned to the left, and marched
until the heat of the day, and then halted for dinner. After eating,
the march was resumed until we arrived at Black Water, and after
staying here one night and part of a day before crossing the stream,
a fine horse was purchased by the privates of the 11th Missouri and
presented to Gen. Mowers. He had several horses shot while engaged in
battle. He made a few remarks--it was unexpected to him, and took him
by surprise. After this was over the division crossed the river on a
pontoon bridge, and the bridge was taken up as soon as we crossed.
Here the division bivouacked for the night. Next morning most of the
division moved forward with the exception of part of the 11th Missouri,
which was detailed to guard some ammunition and artillery which had
been captured from the rebels. Soon after the ammunition and artillery
were removed, and we left the river to rejoin the brigade. Several
hundred confederate prisoners who had been taken in the late battles,
brought up the rear.

We rejoined the brigade, and quite late in the evening arrived in front
of the rebel works. Here the army stopped, and the lines extended all
around the city of Vicksburg. Here we remained until the evening of the
21st, when an order was read with reference to storming the rebel works
on the following day. Meanwhile several batteries were busily engaged
throwing shot and shell into the rebel works from morning until night,
and it was not safe to go within sight of the rebel works and expose
ourselves to their sharpshooters, as several of our soldiers were
struck over 800 yards from the fort.

From Black river there is a range of high hills, of deep valleys, and
heavy timber, until arriving within half a mile of the rebel works.
The timber had all been cut down, and there was no way of approaching
the rebel works except by roads, and these were well protected by
artillery, and the forts were so built that they commanded every road
with stockades.

The morning of the 22d of May, a day long to be remembered by many
was, dark and cloudy. Our lines were formed, and the brigade marched
a short distance from the enemy's works and ordered to stop; and here
they lay until four o'clock in the afternoon, when the order was given
to fall in line, and not speak a word, as the brigade was going to
make an effort to get inside of the rebel works. The 11th Missouri was
in advance. Up they went on double-quick to within 300 yards, when
the rebels opened on us with shot and shell, and their sharp-shooters
from behind their works were pouring volleys of rifle bullets into our
ranks as they advanced. Whole ranks were shot down, either killed or
wounded, and only about 30 reached the works. The Colonel of the 11th
led the charge, and reached the outer ditch. While there the rebels
threw a hand grenade and it tore off the front of his cap, doing him
no other injury. The colors were planted on the outer works, and there
they had to remain until evening, when, under cover of darkness, the
Colonel got away, with the men that had regained the works. At night
the brigade returned to our old camping place. It was a terrible day,
for the regiment was exposed to a heavy fire, failing back with heavy
loss without accomplishing any thing. The loss was over a hundred men
in killed and wounded. After remaining a few days after the storming of
the enemy's entrenchments, order came, and the 2d brigade had to move
again; and early in the evening our lines were formed, the command was
given, and every regiment was soon in motion--destination not known.
After marching until quite late, halted, and camped for the night near
a creek. The night being warm, we had a comfortable sleep with our
blankets and the sky above to cover us. We were not disturbed until
morning. Next morning after eating breakfast we resumed our march,
until we arrived at Snyder's Bluffs, and here we came to a halt, and
remained one night and part of a day. This was a strong position, held
by the rebels, but on the approach of our forces was vacated, as there
was danger of being cut off from the main army at Vicksburg. It was a
place of little importance, as there was nothing but hills and valleys
and some rebel entrenchments. A very small portion of the land could be
cultivated. There were some people living in these hills, and seemed
to enjoy themselves. But few men were to be seen at home, as they were
gone into the rebel army.

Orders came at last, and the brigade was soon in motion again on the
road to Yazoo City. After marching up one hill and down another, the
brigade arrived at Mechanicsburg, where our cavalry fell in with a
force of rebel cavalry and there was a short skirmish. The infantry
went to the cavalry's assistance, when the rebels broke and fled. Our
casualties were slight; not much loss on either side. The cavalry did
not pursue the enemy far, but returned and camped for the night at
Mechanicsburg, where the infantry had kindled fires. You could see
where each regiment was halted and were resting from their weary day's
march.

At the sound of the bugle in the morning every soldier seemed to spring
into life again, and were soon all interested in the work of preparing
their meal. This work was soon over, most of the boys being their own
cooks, and carried their cooking utensils along with them. Water was
not very plenty, and most of it cistern water.

Mechanicsburg was a small town with a few old houses in it, and no
business worth mentioning being done there. Everything appeared
desolate and forsaken. Next morning we left this place for Haines'
Bluff. Our road lay through a heavy timber; it was a road not much
traveled at this time. We followed this road until we came to a very
large plantation, and here the command halted for a short time. Finding
plenty of chickens here, the soldiers took most of them, and when the
command moved forward there was not a rooster left to crow on the
plantation. There were a great many negroes on this place, their master
in the rebel army, and he very wealthy, owning three large plantations.
After staying here a short time the command was ordered to move
forward, and each regiment was soon in motion again. After emerging
from the hills we struck a flat open country along the Yazoo river,
where corn was growing finely, and would soon make good forage. The
command halted for dinner, after which we moved forward again, and late
in the evening came to a halt near a creek of clear water; here the
command bivouacked for the night. Next morning the march was resumed
again, and then commenced the work of climbing a very high hill, and
leaving the Yazoo bottoms. At length the whole army reached the summit
of Haines' Bluffs.

The weather had become very warm and it was almost impossible to march,
but there was a cool breeze stirring on the hills, and if it were not
for this the command would have had to halt, as the heat was almost
suffocating.

Haines' Bluffs was on the Yazoo river and had been in possession of the
rebels, who, for some cause, had left. After blowing up the magazine
they went into Vicksburg, and our forces soon took possession. It was
a place of vast importance to us, as we could get our supplies from
the river, and provisions could be hauled by teams and wagons to the
besieging army very easily, as it was but a short distance to the
landing. The army got plenty to eat here, but we were not suffered to
remain long.

One morning early the brigade was ordered on board steamboats, which
were in waiting to receive us on board. There were several of them
in the river, and one was a gunboat which was to accompany us on the
expedition. This day was passed on the boat, everything ready and
waiting the signal to move. At last we got under way and the boats
moved up the river.

The Yazoo river is a long narrow stream, full of short turns; our
largest boats could not navigate it. Our destination was unknown to us
at that time. At daylight next morning the boats landed us at a place
called Setorsia, a small town, containing one church, a few stores
and groceries. As soon as the boats stopped the soldiers were soon on
shore, the stores plundered of everything they contained, which was not
much. Gen. Mower ordered them on board again. Returning to the boats
the order came to form in line on land. Signs of an enemy were to be
seen, and skirmishers were thrown out to see if the road was clear. The
8th Wisconsin was in advance, and had moved but a short distance from
the town, when the advance fell in with some of the enemy's cavalry,
and they commenced to fire on the 8th. The skirmishers and brigade
halted on the side of a hill, when the rebels fled before them as they
advanced, keeping it up all the way to Mechanicsburg. Two of the 8th
were severely wounded. Here they resolved we should go no further. They
formed their line of battle about one mile and a half from town, and
there awaited our approach. A battery was ordered forward, and they
opened fire where the rebels were supposed to be; after shelling them a
short time, the rebels returned the fire, doing no injury to our men,
as they shot too high. A battalion of the 5th Illinois cavalry was
ordered to make a charge, which was done in gallant style. They bore
down on the rebels with sabres glistening in the sun, rushing at full
speed upon the enemy, which was in line of battle to receive them; but
what could withstand such a charge? The sabre was the principle weapon
used. This was too close work for them, and they broke and fled, taking
their artillery with them. The cavalry took 70 prisoners. Their loss
in killed not known; a large number were wounded with the sabre. The
infantry moved forward to the support of the cavalry, but the rebels
were dispersed before the infantry could render any assistance. The
rebels were supposed to be about 3,000 strong, mostly mounted infantry.
They could not stand but a short time before the impetuous valor of
our brave men, fighting for the right. They made several ineffectual
attempts at resistance, but they were at last forced to flee and leave
us victors.

The cavalry pursued the retreating rebels several miles, cutting them
down with their sabres whenever they overtook them. Some of the men
were quite old and gray. The infantry went about a half a mile from
town and there camped for the night.

Company B, 11th Missouri, and a company of the 47th Illinois, were
sent out in front to act as a grand guard; and here we remained for
twenty-four hours, when we were relieved by company C, and returned
to the regiment. Order was then given to draw two days' rations, as
we were to march next morning. At six o'clock next morning we made
preparations to march, drawing another day's rations, and began our
return to Haines' Bluff. Our knapsacks had arrived but were returned
again to the boats.

The 11th Missouri was rear guard and the advance moved quite slow,
owing to the extreme heat; it was almost impossible to proceed
sometimes; no air stirring, and some of the soldiers died on the way.
A great many were sunstruck. We marched back to Sertorsia, which was
destroyed, and Mechanicsburg was left burning.

After leaving the timber part of a division fell in with our brigade.
On this expedition there were three brigades of infantry, under
command of Brig. Gen. Kimble; also several regiments of cavalry, with
artillery. The Yazoo bottom road was taken. Corn had been planted by
order of Jeff. Davis, and it was growing finely on each side of the
road; some of the stalks were higher than our heads as we passed along.
It would soon make good forage for our cavalry. This road was dry and
dusty. There was plenty of water on the bottom, as there were cisterns
every few miles. The first day we marched until late, and came to a
halt near a creek of running water, and next day arrived at our old
camp early in the evening. After remaining here a short time we went by
steamboat to Youngs Point.

On the march from Mechanicsburg the 11th lost several men; they were
behind and were taken by rebel cavalry, who were picking up stragglers,
but did not get many, as our cavalry were protecting the rear, and they
did not venture up very close. All cotton was burned on this march,
also some corn and a few houses, one a very fine house occupied by a
rebel. Everything of value was taken because he aided in capturing some
of our boys by making signals to a party of bushwhackers. He was taken
and delivered as a prisoner to the General. The brigade marched to
Young's Point, established camp, where we were soon at home.

After resting for a few days orders were received for the brigade to
prepare for a move next morning. Everything was found ready on the
14th of June, and on Sunday every regiment was formed in line and soon
moved from Young's Point to go to Richmond, Louisiana, where the rebels
were said to be in force, throwing up entrenchments. We were sent out
to reconnoitre on the 15th, after a good night's rest. Our advance
fed in with some of the enemy's skirmishers when about two miles from
Richmond. The 5th Minnesota was acting as skirmishers. A line of battle
was formed, and then the order was given to forward, and the whole
line moved to the support of the skirmishers. When within a mile of
Richmond the skirmishers were saluted with a shower of bullets, but
most of them passed harmlessly over their heads. Two of the 5th were
slightly wounded, which was all the damage we received. Two batteries
were brought into play; one was handled by some men of the marine
brigade, and they did some good shooting. They came from Millikin's
Bend. The 11th Missouri was supporting Taylor's battery. The rebels
would send an occasional shot at us as we were laying down in front of
our artillery, and after firing over 100 rounds from the two batteries,
General Mower discovered where the rebels were. They occupied a strong
position on the opposite side of Wolf creek. He rode along the lines,
each regiment being in its place, and the command was given to move
across this creek and take the rebels in the rear. The marine brigade
was ordered to take our place to support the batteries. After marching
through a heavy piece of timber, we emerged into an open field near the
creek, and then we could see the rebels retreating, and our advance in
hot pursuit.

We soon reached the creek opposite the town and crossed over. There was
evidence of there having been a strong force there, as their shanties
were left standing, and deserters informed us that there were 7,000 of
Taylor's and Walker's men here when we attacked them in the morning.
They had dug some rifle pits and had several pieces of artillery,
but used them very little. One man lay dead in a ditch, and two were
wounded, one of them seriously. They were injured by a shell.

A battalion of the 10th Illinois cavalry pursued the retreating rebels
and took 30 prisoners, with slight loss on our side. The citizens of
the town fled with the retreating rebels, as they were informed that
they would be protected inside the rebel lines. Some of them taking
nothing with them, and our men soon took possession. And then commenced
the work of plunder, as everything was ordered to be destroyed, the
town was soon in ashes; there was nothing but a heap of ruins two hours
after our forces took possession.

The day passed away and night found us three miles from Richmond, where
we halted for the night. The marine brigade returned to their boats
that evening, burning everything as they went. Arrived at Young's Point
at 1 o'clock on the 16th day of June. The sun was sending its hottest
rays upon us, and it was almost impossible to proceed. We had water a
short distance from camp and plenty of it; it was not good, and the
brigade soon felt the effects of using this water. Ague and fever
became frequent, and several men died in the brigade. We remained here
encamped until after the surrender of Vicksburg. You may judge of our
feelings when we learned that the rebels had surrendered to Grant. It
was hardly believed that one of the strongholds of the rebellion was
in our possession, and the father of waters was open to commerce again
from St. Louis to New Orleans.


Col. ANDREW JACKSON WEBER,

_11th Missouri Regiment, Mortally Wounded, June 29th, 1863, in front of
Vicksburg._

Nothing of importance transpired until the 28th of June, and then
the 11th Missouri was ordered in front of Vicksburg as grand guard,
and while there the rebels commenced shelling us. A piece of shell
striking Col. Weber on the head, he fell mortally wounded. This was
on the morning of the 29th; he lived until the morning of the 30th.
In him the 11th Missouri lost a true friend, and it was with sorrow
we followed his body to the boat which was to convey him home. His
corpse was put on board of the boat, and after a short prayer, we
returned to camp. All of the brigade followed his body to the boat, as
he was universally esteemed by every one who knew him. Although young
in years, he had the qualifications rendering him an able commander.
He was captain of company B, 11th Missouri, until we arrived at Point
Pleasant, but for services rendered there, he was raised to the rank
of major, which post he held for some time. At length he was raised to
the rank of lieutenant colonel, vice Penny Baker, resigned on account
of ill health. He filled every place with honor to himself and with the
esteem and friendship of his brother officers. He was a sober officer,
and took pride in seeing his men appear well, and was the first to face
danger, always kind and obliging, never resorting to extreme measures,
he won the good will of his men, who would follow him wherever he saw
fit to lead them. He encountered cold, hunger and fatigue, and endured
many privations along with his men; had passed safely through several
hard fought battles, and was always cool and collected in the midst
of danger; always in front of his company or regiment. He was always
with his regiment, and took an active part in all the battles that the
11th Missouri was engaged in, and escaped unharmed until the 29th day
of June, when he was stricken down in the prime of life. His remains
were sent home on the 2d day of July. George Weber accompanied the last
remains of as brave and gallant an officer as ever drew a sword.

The brigade remained encamped at Young's Point until after the
surrender of Vicksburg which happened on the 4th day of July, 1863.
Gen. Pemberton surrendered with his whole army, which was paroled,
and a great many of the men took the oath of allegiance to the U. S.
Government, went home, declaring they would fight no more for Jeff.
Davis and his minions.

While here the climate began to tell on the men in the brigade, and
several fell sick and some died. At last we got on to steamboats and
were transferred to Vicksburg, and from there to Black Water on the
cars. Here tents were pitched, and the brigade remained for nearly two
weeks. From this place the camp was removed ten miles to a heavy piece
of timber, which answered very well for a shade; a choice spot was
selected for a camp, the ground cleaned off, the tents pitched, and
each regiment and brigade took its respective place. Officers' tents in
line of the rear of the privates. On laying out the ground for a camp,
so much ground is allowed to each company, and every tent must be in
line with the others. The ground has to be swept every morning between
the tents, and the dirt hauled off in wagons. At this camp we remained
for two months; the last month we remained here there was a grand
review every Thursday, and company inspection every Sunday. While here
Gen. Mowers returned from the hospital, where he had been on account
of ill health. He took command of the brigade again, in the place of
Col. Hubbard, who was acting brigadier at this time. George Weber also
returned from taking his brother home about this time, also Captain J.
D. Lloyd, of company B, returned from Memphis, and took command of his
company.

The country is very broken and hilly for miles around Vicksburg. Some
corn near our camp was used for forage. Peaches were in great plenty.
The boys would go out miles from camp foraging, bringing in hogs,
chickens, and most all kinds of produce. Several of the boys were taken
prisoners by guerrillas, and an order was issued to stop going outside
the lines. The boys' mules and horses were taken and turned over to the
quartermasters.

Deaths became frequent, and soldiers died off very fast; some regiments
lost a good many men. Here company B lost two. We remained at this
point two months, and on the 26th day of September the brigade returned
to Black Water again, pitching their tents in the old camping ground.

September 26th. Early in the evening our tents were ordered to be taken
down and loaded on the wagons, and the brigade was ordered to prepare
for leaving this camp and return to Black River bridge. Everything
being in readiness, the advance was sounded, and each regiment took
its place and off they started. The weather was fine, the moon was
shining brightly, and the roads were quite dry and dusty. The brigade
soon reached our old camping ground, and after our tents came they were
pitched, and here the brigade remained, without anything worthy of
notice transpiring until the 14th of October, when Mowers' brigade and
the 2d Iowa battery was ordered to get ready to leave camp, taking six
days' provisions and 40 rounds of ammunition to the man. The first day
we went as far as Gen. Tuttle's headquarters, where we camped for the
night, and next morning Tuttle's and Logan's divisions and a brigade
of cavalry, all under command of Maj. Gen. McPherson, crossed Black
River on a bridge. Mowers' brigade was detailed to guard the train of
the division, and night found us at a small town called Brownsville.
Here Tuttle's division came to a halt, and the 11th Missouri was
detailed to act as grand guard. Our lines were formed near the town,
and one man was shot by some of the rebel bushwhackers; we were not
disturbed again. In the morning we were ready to move forward, when
the order came to advance. In this place there was nothing but a few
empty houses, used as stores. Nothing of value could be seen; if there
was anything it was concealed, so that few contraband goods were
obtained. While marching through this place next morning some goods
were discovered in a house belonging to a Jew. The regiment stopping at
this place for a short time, some of the soldiers helped themselves to
whatever they could find; but a guard being placed over this house,
not much could be obtained.

The roar of cannon broke upon our ears, and we could tell by the sound
that it was some distance ahead of us. It continued for a short time,
and then ceased, and we were ordered forward, but soon came to a halt
again. In this way we proceeded all day. At nightfall we came to a
halt, and camped, the brigade forming a hollow square. Here we remained
till morning, when the order came to fall in and move forward.

The cavalry had found the rebels and were shelling them with their
howitzers. After marching us about a mile we came in full view of them.
Logan's division was in line of battle. Skirmishers were thrown forward
and the advance commenced. The rebels occupied a good position on a
hill, and were supposed to be in strong force. It was a splendid sight
to see the blue coats ascend the hill. Skirmishing was kept up and the
rebels fell back slowly, firing as they went. They made but little
opposition to our men, and soon they left us masters of the field.

Tuttle's division had halted, and was now ordered forward again. After
advancing about a mile we came to a halt, stacked arms, and bivouacked.
Rain fell during the night, and the roads next day were quite muddy,
making it pretty hard marching. We were ordered back to Black River
bridge, where we arrived on the sixth day after leaving camp. Part of
this expedition was sent to destroy a mill which contained a great
quantity of provisions. The cavalry, which was in advance, encountered
a battery which was placed in position to defend the mill. The cavalry
being fired upon, they fell back, and formed a line of battle, and
a battery of light artillery was brought forward and opened on the
rebels, where they were supposed to be, and the place was soon made too
warm for them. A charge was made, and several prisoners taken, with a
small loss on our side. After the rebels left, the mill and a machine
shop was burned; then returned to camp. After this was accomplished,
and as soon as the rebels discovered that the army was on its way back
to camp, they returned to harrass our rear. The cavalry had several
skirmishes with them during the day, as they would come up and engage
our rear guard, but in every instance were driven back. They followed
us up to Edwards' Station. It took us two days to return to camp
again, marching 40 miles in a day and a half. Sometimes we were on
double-quick, and marched in single file on the right of the wagons
the whole length of the train. How glad were we when we could see the
tops of our tents in the distance. Tired and foot sore, we laid down
to rest our weary limbs, and our sleep was enjoyed the first night of
our arrival in camp, and we awoke much refreshed. This was the 21st of
October, and here we remained until November. About the 6th orders came
to strike tents and get ready to move camp.

Everything was put on board the cars but the wagons and artillery, and
landed at Vicksburg. The wagons were hauled there by the teams, the
artillery was put on board steamboats that were in waiting to receive
us. Tuttle's division was soon on its way to Memphis. The 11th Missouri
was on the boat with General Mowers. The weather was pretty cool and
dry, and everything went on favorably until our boat was struck by a
floating snag, which tore a hole in the front of it, and it was also
set on fire several times by some person or persons on board. It was
discovered in time to prevent serious damage.

At length we arrived at Memphis, where the division all landed. One
brigade remained at Memphis and the other two were left at posts along
the railroad as guards. The second brigade under Mowers was carried by
railroad to La Grange, Tennessee. Our train had proceeded but a short
distance from Memphis when it was fired into and a negro killed in the
11th Missouri, and two of the 5th Minnesota wounded; also a negro in
the second Iowa battery was killed. Firing on trains had become quite
common, but an order was issued that put a stop to it. Every citizen
was held responsible for damage done the railroad by roaming bands of
guerrillas who were watching opportunities to obstruct the passage of
trains running from Corinth to Memphis.

When we arrived here there was but a small force of cavalry stationed
at this point, and it was the rebels' intention to attack the place,
but they were so long in making up their minds what to do that I don't
think they will venture very close to us again. We arrived here near
the middle of November, and remained until the 1st of December, when
the order came to prepare for marching.--Taking three days' rations in
our haversacks, with our blankets and canteens, we were soon on the
march again at daylight. Our destination was Pocahontas. We marched
up one hill and down another until we arrived within a mile of a
small town on the railroad called Middletown. Tired and foot sore, we
came to a halt and bivouacked for the night. Our march was along the
railroad, and we passed through Grand Junction and Salsbury. At the
latter place part of the 8th Wisconsin regiment and some Tennessee
cavalry, were stationed. When the brigade passed through the 8th was
ordered to accompany it, and when they arrived at Salsbury the town
was left without a guard. The rebel cavalry came right in the rear of
us and tore up the railroad and burned several houses of the town.
Notice was given the General that the rebels were in our rear, when
the command was ordered back. The cavalry being in advance they fell
in with the rebels a short distance from this town. They were posted
in line of battle and were determined to prevent our return to camp.
The artillery was soon brought into play, and after shelling them some
time, doing but little damage on either side, the rebels gave way and
left our forces in possession of the ground. A large open field formed
the battle ground, with timber on each side. A running fight was kept
up all day, a few prisoners were taken. How glad were we when we could
see La Grange again. We reached camp about four o'clock, having marched
over forty miles in less than two days. That night we slept until
morning, and awoke much refreshed.

There was a great stir in camp next morning, caused by the report that
the rebels were seen hovering around our lines. No one was allowed to
leave camp, and our arms were stacked on the color line, and we were
ordered to be ready to take arms at a moment's warning, as there was
no knowing what moment the enemy would make the attack. We were not
long destined to remain in camp. The regiment was detailed to work on
breastworks, and when the fort was nearly completed the order came
to march again, and we had to lay by the shovel and pick and take up
our guns and try the fortunes of the field again. Two regiments of
the second brigade, 47th Illinois, and 11th Missouri, got on the cars
and went to Corinth, Mississippi, and here they bivouacked one night
in some old empty quarters that had been occupied by soldiers. In the
morning the command was ordered to move, and early on the morning
of the 21st took our line of march, and night found us within four
miles of Purdy, having marched twenty miles. Next morning we moved
about five miles and bivouacked until the morning of the third day at
half-past two o'clock, when we were ordered again to march, and that
night we came to a halt within twenty miles of Jackson, Tennessee,
where the rebel General Forrest, was said to have his headquarters.
We marched this day thirty miles. Here we remained all night and next
day until nearly dark, when we were ordered to march again, and the
command was soon on its way back to Corinth again. After marching to
within six miles of Purdy, the command came to a halt until morning
and next day traveled about ten miles, and were told to make ourselves
as comfortable as possible, as we would remain here all night. But an
order came for us to return if possible, to La Grange. The next evening
at seven o'clock the sky had the appearance of an approaching storm.
At about one o'clock that morning we started for Corinth, and arrived
there, the rain falling heavily and the roads becoming so slippery and
muddy that it was tedious marching. At two o'clock we were on the cars
again, and soon left Corinth for La Grange, where we arrived late in
the evening, wet and cold. We retired to our quarters where we soon
forgot our fatigue in the arms of slumber, having been absent eight
days. We did not discover a rebel on this march, but could hear of
them every day, and there would be slight skirmishing with our advance
cavalry. Not much loss was sustained on either side. The expedition was
commanded by General Mowers but I never learned the object of it as
nothing was accomplished. General Forrest was said to have crossed the
railroad a few miles from La Grange.

Our stay was short, an order came to go to Grand Junction, and there
the 11th remained for several days without tents to cover themselves.
It rained twenty-four hours, and from rain it turned to snow, and
froze quite hard. It was almost impossible to endure the cold. We were
allowed to return to camp, and how cheering were the camp fires to us
that evening, as the snow was falling and the wind blowing a strong
breeze from the north-west. As our tents had fire-places in them we did
not suffer much from the cold of January, 1864.

Here we remained until the 26th of January, when we were ordered to
prepare for leaving this camp for Memphis. As most of this railroad
was to be abandoned, every available article was removed to Memphis,
or inside the Union lines. The 11th and 47th Illinois, were detailed
to guard the wagon train into Memphis. After two days we arrived in
sight of that city, and here came to a halt and remained a short
time. The boys received pay and were ordered on transports which were
awaiting to convey troops down the river. At length, all things ready,
the boats headed down the river, and we soon found ourselves in front
of Vicksburg. Here we landed, formed in line and were soon on the way
to Black River bridge, where we arrived on the 4th day of February. A
brigade had left their tents standing for the 11th Missouri to occupy.

Left Black River bridge, where we were in camp, March 4th, 1864. The
regiment occupied the 20th Illinois quarters as they had left their
tents standing, and they kindly tendered them to us while they were
absent with Sherman on an expedition to Meridian. Tuttle's division
was to have gone but did not arrive in time. The expedition had gone
before we got there and we had to remain behind. We remained until
Sherman's army returned to Canton, Mississippi, when the second brigade
was ordered to guard a wagon train of prisoners through to Sherman,
whose command had come to a halt and was awaiting supplies. The train
went through all right, and how glad were the boys when supplies
arrived, they were suffering for the want of something to eat. Their
supplies had been all consumed, and they had to subsist on parched
corn and fresh pork without salt, and could not get enough of that.
The expedition was gone over a month, and had marched over three
hundred miles without a change of clothing, with twenty days rations.
Everything was destroyed as they went; railroads were torn up, and corn
destroyed, which was a great loss to the rebels. They found scarcely
anything to oppose them; a few slight skirmishes now and then, but no
general engagement. After obtaining supplies the regiment returned to
camp again. Five of the 11th Missouri were gobbled up while foraging on
this march, and have not been heard from since. As soon as we returned
to camp again the regiment, with Tuttle's division, were ordered to
Vicksburg, and soon were on the move again.

An expedition was fitting out to go up Red River, but the 11th had
re-enlisted and were promised a furlough home, while all non-veterans
were transferred to other regiments. There were nearly a hundred
non-veterans of the 11th Missouri regiment. We pitched our tents in the
rear of town and there waited to be transferred; the veterans to go
home. As I was one of the non-veterans I was destined to be separated
for a while from my comrades. We were transferred to the 33d Missouri,
and were soon on the way to Red River. A fleet of transports and
gunboats were in this expedition; Smith and Mower were in command; in
all, twelve thousand five hundred men, infantry and artillery; a picked
body of men who never knew what it was to turn their backs on the foe.

Our transfer took place on the 8th of March, after dark. Rain fell that
day and the ground had become slippery and muddy; it was difficult
to walk without falling. This wading through mud could easily have
been prevented if the order had been received in time to have gone
to the boats by daylight. As it was we had to endure considerable
suffering going from shelter and sleeping on the bank of the river
until morning. It was lucky for us that it did not rain any more that
day; but the skies looked very threatening. In the morning we were
assigned to company B, of the 33d Missouri. There were thirteen of us;
seventy-eight belonging to the 11th. Some were assigned to each company
in the regiment. Lieut. Col. Heathe was in command of the regiment.
As my object is to give an account of the expedition I will not be
particular in giving the names of officers.

We remained one day on board of the transport Hamilton. On the 10th,
everything being ready, the gunboats in advance and the transports
loading, we started for Red River. The boats came to anchor at the
mouth of Atchafalaya bayou, where the troops landed and burned a
rebel's house after plundering it, and the men would have hung the
owner but General Mower interposed and saved his life. The soldiers
were ordered on board the boats again and a guard was stationed in
front of each boat, that no soldier might go on shore again.--Here we
remained all night, and in the morning the fleet entered the mouth
of Atchafalaya bayou, which was followed for several miles; anchored
at a place called Simsport, where there had been a rebel encampment.
Some earthworks could be seen but the rebels fled on our approach.
Here some of the troops landed, and in the morning marched four miles,
where they discovered a fort.--It was across a bayou called Yellow
bayou. This was a strong position and was very hard to approach; if the
enemy had chosen to make a stand, would have given our men trouble to
dislodge them, as they had to cross a bayou and a ditch fifteen feet
deep, which would almost have been an impossibility. No resistance
was made however, and this position was evacuated and our men soon
had possession. Every available article was burned and the works were
destroyed. The rebels fell back to a stronger position on Red River.
Mower, with his men, returned to Simsport, stacked arms on shore, and
we were ordered to prepare ourselves with two days' rations in our
haversacks. Everything was soon ready, and we waiting for the command
to move forward. It was on a beautiful Sabbath evening and the boys
were in fine spirits. The order came at last, and off we started, went
marching that evening eight miles; came to a halt, and the next morning
were on the move again quite early. There was nothing worth relating
until our arrival within two miles of Red River, where a very strong
position was held by a force of rebels, and they resolved to make a
stand. There were several siege pieces in position which were covered
by a fort. It would have been almost an impossibility to capture it
if it had been finished. Three guns commanded all approaches by the
river; they were nine-inch guns captured from us and taken off the
Indianola. The water battery was protected with railroad iron with a
foot of white oak frame work. One gun was not mounted yet, but they
were working on it when Mower spoiled their calculation and captured
all their guns and destroyed these works, which had taken them a year
to complete. After examining this position Mower immediately ordered
an advance, with skirmishers in front, while the artillery was opened
and a heavy fire was kept up on the rebel works. The rebels returned
the fire with a will, but doing no damage. A brigade of infantry was
steadily advancing, firing as they went. Soon it began to take effect,
as our men neared the rebel position, and made it dangerous to show
themselves. The firing had nearly ceased on their part when a charge
was made, General Mower leading them. The works were soon gained. It
was almost impossible to get into the fort, owing to the ditch around
it, but with the assistance of one another gained the works. When they
got on top of the works they pulled each other up by the aid of their
guns. The garrison surrendered with eleven pieces of heavy artillery;
also a quantity of ammunition, with nearly three hundred prisoners, who
were sent to New Orleans. As it was in Banks' department all prisoners
had to be sent there from here. Mower embarked with all the troops but
one brigade of infantry, which was left behind to destroy the works,
under the orders of A. J. Smith, who was in command of both corps. The
regiments that made the assault were the following: 24th Missouri, 89th
Indiana, 119th Illinois, 14th Iowa and 21st Missouri, non-veterans.

As the order was received at the same time to take the rebel works by
assault, all moved at once, and the 24th Missouri claims the honor
of planting the first flag on the fort, but all deserve praise for
the manner in which the order was obeyed. Every one was confident of
victory. On they went under a heavy fire, and were soon in possession
of one of the strongest positions in Louisiana. It was well planned.
There were places in the fort for prisoners, and ammunition would be
safe from harm. The gunboats were to assist in taking the fort, but did
not arrive in time to take part in the engagement owing to obstructions
in the river, which the boats had to remove before they could get
along. This caused some delay. A few shots were fired from the boats,
but the fort was taken by this time. Our advance was in possession of
the fort by six o'clock in the evening.

As our brigade was in the rear, did not arrive in time to take part
in the engagement. We were waiting to receive the order to support
the advance, but as our assistance was not needed, we stacked our
arms two miles from the fort, in an open field, and there remained
until morning, when we marched to the landing where the fleet was
awaiting us. We all embarked with the exception of one brigade, which
remained behind to destroy everything that could not be removed. From
carelessness or some other cause, several men were killed and wounded
in the destruction of the works; nearly as many as there were in taking
them. The rest of the forces under Mower proceeded to Alexandria, the
gunboats going in advance, the transports following. Our progress was
very slow, only about five miles an hour. This stream is very crooked
and narrow, and might be very easily blockaded. The gunboats proceed
cautiously. Parker discovered there were torpedoes placed in the river,
and four of these infernal machines were taken out before getting very
close to them. The fleet arrived at last at Alexandria. All the troops
landed, and tents were pitched, and the men were allowed several days
to rest and recruit up; but we were not destined to remain long idle.

An expedition was fitted out, and after marching about 40 miles,
surprised and captured nearly 300 more confederates, with four pieces
of artillery. It was under a heavy storm of wind and rain when this
capture was made in the dead hour of night, on the 21st of March.
Mowers captured the courier, who had the countersign, and by this
means deceived the guard, as they imagined that it was reinforcements
from Walker. They little thought the Yankees were so close, and were
surprised to find themselves in the presence of strangers. We treated
them quite civilly, as they were prisoners of war, and were taken
without firing a shot. When they discovered how easily they had been
taken in, their rage knew no bounds. The 33d Missouri assisted in
making this capture. They were marched to Alexandria, while some of the
boys rode their horses they were compelled to walk. They were put on
board a boat and sent to New Orleans.

On returning to Alexandria we found Banks and staff had arrived. Lee,
who was chief of cavalry, came into town; it was the advance of Banks'
army--it soon came, and encamped in the rear of town for several days.
While here three more pieces of artillery were discovered, concealed by
the rebels in their haste to get away. They were field pieces, which
made in all 18 pieces, with 600 prisoners; a great quantity of sugar
and molasses was also captured. Smith's men were called thieves and
robbers by Banks, who said they would not fight. He started with the
13th corps, the invincible 19th going ahead, and came to a halt at
Grandecore, and there awaited Smith's coming, who was to bring up the
rear. Smith arrived, and the troops marched above the falls, and the
fleet soon followed, but some of our largest gunboats had to remain at
Alexandria, as they drew too much water to get over the falls. After
getting over the falls the troops embarked on board the boats again and
went to Grandecore. Here there was a short skirmish, in which Captain
O'Donald, of the 11th Missouri, was wounded in the arm. A few prisoners
were taken.

This town was situated on a high bluff, and the rebels had thrown up
some earthworks, but left as soon as they saw the gunboats. Few people
were living in the town.

About the first of April Banks moved, with his long train of wagons,
in the direction of Shreveport; the cavalry in advance, and the 13th
corps, what there was of it, in support of the cavalry. Skirmishing
commenced early, and was kept up until in the afternoon, when the
rebels were discovered to be pretty strong in force in our front,
having a good position. The cavalry attacked them without hesitation,
and after a pretty severe fight, drove the rebels. The loss on our side
was light. They were driven several miles this day, which was the 7th
of April. Our men drove them in every instance until the 8th, when the
13th corps were forced to fall back, and all their cannon and wagon
train were captured, and out of 2,600 men, only half of them escaped.

On the morning of the 8th the march commenced, with cavalry in advance,
the 13th corps as support, their train next to them, and Banks and his
invincible 19th brought up the rear, while Smith and Mowers with their
guerrillas were left behind to guard Banks' everlasting train. It was
train enough for 150,000 men, and it took all of Smith's army to guard
it while landing from the boats. We were soon in marching order, and
on the 7th got started, following Banks' grand army. Rain fell this
day, and laid the dust. Our march was through a heavy pine timbered
country; water was scarce. Marched this day about 16 miles, came to a
halt. It was a long dreary march. Very few houses could be seen. Next
morning were on the move again. Marched this day about 19 miles, and
came to a halt in the rear of a small town called Pleasant Hill. Here
we went into camp for the night. Reports began to be circulated through
the regiment that the army under Banks was badly whipped, and things
began to look gloomy, as the truth came to us that the 13th corps were
all killed or captured, with all their cannon and wagon train. Let me
ask, who will have to answer for the manner in which this expedition
was conducted, and the many brave men who fell a sacrifice to an
immense cotton speculation? Who ever heard of a General skirmishing
with a wagon train? All were sent right up in front, and our advance
went as far as Sabine Cross Roads, 70 miles from Shreveport, and here
the battle commenced. A brigade of infantry was sent to support the
cavalry. The rebel lines were in the shape of a horse-shoe, and into
this our men moved, when a heavy fire was opened from all sides.
There was no chance of forming our lines, as the wagon train was in
the way, and after a desperate resistence, our ammunition being all
expended, our men broke and fled in all directions. Many of them fell
into the hands of the enemy. Men and horses were so mixed up they
could not be rallied again. The cavalry were forced to fall back, and
some of them rode through the lines and caused confusion among the
men. Reinforcements were sent for, but did not arrive in time. The
invincible 19th got there at last and formed their lines for battle.
The enemy were steadily driving our men; on they went, not dreaming
that they were hastening to destruction. When they got within short
range, a deadly fire of musketry and artillery were poured into them.
The rebels came to a halt, and returned the fire, and soon the battle
raged fiercely, neither side yielding an inch. Volley after volley was
given and received into their very faces. At length the rebels yielded
and fell back--our men did not follow up their advantage, when night
closed the bloody scene. The loss was heavy on both sides. Kirby Smith
was said to be in command.

Banks ordered a retreat. He and his negroes were hastening back to
Grandecore. We could see the wagons getting to the river as fast as
possible, and all day of the 9th the wagons could be seen passing. Two
divisions of the 16th corps had arrived, and were waiting orders, when
on the morning of the 9th three companies of the 33d Missouri regiment
was detailed to guard our train.--Every fire was put out and a guard
was stationed all around our wagon train.--The 19th had fell back to
Pleasant Hill, and as Banks could not command an army he gave the
command to Smith and Mower, who immediately formed their men in line of
battle.

The place where this battle was fought was on a high ridge, an old
field separating both armies. The artillery was placed in position on
the ridge. All around this old cotton field was a thick growth of heavy
timber and underbrush. In this our lines were formed in the shape of
a horse-shoe. Artillery was placed to sweep this open field, and a
cannonade was kept up on the rebels, who occupied the timber in front
of our men, and were considerably annoyed by a twelve pound howitzer
which was throwing shell amongst them. As there was no good position
for the enemy to use artillery very little was used. A force of
cavalry was sent out to bring on an engagement. Skirmishing commenced
immediately, and was kept up for some time, and they were slowly driven
back until Price's arrival with reinforcements, when the attack was
ordered to commence at once, about 5 o'clock P. M. When the enemy were
seen forming their lines in the edge of the timber, every preparation
was made to receive them. The 19th corps formed part of the first line.
They were seen advancing in three lines. On they came, their object
being to outflank us, but were met at every point. Still they came,
firing as they advanced, until they arrived within a short distance
of our lines, when every gun opened upon them, and as one man fell
another took his place. Still they advanced, but they were mowed down
like grass. A brigade of cavalry, supported by infantry, only three
men of which escaped, made a charge. It was met on the right by the
24th Missouri regiment, and most nobly it was done. Its loss was heavy,
one hundred and eighteen killed and wounded. The infantry flanked them
and they had to change their position, and it was then they suffered
most. All of the regiments suffered that formed this line, as it was
on the extreme right. As they could not turn the flanks they fell
back and massed their forces for another encounter. A brisk cannonade
was kept up all the time, which was killing and wounding their men at
every discharge. The 19th corps broke their first line of battle and
formed with Smith's men, and Col. Hill's brigade formed in the centre,
as it was ordered to the front, and arrived in time to take part in
the engagement. The 33d Missouri and 35th Iowa were laying down when
the rebels were said to be advancing again. They came on with their
accustomed yell, when they were again met with as warm a reception
as in their first attempt to break our lines. It was their object to
break the centre, but in this they failed. They were met by the western
boys. Missouri against Missouri, brother against brother, met in the
deadly strife for the mastery of the field. Charge after charge had
been made, still the contest went on. The rebel dead lay in heaps
along the whole line, and the shouts of the combatants nearly drowned
the roar of artillery and the noise of battle. Seven thousand rifles
with artillery, were making sad havoc in their ranks. It had raged
furiously for two hours, when their lines were seen to waver. Mower,
who was riding where the bullets rained the thickest, waving his sword,
gave the command forward and give the rebels the cold steel, but they
could not stand such a desperate charge as this was. Mower crossed the
field, leading the men double-quick into the timber, where the rebels
were trying to rally for another charge, but a heavy volley was fired
into their masses and they broke and fled in all directions, throwing
away their arms in their haste to get away. They were driven from the
field three miles, and if our forces had followed the retreating enemy,
would have retrieved our loss, and Smith and Price's armies have been
destroyed. As it was, all of our artillery was retaken, but could not
be got away on account of not having horses to haul it. It was left on
the field in the hands of the enemy, with most of our wounded. Banks
ordered a retreat. Smith and Mower strenuously opposed falling back;
they were for pursuing the enemy, who did not halt till they got twenty
miles from the field of battle; leaving some of their best officers on
the field.

Their loss is not known, but was fully as large as ours, which was
great, for it was a hard fought battle, and could be counted one of
the hardest of the war, considering the forces engaged. The rebel
forces were said to have two thousand two hundred strong, cavalry and
infantry. They thought to crush Smith and Mowers and capture their
two divisions, but did not succeed in getting one gun or wagon from
them, while Banks lost half of his artillery and a good many wagons;
also his whisky, paper collars, and ammunition supplies for ten days,
belonging to the 13th corps, was all taken. Our ammunition was made
good use of in the fight at Pleasant Hill, with our new Enfield rifles.
The prisoners call Banks their commissary. They made a requisition on
him for sixty thousand rations, and he filled it, giving them something
better than we received, which was canned fruit and full rations of
whisky.

On the 11th we arrived at Grandecore without molestation, as the rebels
had no idea but that we were in close pursuit, until they sent in a
flag of truce asking permission to care for their wounded and bury
their dead. There was no one to receive it, and word was sent back.
They soon returned and followed us.--Our retreat commenced early in the
morning of the 10th, the 16th corps bringing up the rear. Went into
camp and remained here for a week. The fleet had followed us on our
advance to Shreveport, and went to within thirty-five miles of that
place, when the order was sent to them to return, and it was barely in
time to save the boats from destruction. They were not molested on the
way up, but on their way back suffered from sharp-shooters that lined
the banks. A battery was in position at a small town called Lacompt,
distant eight miles from here, and a force of cavalry and infantry
were sent there and made them take their battery and skedaddle. The
gunboats could not make them leave, owing to the high bank at this
place. The fleet got back at last, gunboats in advance. To clear the
shore of rebel batteries they were placed on every available point,
but could not stand the fire from the gunboats long. The steamer Black
Hawk looked like a sieve, it was all perforated with bullets. Several
men were killed and wounded on it, but in this attempt to capture the
Black Hawk they paid dearly. They did not perceive the Black Monitor
laying low in the water.--Green marched his men down to the shore and
ordered the boat to shove ashore, but they were not so inclined, and
the officer in command informed him that he would try what virtue there
was in cold iron. A heavy volley was fired into the boat, when the
Monitor opened her broad sides. The rebels found they were charging on
the wrong boat, and began to get out of the way as quick as they could,
but were not in time to escape the shell that was making such fearful
havoc in their ranks. They were shelled as long as they could be seen.
Their loss was about five hundred killed and wounded, with Green, who
paid the penalty of charging on a boat with a monitor in tow.

April 20th. After drawing rations, we left Grandecore, to return to
Alexandria. The rebels were determined we should not leave Louisiana,
and were on the move to intercept us from going back to Mississippi,
at every opportunity would attack our lines in front and rear, and at
every point and place where they could make a good stand.

On the morning of the 24th, being Sunday, the rebels commenced throwing
some shells into our camp, aiming at our wagon train, but did no damage
to trains or us until we got ready for them. Our cavalry then made some
desperate charges. The 16th Indiana and 6th Missouri cavalry, did the
principal fighting, with our line of skirmishers, while our regiment
was drawn up in line of battle and watching for an engagement with
them, but they did not come to taw.

We arrived at Alexandria after marching nearly one hundred miles.
There was fighting almost every day, either front or rear, but they
were always met with determination. Our cavalry would not be driven.
The rebels would come up and attack the rear, when the cavalry would
hold the rebels until the infantry could get the start, and then the
cavalry would fall in and come on slowly, the rebels following closely.
Arrived at Alexandria with the loss of a few men. While at that place,
the report was brought into camp that the rebels were to occupy the
city on a certain day, and preparation was made to give them a warm
reception, if they choose to pay us a visit. A line of battle was
formed a short distance from town and we lay on our arms all night,
but in the morning returned to camp, as no enemy had appeared. While
here, reinforcement for the 13th corps arrived, and were sent out to
the front, when orders came for another move. Tents were left standing
and, Mower's and Smith's divisions fell into line and moved out to the
front; came to a halt and remained in line waiting orders. Skirmishing
was going on in front and Banks' men were driving the rebels, and
several prisoners were taken. Several batteries opened on their lines
and they soon got out of harms way. The men under Smith and Mower
fell back about a mile, formed a line and were ordered to be ready to
take arms any moment. Nothing disturbed us this night, and early in
the morning bugle sounded for the men to fall in, when the advance
was sounded and all were on the march again, cavalry in advance. They
soon fell in with the rebel pickets, and skirmishing commenced quite
early in the day. The enemy were driven slowly, they disputed every
foot of ground. Did not come to a halt until we came to a place called
Rodgers' Bayon. Here we stopped and eat our dinners, when the brigade,
under Col. Hill, was ordered to the front to protect our wagon train,
as they were procuring forage at one of the plantations across the
bayou. The 6th Missouri cavalry being out in front, deserve praise
for the manner in which they held their position. They were forced
back on account of superior numbers, there being only two companies.
Artillery was used by the rebels and some of their shot came close to
our lines, killing and wounding eight of the cavalry. When the cavalry
fell back the rebels came close enough to use grape shot, and their
guns could be plainly seen by us. After throwing a few shells over us,
doing no damage but killing the strength of the powder, they desisted,
and as it was nearly dark and our wagons were loaded, we returned to
Governor Moore's plantation, and there we had our camping grounds for
ten days. Corn was growing finely and wheat was ready for reaping, but
everything was destroyed. Governor Moore's family moved to Alexandria,
and every building was reduced to ashes. Picket skirmishing was going
on most of the time, causing constant alarm in camp. The water having
fallen in the river, boats could not get back to Alexandria without
damming the river to make the water deep enough for the gunboats to
pass over the falls. All of the transports got over at last except one,
which was the Woodford. It was used as a hospital, and sunk in getting
above the falls and lay in the river. When the army passed there all
the sick had been taken off. After finishing the dam all the boats
passed through the channel except some of the iron-clads, of which the
plating had to be taken off to render them light enough to pass below
the falls. Banks was for destroying them, lest they should fall into
the rebels' hands, but they got over at last, when Banks got all of
his boats loaded with cotton and niggers, started for the Mississippi,
19th corps in advance, 13th next, and his invincible wagon train, and
last of all, Smith and Mower's guerrillas bringing up the rear. Started
from Moore's plantation, leaving nothing but a few shade trees to mark
the home of the rebel Governor, fell in with Banks' army three miles
from this place, on their way back. Our march was right along the
river and the boats were following us, the Monitor clearing the road
of sharp-shooters, who lined the banks of the river, and were doing
their best to stop the progress of the fleet down to the Mississippi. A
few shell thrown amongst them caused them to get out of danger before
the land force could get to where they were. They had captured some of
the tin-clad fleet belonging to the Monitor, and several transports.
One had five hundred soldiers on it and only about a hundred got to
Alexandria. After running the gauntlet boats were sunk in the river as
an obstruction, but the gunboat soon made a road, passed through, and
at last got around to Simsport. Arrived about the 10th of May, no rain
having fallen for more than a month.

Nothing occurred but slight skirmishing with our advance until after
passing Fort D'Russey, at a place called Marksville Prairie, a small
town three miles from the fort. It was a flat, open country, and for
miles could be seen a beautiful tract of land, inhabited by French
and Creoles, who treated the soldiers with contempt, and very little
respect was paid to the neutral flag that could be seen on most all the
houses on the prairie. The rebels resolved to make a stand and give us
battle. Their lines could be plainly seen. Preparation was made, and
the advance commenced. All of our army could be seen as they came on
and took their position in line of battle. Everything seemed to work
like clock work. It would be a sight for an artist. The blue coats
could be seen as far as the eye could reach, together with our long
wagon train; the dust so thick it was almost suffocating. Mowers moved
his lines. Forward was the word, the skirmishers in advance. The rebels
had opened with several guns, and were throwing shot over our lines,
doing but little injury to us. A battery was opened from our side,
but could not remain long in position, as the rebels soon silenced
the guns. A force was sent to the left which caused them to back out
of our way and let us pass. Some of the non-veterans of the 11th were
wounded, and several of the 33d Missouri killed. The rebels were not
heard from again until next day, when our rear was attacked while
crossing a bayou. They did not gain anything by this, and were held in
check. Presently they left the rear and made a charge on the advance of
the train. The negroes met the charge and after killing two of them,
left, leaving their major's body and horse in our hands. A heavy guard
was placed along the wagon train, and sappers were sent in advance to
examine the woods along the route.

The 19th corps was hurrying to the river as fast as they could get
along, the 13th corps being next, and Smith's and Mowers' brought up
the rear. The rebels were endeavoring to reach Yellow Bayou and occupy
their old works, but were beat in the race, and at night our men
occupied the works, and after crossing the bayou camped in line of
battle, fronting the rebels. The cavalry acting as picket guard, was
out about a mile in front. This night we slept without being disturbed,
and in the morning the cavalry was forced back, when infantry was sent
to support the cavalry. The rebels were heavily reinforced. Paul Neck,
a Texas Colonel, was said to have been in command, the best artillerist
in the South. His practice was so good and aim so accurate, our
batteries could not withstand the fire from their guns, as they fired
by volley. The infantry was formed in line and started on double-quick
for the field where the rebels were supposed to be. A bayou was on one
side and a heavy swamp on the other, and in this and the open space
the rebel's lines were formed, with batteries in position; so they had
decidedly the advantage of our men. Briers and weeds were so thick in
the swamp we could not get through at all. Skirmishers were ordered
forward and the advance commenced. Their lines could not be discovered
until our men were right on them. A volley was given at short range and
a charge was made, when we came to a stand. Still, the rebels slowly
falling back. Another advance was made, and this time the fighting was
quite severe. Our men were so close every shot told; and in this charge
about three hundred prisoners were taken. The artillery could not be
used on account of the men being mixed up so in the charge. But when
they were falling back they suffered most, the rebels using grape.
Colonel Hill's son was killed. Hill's brigade suffered severely, and
himself wounded in the foot. The battle continued most all day. Two
brigades whipped about one thousand rebels, they having the advantage
of position. Two of the guns used were taken from the gunboat, and our
artillerists could not reach them as they were placed out of range.
Their own report of their loss was twenty-five hundred, while ours
would not amount to more than five hundred. It was a hot sultry day
in May, and a good many of the soldiers fell struck down with the
excessive heat.

The rebels left our front that night, and reinforcements being sent
to relieve those in front, returned to our old place of camping. At
night enjoyed a good sleep, and in the morning, May 19th, started to
Atchafalaya Bayou. The rebels brought a battery along with them and
commenced shelling our rear. A battery was left to protect the rear
until everything was got safely away, when the artillerists limbered up
and got out of danger. The rebels shelled them as long as they could be
seen, doing no damage. Banks had been crossing his men and trains for
two days, and as they were out of danger, Smith's guerrillas, who were
guarding the rear, were ordered to prepare for crossing the Atchafalaya
and march eleven miles and take the boats.

A bridge was constructed of boats lashed side by side and plank layed
across the front of them, answering very well for a pontoon. On
arriving at the bridge we were not long in crossing; we got over that
day and encamped.--Whisky was distributed to the boys and some of them
became quite merry, as there was no danger of being waked up in the
morning by the enemy's shell falling in their midst; and were out of
hearing of the enemy's cannon for once in two months. As everything was
got over safe the 19th, on the 20th started for the boats. Encamped
on the bank of the river until everything was put on board, and we
were soon on the way to Vicksburg again. As we were leaving, Banks'
grand army could be seen moving in the direction of New Orleans, his
expedition having been a grand failure on his part. Loss in men was
about ten thousand; three hundred wagons, about three thousand mules
and horses, and several batteries of artillery; also several transports
and gunboats fell to the rebels to pay for a few bales of cotton,
leaving the bereaved friends at home to mourn the loss of those who
fell sacrifices in this disastrous expedition, got up for political
purposes and cotton. You can see how well it was managed; it was sent
into the fight by detail, and as soon as one regiment or brigade was
whipped another was sent in, and in this way a whole army could have
been annihilated. But when they met Mower's and Smith's guerrillas,
Banks was pleased to call them, as they did not wear paper collars, as
some of his men did; found they had to fight with men that were not
afraid of a greycoat, and well did the army sustain their credit. Mower
and Smith have won the confidence of the men in this little band, who
arrived at Vicksburg about the 25th. After remaining here for several
days, took boats and went to Memphis; the boats came to anchor at a
place called Sunnyside. Between Greenville and Memphis, on the way up
the river, the rebels were reported to be in force, and it was with
extreme danger boats could go either up or down the river. Some cavalry
were sent out to reconnoitre, who fell in with some rebel scouts and
had a short skirmish, killing and wounding a few of them.

June 5th, some rain fell. Most of the troops landed and slept on shore.
All night long you could hear a noise as if artillery was moving.
Next morning commenced raining. While the fleet went by water a force
was sent by land to clear the shore of artillery. The marines started
in advance and skirmishing commenced quite early, the enemy driving
stubbornly. The 2d brigade supported by the marines, 5th Minnesota,
47th Illinois, and 8th Wisconsin, drove the rebels across a bayou
called Muddy Bayou, where artillery was in position. Hill's brigade was
ordered to support the 2d brigade, form our lines on theirs, but by
some mistake were ordered to charge and take the battery.

June 10th. Returned to the 11th Missouri again, but were not destined
to remain long inactive. After rejoining the regiment orders came to
prepare to march, when they got on the cars at Memphis and went to
Moscow, and there remained until the bridges were repaired all along
the railroad to La Grange, when the cars commenced running again, and a
daily communication was kept up from La Grange to Memphis. The regiment
left on the 16th, acting as guard to the railroad until they arrived at
La Grange, when they went into camp and remained there until July 5th.
Troops began to arrive here in great numbers, and every indication of
some important movement going on. A great quantity of provisions sent
over the road to La Grange, and when everything was ready two divisions
of infantry, one division of cavalry and a brigade of negroes, all
under command of A. J. Smith, Mower was in command of the first
division, Moore, Colonel of the 21st Missouri, commanded the third
division, Bouton was in command of the negroes, and Grierson was in
command of the cavalry. All started from La Grange on the 5th of July,
and went about five miles, came to a halt and remained there until
morning. Started again on the morning of the 6th. After marching about
twelve miles came to a halt and waited for the rear to come up, it was
late getting into camp. Next morning resumed our march again and passed
through Ripley. Here we discovered that the rebels were watching us.
The cavalry skirmished. The rebels were commanded by Forrest, a brother
of Gen. Forrest. About 3,000 mounted infantry took a position on a high
hill awaiting our approach. Our cavalry by some means got information
of their whereabouts, and got in their rear, and soon made them seek
shelter in flight, leaving 11 dead on the field, and 14 wounded. Our
loss was none killed or wounded. The cavalry pursued them for several
miles beyond Ripley. We went from there to Pontotoc; there we remained
one day and rested. Rebels were reported in force in our front, but
no serious demonstrations were made until we arrived within 10 miles
of Tupelo. While we were marching along the rebels made a charge,
firing a heavy volley of musketry, creating some confusion among the
teamsters, some of them running into the brush and leaving their teams
to take care of themselves. The rebels were soon met and made to leave
in a hurry, having accomplished nothing but killing and wounding a few
of our men. They suffered severely in this attack. The negroes being
in the rear, on them they vented their spite, but in every instance
were repulsed, the negroes showing them no quarters. A heavy guard was
stationed along the train which resisted every attempt of the rebels
to capture any of our wagon train. Having tried the train to their
satisfaction, and seeing that it would be impossible to get any of
our hard-tack, took up a position in front of us, forming their lines
across the road, with two batteries of artillery. In this way they
divided the army. Smith, with most of the cavalry and 3d division of
infantry, was hastening as fast as possible to Tupelo, where there was
a very good position. The cavalry soon reached this place and commenced
tearing up the railroad track, leaving Mowers with the 1st division
to guard the train and bring up the rear. The rebels being beat in
the race to Tupelo, turned their attention to the rear, and expected
by dividing the army they could easily whip and capture each division
separately. They reckoned without their host, for our men were ready
for them. The rebels fired a volley, and charged with terrific yells
on our advancing columns, but Waterhouse's and the 2d Iowa batteries
were soon in position to receive them. On they came, hoping to capture
these guns as they were waiting to deal death and destruction among
them. All at once a deadly fire from cannon and musket was opened upon
them at short range, and so desperate was the conflict that most all of
the horses of one gun were either killed or disabled, and 11 of their
men lay dead in front of the guns. This fight lasted an hour when they
were driven off. They used two batteries, but being at long range, did
not damage us much. Everything was hurried up, and the rebels with all
their shelling could not stop our wagon train, and we were soon out of
range of shell.

July 13th and 14th. In this attempt they were severely punished, having
accomplished nothing, and leaving a number of their dead and wounded
in our hands. This fight took place about five miles from Tupelo. We
marched this day 18 miles, and encamped on the side of a hill two and
a half miles from Tupelo. Tired and weary we were soon in the arms of
slumber, being waked by the drum in the morning.

Everything arrived safe that evening. They came up and attacked the
rear again, but were met by the negroes and cavalry, which were drawn
up in line of battle to receive them. Failing again to fall back under
a heavy fire from our men. Our loss was slight. A heavy picket guard
was stationed all around our camp to guard against a night attack. A
desultory fire was kept up, doing but little damage on either side.
Things remained in this state until the next morning, when our lines
were formed for battle. The rebels were seen advancing in heavy force
to attack us. Every preparation was made to receive them. On they
came, supported by artillery, to within 150 yards of our lines, when a
deadly fire of grape and canister was thrown into their ranks, mowing
them down like grass, and soon they were forced to fall back. They
rallied again for another desperate effort to take our guns that were
making such sad havoc in their ranks, but the second time they were
driven back with great slaughter, and they rallied for the third and
last charge, to break our lines, but they were met with a deadly storm
of bullets no human could withstand. In vain their officers urged
them on, and swore that any man who was discovered going to the rear
should be shot, but all their efforts were unavailing, they could
not stand such deadly volleys from cannon and musketry. A charge was
made, and the rebels were driven from the field at the point of the
bayonet. A few prisoners were taken. Our loss was slight compared to
theirs. They suffered severely in officers--five colonels lay dead
on the field--Nelson, Forrest, Harris, Fitzpatrick, Falkner--all had
fallen victims to their unholy cause, along with over a thousand more
brave men; some of them mere boys, who had left their homes to drive
the invaders from their soil, as they called us, but did not succeed
in making us leave. We held our position for two days. It was in the
rear of Harrisburg, a short distance from Tupelo, with a swamp on both
sides, in front was an open country, with a few trees, thick under
brush and weeds, for sharpshooters to lay concealed in, and pick off
men. The ground was a gentle slope where the rebels had to advance, and
we had decidedly the advantage of position. They tried hard to drive us
from it, but they were out-generaled. Smith, with the first division,
gained the hill first, took up a position on it, and resolved to give
the rebels battle. Being defeated in the day time, thought they would
try a night attack, and take our men by surprise, but our men were
waiting for them, and after an hour's hard fighting were at length
compelled to give up the contest and wait for morning to renew it.

The armies lay in sight of each other all night, thinking that on the
morrow some would sleep beneath the sod. Before morning the rebels
withdrew. The negroes fought well, and drove the rebels in every
instance. A colonel of the 9th Minnesota, commanding a brigade in the
1st division, was killed; he was shot by a sharp-shooter through the
heart. The rebels were commanded by Lee and Forrest. It was reported
that Forrest was killed, but I think it was a mistake, there was no
such good news for us. Their force was said to be 10,000 strong, mostly
mounted infantry. They did not use much artillery in the engagement; it
was always off so far that it did but little damage to us. Their shot
went crashing through the trees over our heads, doing us no damage.
They thought to drive us from our position, as our lines were formed in
the swamp to guard against flank movements. The rebels were said to be
moving towards our right, and on this they made the night attack, but
were defeated in every attempt to break through our lines.

A flag of truce was sent in asking permission to take care of their
dead and wounded, but it was not so much to take care of their wounded
as to gain an advantage over us. Our generals suspected their design,
which was to advance and take us unawares, and they were not permitted
to advance. All of their wounded were brought from the field along with
ours, and received such care as the times would allow.

July 15. We still hold the hill in front of the rebels. Skirmishing
was still going on. Our wagon train commenced moving out, the cavalry
in advance, the 3d division next, and the 1st division to bring up the
rear, with some cavalry as support. The rebels were seen advancing
in force when the second brigade was ordered to support the 2d Iowa
battery, which was sending its compliments in shell into the rebel
ranks, who were advancing. Here the 11th Missouri lost four men
wounded, who were all struck by the same shell, a captain and three of
his men, none of them dangerously wounded. Captain Clealand was struck
twice, but will soon be able to take command of his company again.
Here we remained as support for a short time, when our position was
changed and we were ordered to form our lines on the 3d brigade. When
we arrived opposite the 3d brigade they raised a yell and over the
barricades they went, firing as they advanced. The rebels fled as fast
as possible to their horses, which they left in their rear. Our forces
watched them for about a mile, and we could see their wagon train
getting out of the way in great haste. The 2d Iowa was accelerating
their movements by sending a few shell amongst them. A charge was made
by some Iowa cavalry, but they found the rebels too strong for them
and they had to fall back with slight loss, when the order came for us
to fall in and follow the train, as it had all got started on its way
back to La Grange. In this morning's engagement the rebel loss was over
a hundred. While we were watching the rear they made a demonstration
on the train, but were driven off after some severe fighting. They
suffering severely in every instance. An Indiana battery was used to
some purpose. We marched this day only about seven miles, and here
the 3d division waited until the rear came up, was in camp early this
evening, and the rebels were following the rear closely. A trap was
set, and into it they easily ran. The 21st Missouri regiment was laying
in ambush, and the rebels marched right along, not dreaming that they
were rushing on death and destruction. The cavalry were holding them in
check but were longing for the infantry to come to their assistance.
Soon the first brigade was heavily engaged. The 114th Illinois charged
upon them as they were drawn up in line along a cornfield, capturing
one piece of artillery and thirty prisoners.--They fled, pursued by
our cavalry, leaving five hundred killed and wounded in our hands.
They did not molest us again that night, as they got enough of trying
to capture wagon trains. They found to their cost, Sturgis was not in
command. Where danger was, you would find Mower or Smith. They were
always on the alert to prevent surprise, and it was owing to their
vigilance that we escaped so well. We returned to La Grange the 21st,
having nothing to impede our progress from Tupelo after the last fight.
We marched through a very hilly country, up one hill and down another.
All day long we toiled on under the scorching sun. A great many died
from the effects of the sun, being extremely warm. But the road was
shaded with trees that grew along the path, and the men did not suffer
so much on the way back. There was plenty of good water on this route,
but provisions had become scarce and our allowance was third rations
of hard-tack with no coffee and very little meat, and that was fresh
beef without salt. Some lived on green apples until we arrived at a
small town called Salem, where we received full rations of hard-tack,
half rations coffee without sugar, and fourth of meat. Then we fared a
little better. From here we went to Davis' Mills, and there encamped
for the night. This was only five miles from our place of starting.
All the train was correlled before night. Next morning marched to La
Grange to the cars for Memphis, where we arrived at our old camp. A
train ran off the track the day we started, owing to some imperfection
in the road. A few of the passengers were injured. This caused delay
in getting to Memphis, but we got back at last with most of our wagon
train. Marched two hundred miles, whipped Forrest in every engagement,
took one hundred and fifty prisoners with one piece of artillery,
killing and wounding two thousand five hundred of the enemy by their
own account. Our loss in all will not amount to four hundred and fifty.
The rebels in Mississippi received a lesson that will not be forgotten
by them soon. There was severe fighting for three days, but in every
instance they got the worst of it.


_Finish of the Red River Expedition--Battle of Muddy Bayou, June 6,
1864._

When the yell was raised two regiments started on the double-quick
to take the batteries at the point of the bayonet, but on reaching
the bayou could not get across. The brigade suffered severely in this
charge. Four men in the 33d Missouri were struck down by one shot,
and the loss in two regiments, 33d Mo. and 35th Iowa, was 80 men.
One of their guns was masked. Our artillery did not render us any
assistance. Eight guns were playing on us as we advanced, until we got
close enough to them to use our guns, and they were forced to leave
under a heavy fire. Their loss was not known. Five more of the 11th
Mo., non-veterans, were wounded; two of them had to have a leg each
amputated; one has since died, a corporal in company B, named Columbus
Roe. This makes fifteen killed and wounded in this expedition of the
11th Missouri non-veterans. Our men crossed over and the cavalry
pursued the retreating rebels hauling their guns from the field by
hand, as our lines were so close to them they could not use horses
until they got out of range. A battery was crossed over, and our men
shelled them as long as they were in sight.

The houses along the road were filled with their wounded, and their
loss must have been as heavy as ours. Marmaduke was said to have been
in command. We camped at town called Lakeville one night and returned
to the boats, which were awaiting us, taking our wounded with us. Got
on board of the transport Freestone, and arrived at Memphis, where the
11th Missouri veterans were said to be. Remained two days with 33d
Missouri.

Wm. L. Barnum was elected Colonel of the veterans, being raised from
a captain to lieutenant colonel, and on Websters death took command
of the 11th Missouri regiment, and on the regiment re-enlisting was
elected Colonel. George Weber resigned on account of disability, and
went home with the veterans.

Our loss in three years, of officers, was Captain Moore, who died at
Cape Girardeau; Captain Singleton, killed at Iuka; Captain Hollister,
killed at Corinth, Oct. 4, '62; Andrew J. Weber, June 29, '63, and
Adjutant Bookings, May 22, in front of Vicksburg, killed by a rebel
sharp-shooter.

As my time was drawing to a close, it being the 5th day of August, did
not take part in the next expedition under A. J. Smith; and when the
veterans left Memphis on another expedition, the non-veterans went
to St. Louis, having been mustered out at Memphis, and receiving our
discharges, pay and bounty, each one went his own way.


       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's Notes


Minor punctuation and printer errors repaired.

Italic text is denoted by _underscores_





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Three Years in the Service, by D. McCall

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THREE YEARS IN THE SERVICE ***

***** This file should be named 48822.txt or 48822.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/8/8/2/48822/

Produced by MWS and the Online Distributed Proofreading
Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from
images generously made available by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

