The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Holy Isle, by Father Ignatius


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Holy Isle
       A Legend of Bardsey Abbey


Author: Father Ignatius



Release Date: June 29, 2015  [eBook #49306]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOLY ISLE***


credit



Transcribed from the 1870 G. J. Palmer edition by David Price, email
ccx074@pglaf.org

                      IN OMNIBUS GLORIFICETUR DEUS.

                                  --_Regula_, _S. Benedicti_, _Cap. lvij_.

                  [Picture: Decorative graphic of cross]





                              THE HOLY ISLE;
                        A Legend of Bardsey Abbey.


                           By IGNATIUS, O.S.B.

  _Dedicated_, _without permission_, _to Lord Newborough_, _and to the_
       _Rev. Hugh Roberts_, _Vicar of Aberdaron_, _Carnarvonshire_.

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
                  G. J. PALMER, 32, LITTLE QUEEN STREET,
                          LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS.

                                  1870.

                  [Picture: Decorative graphic of cross]




THE HOLY ISLE.
A Legend of Bardsey Abbey.


   I WATCHED the sea waves ebbing,
      Beneath the crimson glow,
   Which sunset light was pouring,
      Upon their soft, sweet flow.
   The wavelets looked liked dancers,
      Upon the sun-lit sea,
   They sung in whispering chorus,--
      I thought they sung to me
   Of fair and far off landscapes
      Beyond that molten tide,
   Of better joys, and gladness
      Beyond those waters wide.
   The wavelets all seemed passing
      On, to some other strands,
   And following the sun's-glow,
      To ever sun-lit lands.
   But as I thought these fancies,
      Again I raised mine eyes
   And saw the sunset tinting
      The glorious western skies.
   Now 'mid the farewell glories
      "Of Sol's departing ray,"
   I saw an Island resting
      Upon his golden way.
   There, misty mid the Sunshine,
      The far off Isle appears,
   Right out among the sea waves
      Its rocky coast uprears.
   And as I gaze, the sunset
      Seems lighting up its shore,
   Bathing the isle in glory
      And then is seen no more.
   Sweet, soothing calm fell o'er me
      I watched the Islet still,
   All round me heard I voices
      Which seemed the air to fill.
   Said one, "That Isle is holy,
      For Saints are sleeping there,
   Now lonely and deserted,
      T'was once an Isle of prayer."
   "O Man! say would'st thou tremble,
      To come away and see,
   In vision, strange, sweet pictures
      Which I can shew to thee?"
   The Angel was so lovely,
      So sweet the Angel's smile,
   I easily consented,--
      He pointed to the Isle!
   "Then will I bear thee thither,
      One thousand years ago;--
   I speak to aid thy weakness,
      No _time_ can Angels know.
   The present, past, and future,
      All one they are to me,
   I pass along their boundaries,
      Unlimited, and free."
   A strange, calm change stole o'er me,
      My spirit seemed to rise
   In gentle, tireless motion,
      Just as the sea-bird flies.
   My Angel-guide was leading
      My spirit o'er the sea
   One moment--and we rested,
      Upon the Islet's lea.
   Soft gloaming filled the air,
      Deep peace lay all around,
   Hushed voices seemed to whisper,
      A wavelike, murmuring sound.
   "Sweet Angel, say, where am I,--
      Say me the Island's name,
   And tell me why such glory,
      Enwraps it as a flame?
   Say, too, what is that chanting,
      So sweet, so very near,
   The strangeness of this beauty
      It fills my soul with fear?"
   "This Holy Place is Bardsey,
      Jesus, He loves it well,
   'Tis wrapped in God's own brightness,
      Safe from the power of Hell.
   Those voices are the Virgins,
      In yonder Abbey Choir,
   Praises to Jesus singing,
      Of which they never tire.
   Hush! mid the shades of evening,
      How restfully they sing,
   Their Vesper praise-wreaths bringing
      To Jesus Christ their King.
   'Mid lights of sunset glowing,
      St. Mary's Abbey stands;
   But see! t'is wrapped in glories,
      From far off better Lands."
   I looked again, and started,
      For lo! another scene.
   The Convent is surrounded
      With Heaven's own brightest sheen.
   And choirs of Angels hover
      High in the sunset air,
   While th' holy monks are chanting
      Their peaceful, evening prayer.
   The Monastery is glowing,
      Like heaps of molten gold;
   The walls seem all transparent,
      With majesty untold.
   T'is strange; my spirit enters
      St Mary's Sacred Shrine,
   I see the cowled figures,
      In many a white rob'd line, {6}
   Filling the stalls, but facing
      The hallow'd Altar Throne,
   Where Jesus makes His dwelling,
      Untended and alone.
   O peaceful, happy Bardsey,
      Sweet Islet of the Sea!
   I would for ever rest me,
      All joyfully in thee!
   O dear St. Marys Abbey,
      On Bardsey's northern shore;
   Would I could bide within thee,
      And part from thee no more!
   O happy Monks and Virgins,
      Singing by night and day,
   Your hymnals to Sweet Jesus,
      In dearest, fondest lay!
   How can I speak your glory,
      How can I tell your worth?
   Ye are the Church's safeguard;
      Ye are the "Salt of earth."
   Ye live the life of Angels;
      Ye never cease from praise,
   To Heaven your intercedings
      For sinners ceaseless raise.
   Ah! well may throngs of sinners
      Seek this most Sacred Isle,
   Well may ten thousand pilgrims
      Visit St. Mary's pile.
   Well may'st thou, Aberdaron, {8}
      Loving to Bardsey be,
   And daily turn thy glances
      To the Islet out at sea.
   For Bardsey is the lighthouse
      Of many a shipwrecked soul;
   To many a way-worn wanderer
      Is Bardsey's Isle the goal.
   The glow of Bardsey's brightness,
      Illumes wild Cambria's shores,
   Across the Irish Channel,
      Her Heavenly light she pours.
   And blessed saints in thousands
      Have dwelt on Bardsey's hill,
   Sending her countless Virgins
      Celestial choirs to fill.
   How Jesus must love Bardsey,
      And prize her sacred soil;
   Here Saints in countless numbers
      Have rested from earth's toil:
   Have laid aside the burden
      Of poor mortality,
   And entered on the Sabbath
      Of glad eternity.
   While thus I dream, the Organ
      Is pealing forth its wave,
   The Holy Monks are marching
      All slowly down the Nave.
   "Dear Angel! may I follow
      Them, down the Cloister still,
   And join their recreation,
      On yonder mossy hill?"
   The Angel smiled permission;
      I willed myself along,
   Until unseen, I joined me
      To th' happy, Virgin throng.
   Here, there were boys most lovely;
      And there, old hoary men;
   And youths, and those of mid-age;
      Here joyous boys again.
   I followed one young novice,
      Who held an old man's hand;
   I listened,--they were speaking,
      Of some dear, distant Land.
   The boy I saw was pointing
      Away, right out to sea,
   Where moonlight made a pathway,
      Of silver radiancy.
   The silver way seemed joining
      Together sea and sky,
   The stars seemed trembling o'er it,
      Like lightlets from on high.
   "Dear Father Cadfan, look now,"
      --Said the bright and lovely boy,--
   "I'm sure that silver roadway
      Leads to our Home of Joy."
   "No, no, my Son, t'is only
      An emblem of the way,
   Across time's changing storm-tide,
      To regions of the day."
   And then the old man turning,
      Towards Cambria's rock bound shore,
   Pointed the boy to Barmouth, {11}
      But then called Abermawr.
   "My son," said he, "'tis yonder,
      Long years ago I tried
   To bring poor souls to Jesus,
      Who once for sinners died.
   But there the Druids held them
      In error's iron chain, {12a}
   They would not hear of Jesus,
      And drove me thence again.
   Yet though at Abermawr I failed
      'Mid Towyn's marshes drear, {12b}
   The people bowed before the Cross,
      And sought the Saviour dear.
   My son, one day thou must away,
      If Father Abbot wills,
   And build a Shrine to Christ Divine,
      'Mid Barmouth's rocky hills.
   The idols which they worship
      Thou boldly must destroy,
   Promise old Father Cadfan this,
      My brave, my darling boy!"
   The boy's bright eyes were flashing,
      He grasped the old man's hand,--
   "Father, I will preach Jesus
      Upon that darkened strand.
   Only, my father, pray for me,
      When thou hast past the sea,
   And reignest with our Jesus,
      In the 'kingdom of the free.'"
   St. Cadfan smiled, and blessed the lad,
      His heart's desire seemed gained,
   From idol worship for the Lord
      Should Abermawr be claimed.
   The Compline Bell tolled solemnly
      From out St. Mary's Tower,
   Calling the Monks to worship
      At day's last hallowed hour.
   Dubritius, {14} the novice boy,
      Stood meekly in his stall,
   The fathers and the novices
      Chanted the Office all.
   But Father Cadfan was not there,
      Calmly his body lay;
   Upon the mound by Bardsey Sound,
      His spirit passed away.
   His work was done, his prize was won,
      The holy Monk was gone,
   To join the virgin song notes,
      Before th' Eternal Throne.

                                * * * * *

   The boy, so beautiful and pure,
      Grew up to manhood's bloom,
   And ofttimes visited for prayer
      The Blessed Cadfan's Tomb.
   One night the sun was sinking
      Behind the Western wave,
   Dubritius was kneeling
      Beside St. Cadfan's grave.
   The Compline chants were over,
      The twilight almost gone,
   The youth was startled by a voice
      Which cried--"My son! my son!"
   A gentle light shone round the grave,
      He raised his eyes, and lo!
   St. Cadfan stood beside him,
      Amid the weird-like glow;
   "My son, make haste, thy solemn vows
      Thou speedily must make,
   Then to the men of Abermawr
      The Cross of Jesus take.
   The Banner and the Gospel,
      With holy Chant and Psalm,
   Straight to the Druid's Temple go,
      Nor fear, nor feel alarm.
   For Jesus must be Cambria's God,
      The night must hie away,
   Thyself must be the harbinger
      Of Everlasting Day."
   The youth sprung forward to embrace
      The friend he loved so well,
   But he was gone; no sound was heard,
      Save the lone ocean's swell.

                                * * * * *

   How beautiful! how beautiful!
      Is now the Convent Choir;
   All deck'd for some high festival
      In exquisite attire.
   Most precious gems are gleaming
      Upon the frontal fair,
   The Mass Priests too are vested
      In garments passing rare.
   The sacred tapers glisten
      The Altar all along;
   The holy Monks are chanting
      Some sweet--some wedding song!
   And tall white lilies, scenting
      The Incense laden air,
   Are bending down their petals,
      T'wards a novice bow'd in prayer.
   Yes! there before the Altar,
      I see Dubritius bow,
   Pure as the virgin lilies,
      Encircling his fair brow.
   His vows are said--the Cowl is given,
      His live-long promise made;
   All earthly loves are buried now,
      Within the Cloister's shade.

                                * * * * *

   "Unfurl the sail! unloose the chain!
      That links us to the shore--
   To our own precious Island home
      Which we may see no more!"
   Thus spake Dubritius; and the tide
      Fast wafted him away,
   Out t'wards the rocky Cambrian coast
      Of Cardigan's fair bay.
   The sea was calmly resting,
      Lit by the summer's sun;
   In three short hours the Convent boat
      Her little voyage had run.
   Dubritius and his monkish band
      At once pursued their way,
   Reaching the town of Abermawr
      Just at the close of day.
   The evening's hush was resting
      So peacefully around,
   Alone was heard the shrill sea bird,
      And the waves' soft murmuring sound.
   When all at once through th' restful air,
      Dread shrieks of anguish rung
   From the idol temple near the town,
      While Druid choirs sung
   Fierce hymns to their false savage gods,
      Around the kindling flame,
   Prepared for sacrificial rites,
      Too terrible to name.
   A fair young mother brings her babe,
      A warrior brings his boy,
   The Druids bind their victims
      With fierce, fanatic joy!
   The weeping mother hears the wail
      Well from her darling's breast;
   The father sees the Druids bind
      His boy with savage zest.
   The lad was fair to look upon,
      Ah! must he really die,
   Oh! shall such sacrifice pollute
      That calm blue evening sky?
   The boy, though brave, is trembling now,
      He nears the dreadful fire,
   He feels its scorch, yet gives his life,
      To still the idol's ire.
   The father's cheek grows blanched and pale,
      The poor young mother stands,
   Yearning to snatch her precious one
      From the stern Druid's hands.
   High leaps the flame, loud swells the song,
      From the Druids' choirs around;
   But suddenly the evening wind
      Fills with another sound!
   'Tis "Miserere Domine,"
      Sung by the Monkish train,
   "Exurgat Deus Dominus," {20}
      A grand and glorious strain!
   With Crucifix and banner bright,
      The bold brave monks appear;
   And then among the heathen crowd,
      Christ's mighty Cross they rear.
   "Cease, cease, ye sons of wickedness,
      This useless wicked rite;
   The God of Heaven has sent me here,
      Of Majesty and Might!"
   Dubritius spoke, and seized the boy
      Straight from the altar's side;
   And caught the infant from the flame,
      Or ere the darling died!
   While this was done, some novices
      Had hurl'd the idol down;
   "Jesus is God!" the Monks proclaim,
      "Your King with homage crown!
   Ye Druids move not, or we call
      God's Angels to our aid.
   The hour has come.  By Abermawr
      Worship must now be paid
   To Jesus Christ, and Him alone,
      Crown Him ye people all;
   He bought you with His Precious Blood,
      Prostrate before Him fall!"
   Dubritius, with mighty power,
      Told of the love so free,
   That made God Man to die to save,
      And bring true liberty.
   God gave the Monks the victory,
      The power of Jesus' Name
   Prevailed among those savage hearts,
      Put out the cruel flame;
   Rescued the boy, and snatched the babe
      From that dread altar's side;
   Plunged them in gentle mercy's stream,
      The blest Baptismal tide.
   The days and weeks passed swiftly,
      New converts owned the Lord,
   Ere long, all Abermawr became
      Obedient to the Word.

                                * * * * *

   Seventy long years had flown away,
      See! Aberdaron weeps;
   Forth from her Church beside the shore, {23a}
      A long procession sweeps.
   See crowds of pilgrims waiting
      From all Carnarvon round,
   The hushing of the sea roar,
      To cross the dangerous sound. {23b}
   The Church at Aberdaron
      Is wet with mourners' tears;
   Dubritius has entered
      Upon the Eternal years.
   His body rests so calmly
      Before the Altar high,
   The Priests are softly wailing
      The mournful Requiem's sigh.
   Upon the Altar glisten
      The waxen tapers tall,
   And summer flowers are lying
      Upon the snow-white pall.
   Sweet Incense clouds are rising
      Around the hallowed bier;
   From many an eye is falling
      The sad, the loving tear.
   Dubritius left Bardsey,
      His lov'd--his peaceful home,
   For fifty years mid war-strife,
      This valiant Saint did roam.
   But now, in peace, he cometh,
      In Bardsey's Isle to rest,
   His spirit calmly dwelling
      In regions of the blest.
   Lower your crest, ye foam waves,
      Wail adverse winds no more,
   Dubritius must pass over
      To Bardsey's sainted shore.
   'Tis evening, and the sun glow
      Is lighting up the sea:
   The tiny waves are dancing,
      For merriment and glee.
   They bore Dubritius to toil,
      To the fight at Abermawr,
   And now they sing his lullaby,
      And hush their noisy roar.
   The boats are filling quickly
      At Aberdaron's quay,
   The Bardsey bells are pealing,
      Across the crimson sea.
   The Aberdaron Canons {25}
      Are chanting their sweet Psalm,
   The blessed Saint is passing
      Across those waters calm.
   The Bay of Aberdaron
      Seems full of peace and life,
   Dubritius the Warrior,
      As victor from the strife,
   Is coming full of glory,
      To his Island Home again;
   The welcome bells are ringing,
      Athwart the calm blue main.
   Hark! how the chant is rising
      From a hundred boats and mo',
   Mingling its soft sweet requiem,
      With the murmuring wavelet's flow.
   And now the fleet of mourners
      Reaches the haven still,
   And th' Monks' slow, sad procession
      Is winding down the hill.
   The sacred banners waving,
      In th' restful evening air,
   Borne by some weeping novices,
      Wrought in devices rare.
   And Incense-clouds ascending,
      And many a taper's light,
   Burst on the pilgrims' vision,
      A fair and holy sight.
   "Requiem aeternam,"
      The aged Abbot sings;
   "Dona ei Domine,"
      The loud response-note rings.
   He comes! he comes! the victor!
      We'll welcome him with song;
   Another Saint now perfect,
      To Bardsey doth belong!
   The dread Pelagian heresy
      He trampled from our land, {27}
   And drove the Druid's tyranny
      From Cambria's noble strand.
   He joined his Alleluia
      With countless thousands more,
   And drove the heathen foemen,
      The Holy Cross before.
   "Now that thou reign'st with Jesus,
      A glorious Saint above,
   O pray, dear St. Dubritius,
      For the island of thy love!"
   The Abbey Church was glistening
      With incense, lights, and gold,
   The organ's peal of welcome,
      Through aisle and choir rolled.
   The hooded Monks are bearing
      Slowly the bier along,
   The choristers are chanting
      A glad triumphant song.
         "Rest for thy toil is o'er,
         The battle's shout no more
         Shall break thy spirit's calm,
         Or mar thy peaceful Psalm;
         Of praise to Christ the King,
         Whose beauty thou shalt sing,
         Throughout the ages long,
         In one unbroken song.
         For ever, and for aye,
         In everlasting Day."

                                * * * * *

   The lichens and the ivy
      Are creeping up the wall,
   And growing round the casements,
      And o'er the towers tall.
   The Abbey hath grown hoary,
      With centuries of age,
   St. Mary's Abbey stories
      In many an ancient page.
   And yet her grand old praise notes
      Linger in her choir,
   For of the praise of Jesus,
      Her Monks can never tire.
   Now round the hallowed precincts
      Saint's ashes crowd her sod,
   Here thousands, and ten thousands
      Have passed away to God. {30}
   Men call the Holy Island
      "The Gate of Paradise,"
   And crowd her shores with pilgrims,
      Who offer Sacrifice,
   In Holy Eucharist, and tears,
      And penance for their sin,
   And pray that through sweet Jesus
      God's pardon they may win.
   A pilgrimage to Bardsey,
      If faithfully _twice_ made,
   Brings blessings all as gracious,
      As if to Rome _once_ paid.
   So thought the Faithful in that day,
      Of Bardsey's Sacred Isle,
   And sought her weal devoutly,
      For Jesu's sake the while.

                                * * * * *

   A maiden fair was weeping;
      Her warrior lover gone,
   Yet not for noisy war-strife,
      He leaves her thus alone.
   Valiant in battle--bravely
      The gory plains he trod,
   Nor feared the deadly sword-thrust,
      Nor th' battles death-strewn sod.
   And ofttimes 'mid the strife-clang,
      He thought of his fair bride;
   Whom he should press in triumph,
      So closely to his side.
   When all at once he altered,
      He laid his armour by,
   He said, his eyes were opened
      To see earth's vanity.
   Eternity seemed opening
      Her vista to his view,
   He trembled at the prospect,
      Graver he daily grew.
   Men tried their skill all vainly
      To dissipate his fear;
   But Rudolph only answered--
      "Eternity is near!
   They say this life is joyous,
      'Tis all too short for me,
   I must seek joys that fade not,
      Throughout Eternity.
   All--all of earth I'll banish,
      Its hopes, its loves, its smile;
   And live alone for Jesus,
      In Enlli's {33} sainted isle."
   This stern resolve all firmly,
      Rudolph right soon did make;
   And parents, lover, glory,
      For Christ he did forsake.
   "These things for money promptly,
      Earth's servants oft forego,
   Then I, for years eternal,
      Relinquish _all_ below.
   I'll live alone for Jesus
      In the Monastic Life,
   And in the sacred cloister
      I'll wage the wondrous strife
   With Satan, like our Master,
      Amid the desert wild,
   I'll give my will to Jesus,
      Just as a little child,
   That thus I soon 'may enter
      The Kingdom' of the Lord,
   As said our Saviour Jesus,
      In His own Holy Word."
   But Mabel pines; young Rudolph,
      She pineth sore for thee;
   To thee her troth she plighted,
      In love's first purity.
   Within her bower she waiteth,
      Her eyes with weeping sore,
   They cannot stay her sorrow,
      She mourneth more and more.
   "Go, tell her," said young Rudolph,
      "Go, tell the lady fair,
   That I have found a Lover,
      Of Beauty wondrous rare.
   Yes, tell her He is chiefest
      'Among ten thousand' too,
   Yea, 'altogether lovely,'
      His Love is ever true.
   Tell her, my Love is Jesus,
      The Prince of Peace--the King,
   Whose Beauty all the Angels
      Eternally do sing."
   But Rudolph, list! she pineth,
      Oh, canst thou break her heart?
   Wilt thou prove false to Mabel,
      So cruelly thus part?
   Her rosy blush is waning,
      Her cheek is growing pale,
   Her maiden heart is breaking,
      Soon will her young life fail.
   As Rudolph listened, tear drops
      Flashed in his dark blue eye,
   His manly breast was heaving
      A deep, a piercing sigh.
   Oh! tell her, brother, tell her,
      She must not weep for me;
   Say that I long to meet her
      Where parting may not be.
   My love is all unaltered,
      But the eternal years
   Have stole my heart from Mabel,
      And earth's sad vale of tears!

                                * * * * *

   And now a boat is waiting
      The resting of the tide,
   One hour--Rudolph is landing
      On Bardsey's southern side.
   And quick his steps are seeking
      The Abbey's quiet shade;
   Three months--the princely Rudolph
      His novice vows had made.

                                * * * * *

   'Twas the Corpus Christi Spring Feast,
      That now was hard at hand,
   And Pilgrim crowds are waiting
      On Aberdaron's strand.
   The sea was gaily sparkling,
      Beneath the May-day sun,
   The Aberdaron boatmen
      A race to Bardsey run.
   Now, in all haste the pilgrims
      Are landing on the isle,
   For crowds at Aberdaron
      Are waiting all the while.
   The boats return to fetch them,
      Across the sparkling bay,
   In time for the First Vespers
      Of Corpus Christi Day.
   The grand old Abbey Temple
      Was throng'd both aisle and nave,
   The Vespers from the choir
      Roll'd forth their choral wave.
   And then a grand procession,
      With lights, and incense, came
   From out the choir; the old Church
      Seem'd one bright blaze of flame.
   For all the congregation
      A lighted taper bore,
   In honour of the Victim,
      Once slain in days of yore.
   But now with solemn worship
      Borne in procession long,
   Mid incense-clouds, and tapers,
      And bursts of triumph song.
   The Fathers and the Novices
      Came first in order due,
   Then choir-boys with banners,
      All marching two and two.
   The people fall back reverently,
      As th' holy Monks draw near,
   One maiden there is trembling,
      As if for very fear.
   Or p'r'aps it's her devotion
      That palsies all her frame,
   But then she would most surely
      Be bow'd for virgin shame.
   It is not thus, for, see now,
      She pushes through the crowd,
   Close to the Monks' procession,
      She kneels and sobs aloud.
   She marks young Brother Rudolph,
      And wails a long deep cry;
   He knew her voice, but turns not,
      Nor lifts his downcast eye;
   He chants his grand old love-song
      To Jesus Christ the King,
   Borne in the slow procession,
      As the glad joy bells ring:--
      "Tantum ergo Sacramentum,
         Veneremur cernui;
      Et antiquum documentum,
         Novo cedat ritui;
      Praestet fides supplementum,
         Sensuum defectui."
   "O Jesus! my sweet Jesus!"
      The warrior-monk doth pray,
   "Shew her Thine Own great Beauty,
      Make her Thine Own to-day;
   Be Thou her glorious Bridegroom,
      Be Thou her only Choice,
   Ravish her with Thy Beauty,
      Make her to hear Thy voice."
   But as the long procession
      Did wind its joyous way,
   Making the evening twilight
      Almost as bright as day,
   The countless tapers glittered
      Like hosts of meteors round,
   And sent a glow of radiance
      Athwart the Bardsey Sound.
   Right round the Islet pealing,
      The gladsome songs ascend,
   And with the evening breezes
      The clouds of incense blend.
   But what was Mabel doing,
      Where was the maiden now?
   O joy! at Mary's altar,
      She plights another vow!
   Yes! while the girl was weeping,
      Her Rudolph lost and gone,
   The Sacred Host drew near her,
      There from strange glory shone.
   And there as if in vision,
      All wondrous, and most clear,
   Mabel beheld the Saviour,
      His voice fell on her ear.
   "Arise, my love, my fair one,
      Arise, and come away;
   The winter's past, the rain gone,"
      The sunbeams strew thy way.
   In lily vales the virgins
      Are waiting now for thee,
   "Arise my love, my fair one,
      Arise, and follow Me."

                                * * * * *

   Hush! softly in the distance,
      I hear the nuns' sweet song,
   'Tis floating through the Cloister,
      Its fretted roofs along.
   And mingling with the echoes
      Of nature's own sweet praise,
   Which the lowing herd, and the sweet song-bird,
      With insects hum doth raise.
   How peacefully, how restfully,
      Such sounds as these combine
   To soothe the weary spirit,
      A weary one like mine.
   But now my spirit wanders,
      Woo'd by that distant hymn,
   Through the hallow'd door, o'er the storied floor,
      To the steps of the chancel dim.
   The nuns' sweet hymn was dying
      In faintest tones away,
   While prostrate at the altar,
      A maiden's figure lay.
   Two years had pass'd since Mabel
      Had heard the Bridegroom's voice,
   In Bardsey's Holy Island,
      And made her happy choice.
   And now before His Altar,
      She lays her young life down,
   And from the hands of Rudolph
      Receives the virgin crown!
   Yes! Father Rudolph blesses,
      The Virgin-Crown and Veil
   Adorn the brow of Mabel,
      With wreaths of lilies pale.
   Her vows, like his, are plighted,
      For ever and for aye,
   To One Whose Love and Beauty
      Can change not or decay.
   O happy youths and virgins!
      In cloister homes that dwell,
   For ever and for ever
      Your joyous songs shall swell--
   Upon the soft sweet breezes
      Of Zion's sun-lit lands--
   Upon the lily hill-slopes,
      With all the virgin bands.

                                * * * * *

   And so Carnarvon Convent
      Enclosed another bride,
   For Jesus Christ, the Bridegroom,
      The Virgins Joy and Pride.

                                * * * * *

   It was a calm sweet festal,
      In joyous, summer time,
   And Bardsey's Abbey bell-notes
      Rang out a merry chime.
   The Island seem'd rejoicing,
      With holy joy and mirth,
   The Monks are going to honour
      St. John the Baptist's birth.
   For John shines forth as Primate
      Of Monkish Choirs above,
   On earth he dwelt in deserts,
      And knew no earthly love.
   The poor, the sad, the orphans,
      All love St. Mary's shrine,
   And venerate her Cloister,
      Fill'd with the Love Divine.
   The Fathers, and the Novices,
      They count as loving friends,
   Whom Jesus in His Mercy,
      The poor and helpless sends.
   They teach their children sweetly,
      The Gospel's glorious tales,
   And tend their sick and dying
      With care that never fails.
   No poor's rates, and no workhouse,
      Were needed in those days,
   The monks were all they wanted,
      They work'd for Jesu's praise.

   The Holy Mass was over,
      The Abbot seeks his cell,
   His heart is strangely trembling,
      Wherefore he cannot tell.
   'Tis some foreboding sorrow
      That makes his spirit sad,
   Though all around is sunshine
      And everything seems glad.
   A strange, a chill forewarning,
      Shakes the old man with fear,
   Some dread, some dire affliction,
      Too surely must be near.
   That night, ere hushful Compline
      Had closed the sacred day,
   Two boats the Point were rounding,
      Of Aberdaron's Bay.
   In one brief hour there landed,
      On Bardsey's holy shore,
   Ten men from Windsor, bringing
      Tidings most sad and sore.
   They seek at once admission,
      Telling the news they bring,
   The Monks must, ere the morrow,
      Surrender to the king
   The Abbey and its treasures,
      Its Church, its relics rare,
   Its Vestments and its Chalices,
      Its Shrines with jewels fair.
   The Monks _must_ sign surrender,
      Acknowledge many a sin
   They never could have dreamt of,
      If they would safety win.
   And call the tyrant merciful,
      For driving them away,
   Making them leave their Abbey
      To ruin and decay. {48}
   The Compline Bell was tolling
      Its last dear Compline call,
   To-morrow death-like ruin
      Would o'er the Convent fall.
   That night the holy Fathers
      Held consultation long,
   And all agreed--Surrender
      Would be unjust and wrong.
   "Then die we at God's Altar,
      Sooner than yield the right
   Which God Himself has given us,
      To sacrilegious might."
   And true to their confession
      The holy Monks remained,
   And with their virgin life-blood
      The Altar-steps are stained.
   The poor arose right bravely,
      Their much-loved Monks to aid,
   And many thus right gladly
      Their lives a forfeit made.
   Now having done all thoroughly,
      Their work of cruel wrong,
   They left the Island weeping,
      All hushed the Holy Song,
   Which for so many ages,
      By night as well as day,
   Had praised the Love of Jesus,
      In one long ceaseless lay.
   And now the poor are seeking,
      Among the ruins drear,
   The bodies of the Martyrs,
      So holy, and so dear.
   Ah! there before the Altar,
      The brave old Abbot lies;
   And there, too, Father Rudolph,
      With fixed and glassy eyes.
   But oh! a calm serenest
      Enfolds the Martyrs blest,
   Strange joy lights up their faces,
      Their spirits are at rest.
   The dear old Abbey crumbles
      All swiftly to decay:
   Oh! for its restoration!
      Cadfan! Dubritius! pray!
   Ye thousand Saints of Bardsey,
      Lift up your pleading song,
   That Jesus may avenge you,
      Of this most cruel wrong!

                                * * * * *

   A hundred years are over,
      Two stranger pilgrims steal,
   To Bardsey's Abbey ruins,
      To pray for Bardsey's weal.
   The night was stormy, darksome,
      No moonlight's silver ray
   Lit up the desolation
      That all around them lay.
   The hour was lonely midnight,
      See! now beside the tomb,
   Where holy Cadfan resteth,
      A light steals through the gloom,
   And 'mid the light a figure,
      In holy Monk's attire,
   And smiling sweetly, brightly,
      Points to the ruined choir.
   "Pilgrims faithful, Pilgrims true,
   List to that I tell to you.
   Years three hundred shall not end,
   Ere the King of Heaven shall send,
   Saints to rear this sacred fane,
   And restore her walls again.
   Saints above cease not their cry,
   Unto Christ the Lord Most High,
   That His ceaseless praises may
   Here arise by night and day.
   Newborough's Lord shall own this soil;
   Ere he resteth from life's toil,
   Jesus, for His servants' sake,
   Bids him restoration make.
   And if Newborough's Lord obey,
   That which Jesu's servants say,
   He shall gain a blessing bright,
   In the realms of Morning Light.
   If he do not grant their prayer,
   He shall lose a blessing rare,
   When he lies on his last bed,
   Sad regret shall crown his head.
   To his son shall then be given, {52}
   Choicest blessings from High Heaven,
   For he shall restore to God,
   Through the Monks this sacred sod."
   Saying thus he sought repose,
   In the tomb whence he arose.

                                * * * * *

   The Angel shewed me these things,
      In pictures bright and true;
   I woke!--my eyes were resting
      Upon the waters blue.
   But oh! the waves seem sighing
      For sorrow at my tale,
   The sea-birds floating o'er them.
      Sent forth a piteous wail.
   Oh happy waves! no tyrant
      Can hush _your_ endless song.
   May ye again comingle
      With Bardsey's chants ere long.
   Then Heaven, and Earth, and Nature,
      In unison shall raise,
   One grand joy-peal of gladness,--
      One mighty shout of praise!

_Written at Barmouth and Aberdaron_, _off Bardsey Isle_, _February_,
1870.

                                * * * * *

                 [Picture: Decorative graphic of a cross]

                                * * * * *

                                 LONDON:
            PRINTED BY G. J. PALMER, 32, LITTLE QUEEN STREET,
                          LINCOLN'S INN FIELDS.




Footnotes.


{6}  The Bardsey Monks, at this time (the eighth century) doubtless wore
the black habit, but assumed the white habit of the Premonstratensians
some hundreds of years later.

{8}  Aberdaron is situated on the mainland of Carnarvonshire, just five
miles from Bardsey Island, in its own snug bay shore, just round the last
point of the Promontory of Lleyn.  It was the starting place of the
pilgrims for the Holy Isle.

{11}  Barmouth is nearly thirty miles due east of Bardsey, across
Cardigan Bay, and quite visible on a clear day.  It is a seaport of
Merionethshire.

{12a}  This may seem an anachronism, but it should be remembered that
Druidism lingered a long time in Wales, after it was fairly driven from
the rest of Britain.

{12b}  The Church here is dedicated to St. Cadfan.

{14}  St. Dubritius spent much of his early life in Bardsey, and was
buried there.

{20}  Psalm lxviii.





***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HOLY ISLE***


******* This file should be named 49306.txt or 49306.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/4/9/3/0/49306


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

