The Project Gutenberg EBook of Personal record of the Thirteenth Regiment,
Tennessee Infantry, by A. J. Vaughan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Personal record of the Thirteenth Regiment, Tennessee Infantry

Author: A. J. Vaughan

Release Date: September 7, 2015 [EBook #49898]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERSONAL RECORD--13TH REG. TENNESSEE ***




Produced by Alyssia Turner and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)





Transcriber's Note: Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.



[Illustration: A. J. VAUGHAN.]




                            PERSONAL RECORD

                                OF THE

                         THIRTEENTH REGIMENT,
                          TENNESSEE INFANTRY.

                            [Illustration]

                                  BY
                          ITS OLD COMMANDER.


                                            Price, 75 cents.




                       PRESS OF S. C. TOOF & CO.
                               MEMPHIS.
                                 1897.




                     MOST AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED
                                 TO THE
                        NOBLE MOTHERS AND WIVES
                                 OF THE
                 TRUE AND HEROIC MEN WHO FOR FOUR YEARS
                      FOLLOWED THE CONFEDERATE FLAG,
                 AND WHO WERE WILLING TO LAY DOWN THEIR
                   LIVES IN DEFENSE OF THAT CAUSE THEY
                        BELIEVED RIGHT AND JUST.

                                               A. J. VAUGHAN.




PREFACE.


_MY OLD COMRADES_:

In writing out this record I have gone back to the morning time of my
own life, and lived once more in that other day that not only tried,
but proved men's souls. Insignificant as my work may appear as a
literary production, it carries with it the most sacred memories of
the past. In writing, I have lived over again the days when the boom
of cannon, the rattle of musketry and the old rebel yell were familiar
sounds to our ears. If a shade of mournfulness hovers over the failure
of the cause for which these brave men fought and many fell, it is
not a mournfulness born of regret. When we who wore the gray put away
forever the musket and sword--and let me say, my comrades, swords and
muskets that had been bravely borne--we did so in sorrow but not in
malice or hate. And today, I am sure, where one of the old regiment
lingers yet a little while this side of the dark river, he accepts in
good faith the terms of his parole, and is a peaceful and faithful
citizen of the United States; not only faithful, but as loyal to the
stars and stripes as we were once to that other flag which we followed
for four long years, and which was woven from an honest belief of a
people's need.

Now, to my old comrades, whether in flesh or spirit, to whom this
little compilation has carried me back with such tremendous force, and
to keep alive whose fair fame I have written, I can only say as my last
words--God bless you!

                                                     A. J. VAUGHAN.




The Thirteenth Regiment,

TENNESSEE INFANTRY.


This was one of the regiments that made Cheatham's Division, and
Smith's-Vaughan's and Gordon's Brigades so famous in the Army
of Tennessee. It was organized and mustered into service on the
third day of June, 1861, in answer to a call of Governor Isham G.
Harris for seventy-five thousand volunteers. At that time it was
the seventh infantry regiment organized in West Tennessee and the
thirteenth in the State. It was made up of the "flower of the South"
young men, most of whom were fresh from the best institutions of
learning--aspiring, hopeful and ambitious--sons of men of education,
wealth and influence--the very best material for volunteer service. It
was composed of ten full companies--five from Fayette county, one from
Shelby, one from Dyer, one from McNairy, one from Gibson, and one from
Henderson, and were as follow:

 Company A, Fayette Rifles, Captain William Burton of Somerville, Tenn.

 Company B, Macon Grays, Captain J. L. Granberry, Macon, Tenn.

 Company C, Secession Guards, organized at Germantown, Tenn., and
 composed of Mississippians and Tennesseeans, Captain John H. Morgan,
 Horn Lake, Miss.

 Company D, Yorkville Rifles, Captain John Wilkins, Yorkville, Tenn.

 Company E, Dixie Rifles, organized at Moscow, Tenn., and composed
 of Tennesseeans and Mississippians, Captain A. J. Vaughan, Marshall
 county, Miss.

 Company F, Wright Boys, Captain Jno. V. Wright, Purdy, McNairy county,
 Tenn.

 Company G, Gaines Invincibles, Captain W. E. Winfield, LaGrange, Tenn.

 Company H, Yancey Rifles, Captain Robert W. Pittman, Hickory Withe,
 Tenn.

 Company I, Forked Deer Volunteers, Captain G. S. Ross, Forked Deer,
 Tenn.

 Company K, Dyer Grays, Captain S. R. Latta, Dyersburg, Tenn.

On the following day, the 4th of June, the election of field officers
was held, and resulted in the election of Captain Jno. V. Wright
of Company F as Colonel, Captain A. J. Vaughan of Company E as
Lieutenant-Colonel, and Captain W. E. Winfield of Company G as Major.

The regiment was ordered at once by way of Memphis to Randolph, on
the Mississippi river, when the organization was completed by the
appointment of Lieutenant W. E. Morgan, Company C, Adjutant; Dr. J. A.
Forbes, Company E, Surgeon; Dr. B. F. Dickerson, Company I, Assistant
Surgeon; W. E. Dyer, Company G, Commissary; L. B. Cabler, Company A,
Regimental Quartermaster; Peter Cole, Company H, Sergeant-Major; and W.
D. F. Hafford, Chaplain.

The regiment remained at Randolph engaged in drilling, camp duty,
etc., until July 26th, when it was ordered to New Madrid, Mo., and
placed in a brigade under command of Colonel J. P. McCown, who, under
orders from General Gid. J. Pillow, was about to make a campaign into
South-west Missouri to prevent reinforcements being sent to the Federal
General Lyons, then operating in that section.

On the 18th of August, 1861, the troops were moved in the direction of
Benton, Mo., where the Thirteenth Regiment arrived on the 19th. This
was the first campaign or march of the regiment, and though in the
middle of summer during a severe drouth, under a burning sun and over
roads shoe deep in sand and dust, it was cheerfully performed, and
showed an endurance and fortitude rarely witnessed in new troops. The
object of the campaign being accomplished, the command returned to New
Madrid on Sept. 2, and on the following day the regiment was ordered to
Hickman, Ky., where it was placed in Cheatham's Brigade. At Hickman,
on Sept. 4, 1861, the regiment for the first time caught a glimpse of
the "boys in blue" and saw the first "burning of gunpowder," which was
an artillery duel between the Federal gunboats and the Confederate
land batteries; but it was at long range, no damage was done, and the
gunboats were soon withdrawn up the river.

About this time General Leonidas Polk, commanding the Mississippi
Department, determined to occupy Columbus, Ky., and ordered General
B. F. Cheatham to proceed at once to that point, where the Thirteenth
Regiment arrived Sept. 6, 1861, and was among the first, if not the
first, to occupy that important position. Nothing but camp duty,
throwing up heavy fortifications and hard and constant drilling
occurred in the regiment until Nov. 7, when it was reported that the
enemy in heavy force was advancing on Columbus on both sides of the
river. The long roll was sounded and every regiment reported at once
and fell into line on its parade ground. All were excited and anxious
to meet the enemy. Soon it was ascertained that a heavy force had
disembarked from their gunboats above and were moving down to a point
near Belmont, on the opposite side of the river.

The Thirteenth Regiment, under command of Colonel John V. Wright,
having been supplied with ammunition, was ordered at once to cross the
river and take position on the extreme left of our line of battle near
Watson's Battery. Never was a regiment more anxious or more willing
to face an enemy. It was the maiden fight of the regiment and every
man felt that he was "on his mettle." Though our position was an
unfortunate one--in an open field, the enemy being under cover of thick
woods--this regiment met the advance with the steadiness of veterans
and held its position and fought while comrades fell on every side
until the last round of ammunition was exhausted, and the order given
to fall back to the river. By the time the regiment reached the river
reinforcements had crossed from Columbus which engaged the enemy and
checked his further advance. The Thirteenth, obtaining a fresh supply
of ammunition, rallied and again advanced gallantly to the contest,
which had become fierce and obstinate. In a short time the Federals
were driven from their position and fled to their gunboats, hotly
pursued by the Confederates. At their gunboats, such was their haste,
confusion and disorder that they did not attempt to return the fire.
The Federal loss here, as in previous engagements, was heavy.

The loss of the Thirteenth Regiment was heavy; out of one hundred and
fourteen killed and wounded, thirty-four were killed on the field,
among them the very best men of Tennessee. Their names should never be
forgotten, and are as follow:

Company A--A. Middlemus, First Sergeant; A. J. McCully; Mike McCully;
Matthew Rhea, First Lieutenant commanding.

Company B--F. M. Stockinger; W. H. Burnett, Second Corporal.

Company C--Arthur R. Pittman; J. W. Rogers; Robt. F. Dukes, Lieutenant;
J. P. Farrow; J. W. Harris.

Company D--W. H. Parks; W. H. Polk; Jno. H. Shaw; Albert G. Zaracer; B.
M. Dozier.

Company E--S. J. Roberson; Geo. R. Tiller; E. Wales Newby.

Company F--H. H. Barnett; E. H. Hill; John A. Jones, Sr.; C. H.
Middleton.

Company G--P. N. D. Bennett; Jno. Mayo; Jno. C. Penn.

Company H--George Hall; Wm. J. Dunlap.

Company I--C. C. Cawhon; L. F. Hamlet; John G. Nesbit; H. H. Waggoner;
James Hamlet.

Company K--Y. W. Hall; K. A. Parrish; Jas. L. Smith.

J. P. Farrow and Wm. J. Dunlap were the first men in the regiment who
yielded their young lives in battle to the Confederate cause, and were
killed by the first volley of the enemy's fire.

Early in action Colonel John V. Wright was painfully injured in the
knee by the fall of his horse which was shot under him. I, who then
took command of the regiment, had two horses shot under me: the first
at the very commencement of the engagement; the second (which had been
cut out of Watson's Battery after its men had been driven from their
guns) was shot just as I reached the river bank.

Never did men display more heroic courage and deport themselves in
a more soldierlike manner, and while it is impossible in this brief
sketch to refer to all the acts of devotion and fidelity to the
Southern cause performed by the officers and men of this regiment,
Lieutenant Matthew Rhea certainly deserves special mention. As soon as
the regiment took position in line of battle, in command of his company
(A) he was sent to the extreme left of our line with instruction to
extend his line to the river, which he did. By some means the enemy
got in between him and the regiment, thus cutting him off. Though
surrounded he continued to fight, and rather than surrender his sword,
which had been worthily worn by his grandfather, he fell at the hands
of the enemy. A braver, truer or more faithful officer never fought for
any cause.

About this time, if not on the very day of the battle of Belmont,
Colonel John V. Wright was elected to the Confederate Congress, and
resigned his position as Colonel of the regiment. No man ever stood
higher in the estimation of his soldiers or was more beloved by them.

Upon the resignation of Colonel Wright I was unanimously elected
Colonel of the regiment. I was a disciplinarian while on duty of the
strictest school, which for the first months of the war made me very
unpopular with volunteer soldiers, but only one fight was necessary to
satisfy them that an undisciplined army was nothing more than an armed
mob. Adjutant W. E. Morgan was now elected Lieutenant-Colonel, and
Lieutenant Richard M. Harwell of Company E was appointed Adjutant.

After the battle of Belmont and while at Columbus, Ky., the measles
broke out in the regiment, and it was a matter of surprise that there
should be so many grown men who had never had the measles. So many were
down at one time that there were scarcely enough well ones to wait on
the sick, and many died.

Early in the spring it became necessary to move our lines further
south, and Columbus was evacuated March 12, 1862. The Thirteenth was
ordered to Union City, and four days later to Corinth, Miss., where it
arrived March 19, 1862. Before leaving Columbus, however, there had
been some changes made in the command. General B. F. Cheatham had been
promoted to a division commander, and the Thirteenth was assigned to
Colonel R. M. Russell's Brigade, General Chas. Clark's Division. In
this brigade and division the regiment remained until after the battle
of Shiloh.

About this time the enemy was known to be landing and concentrating
a large force at Pittsburg Landing, on the Tennessee river. It was
determined by Gen. Albert Sidney Johnston, who had been placed in
command, to give battle; so on the 3rd of April, 1862, the regiment,
with the whole army, was moved toward the point of attack, but heavy
rains and bad roads prevented forming line of battle until the evening
of the 5th of April. That night a council of war was held, and though
some officers were opposed, an attack was determined upon.

On the morning of the 6th, just as the sun in all its splendor was
rising above the horizon, and while in the second line of battle,
General Clark rode up to us and stated that Marks' Louisiana Regiment
had been repulsed, and asked, "Can you take that battery yonder, which
is annoying our troops so much?" Having such unlimited confidence in
the Thirteenth, I replied, "We can take it." Whereupon the regiment
was moved by the right flank, under cover of a hill, until in proper
position, and then fronted the battery and advanced rapidly up the
hill. All was well until the crest of the hill was reached, when the
enemy opened fire with canister, grape and musketry, which was so
severe that it literally tore the regiment in two. But, though, for
a moment checked, nothing daunted, our officers and men gallantly
stood their ground, and poured into the ranks of the enemy such deadly
volleys as to cause them to waver, and then with the "rebel yell"
rushed so impetuously upon them that they could no longer stand,
precipitately fleeing and leaving battery and dead and wounded on the
field.

This was indeed a brilliant charge, and only equaled on that
battlefield by the charge made shortly afterward by that magnificent
regiment, the Fourth Tennessee. But the loss to the regiment was
terrible; some of Tennessee's best blood was shed here, and many a
noble spirit sank to rise no more.

The balance of the day the regiment, though not actively engaged, was
for the most time under heavy fire in changing and shifting positions
and in supporting and relieving other troops. It was present and
assisted in capturing Gen. Lew Wallace[A] and his brigade late in
the evening on the bank of the Tennessee river, to which point we
had driven the enemy. Here, because of the steep bluff, the gunboats
could not reach us, and a rain of iron and lead passed over our heads
until late in the night. Under orders the regiment retired from the
river bank and bivouaced for the night in the enemy's camp, rich with
quartermaster's stores, commissary supplies and sutlers' goods.

[Footnote A: By oversight I have printed on page 16 the name LEW
WALLACE. Of course it should have been GEN. PRENTICE.]

Every officer and soldier of the regiment sank to sleep serenaded by
the guns from the river, and supposed that the battle was won and the
victory ours. But how sadly disappointed next morning, when it was
known that Buell had arrived and crossed the river that night with his
whole army, and was drawn up in line with fresh troops to renew the
contest. Though not anticipating such a state of affairs, the regiment
was formed by early dawn and moved forward to meet the enemy as proudly
and defiantly as on the day before. But their batteries, within easy
range and supported by columns of infantry, opened such a terrible fire
of grape and canister that we were forced to retire and seek shelter
beyond the next ridge. By this time the whole Confederate forces
were hotly engaged, and from right to left was one continuous roar
of artillery and musketry. The struggle was terrific, and closer and
harder fighting was never done on any battlefield; and though the enemy
were held at bay from early dawn till nearly noon, it was apparent
that the unequal contest could not be much longer maintained. So the
Confederate forces were gradually withdrawn, and the army returned
to its old camp grounds at Corinth, Miss. No attempt was made by the
enemy to follow. The first day's fight of this battle was the grandest
of the war--less friction, more concert of action, more thorough
co-operation and better generalship displayed--everything moved with
clock-like precision--a master mind directed the whole until General A.
S. Johnston fell.

Throughout the two days' fight every officer and man of the Thirteenth
did his whole duty, as shown by the heavy loss in killed and wounded.
We lost one hundred and twelve men killed and wounded, and of this
number forty-two fell dead on the bloody field, thus sealing their
devotion with their lives to the cause they believed right. Their names
deserve to be remembered by their countrymen, and are as follow:

Robert Thompson, B. F. Eaton, H. B. Hunt, R. Harrison, J. M. Moore,
James Moore, N. Matthews, R. M. Thompson and Lieut. C. H. Whitmore
of Company A; J. G. Babbett, Lieut. S. B. Dugan and Henry Walker of
Company B; W. B. Dukes, C. P. Graham, H. J. Hutchinson, Thos. Rainey
(color bearer) and W. L. Stokes of Company C; Second Lieut. W. F.
Cowan, First Lieut. J. W. Cunningham, R. D. Eaton and Capt. John A.
Wilkins of Company D; D. C. Arnett, D. C. Bull, J. C. Black and M. C.
Grisson of Company E; M. Donelly, J. N. Guthrie, Jno. Morgan, William
Saunders, J. D. Springer and B. Thomas of Company F; M. M. McKinstry,
J. H. Brown and J. O. Winfield of Company G; E. O. Chambers, S. O.
Cole, D. R. Royster and Carr Young of Company H; Jno. Mitchell, Lewis
Roberson, J. N. Vandyke and G. W. Borger of Company I; Carroll Chitwood
of Company K.

From the opening to the close of this engagement I was most ably and
efficiently assisted in the management and direction of the regiment
by Lieut.-Col. W. E. Morgan, Adjutant R. M. Harwell, and Major W.
E. Winfield. Adjutant Harwell was painfully wounded in the first
engagement but remained at his post of duty until the close of the
struggle. Lieut.-Colonel Morgan and Major Winfield had their horses
shot, and I had two horses shot under me and was struck by a spent ball
that did no serious harm.

While at Corinth, the period for which the regiment had enlisted
having expired, it re-enlisted for the war and reorganized. Company A,
from some disaffection or dissatisfaction, refused to reorganize, and
was consolidated with Company D, and the deficiency supplied by the
admission of Company L, Zollicoffer's Avengers, Captain C. B. Jones,
of LaGrange, Tenn. On the 28th of April, 1862, the reorganization
was perfected by the election of the following officers: I was
unanimously re-elected Colonel; W. E. Morgan unanimously re-elected
Lieutenant-Colonel; Sergeant-Major P. H. Cole elected Major; Lieut.
R. M. Harwell re-elected Adjutant. Many changes were made in line
officers, but the writer has no data from which to supply them. While
at Corinth the regiment, from the use of bad and unhealthy water,
suffered very much with sickness, and many were furloughed on sick
leave to recuperate for the summer campaign.

The enemy in the meantime having recovered from the severe blow
received at Shiloh commenced to advance on Corinth by gradual
approaches, and by the latter part of May was in the vicinity of
that place. The regiment was daily engaged in heavy skirmishes, and
sometimes in sharp engagements but with small losses. On May 13, 1862,
Corinth was evacuated, and the Thirteenth fell back by way of Baldwin
to Tupelo, Miss. Here, with good water, the health of the regiment
improved rapidly, and with strict discipline and constant drilling we
soon became one of the crack regiments in that army.

About this time General Charles Clark, commanding the division, was
assigned to another department, and his division broken up and assigned
to other commands. The Thirteenth was assigned to Cheatham's Division
and General Preston Smith's Brigade, which, on July 10, 1862, was
ordered to report to General E. Kirby Smith at Knoxville, Tenn., who
was about to make a campaign into Kentucky. Everything being ready the
Thirteenth, with the forces under General Smith, moved on the 13th day
of August into Kentucky by way of Wilson Gap, and on the 18th of August
arrived at Cumberland Gap after a weary and toilsome march of five
days. From this point by way of Manchester the forces were moved in the
direction of Richmond, Ky. The enemy was watching the movement, and
had sent forward General Bull Nelson with a large force of infantry,
artillery and cavalry to check our advance. A battle was now imminent.

Early on the morning of August 30 the army was put in motion, and by
8 o'clock while marching up the road a shell from the enemy's battery
not far off came whizzing over the head of our advancing column and
exploded high in the air. The Thirteenth with the other regiments of
the brigade immediately deployed in line of battle on the right of the
road, when Allen's sharpshooters under command of Lieut. Creighton were
sent forward and deployed as skirmishers, with instructions to feel
the enemy and develop their position. This being done the regiment
with the brigade was ordered to advance, and in a short time a most
terrific fire was opened by both sides from one end of the line to
the other. The enemy occupied a strong position and stubbornly held
their ground, but onward the Confederates continued to march, when,
with a charge and a yell in front and a volley on their flank, which
General Smith with the One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Sr. had succeeded
in reaching, the enemy precipitately fled, hotly pursued and pressed by
the Confederates. The enemy lay thick upon the field, and their loss
was heavy. The Thirteenth's loss was also heavy in officers and men,
and among them some of Tennessee's best and bravest soldiers.

It was in this first engagement that Lieutenant Edward Lanier of
Company G was killed, a young, brilliant and gallant officer who, had
he lived, would either as citizen or soldier have inscribed his name
high up on the roll of fame. Gifted by nature, young, aspiring and
ambitious it seemed hard that he should have been stricken down at the
very threshold of his manhood. A truer soldier never shed his blood on
his country's altar. Here, too, General Pat Cleburne was wounded in the
mouth, and had to retire from the field, whereupon the command of the
division devolved upon Brigadier-General Preston Smith, and that of the
brigade on me, and that of the regiment on Lieutenant-Colonel W. E.
Morgan.

The enemy after retiring a couple of miles made a second stand, but
so impetuous was the second attack that after a short engagement they
broke in disorder and confusion, and did not halt until at or near
Richmond, where for the last time they made a stand, and it was here
that they were completely routed and demoralized.

This was the most complete victory gained during the war in which the
Thirteenth participated. Nothing escaped. All the enemy's artillery,
their artillery horses, their transportation, quartermaster and
commissary supplies, together with all their camp equipage fell into
the hands of the Confederates. In this engagement our forces captured
and paroled more officers and men than General E. Kirby Smith had in
his command. The Thirteenth did its whole duty, as attested by the
killed on that battlefield as follow: R. A. Donalson, W. L. Fullerton,
S. G. Lawrence, Company A; T. F. Gaither, Company B; W. L. Rhodes,
Company C; Jas. J. Lawrence, W. H. Minter, Company D; T. M. Ballard,
Company E; H. L. Winningham, Company F; Lieutenant Edward Lanier,
Edward Dicks, Company G; Wm. Claiburn, R. H. Crouch, Company H; John
Reed, R. R. Stone, B. F. Holtom, Company I; John H. Gates, B. G. Sims,
H. A. Gray, J. S. Jenkins, M. R. Winfield, B. W. Wilkerson, Company L.

In this battle I received from the hands of a captain of an Indiana
company a beautiful and highly ornamented sword, which had been
presented to him by the citizens of his town when he started to the
war. After the first attack the Federal captain was retreating with
his company when he was shot in the leg. Unable to proceed further a
private of the Thirteenth ran up to him and ordered the surrender of
his sword. This he refused to do, saying that he would surrender it to
an officer, but never to a private. This so enraged the private that he
was in the very act of shooting him when I rode up and ordered him not
to shoot a prisoner, whereupon the officer extended to me his sword,
and thanked me for saving his life. I wore this sword a long time, but
while on leave of absence left it in charge of a young Confederate
officer who, being insulted by a negro, broke it over his head.

After the battle of Richmond the Thirteenth with the brigade marched
to Lexington, Ky.; thence to Cynthiana, thence to Covington, thence
to Frankfort, and joined Gen. Bragg's army just before the battle of
Perryville, where it rejoined Cheatham's Division.

The next engagement was the battle of Perryville, which was fought on
October 8, 1862. In this battle the Thirteenth with the brigade was not
actively engaged, but was held in reserve, and with the brigade acted
as rear guard to the army on its march out of Kentucky.

Our march into Kentucky was an ovation. We were the first infantry
troops to enter that part of the State, and as soon as we crossed
the mountains and struck the Blue Grass region, the demonstration of
sympathy for the South and the hearty welcome extended us filled every
heart with profound gratitude. Citizens all along our line of march
received us with open arms, and showed us every hospitality. When we
halted for the night, droves of fattest cattle, herds of the fattest
sheep, and wagonloads of corn and hay, were driven to our camp. Even
the women--God bless them--brought to our soldiers the delicacies of
the table and garden. We thought that Kentucky was ours, and that no
Federal force would invade her beautiful territory; but, alas! how soon
the scene shifted.

The retreat out of Kentucky was one of greater trial and hardship than
any march made during the war. Over a rough and barren country, without
shoes and thinly clad, with scarcely anything to eat, the suffering was
great, yet it was borne with fortitude and without a murmur.

The regiment, with the army, reached Knoxville on October 24, 1862.
From Knoxville the Thirteenth was moved by rail to Tullahoma, where
it received a fresh supply of clothing, blankets, shoes, etc., which
was so much needed. After a few weeks' rest we were marched to
Murfreesboro, where we arrived the latter part of November, 1862. It
was here that smallpox broke out in the regiment, and it was detached
from the brigade, but by strict quarantine and vaccination it was soon
checked--not, however, without the loss of some good soldiers.

Early on the morning of December 30, 1862, we commenced that
hard-fought and stubbornly-contested battle of Murfreesboro, or Stone
River. It was a most terrific contest--one that brought forth those
shining and brilliant qualities of the Southern volunteer which made
him so renowned in the Mexican and other wars. In the absence of
Brigadier-General Preston Smith, I was in command of the brigade and
Lieutenant-Col. W. E. Morgan in command of the regiment. In this fight
the Thirteenth, as in every other from Belmont to Murfreesboro, took
an active part, and did its whole duty and gathered fresh laurels. It
was the most satisfactory fight, both to the officers and men, that was
made by the regiment during the war. With the exception of a slight
check in the morning, it drove the enemy from every position from early
dawn till late in the evening; and though every inch of ground was
fiercely contested, the regiment never faltered, but onward like an
avalanche it swept everything before it. I had two horses shot under
me, and the horse of every field and staff officer of the regiment was
killed.

In this engagement I witnessed an exhibition of discipline and coolness
that I never saw on any other battlefield. We had in our front and
opposed to us a brigade of United States Regulars; they were formed
in two lines of battle some distance apart. Firing as we advanced,
their first line waited until we got within easy range and then coolly
delivered their fire; without waiting to reload they faced to the rear
and double-quicked through their second line and reformed in line of
battle. The second line then awaited our approach, and though their
men were falling fast around them, they coolly delivered their fire
and retired through the first line and reformed in line of battle; and
thus they continued to fire and fall back until they were driven across
a large field. Their lines were plainly marked by their dead, who lay
thick upon the ground.

These were Americans fighting Americans--the one, the trained soldier,
who fought because he was ordered to do so, and because of the old flag
and that Union which he believed ought to be eternal; the other, the
Southern volunteer, who fought because he believed that his home and
fireside were invaded and that his constitutional rights were trampled
upon. Both exhibited a courage which commands the world's admiration.

In this battle a battery of four beautiful Napoleon guns was captured
from the Federals. Four divisions of our army claimed to have
participated in the capture, and each division laid claims to the
battery. A conference of the officers of the divisions was called, and
after a full discussion and careful consideration of the claims of
each division, it was decided that one of the guns should be given to
each division, and that upon it should be inscribed the name of the
most gallant and meritorious soldier who fell on that battlefield. One
of the guns was given to Cheatham's Division and assigned to Preston
Smith's Brigade. At that time I was Colonel of the Thirteenth Tennessee
Regiment and W. E. Morgan Lieutenant-Colonel; but in the absence of
Gen. Preston Smith I commanded the brigade and Lieutenant-Colonel
Morgan the regiment. He fell in the first day's fight, and by unanimous
consent his name was inscribed upon the gun, and read as follows:
"Lieutenant-Colonel W. E. Morgan, Thirteenth Tennessee Regiment, Pres.
Smith's Brigade, Cheatham's Division, Polk's Corps." This gun was
assigned to Scott's Battery, and at the battle of Chickamauga it was
skillfully handled and did effective work in checking the advance of
the Federals; but when Gen. Grant attacked our lines at Missionary
Ridge, it was recaptured by the Federal forces, and today it stands a
silent sentinel in the beautiful "Park of Gettysburg." Captured and
recaptured on two famous battlefields, it stands there a proof of the
heroism of both sides; it stands there as ready to do service for the
stars and stripes as it once did for that other flag which lived its
brief life always in the storm of battle, and which, without dishonor,
was laid aside and folded forever, with no other stain upon its fold
than that of heroes' blood shed to give it life.

Here it was that Lieutenant-Colonel W. E. Morgan, the pride of the
regiment and the hero of so many brilliant achievements, fell mortally
wounded; he fought his way up from Lieutenant of his company (C) to
Lieutenant-Colonel of the regiment, and no promotion was ever more
deserved. Major P. H. Cole also fell in this battle; he, too, deserves
the gratitude of his countrymen for the faithful discharge of his duty.
It was here, too, that Private W. A. Abernathy was killed; though a
mere youth he was endowed with all of those sterling qualities which
make heroes; he was every inch a soldier; whether on the march, in
the camp, or on the field of battle, he was the life and pride of
his comrades; though offered promotion he always refused, saying
he preferred fighting in the ranks. Here, too, J. A. Stone, though
severely wounded, bound up his wounds and returned to his company,
remaining with it and leading every charge during the day.

Upon the fall of Lieutenant-Colonel W. E. Morgan and Major P. H. Cole,
R. F. Lanier, senior Captain, the bravest of the brave, took command
of the regiment and led it throughout the remainder of the fight with
skill and judgment, and made for himself a character for dash and
daring that followed him throughout the war; no man in the army of
Tennessee was more devoted to the Southern cause.

The regiment went into this battle with two hundred and twenty-six
officers and men, and lost in killed and wounded one hundred and ten.
Twenty-eight were killed and their names should be ever remembered with
affection. They are:

J. C. Kelly, Company A; G. H. Adams, Logan McKinstry, W. B. Reed, W.
R. Carter, J. C. Tharp, E. M. Waller, Company B; Boggan Cash, Wayne
Holman, Lieutenant-Colonel W. E. Morgan, Captain John H. Morgan, Palmer
P. Tuggle, Company C; W. A. Abernathy, William Greene, Company E; M. N.
Burns, Company F; J. W. Jones, Otey Gloster, W. H. Simmons, Company G;
Maj. P. H. Cole, T. J. Forgey, S. D. Aikin, Company H; J. McLaughlin,
D. R. Tillman, J. H. McLaughlin, Company I; James F. Dukes, Carter E.
Skipwith, Company K; R. J. Bailey, Company L. Boggan Cash was the only
one whose fate was not absolutely known. He was in every charge of his
company and could not have been wounded or captured, as none of the
ground fought over was reoccupied by the enemy. He was a brave and
true soldier and always at his post of duty.

On the night of the first day's fight General Preston Smith returned
to the brigade and assumed command, and I returned to the regiment. In
the second day's fight the regiment was not actively engaged and lost
no men. On the night of January 2, 1863, the regiment with the brigade
was withdrawn toward Murfreesboro, and the retreat to Shelbyville
commenced, which point the regiment reached the next day and went into
camp. The enemy did not attempt to follow.

At Shelbyville the Thirteenth and One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Sr.
Regiments, having become so reduced in numbers, were consolidated. I
was retained as Colonel. Captain R. W. Pittman of the Thirteenth, who
had been promoted to Lieutenant-Colonel, was retained with same rank,
and Major John W. Dawson of the One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Sr. as
Major. Though consolidated, neither regiment ever lost its identity,
and each was known to the close of the war by its original regimental
appellation. From Belmont to Murfreesboro they had fought side by
side on every battlefield. In daylight or in darkness, in victory or
in defeat, they had stood shoulder to shoulder. Each knew the worth
and value of the other and both had but one purpose in view--and that
purpose, even to the extent of their lives, was to maintain the honor
of Tennessee and uphold the Confederacy. From this time to the close of
the war the history of the two regiments was one common history. The
glory of the one was the pride of the other, and neither ever lost hope
until the Confederate banner went down forever.

From Shelbyville the army fell back across the Cumberland mountains,
thus occupying the same position it did twelve months previous, and
before it started into Kentucky. Tennesseeans for the second time saw
their section abandoned, yet true to the Southern cause, cheerfully
followed the fortunes of the Confederate flag.

The next important event in the history of the regiment was the
hard-fought battle of Chickamauga, on September 19 and 20, 1863. It was
the first battle after the two regiments had been consolidated that
they had fought, and each sustained its former record and gathered
fresh laurels. After two days of grand and magnificent fighting the
enemy was completely routed and victory perched on the Confederate
banner; but, alas! its fruits were lost by the tardy movements of the
army in following up the victory. It is not for the writer to say who
was at fault, but it was apparent to all that some one was to blame.

The loss in killed and wounded on both sides was exceedingly heavy,
and the Thirteenth lost some of its best officers and bravest men. It
was here, on the night of the first day's fight (Sept. 19, 1863), that
General Preston Smith fell. The circumstances of his death are worthy
of record here.

After heavy fighting all day, Cheatham's Division was formed in the
second line of battle, and Preston Smith's Brigade was ordered to keep
within five hundred paces of Deshler's Texas Brigade of the first line.
The two lines were ordered forward with instructions to march directly
to the front; but Deshler's Brigade, on account of obstructions and
the irregularity of the ground, instead of marching directly to the
front, obliqued to the left and passed unnoticed an isolated regiment
which proved to be the Seventy-seventh Pennsylvania, which had in some
unaccountable manner become separated from the Federal army. Smith's
Brigade, marching directly to the front, was approaching too near the
first line, when Gen. Smith, thinking it was getting too close, as he
supposed, to Deshler's Brigade, ordered a halt and rode forward with
his volunteer aid, Captain King of Georgia, to see why, as he thought,
Deshler's Brigade had halted. Riding up to the Federal regiment he was
discovered to be a Confederate officer and was fired upon and instantly
killed, as was Captain King. It was now becoming dark, and I being on
the right, and also supposing that Deshler's Brigade had halted, I rode
forward with Captain John Donaldson at my side to inquire the cause.
When within thirty or forty yards of the regiment a Federal soldier
jumped up from under a bush, advanced to me, supposing me to be a
Federal officer, and inquired, "Where is the enemy?" Discovering his
mistake, he jerked up his gun and without taking aim, fired. The load
passed just in front of my breast into the body of Captain Donaldson,
who fell a corpse. I ordered the Federal to be fired upon, which was
done by the Twelfth Tennessee. In shooting at the Federal soldier their
balls ranged into the ranks of the Federal regiment, when they called
out, "Don't shoot! don't shoot! we surrender!" Whereupon I rode forward
and ordered the regiment to ground arms and surrender their flag,
which I received from the color-bearer, and turned over the regiment
of prisoners to Captain Carthall of the Twelfth, who marched them to
the rear. Thus fell General Preston Smith and his faithful aid Captain
King, and Inspector-General Donaldson. I now took command of the
Brigade and a short time after was promoted to Brigadier-General.

After the battle of Chickamauga, Cheatham's Division was the first
to move and to advance toward Chattanooga, to which point the enemy
had retreated, and the Thirteenth was among the first to drive in the
enemy's pickets from Missionary Ridge. In doing so, however, Company
C of the regiment lost one of her truest and most faithful officers,
Lieutenant Henry Brooks, who fell at the head of his command in the
full discharge of his duty, admired and loved by his comrades and
superior officers.

The next move of the regiment was in the direction of Knoxville to
reinforce General Longstreet, but on arriving at Sweetwater news was
received of his repulse, and the regiment returned to the old division
on Missionary Ridge.

It was now known that the Federals were strongly fortified in
Chattanooga, had been heavily reinforced, and were preparing for an
advance on the Confederates occupying Missionary Ridge and Lookout
Mountain. On November 25, about noon, the Federals advanced in
overwhelming numbers, and like an avalanche swept the Confederate lines
from Missionary Ridge, though the One Hundred and Fifty-fourth and
Thirteenth kept the Federals back in their front until flanked on their
left. At this time these two regiments did some of the grandest and
most heroic fighting they had done during the war, and though forced
to fall back, they contested every inch of ground with that heroism
which had characterized them on every battlefield. Night coming on,
the Confederates crossed Chickamauga Creek and retired to Dalton, Ga.,
where our army went into winter quarters.

At Dalton General Braxton Bragg was relieved of command and General
Joseph E. Johnston appointed to the command of the army. His
appointment was joyfully received by the whole army. Its morale
commenced at once to improve, and by early spring it was in splendid
fighting condition.

Early in May, 1864, the enemy 100,000 strong made an advance, and it
was supposed from the overwhelming numbers of Sherman's army that he
would give battle in front of Dalton, but after trying two or more
days to dislodge the Confederates, he commenced his flank movement
under cover of Rocky Face Ridge. This forced the withdrawal of the
Confederates from Dalton to Resaca. The Thirteenth and One Hundred
and Fifty-fourth were the first to arrive at Resaca, where they found
General Canty's Division skirmishing with the enemy. The enemy was held
in check until sufficient reinforcements arrived to drive Sherman back
through Black Snake Gap. It was here that the writer, standing by the
side of General Johnston (who was intently watching the skirmish line),
heard him say that never in his life had he seen skirmishers behave
better, or handled with more skill, and turning to the writer, asked:
"Do you know to what command they belong and who is their commander?"
The writer replied that they were commanded by Lieutenant-Colonel
John W. Dawson and belonged to the Thirteenth and One Hundred and
Fifty-fourth Tennessee Regiments, Vaughan's Brigade, Cheatham's
Division.

From Resaca the regiment fell back to Adairsville, where it had a
sharp engagement and inflicted a heavy loss upon the enemy. Thence to
Cassville, where everything indicated a pitched battle, and never
was the regiment, in fact, the whole army, in better condition. Its
morale had improved every day since Johnston assumed command, and it
was confidently believed by both officers and men that whenever battle
was given, victory was certain. But from some cause battle was not
given. It was here that the Thirteenth and One Hundred and Fifty-fourth
Regiments had the highest compliment paid them during the war. After
the line of battle was formed and every brigade and division in
position, General Cheatham was ordered by General Johnston to furnish
the best regiment in his division to bring on the engagement. The
Thirteenth and One Hundred and Fifty-fourth were furnished.

The next hard fighting done by the regiment was at New Hope Church
and Lost Mountain, then on the Kennesaw line at what was known as
"dead angle." It was here that Hooker, with that splendid fighting
corps of his, made the attack and was so signally repulsed. In column
seven lines deep, with not a cap on the guns of the first two lines,
he attempted to storm our position. Never did men march into the very
jaws of death with a firmer tread and with more determination than did
the Federals to this attack. But they met intrenched infantry, and the
concentrated fire of musketry, canister, grapeshot and shell mowed
them down at every step. Yet they still struggled forward, but every
Confederate stood at his post, and in a short time it was more than
mortals could stand and they broke and fled, leaving eight hundred of
their dead. The Thirteenth and One Hundred and Fifty-fourth were in the
angle, supported on the right and left by the veterans of the Army of
Tennessee.

While occupying this point the writer received orders from headquarters
that the safety of the army depended upon holding this position, and
that it must be held if it required the sacrifice of every man in the
regiments. This order was communicated to the men and their unanimous
response was that "we will stay here." A few days after this the army
fell back and took position twelve miles below Marietta, Ga., at Vining
station on the railroad to Atlanta. It was at this point, on the
fourth day of July, 1864, while the regiment and brigade were resting
in the trenches behind a battery that the writer lost a leg by the
explosion of a shell from the enemy's battery, which released him from
field service during the remainder of the war. Hence I had no personal
knowledge of the movements of my old command after this date.

In a short time after this, Colonel George W. Gordon, of the Eleventh
Tennessee, was promoted to Brigadier-General and took command of the
brigade. The Thirteenth and One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Regiments
were under his command at the crossing of Chattahoochee, at Peach Tree
Creek, with Hardee on the twenty-second of July, in the defenses of
Atlanta, at Jonesboro, at the capture of Dalton, at Spring Hill, at the
bloody battle of Franklin, in front of Nashville, in the retreat out
of Tennessee, and at Bentonville, N. C., the last battle of the war.
From Belmont, Mo., the first engagement, to Bentonville, N. C., the
last, this regiment shed luster upon the soldiery of Tennessee, and
well merited the compliment of General Joseph E. Johnston when he said:
"They were unsurpassed by the Old Guard of Napoleon, or the army that
Wellington marched out of Spain into France."

When the great soldier and leader, Joseph E. Johnston, surrendered the
remnant of the Army of Tennessee, on April 26, 1865, there were left of
the gallant old Thirteenth less than fifty officers and men. More than
twelve hundred men had once mustered in its ranks. Throughout the four
years they had fallen in battle, been stricken in camp, died on the
march, and sometimes, alas! in prison. Faithful always, only a handful
were left when the curtain was rung down on the awful drama. I was not
there to see the old flag furled, the guns grounded, and the swords
handed over; but I know that the same heroism, fortitude and love were
with the remnant, as had been with those who four years before had
marched away from home at the call of country and of duty.

[Illustration: GENERAL A. J. VAUGHAN.

1885.]




                         ROSTER OF OFFICERS
                                 OF
                       The Thirteenth Regiment,
                     TENNESSEE INFANTRY, C. S. A.


FIELD AND STAFF.

 CAPT. JNO. V. WRIGHT. Elected Colonel at organization of the regiment;
 fought in the battle of Belmont; elected to the Confederate Congress,
 and resigned; Washington, D. C.

 CAPT. A. J. VAUGHAN. Elected Lieutenant-Colonel at organization
 of the regiment; elected Colonel on resignation of Col. Wright;
 re-elected Colonel at reorganization of the army at Corinth; promoted
 to Brigadier-General after the battle of Chickamauga; lost a leg at
 Vining station, below Marietta, Ga., on July 4, 1864; Memphis, Tenn.

 CAPT. W. E. WINFIELD. Elected Major at organization of the regiment;
 was in the battles of Belmont and Shiloh; resigned at reorganization
 of the army at Corinth; died since the war.

 LIEUT. W. E. MORGAN. Appointed Adjutant at organization of the
 regiment; elected Lieutenant-Colonel after the battle of Belmont;
 re-elected Lieutenant-Colonel at reorganization of the army at
 Corinth; was killed at Murfreesboro.

 LIEUT. R. M. HARWELL. Appointed Adjutant of the regiment after the
 battle of Belmont; re-elected Adjutant at reorganization of the army
 at Corinth; appointed Aid-de-Camp to Gen. Vaughan; painfully wounded
 at Shiloh; died in service.

 T. B. YANCEY. Company E; appointed Lieutenant in the regular C.
 S. Army; assigned to duty with Col. A. J. Vaughan, and, when he
 was promoted, was appointed on his staff; was wounded at Shiloh;
 postoffice, Somerville, Tenn.

 T. P. COLE. Company H; appointed Sergeant-Major at organization of
 the regiment; elected Major at reorganization of the army at Corinth;
 killed at the battle of Murfreesboro.

 W. ED. DYER. Appointed Regimental Commissary at the organization of
 the regiment; transferred to Gen. J. P. McGowan's Brigade; promoted to
 Major; died since the war.

 L. B. CABLER. Company A; appointed Regimental Quartermaster at
 organization of the regiment; resigned at reorganization of army at
 Corinth; died since the war.

 W. D. F. HAFFORD. Appointed Chaplain at organization of the regiment;
 resigned; died since the war.

 LEONARD H. MILLIKEN. Appointed Chaplain after W. D. F. Hafford
 resigned; appointed Brigade Chaplain; died since the war.

 B. L. DYER. Company E; elected Lieutenant at organization of the
 company; promoted to Captain; appointed Regimental Quartermaster;
 promoted to Brigade Quartermaster; promoted to Lieutenant-Colonel and
 Colonel; appointed Inspector on Gen. Vaughan's staff; wounded twice;
 died since the war.

 WM. J. BROWN. Company E; appointed Assistant Commissary; promoted to
 Regimental Commissary; transferred to cavalry; Collierville, Tenn.

 N. F. HARRISON. Company C; appointed Sergeant-Major at reorganization
 of the army at Corinth; promoted to Lieutenant after the battle of
 Chickamauga; was wounded at Chickamauga; Germantown, Tenn.

 W. A. MILLIKEN. Company G; appointed Sergeant-Major after the battle
 of Chickamauga; Washington, D. C.


MEDICAL STAFF.

 DR. J. A. FORBES. Regimental Surgeon at organization of the regiment;
 resigned; went to the Virginia army.

 DR. ROBT. W. MITCHELL. Assistant Surgeon of Fifteenth Tennessee
 Regiment; appointed Surgeon C. S. A., October 1, 1861, and assigned to
 the Thirteenth Tennessee Regiment by seniority; Brigade Surgeon and
 Division Surgeon of Clark's Division; Memphis, Tenn.

 B. F. DICKERSON. Company I; elected Assistant Surgeon of Thirteenth
 Regiment; appointed Surgeon C. S. A. and assigned to Thirteenth
 Regiment; died since war.

 N. M. BOSTWICK. Appointed Assistant Surgeon while a member of Company
 K, One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Senior Tennessee Regiment; assigned to
 duty in the Thirteenth Tennessee Regiment; seriously wounded in the
 foot near Lovejoy station and sent to hospital; Memphis, Tenn.


REGIMENTAL BAND AND INFIRMARY CORPS.

(Afterward Brigade Band.)

 J. T. Ferth (leader), Memphis, Tenn.

 T. E. Daily, Company H, wounded at the battle of Murfreesboro;
 Memphis, Tenn.

 W. P. Lipscomb, Company G, LaGrange, Tenn.

 W. F. Gowan, Company H, Bartlett, Tenn.

 J. G. Leach, Company G, Holly Springs, Miss.

 S. H. Lockhart, Company G, died since the war.

 W. M. Herndon, Company L, died since the war.

 R. P. White, Company G, Holly Springs, Miss.

 J. E. Yancey, Company G, died since the war.

 George Turner (drummer), One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Regiment, died
 since the war.

 Mike Lynch, One Hundred and Fifty-fourth Regiment, died since the war.

 Chas. E. McNamee, Company L, died in service.

 J. H. Mitchell, Company G.

 Hiram Richmond, Company C.

 J. R. Millen.


Roster of Company A.

 Arnold, T. H. Elected Second Lieutenant at organization of company;
 elected Captain after battle of Belmont; wounded at Belmont; resigned
 and joined cavalry; Memphis, Tenn.

 Amis, S. S.

 Burton, Wm. C. Elected Captain at organization of company; resigned
 after the battle of Belmont; died during the war.

 Bell, W. A. Elected Third Lieutenant at Columbus, Ky.; resigned at the
 reorganization at Corinth; wounded at Shiloh; joined Twelfth Tennessee
 Cavalry; died since the war.

 Brown, J. Fisherville, Tenn.

 Baldridge, Wes. In Arkansas.

 Blankinship, H.

 Boyd, M. Died in service.

 Beard, R. Discharged at Columbus, Ky., 1861.

 Bone, Charley.

 Bone, Church. Fourth Corporal.

 Brooks, James.

 Branch, P. Discharged at Columbus, Ky.

 Burtin, --. Whiteville, Tenn.

 Brown, Frank. Discharged at Columbus, Ky.

 Clay, G. W. Transferred to cavalry.

 Canada, J. M. Died since the war.

 Carter, Fletcher. Elected Lieutenant; promoted to Captain at
 Chickamauga; killed at Franklin.

 Claxton, E. A. Discharged at Corinth.

 Claxton, W. W. Killed at Peach Tree Creek.

 Crawford, W. E. Wounded at Shiloh and at Jonesboro; captured at
 Missionary Ridge; elected Lieutenant at Chickamauga; Somerville, Tenn.

 Cabler, L. B. Appointed Regimental Quartermaster at organization of
 regiment; resigned at the reorganization of the army at Corinth; died
 since the war.

 Crawford, P. D.

 Cairy, C. M. Died in service at Chattanooga, Oct. 10, 1862.

 Claxton, T. J. Died since the war.

 Casey, J. N.

 Crawley, Jim. Discharged at Corinth.

 Cody, J. F. Wounded at Belmont; died in service.

 Cain, Daniel. Killed in service.

 Cody, M. Died since the war.

 Carter, Burrus. Wounded at Belmont and discharged.

 Carter, J. Killed in service.

 Donaldson, R. A. Killed in Richmond, Ky.

 Duncan, W. C. Died in service, May 5, 1862.

 Durham, H. Wounded at Shiloh; lost an eye; in Arkansas.

 Daniel, T. Third Lieutenant; discharged 1863.

 Eaton, B. F. Killed at Shiloh.

 Eason, C. T. Discharged at Tupelo, 1862; died since the war.

 Emmerson, J. L. Corporal; discharged at Columbus, Ky.; died since the
 war.

 Edmondson, H. Fourth Sergeant.

 Earles, J. K. Died since the war.

 Fullerton, W. L. Killed at Richmond, Ky., Aug. 30, 1862.

 Finney, W. P.

 Frasier, G.

 Frasier, Milt. Wounded at Belmont.

 Frasier, Mark.

 Goodbread, J. W. Died in service, 1861.

 Godsey, W. H.

 Gilliam, W. A. Wounded, Richmond, Ky.; died since war.

 Goabey, J. M. Died since the war.

 Gray, W.

 Harris, Jim. Discharged, 1861.

 Hunt, H. B. Killed at Shiloh.

 Hexter, Jim. Killed at Belmont, or Shiloh.

 Harrison, R. Killed at Shiloh.

 Hickson, J. Discharged, 1862.

 Hughbanks, --. Bolivar, Tenn.

 Heflin, H. L. Wounded at Franklin in thigh and hand.

 Harrison, R. K. Oakland.

 Jones, J. Killed in service.

 Jordan, Hardy. Died in service, June, 1862.

 Kelley, J. C. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Kelley, P. M. Died in service, November, 1862.

 Laurence, S. G. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Langdon, James J. Wounded at Shiloh; elected Lieutenant at
 Chickamauga; detailed on recruiting service in Georgia; Moscow, Tenn.

 Lockhart, A. H.

 Moore, J. M. Killed at Shiloh.

 Matmiller, Fred.

 Middlemiss, A. First Sergeant; killed at Belmont.

 Martin, James.

 Moore, George. Wounded at Belmont and Atlanta, Ga.

 Manus, J. D.

 Moore, W. Died since the war.

 Moore, James. Killed at Shiloh.

 McCully, A. John. Killed at Belmont.

 McCully, Miles. Killed at Belmont.

 McCully, R. Died since the war.

 Mathews, A. N. Killed at Shiloh.

 Mathews, J. F. First Sergeant; elected Lieutenant at Corinth; wounded
 at Shiloh.

 Morris, T.

 Mathenting, Joe.

 Manley, T.

 Oliver, W. H.

 Nobles, J. A. Died in service, May 17, 1864.

 Poor, Thomas. Died in service, December, 1861.

 Poor, E. H. Taken prisoner on Dallas campaign; Williston.

 Pathon, George. Died in service at Tupelo, Miss.

 Park, R. H. Died in service at Tupelo, Miss.

 Pierce, J. Killed in Somerville, 1862.

 Price, James.

 Poston, Frank. Died in service, December, 1861.

 Rankin, W. L. Died in service, May 28, 1862.

 Rhea, Mathew. Elected First Lieutenant at organization of his company;
 killed at Belmont.

 Roberson, J. W. Killed in battle.

 Reardon, Wm. Captured at Belmont; he was never afterward with his
 company.

 Roberts, --. Discharged at Corinth.

 Roberts, J. M.

 Reeves, Calvin J. Died in service, March, 1862.

 Simon, John. Discharged at Corinth.

 Shaw, W. J. Died in service, June 15, 1862.

 Stephens, W. J. Killed at Chickamauga.

 Shaw, J. C. Transferred to Sixth Tennessee Regiment; killed at Atlanta.

 Stephens, W. D. In Arkansas.

 Shay, Dan. Discharged at Dalton, Ga.

 Simons, Thomas. Discharged at Corinth.

 Stafford, W. Died in service, November, 1861.

 Stafford, J. T.

 Stafford, J. B. Died since the war.

 Stafford, P. Oakland, Tenn.

 Thompson, R. M. Killed at Shiloh.

 Tucker, W. C. Died in service in Kentucky.

 Taylor, Wm. Died since the war.

 Thomas, G. Discharged, 1861.

 Thompson, R. Killed at Shiloh.

 Waggoner, J. L. Oakland, Tenn.

 Wiley, D. C. Smithfield, Texas.

 Williams, D. H. Wounded at Shiloh, again in 1864.

 Webb, James.

 Ward, W. P. In Texas.

 Ward, Ed. Died in service, May, 1862.

 Whitmore, C. H. Elected First Lieutenant; killed at Shiloh.

 Ward, P. Died in service.

 Wilson, W. P. Somerville, Tenn.

 Williams, W.

 Wilson, W. B. In insane asylum.

 Walls, John.

 Wilkerson, John.

 Wilkerson, W. D. Transferred to Sixth Tennessee Regiment at Randolph;
 Memphis, Tenn.

 Wilkerson, W. N. Memphis.

 Wilson, J. E. Transferred to Company G; Williston, Tenn.

Note--Companies A and D were consolidated at the reorganization of the
army at Corinth, and sometimes the names of killed and wounded are
reported on both rosters.


Roster of Company B.

 Adams, G. H. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Alexander, J. A. Died since the war.

 Alexander, W. J. Wounded at Shiloh and Murfreesboro; when the color
 bearer was killed at Shiloh, he snatched up the flag and carried it
 until wounded; postoffice, Hickory Withe, Tenn.

 Alexander, J. V. Wounded at Murfreesboro; postoffice, Oakland, Tenn.

 Anderson, J. W. Died in service.

 Askew, Benj. F. Wounded at Murfreesboro; postoffice, Hickory Withe,
 Tenn.

 Burnett, W. H. Corporal; killed at Belmont.

 Beal, T. S. Postoffice, Macon, Tenn.

 Barron, J. T. Died in service December, 1863.

 Barron, W. J. Promoted to Assistant Surgeon. Eleventh Tennessee
 Regiment; postoffice, Macon, Tenn.

 Bailey, J. G. Wounded at Murfreesboro; died since war.

 Blaydes, J. G. Postoffice, Oakland, Tenn.

 Babbitt, J. G. Killed at Shiloh.

 Brown, A. H. Wounded at Murfreesboro; Vanndale, Ark.

 Brammett, B. F.

 Burnett, J. E. Postoffice, Moscow, Tenn.

 Carter, J. J. Died since the war.

 Carter, W. R. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Castles, J. T. Severely wounded at Murfreesboro; at hospital one
 month; taken to Camp Morton; exchanged August, 1863.

 Cocke, H. C. In Texas.

 Cocke, W. L. Wounded at Murfreesboro; Prescott, Ark.

 Cogbill, W. H. Elected First Sergeant at reorganization of army;
 wounded at Peach Tree creek; Wynne, Ark.

 Coleman, B. F. Wounded at Perryville; Camden, Ark.

 Crawford, W. H. Wounded at Murfreesboro; died since the war.

 Cartwright, J. G. Died since the war.

 Cartwright, T. M. Postoffice, Oakland, Tenn.

 Dougan, S. B. First Lieutenant; killed at Shiloh.

 Daily, T. E. Wounded at Murfreesboro; member of the band and infirmary
 corps; Memphis, Tenn.

 Daily, G. W. Wounded at Murfreesboro; Petitsville, Ala.

 Deener, S. F. Died in service at Columbus, Miss., 1861.

 Dillard, A. R. Captured at Shiloh; never heard from.

 Dougan, J. W. Discharged; postoffice, Williston, Tenn.

 Dobbins, T. E. Died in service.

 Etherton, A. W. Wounded at Murfreesboro; St. Louis, Mo.

 Edenton, J. C. Wounded at Murfreesboro; Macon, Tenn.

 Elder, J. C. Died in service.

 Farley, J. M. Wounded at Resaca; died since the war.

 Folwell, J. H. Killed at Franklin.

 Folwell, J. W. Died since the war.

 Folwell, R. V. Killed at Peach Tree creek, Ga.

 Gaither, G. A. Wounded at Chickamauga; postoffice, Williston, Tenn.

 Gaither, T. F. Killed at Richmond, Ky., August 30, 1862.

 Gaither, W. M. Williston, Tenn.

 Gardner, J. M. Captured at Corinth; Cotton Plant, Ark.

 Granbery, Capt. J. L. Elected Captain at organization of company;
 served in regiment twelve months; resigned and joined cavalry;
 postoffice, Collierville, Tenn.

 Granberry, R. B. Killed at Kennesaw mountain.

 Garvin, J. A. Postoffice, Moscow, Tenn.

 Higgason, E. J. First Sergeant; wounded at Belmont; died since the war.

 Hare, T. E. Elected Second Lieutenant at reorganization of the army;
 severely wounded at Richmond, Ky.; postoffice, Nicholasville or
 Lexington, Ky.

 Hewlett, J. C. Died since the war.

 Hollowell, M. D. Discharged from service; postoffice, Collierville,
 Tenn.

 Irby, R. W. Wounded at Murfreesboro; Macon, Tenn.

 Kerr, Jno. B. Died since the war.

 Kyle, W. D. Captured at Belmont; exchanged; severely wounded at
 Atlanta, unfitting him for further service; postoffice, McCrary, Ark.

 Lightle, B. F. Fourth Sergeant; elected Captain at reorganization of
 the army; wounded at Murfreesboro; died since the war.

 Lazenby, T. W. Died in service.

 Lightle, Richard. Killed by Kansas jayhawkers.

 Little, Watt. Discharged from service.

 Mebane, J. W. Third Lieutenant; transferred and elected Third
 Lieutenant in Wright's Battery; killed at Pine Mountain, Ga.

 Mitchell, W. F. R. Elected Second Lieutenant at organization; died
 since the war.

 Mathews, J. S. Captured at Kennesaw mountain, Ga.; Hickory Withe, Tenn.

 Mewborn, J. L. Third Lieutenant; elected Third Lieutenant at
 reorganization; captured while on detail service and taken to prison;
 Memphis, Tenn.

 Mewborn, J. C. Wounded at Murfreesboro; captured at Kennesaw mountain;
 Macon, Tenn.

 Mewborn, J. W. Transferred from Company C; captured at Perryville and
 exchanged; wounded at Atlanta; postoffice, Macon, Tenn.

 Mebane, Capt. W. G. Elected Captain at reorganization of army; wounded
 at Murfreesboro; captured at Kennesaw mountain; died since the war.

 Mitchell, J. C. Died in service October, 1861.

 Moore, J. L. Killed at Jonesboro, Ga.

 Moore, Cadmus. Died since the war.

 Murrell, A. R. Captured in 1864; died since the war.

 McFerren, J. H. Second Sergeant; Collierville, Tenn.

 McKinstry, J. Logan. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 McLin, J. E. Discharged.

 McClaren, F. M. Captured at Kennesaw mountain, Ga.; postoffice,
 Vanndale, Ark.

 Neel, W. L. Discharged; died since the war.

 Neel, T. V. Captured at Kennesaw; White Haven, Tenn.

 Neel, S. M. First Corporal; wounded at Murfreesboro; Kansas City, Mo.

 Owen, T. H. Hickory Withe, Tenn.

 Owen, D. O. Discharged from service.

 Parker, J. H.

 Porter, W. B. Died in service.

 Reid, W. B. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Reid, T. J. Promoted to Surgeon and assigned to Thirty-eighth
 Tennessee Regiment; died since the war.

 Rhea, A. Promoted to Surgeon and assigned to post duty; postoffice,
 Whiteville, Tenn.

 Richards, T. L.

 Seward, A. N. Second Corporal; wounded at Murfreesboro; Hickory Withe,
 Tenn.

 Steadman, W. C. Killed at Chickamauga.

 Stone, W. T. Transferred from Company E to Company B; captured at
 Atlanta; died since the war.

 Stone, Jake. Wounded at Murfreesboro; Florence, Ala.

 Smith, J. P. Oakland, Tenn.

 Sanderlen, J. W. Discharged from service; died since war.

 Sanderlen, D. M. Captured, taken to prison, and died on his way home,
 after exchange.

 Summers, J. Q. In Arkansas.

 Summers, J. W. Coldwater, Miss.

 Scott, J. M. Germantown.

 Scott, Richard. Germantown.

 Stockinger, F. M. Color Bearer; killed at Belmont.

 Starks, T. J. Discharged from service.

 Tomlinson, J. Wounded at Murfreesboro; postoffice, Williston, Tenn.

 Tharp, J. C. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Torrence, J. T. Wounded at Richmond, Ky.; Moscow, Tenn.

 Wade, W. P. Wounded at Murfreesboro; died since the war.

 Ward, N. A. Killed at Atlanta, Ga.

 Waller, E. M. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Warr, J. M. Transferred to Wright's Battery. Rossville, Tenn.

 Willis, J. W. Died in service at Columbus, Ky.

 Webber, J. T. Discharged from service; died since the war.

 Walker, J. H. Killed at Shiloh.

 Williams, B. M. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Williams, C. E. Died since the war.

 Williams, J. H. Wounded at Murfreesboro; in Arkansas.

 Williams, W. M. Elected Lieutenant at reorganization; wounded at
 Murfreesboro; died since the war.

 Williams, W. J. Died in service at New Madrid, Aug. 4, '61.

 Williams, T. J. Killed at Franklin.

 Williams, W. W. Discharged from service.

 Williams, John A. Wounded at Richmond, Ky.; killed at Franklin.


Roster of Company C.

 Atkins, --.

 Allison, Jim. Lieutenant.

 Brooks, Henry. Lieutenant; killed at Missionary Ridge.

 Buster, John. Died since the war.

 Barsfield, J. W. Lebanon, Tenn.

 Bettis, Tillman. Killed at Chickamauga.

 Burton, Logan. Died in service, June 1, 1861.

 Brackett, L. J. Died in service, June, 1862.

 Carraway, Thomas. Lost an arm since the war; Memphis.

 Crewson, Gus. Wounded at Franklin; died from wound.

 Craig, Burt.

 Cash, P. Boggan. Killed at Murfreesboro; only 18 years old; he wounded
 a Federal officer at Belmont, bound up his wounds, captured his sword
 and gave it to Gen. Marcus J. Wright, who sent it to his mother.

 Douglass, H. F. Germantown.

 Douglass, Elmore. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company;
 elected Captain at reorganization, and killed at Atlanta.

 Dukes, Robert T. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Dukes, Wm. B. Killed at Shiloh.

 Dunn, Laurence. Lost; supposed to have died.

 Ellis, Wm. Captured; died in Alton prison.

 Ellis, A. B. Wounded at Chickamauga and Missionary Ridge; Capleville.

 Ellis, W. W. Wounded at Murfreesboro; paralyzed since the war;
 Capleville.

 Elam, E. E. Was taken sick in Kentucky and left, but as soon as he was
 well enough joined the Eleventh Texas Cavalry and was crippled by the
 fall of a horse at Chickamauga; remained with the cavalry to the close
 of the war; Oakville.

 Farrow, G. Ferd. Transferred to cavalry after Belmont.

 Ford, Robt. Drowned after battle of Belmont; fell from boat.

 Farrow, J. P. Killed at Belmont; fell at the first volley of the enemy.

 Graham, C. P. Killed at Shiloh.

 Gill, Wm. J. Tennessee.

 Harrison, W. D. Elected to Lieutenant at organization of company;
 promoted to Captain on death of Capt. Douglass; Capleville.

 Hutchinson, H. J. Killed at Shiloh.

 Hilderbrand, John. Transferred to Wheeler's Cavalry; died since the
 war.

 Holeman, Wayne. Killed at Murfreesboro, Dec. 31, 1862.

 Hues, Andy. Died in service.

 Herron, Louis. Transferred to cavalry; died since the war.

 Harrison, N. F. Appointed Sergeant-Major at reorganization of the army
 at Corinth, 1862; promoted to Lieutenant after battle of Chickamauga;
 wounded at Chickamauga; Germantown.

 Holeman, Tom, Jr. Wounded at Shiloh; Oakville, Tenn.

 Harris, J. W. Killed at Belmont.

 Jamison, J. P. Discharged for disability; died since war.

 Jackson, Sam. Hernando, Miss.

 Joplin, --.

 Kyle, W. G. Died in service, May 17, 1862.

 Kyle, Rogers. Texas.

 Lake, W. L. Killed at Shiloh.

 Lewis, Tobe.

 Mitchell, John. Transferred to Sappers and Miners.

 Morgan, W. E. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company;
 appointed Adjutant at organization of Thirteenth Regiment;
 elected Lieutenant-Colonel after battle of Belmont; re-elected
 Lieutenant-Colonel at reorganization of army at Corinth; killed at
 Murfreesboro; his name was inscribed on a piece of artillery as
 the most gallant officer of Cheatham's Division who fell on that
 battlefield.

 Morgan, John. Elected Captain at organization of company; resigned
 at the reorganization of the army at Corinth; joined a Mississippi
 regiment; elected Captain; wounded at Belmont, and killed at
 Murfreesboro.

 Madden, Jim. Clubbed his musket and struck a Federal soldier at
 Belmont, afterward lost an arm; died since the war.

 Madden, George. Died in service.

 McCarthy, Jim. Corporal.

 McNichols, John. Wounded at Belmont and Shiloh; discharged after 12
 months' service; died since the war.

 Norris, N. Died since the war.

 Nelson, W. Henry. Paralyzed since the war; Whitehaven.

 Prest, Wm. Germantown.

 Patterson, Joe A. Germantown.

 Pittman, Arthur R. Killed at Belmont.

 Paine, John. Died since the war.

 Pierson, --.

 Pratt, --.

 Rogers, J. W. Killed at Belmont; his last words: "Tell my mother I
 died in discharging my duty; that was all I could do."

 Rowlett, John W. Wounded at Murfreesboro; died since the war.

 Rainy, Thomas, Color Bearer. Killed at Shiloh.

 Rhodes, W. L. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Richmond, Hiram. Died since the war.

 Richmond, John. Died since the war.

 Rickett, --.

 Simms, Tim J. Wounded at Belmont; died from wounds.

 Saffran, George.

 Stratton, M. V. Wounded at Belmont and Missionary Ridge; captured at
 Franklin, but made his escape; Capleville.

 Stratton, C. Died in service from wounds at Stone Mountain.

 Stokes, W. L. Killed at Shiloh.

 Sough, Jim. Killed in service.

 Stratton, B. M. Wounded early in action at Shiloh; discharged; Memphis.

 Stratton, J. H. Discharged for disability; joined cavalry.

 Small, R. W. (Dick). Wounded at Belmont; twice captured and twice
 escaped; Hazen, Ark.

 Seats, Wyatt.

 Smith, John. Wounded at Murfreesboro.

 Savage, John.

 Shockly, --.

 Tuggle, Joe. Killed at Peach Tree Creek, Ga.

 Tuggle, Palmer B. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Tuggle, Thompson. Died in service at Columbus, Ky.

 Tuggle, George R. Capleville.

 Vandervest, --. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Williams, J. H. Killed in service.

 Williams, W. W. Wounded in service; died since the war.

 Weatherall, A. C. Died since the war.

 Walton, --.

 Winford, Sam. Died since the war.

 Woodson, Gus.

 Wright, John W. Wounded at Richmond, Ky., and at Murfreesboro and
 captured; Memphis, Tenn.


Roster of Company D.

 Archibald, J. G. Died in service, June, 1861.

 Bell, Frank. Yorkville, Tenn.

 Biggs, Jeremiah, Yorkville, Tenn.

 Brewster, R. S. Elected Captain on death of Capt. J. A. Wilkins;
 appointed Captain of Companies A and D at reorganization, and was in
 command at close of the war; Louisville, Ky.

 Brewer, John A. Died in service in 1861.

 Brewer, N. B. Died in service.

 Busick, J. Morton. Kenton, Tenn.

 Brown, Wm. Died since the war.

 Burrus, John.

 Cunningham, J. W. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; died
 in service, May, 1862.

 Carter, A. S.

 Canada, Henry. Died since the war.

 Canada, James. Wounded at Shiloh; Arkansas.

 Gary, C. M. Died in service, September, 1862.

 Carmack, Tip. Died in service.

 Cowan, W. F. Elected Lieutenant at organization of the company; died
 from exposure in the battle of Shiloh.

 Davis, Wm. Gleason, Tenn.

 Dickey, A. J. Died since the war.

 Dickey, James. Dyer county.

 Dozier, B. M. Killed at Belmont.

 Dozier, Joseph. Dyer county.

 Duncan, W. C. Died in hospital in Mississippi, June, 1862.

 Eaton, R. D. Killed at Shiloh.

 Fullerton, Henry T. Shot through thigh, severing sciatic artery;
 discharged at Shelbyville; Kenton, Tenn.

 Fullerton, W. L. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Garrison, Ed. Texas.

 Gibson, Allen. Rutherford, Tenn.

 Goodloe, C. A. Alamo, Tenn.

 Goodloe, Morris. Transferred to cavalry; elected Lieutenant of cavalry
 under Forrest.

 Greer, J. N. Died since the war.

 Guthrie, Ewing. Missouri.

 Hall, John R. Yorkville, Tenn.

 Hale, James K. Polk. Yorkville, Tenn.

 Hamilton, Robert, Died since the war.

 Hinson, Ben. Yorkville, Tenn.

 Holmes, Elihu. Elected Lieutenant; wounded at Belmont; died since the
 war.

 Holt, Joseph. Newbern, Tenn.

 Holt, James. Newbern, Tenn.

 Hunt, H. B. Killed at Shiloh.

 Jones, Charles. Died since the war.

 Lee, James. Rutherford, Tenn.

 Leigh, Wm. Died since the war.

 Lawrence, James J. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 McCorkle, J. E. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company;
 resigned from bad health; Newbern, Tenn.

 McCorkle, J. S. Newbern, Tenn.

 McCorkle, Locke. Killed or died in service.

 McCorkle, E. J. Died in service, August, 1862.

 Mills, Eugene. Died in service.

 Mathews, Elisha.

 Minton, W. H. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Minton, J. S. Died in service, June, 1861.

 Moore, T. Jeff. Winchester, Tenn.

 Montgomery, John M. Discharged from ill-health; died since the war.

 Montgomery, G. R. Died in service, 1861.

 Northern, John B. Died since the war.

 Northern, Rufus. Died in service.

 Oakey, Mack. Died since the war.

 Parks, Robert H. Died in service, 1862.

 Parks, W. H. Killed at Belmont.

 Patton, Geo. W. Wounded at Shiloh; died in camp at Tupelo, 1862.

 Penn, H. T. Christian county, Ky.

 Pierce, Wm. Died either in service or at close of the war.

 Polk, W. H. Killed at Belmont.

 Ray, Alexander. Died since the war.

 Rankin, W. D. Died in service, May, 1862.

 Reed, John L. Yorkville, Tenn.

 Roach, Harwood. Killed at Belmont.

 Reynolds, Wm.

 Robinson, J. H. Trenton, Tenn.

 Robinson, W. P. Wounded at Belmont; Eaton, Tenn.

 Robinson, M. R. Texas.

 Robinson, John. Died in service from wounds in battle.

 Scott, W. L. Died since the war.

 Shaw, Wm. Died in service, June, 1862.

 Shaw, John H. Killed at Belmont.

 Senter, David. Trenton, Tenn.

 Tucker, Wm. Died in service, October, 1862.

 Wade, Nash. Texas.

 Weddington, Rufus H. Wounded at Shiloh; Arkansas.

 Wherry, L. C. Died in service.

 Wilkins, J. A. Elected Captain at organization of company; killed at
 Shiloh.

 Zaricor, Albert G. Killed at Belmont.


Roster of Company E,

Composed of Tennesseans and Mississippians.

 Allen, Thos. B. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; served
 12 months; resigned; died since the war.

 Allen, G. W. McKenzie, Texas.

 Arnett, D. C. Killed at Shiloh; from Mississippi.

 Arnett, R. C. Canaan, Miss.; from Mississippi.

 Allen, Sam H. Wounded at Shiloh; Memphis, Tenn.

 Abernathy, W. A. When the war broke out he was at Charlotte Military
 Institute; joined the First North Carolina Regiment; fought the battle
 of Big Bethel; was complimented by his officers for gallantry; was
 transferred to Company E, Thirteenth Tennessee Regiment; killed at
 Murfreesboro.

 Brown, W. J. Appointed Commissary Sergeant of the regiment;
 transferred after the battle of Chickamauga to Forrest's Cavalry;
 wounded at Columbia, Tenn.; Collierville, Tenn.

 Brown, A. C. Enlisted at Murfreesboro; wounded by the explosion of a
 shell, from which he never recovered, and is now in the asylum.

 Bull, D. C. Killed at Shiloh.

 Bailey, B. T.

 Ballard, F. M. Missing at the battle of Richmond, Ky.; supposed to
 have been killed.

 Batte, Tom B. Died in service.

 Black, J. C. Killed at Shiloh; from Mississippi.

 Blackwell, J. W. Transferred to a Georgia regiment; from Mississippi.

 Bonner, R. H. Though not a member of Company E, he fought with it in
 the battle of Shiloh, and afterward became one of Henderson's famous
 scouts.

 Boyd, J. W. Died since the war.

 Bryan, J. D.

 Burton, Cornelius. Killed on Kennesaw line.

 Clay, L. B.

 Cowan, James. Died in service, May 1, 1862.

 Clay, W. C.

 Craddock, Geo. C. Elected First Lieutenant; transferred to cavalry;
 killed at Nashville, Tenn.

 Dyer, B. L. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; promoted
 to Captain; appointed Quartermaster of regiment; promoted to
 Lieutenant-Colonel and Colonel of regiment; wounded at Vining Station
 and in front of Atlanta; Inspector-General on General Vaughan's staff;
 died since the war.

 Dyer, M. B. Died since the war.

 Davis, W. F. Died since the war; from Mississippi.

 Davis, J. S. From Mississippi.

 DeAregan, Dr. Assistant Hospital Surgeon of the regiment; died since
 the war.

 Doyle, E. T. Canaan, Miss.; from Mississippi.

 Doyle, Z. Q. Bride, Tenn.; from Mississippi.

 Dennis, Charles. Died since the war; from Mississippi.

 Dukes, W. A. Died in service, March 25, 1862.

 Doyle, O. A. Died in service; from Mississippi.

 Fuiks, Morris. Missing at Missionary Ridge; supposed to have been
 killed.

 Fletcher, Asbury. Died since the war.

 Forbes, J. A. Started out in Company E; was appointed Surgeon;
 resigned and went to Virginia army.

 Green, A. J. Texas.

 Green, Wm. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Gates, W. A.

 Grissum, Felix; died since the war.

 Grissum, M. C. Killed at Shiloh.

 Grider, W. L.

 Gober, B. W. Moscow, Tenn.

 Gober, S.

 Harwell, Richard M. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company;
 appointed Adjutant of the regiment; re-elected Adjutant at
 reorganization of the army at Corinth; appointed Aid-de-Camp to Gen.
 Vaughan; painfully wounded at Shiloh; died in the service.

 Hicks, Sam. Discharged in Kentucky.

 Hicks, M. D. Died since the war.

 Holliday, G. W. Died in service, November 1, 1861.

 Hogan, D. H. Discharged in 1862.

 Hill, E. E. Arkansas; from Mississippi.

 Hill, L. H. Killed at Atlanta; from Mississippi.

 Heflin, H. L. Stanton, Tenn.

 Jackson, W. A. Died since the war; from Mississippi.

 Jackson, Tom. Killed at Perryville.

 King, B. Died in service.

 Landreth, W.

 Leverett, J. W. Died since the war.

 Lane, Thomas M. Severely wounded at Murfreesboro; died since the war.

 May, Powell. Elected Lieutenant at the reorganization of the army at
 Corinth; Clarendon, Ark.

 Moore, J. B.

 Mason, David H. Died at Murfreesboro from smallpox; was wounded in the
 ear.

 McConnell, Charles. Rossville, Tenn.

 Moody, John A. Elected Captain at the reorganization of the army at
 Corinth; wounded at Chickamauga and Franklin; Trinity, Texas.

 McNeese, John. Killed in Hernando, Miss., since the war.

 McKinley, Robert W. Died since the war.

 Newby, E. W. Mortally wounded at Belmont; died in Memphis from wound.

 Pierce, W. G. Died since the war.

 Pierce, J. R. Moscow, Tenn.

 Pickins, R. T. Transferred from Company E to Company G; Moscow, Tenn.

 Rosser, W. B. Discharged during war; Cotton Plant, Ark.

 Rosser, J. H. Cotton Plant, Ark.

 Robertson, S. J. Killed at Belmont.

 Robertson, Alfred. Died in service, October, 1861.

 Roland, W. T. Canaan, Miss.; from Mississippi.

 Reed, W. C. Fisherville, Tenn.

 Scarborough, L. A. Wounded and lost his foot; Memphis.

 Scarborough, J. G. Discharged; died since the war.

 Smith, J. W. Transferred to cavalry; promoted to Colonel of Cavalry;
 Grand Junction, Tenn.

 Stinson, W. W. Cornersville, Miss.

 Stinson, Anderson.

 Stone, W. T. Transferred to Company B, Thirteenth Tennessee Regiment;
 captured at Atlanta; died since war.

 Stuart, H. Died since the war.

 Smart, N. Z. Grand Junction, Tenn.; from Mississippi.

 Spencer, W. T. Died since the war: from Mississippi.

 Teague, B. F. Moscow, Tenn.

 Tiller, G. R. Killed at Belmont.

 Tiller, Tom H. Died since the war.

 Vaughan, A. J. Elected Captain at organization of regiment;
 elected Lieutenant-Colonel at Columbus, Ky.; re-elected Colonel at
 reorganization of army at Corinth; promoted to Brigadier-General; lost
 a leg; Memphis, Tenn.

 Watts, C. W. Died in service.

 Wells, E. S. Wounded at Belmont and Missionary Ridge; Canaan, Miss.;
 from Mississippi.

 Yancey, B. Transferred from Company C, Ninth Mississippi Regiment, to
 Company E, Thirteenth Tennessee Regiment; Clarendon, Ark.

 Whitehorn, H. H.

 Yancey, T. B. Appointed Lieutenant in the regular Confederate States
 Army; assigned to duty with Col. A. J. Vaughan, and when he was
 promoted was appointed on his staff; Somerville, Tenn.

 Zellner, J. W. Transferred at the reorganization of the army at
 Corinth from Company H to Company E; wounded at Shiloh, at Richmond,
 Ky., at Chickamauga and at Atlanta; Arlington, Tenn.


Roster of Company F.

 Atkins, J. P. Wounded at Shiloh; Corinth, Miss.

 Burns, M. N. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Barnett, H. H. Killed at Belmont.

 Bell, Robert N. Detailed to drive Gen. Cheatham's headquarters wagon.

 Cross, Richard. Captured at Belmont; died in service.

 Connors, John. Died in service.

 Cain, Dennis. Died since the war.

 Churchwell, George W. Elected Captain at reorganization at Corinth;
 killed at Murfreesboro.

 Clayton, Francis. Montezuma, Tenn.

 Denchy, M. Killed at Shiloh.

 English, W. E. Died in service, August 10, 1862.

 Gullett, J. P. Died in service, March 1, 1862.

 Guthrie, J. N. Killed at Shiloh.

 Gorman, Dan. Severely wounded at Shiloh; Jackson, Tenn.

 Hunt, Campbell.

 Houston, A. K. Though not a member of this company, fought with it at
 Belmont; died since the war.

 Hill, E. H. Killed at Belmont.

 Henry, Samuel W. Elected First Lieutenant at organization; died in
 service first year of the war.

 Houston, J. T. Corinth, Miss.

 Hunt, E. C.

 Isbell, S. M. Died in service, May, 1862.

 Jones, --.

 Jones, John A., Sr. Killed at Belmont.

 Jones, John A., Jr. Killed at Belmont.

 Johnson, J. R. Elected Lieutenant; died since the war.

 Middleton, C. H. Killed at Belmont.

 Morgan, John. Killed at Shiloh.

 McGhee, J. F. Died in service, October, 1862.

 McHughes, J. F. Died in service, October, 1862.

 Owens, Enoch. Died in service.

 Pinkston, Harrison. Elected Second Lieutenant; Colorado City, Texas.

 Ramey, W. A. Orderly Sergeant; wounded in battle; Ark.

 Sims, J. A. L. Died in service from measles, July, 1861.

 Saunders, Wm. Killed at Shiloh.

 Springer, J. D. Killed at Shiloh.

 Shelby, James. Wounded at Shiloh; Texas.

 Simms, Ezekiel. Madison county.

 Simms, Milton. Captured and died during the war.

 Thomas, B. L. Killed at Shiloh.

 Wisdom, Dew M. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; promoted
 to Captain after battle of Belmont; wounded twice at Belmont; resigned
 at reorganization of the army; went into cavalry; was made colonel of
 a cavalry regiment and served in Forrest's command till the close of
 the war; Guthrie, I. T.

 Wigley, James. Died in service, August, 1861.

 Winningham, H. L. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Wiley, --. Died in service at Fort Wright, Memphis.

 Williams, J. E. Died in service, June, 1862.

 Yancy, J. E. Died in service, November, 1862.

 Yarbro, Martin. Mortally wounded and died at Franklin, Tenn.

 Wright, John V. Elected Captain at organization of the company;
 elected Colonel at organization of the regiment; fought at the battle
 of Belmont; elected to Confederate Congress; resigned; Washington, D.
 C.


Roster of Company G.

 Adkins, --.

 Baugh, Wm. Died since the war.

 Baugh, Jno. Died since the war.

 Boyd, Wm. Died since the war.

 Burton, Cornelius.

 Bidwell, A. W.

 Brown, J. H. Killed at Shiloh.

 Brewster, H. J. Died since the war.

 Bennett, P. N. D. Killed at Belmont.

 Bryant, R. C. Died since the war.

 Burton, John W.

 Baugh, Link. Died since the war.

 Bickers, Wm. Died since the war.

 Branscomb, Geo. Discharged; died since the war.

 Cabler, Tom F. Died since the war.

 Carraway, E. W. Fayette county.

 Chapman, Walter C. Mississippi.

 Connor, Chas. Died November 12, 1862.

 Crenshaw, C. W.

 Crenshaw, Terrell.

 Dicks, Ed. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Clay, L. B. Georgia.

 Davis, Elijah. Died since the war.

 Davis, Tom.

 Donahue, Mike. Ordnance Sergeant.

 Dyer, W. E. Appointed Regimental Commissary at organization of the
 company; transferred to Gen. J. P. McCown's Brigade; promoted to
 Major; died since war.

 Dowdy, John. Fayette county.

 Edwards, Joe B. Wounded at Murfreesboro; died from the effects of the
 wound since the war.

 Edwards, Warren. Texas.

 Edwards. Tucker. Transferred to cavalry.

 Ferth, J. T. Leader of the band and on infirmary corps.

 Falls, Henry N. Commissary Sergeant; died since war.

 Falls, Charley.

 Gloster, Otey. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Gorman. E. W. Wounded at Jonesboro; captured and exchanged; wounded at
 Nashville; Germantown, Tenn.

 Gynne, Steve J. Killed after the war.

 Gynne, Henry C. Moscow, Tenn.

 Gynne, Gus. Died since the war.

 Gynne, H. L. Texas.

 Heath, Z. W. Entered service at age of 15; arm shattered at Richmond,
 Ky.; badly wounded at Atlanta, which disabled him for further service;
 paroled from convalescent camp; Terrell, Tex.

 Huddleston, W. H. Bolivar, Tenn.

 Herndon, W. M. Member of band and on infirmary corps.

 Henderson, Sam. Died since the war.

 Jobert, Lee. Color Bearer; killed at Missionary Ridge.

 Jones, John W. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Jones, Wiley F. Transferred to cavalry; LaGrange, Tenn.

 Jones, Arthur. Memphis, Tenn.

 Jones, J. A. Died in service, June 15, 1861.

 Jones, Paul.

 Kane, A. C. California.

 Lashley, Jim. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; resigned;
 died during the war.

 Lacey, W. C.

 Lanier, R. F. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; promoted
 to Captain; severely wounded, from which he never recovered; died
 since the war.

 Lanier, Ed. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; killed at
 the battle of Richmond, Ky.

 Lipscomb, Geo. LaGrange, Tenn.

 Lipscomb, Peter. Member of band and on infirmary corps; LaGrange, Tenn.

 Leach, Josh G. Member of band and on infirmary corps, Holly Springs.

 Landrum, L. Killed at Columbus, Ky., after the war.

 Limburger, W. C. Known as "Blind Tiger;" Greenville, Tex.

 Moorman, H. C. Elected Lieutenant; Somerville, Tenn.

 Moorman, Robert A. Killed at Franklin.

 Massey, Nat. Discharged; died.

 Mitchell, James. Big Greasy.

 Mitchell, J. H. Died in service at Cleveland, Tenn.

 Mustin, J. M. Died in service at Chattanooga, June 22, '63.

 Mayo, John. Killed at Belmont.

 Malone, Lon. Died since the war.

 Malone, Cass.

 McKnight, John. Forrest City, Ark.

 McNamee, John T. Lieutenant; detailed on special duty; killed in the
 discharge of his duty in Fayette county.

 McNamee, W. T. Wounded in service; died since war.

 McKinstry, M. M. Killed at Shiloh.

 McNeel, J. J. LaGrange, Tenn.

 Palmer, Chas. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; resigned;
 died during or since the war.

 Parham, W. R. Joined company after battle of Shiloh; slightly wounded
 at Murfreesboro and on the Dalton campaign; Holly Springs, Miss.

 Penn, John. Killed at Belmont.

 Pickins, R. T. Transferred from Company E to Company G; Moscow, Tenn.

 Price, Will.

 Parham, Walter.

 Parham, W. S. Died in service.

 Parham, Frank.

 Parham, Josh. O. Forrest City, Ark.

 Parham, Joshua. Died in service.

 Pledge, Clinton.

 Rainey, John H. Alabama.

 Rawlings, Joe. Killed at Franklin.

 Rieves, Mat.

 Rodgers, W. J. Elected Lieutenant; Moscow, Tenn.

 Robertson, Jim F. Died in service.

 Reeves, J. M.

 Reeves, Will H. Died since the war.

 Sturdevant, Jim.

 Sharp, Rufus. Transferred to pioneer corps.

 Sigman, T. F. Holly Springs, Miss.

 Simmons, Rufus.

 Stewart, M. Don. Died in service at Columbus, Ky.

 Sullivan, Jim. Died at Tupelo, Miss., 1862.

 Simmons, W. H. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Stafford, Noah. Wounded at Shiloh.

 Steger, Jno. J. Discharged on account of his eyes; afterward joined
 the cavalry; captured at Holly Springs and sent to Irving Block;
 released and returned to his company; paroled with army at Greensboro,
 N. C.

 Todd, J. R. Died since the war.

 Tucker, R. G. Wounded at Shiloh; LaGrange, Tenn.

 Thornton, W. S. Wounded in service; died since the war.

 Taylor, Will. Wounded at Kingston, Ga.; discharged on account of his
 wound; died.

 Winfield, W. E. Elected Captain at organization of company; elected
 Major at organization of regiment; was in the battles of Belmont and
 Shiloh; resigned; died since the war.

 Winston, T. J. Killed by fall of horse since the war.

 Winfield, J. O. Killed at Shiloh.

 Winston, Jim.

 Woodard, B. T. Transferred to Forrest's Cavalry.

 Whyte, R. P. Member of band and on infirmary corps; Holly Springs,
 Miss.

 Weems, John. Teamster.

 Winston, Ed. Middle Tennessee.

 Woods, E. O. Lieutenant; died since the war.

 Wilson, J. E. Transferred from Company A; Williston.

 Young, Dave. Middle Tennessee.

 Yancey, Frank. Severely wounded at Murfreesboro; Memphis.

 Yancey, Jas. E. Member of band and on infirmary corps; died since the
 war.


Roster of Company H.

 Allen, J. W. Wounded severely at Murfreesboro; Dexter, Tenn.

 Allen, Ed. Died since the war.

 Aiken, Sam Dudley. Wounded at Belmont; killed at Murfreesboro.

 Aiken, W. M. Captured at Peach Tree Creek and sent to Camp Chase.

 Anderson, J. W. Killed at Adairsville, Ga.

 Allen, Walter. Died since the war.

 Barnes, William. Discharged.

 Bond, W. A. Wounded at Atlanta.

 Berryhill, Frank. Died since the war.

 Bazimore, Thomas. Died in service.

 Brown, Wilber. Died in service.

 Bond, N. P. Died since the war.

 Brooks, R. H. Wounded at Shiloh; White Station, Tenn.

 Bond, R. B. Died in service, April 18, 1862.

 Barber, Buck. Arkansas.

 Bass, E. Died in service.

 Chambers, J. F. Mississippi.

 Chambers, T. J. Wounded at Peach Tree Creek; Tipton Co.

 Chambers, E. O. Killed at Shiloh.

 Claiborn, Wm. B. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Cole, S. O. Killed at Shiloh.

 Cole, R. A. Captured at Missionary Ridge; died in prison.

 Cole, Jackson.

 Coulter, W. S. Captured at Peach Tree Creek; Arkansas.

 Coulter, Ben. Died in service, in hospital.

 Cole, P. H. Appointed Sergeant-Major at organization of regiment;
 elected Major at reorganization of army at Corinth; killed at
 Murfreesboro.

 Christopher, L. Gainsboro, N. C.

 Callis, Clem. Captured at Jonesboro and exchanged; Germantown.

 Crouch, R. H. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Craig, W. E. Died in service.

 Clayton, Henry M. Died since the war.

 Dunlap, D. R. Germantown.

 Dunlap, Wm. J. Killed at Belmont.

 Dailey, Ed. Elected First Lieutenant at organization of company;
 resigned; joined Forrest's Cavalry; killed at Sulphur Trestle.

 Donelson, R. S. Wounded severely at Chickamauga; unfit for service the
 balance of the war; Arlington, Tenn.

 Echlin, J. B. Captured at Murfreesboro; died in prison.

 Ellis, P. S. Wounded at Shiloh; Lenow, Tenn.

 Exum, W. H. Lieutenant; killed at Atlanta, Ga.

 Easthorne, E. P. Died since the war.

 Echles, George. Buntyn Station.

 Farabee, B. F. First Sergeant; wounded and captured at Nashville;
 Memphis.

 Finnegan, J. P.

 Forgey, T. J. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Freeman, W. F. Transferred.

 Ferguson, Thomas. Died since the war.

 Garrett, John.

 Goodloe, R. C. Died in service, September 30, 1861.

 Gowan, Haywood. Harrison Station, Miss.

 Gowan, W. F. Member of band and on infirmary corps; Bartlett, Tenn.

 Goodlett, J. E. Elected Lieutenant; died in service.

 Gray, Willis. Died since the war.

 Griffin, Thomas. Killed while in service, by lightning.

 Hall, Robt. G. Shot through both eyes at Franklin, Tenn.; entirely
 blind; Dexter, Tenn.

 Hall, George. Killed at Belmont.

 Hodge, John. Elected Lieutenant in a company of the Fifty-first
 Tennessee Regiment; transferred.

 Hancock, John. Captured at Missionary Ridge; Red Banks, Miss.

 Herring, Lon S. Elected Lieutenant; wounded at Shiloh; died since the
 war.

 Jordan, G. S. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; resigned
 for bad health in 1861; joined the Twelfth Tennessee Cavalry in
 Forrest's command; was detailed in the Quartermaster's Department with
 Neely's Brigade; Memphis, Tenn.

 Lambe, James. Mississippi.

 Land, John T. Near Brunswick, Tenn.

 Loring, A. R. Died in service, November 14, 1864.

 Lockridge, J. W. Wounded at Shiloh.

 Lock, J. W. Wounded at Belmont; discharged on account of his age at
 Tupelo; joined Forrest's Cavalry; died since the war.

 Lurray, A. W. Raleigh, Tenn.

 Lenow, John H. Discharged; Memphis, Tenn.

 Moore, A. J. Captured at Missionary Ridge; died since the war.

 Munson, S. A. Elected Lieutenant; promoted to Captain; wounded at
 Shiloh; captured on Missionary Ridge and sent to prison at Johnson's
 Island; Memphis, Tenn.

 Mullins, T. B. Mullins Station.

 Moore, J. R. Died in service, June 8, 1862.

 Marshall, W. A. Died October 8, 1861.

 Mason, R. M. Elected Quartermaster at organization of the regiment;
 promoted to Depot Quartermaster by General Pillow at Columbus, and
 promoted to Corps Quartermaster by Gen. Polk; died since the war.

 Miller, Lucius W.

 Massey, J. W. Died in service, April 28, 1863.

 McDonald, J. W. Transferred to marine service.

 McBrooks, John. Detailed in the Quartermaster's Department, where he
 served during the war; died since war.

 Nolly, W. B. Elected Lieutenant at organization of regiment; resigned
 in 1863 for bad health; Little Rock.

 Nathan, Sam. Died in service.

 Osborn, George. Arkansas.

 Owens, W. G. Died in service.

 Patrick, Henry. Discharged at Chickamauga, for disability and bad
 health. Lenow, Tenn.

 Powell, C. W. Killed at Franklin.

 Perkins, N. C. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; resigned
 at Columbus in 1861; Memphis, Tenn.

 Potts, Thomas J. Died in service.

 Pittman, R. W. Elected Captain at organization of his company;
 wounded slightly at Belmont and severely at Shiloh; promoted to
 Lieutenant-Colonel on the death of Lieut.-Col. Morgan, and to Colonel
 of the regiment on the promotion of Col. Vaughan to Brigadier General;
 Denton, Tex.

 Russell, J. W. Mortally wounded at Shiloh; died in service.

 Roberts, William. Missing at Perryville, and was either killed or
 captured.

 Rogers, Chip. Died since the war.

 Rogers, Harvey. Died since the war.

 Robinson, Henry. Color Corporal; missed at Richmond, Ky.; either
 killed or captured; most probably killed.

 Royster, D. R. Killed at Shiloh.

 Starr, Howard. Killed December 20, 1862.

 Stephenson, J. J. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Sensing, J. P. Bell, Tenn.

 Sensing, Robert. Gadsden, Tenn.

 Sweeney, Casey. Wounded at Franklin; died since the war.

 Sturges, J. L. Morning Sun, Tenn.

 Snell, J. T. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Snowden, M. C. Died since the war.

 Timmons, Henry. Buntyn Station, Tenn.

 Thompson, J. A. Killed at Atlanta.

 Turner, George W. Elected Lieutenant; killed in front of Atlanta on
 outpost duty.

 Turner, J. W. Died since the war.

 Turner, W. W. Died since the war.

 Thompson, C. Virgil. Florida.

 Tally, A. J. Wounded at Shiloh and died from wounds.

 Terry, J. W.

 Thomas, William. Died since the war.

 Waddell, George. Died since the war.

 Waddle, S. B. Arkansas.

 Wooten, T. J. Wounded at Atlanta; permanently disabled; Eatonton, Ga.

 Williams, J. Kimball. Died in service.

 Wiley, Thomas. Elected Lieutenant.

 Whitehead, J. W. Died since the war.

 Wynne, George W. Covington, Tenn.

 Woodson, Henry M. Transferred from Company E, Thirty-fourth
 Mississippi Regiment, to Company H, Thirteenth Tennessee Regiment;
 Memphis, Tenn.

 White, W. F. Died since the war.

 White, Dick. Died since the war.

 Whitley, J. P. Arkansas.

 Yates, Ed A. Wounded at Adairsville, Ga.; died since war.

 Yates, P. C. Wounded at Murfreesboro and captured; Dexter, Tenn.

 Yates, W. H. Wounded at Jonesboro; Dexter, Tenn.

 Young, J. Carr. Killed at Shiloh.

 Zellner, J. W. Transferred at reorganization to Company E; wounded at
 Shiloh, Richmond, Ky., Chickamauga, on New Hope Line and at Atlanta;
 Arlington, Tenn.


Roster of Company I.

 Autry, John. Died in service, October 15, 1861.

 Alsup, Wm. Died in service, October 10, 1861.

 Anderson, Andrew.

 Barham, R. J., Jr. Wounded at Atlanta; died since the war.

 Bray, B. M. Elected Second Lieutenant; wounded at Shiloh; Santiago,
 Cal.

 Bray, Randolph. Mortally wounded at Richmond, Ky., and died.

 Berger, G. W. Killed at Shiloh.

 Bell, John. Died in service, August 1, 1861.

 Beaver, W. H. Died in service, October 4, 1861.

 Brewer, Jno. Died in service, Oct. 7, 1861, at Columbus, Ky.

 Barham, Jno. Died in service, Oct. 10, 1861, at Randolph.

 Baine, Bob. Mifflin, Tenn.

 Baine, James. Texas.

 Brown, Harper. Mifflin, Tenn.

 Brown, W. J. Altus, Ark.

 Barham, R. J., Sr. Wounded at Shiloh and Murfreesboro.

 Barham, Richard. Drowned at Frankfort, Ky., 1862.

 Barham, Isaiah. Wounded at Murfreesboro; transferred to Forrest's
 Cavalry; killed at Parker's Cross Roads.

 Bailey, Thomas. Texas.

 Crook, W. J. Started out private; elected Captain; promoted to Major
 Thirteenth Tennessee Regiment; died since the war.

 Cawthon, James. Malden, Mo.

 Crook, E. H. Henderson Station, Tenn.

 Crook, W. B. Texas.

 Croom, Ben. Pinson, Tenn.

 Crow, G. W. Died in service just before battle of Murfreesboro,
 December 13, 1862.

 Cawthon, Kit. Killed at Belmont.

 Carver, Henry. Died in service, Sept. 11, 1861, at Memphis.

 Collins, Nathan. Texas.

 Crooms, James. Died in service in Mississippi in 1862.

 Collins, J. F. Texas.

 Crooms, Jesse. Pinson, Tenn.

 Dickerson, B. F. Started out private; appointed Assistant Surgeon of
 Thirteenth Regiment; promoted to Surgeon of Thirteenth Regiment; died
 since the war.

 Dickerson, W. B. Died in service, August 22, 1861.

 Diffee, Clark. Wounded on infirmary corps at Shiloh; White Fern, Tenn.

 Daniel, Thomas.

 Dickie, Thomas. Died in service, 1862.

 Daniels, "Parson." Mississippi.

 Edwards, Wm. Third Lieutenant; McKinney, Texas.

 Edwards, J. R. Mifflin, Tenn.

 Fawcett, M. Texas.

 Farrow, P. B. Died since the war.

 Farnsworth, Wm. Wounded at New Hope Church.

 Fringer, W. H. Died since the war.

 Farnsworth, Sam. Died since the war.

 Freeman, W. H. Lexington, Tenn.

 Green, G. B. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Griswell, John.

 Galbreath, J. N. Discharged during the war; Center Point, Tenn.

 Glenn, Peter. Wounded at Murfreesboro; killed at Franklin.

 Henry, Felix. Died in service.

 Hendrix, J. C. Wounded at Shiloh; died in service at Oxford, Miss.

 Hamlett, L. F. Killed at Belmont.

 Hart, Thomas. Wounded at Belmont, Shiloh, Richmond, Ky., and at
 Atlanta; died since the war.

 Hart, J. M. Transferred to Henderson's scouts; died since the war.

 Haltom, B. F. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Hart, James. Wounded July 22, 1864; died since the war.

 Holis, Crow. Discharged before the battle of Richmond.

 House, Freeman.

 Hardeman, Joseph. Discharged during the war.

 Hardeman, Newton. Discharged during the war.

 Haltom, Elisha.

 Houston, Wm. H. Pinson, Tenn.

 Hurt, Jeremiah. Died in service, October 2, 1862.

 Hamlett, Daniel. Died in service.

 Hamlett, James. Killed at Belmont.

 Hendrix, Jerry. Wounded at Murfreesboro, captured and died in prison.

 Horton, L. D. Shady Hill, Tenn.

 Horton, Jess. Shady Hill, Tenn.

 Haygard, --. Henderson, Tenn.

 Hubbard, John.

 Ivey, James. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Joiner, Arch. Wounded at Franklin; Mifflin, Tenn.

 Joiner, Joe. Mifflin, Tenn.

 Laird, T. B.

 Mitchell, John. Killed at Shiloh.

 Mitchell, Thomas. Died in service.

 Milton, Wm. Discharged during the war.

 Mitchell, James. Mifflin, Tenn.

 McHaney, C. F. Lexington, Tenn.

 McGlothen, Joe. Dyer county.

 McGlothen, John. Died in service.

 McLaughlin, J. H. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 McNeely, F. W. Died in service, April 2, 1862.

 McCallum, Daniel. Killed at Atlanta.

 Nesbit, John G. Killed at Belmont.

 Neil, G. H. Died in service, June 1, 1862.

 Neil, Sam. Morris Chapel, Tenn.

 Ozier, G. B. Killed at Atlanta.

 Ozier, J. D. Memphis, Tenn.

 Ozier, John W. The first man wounded on skirmish line at Belmont;
 wounded at Shiloh, and at Franklin three times; Henderson, Tenn.

 Parish, John. Wounded at Belmont and Franklin; Henderson, Tenn.

 Priddy, Chas. W. Wounded at Belmont and lost right arm at Atlanta;
 died in service near close of the war.

 Piles, A. B. Wounded at Belmont. Arkansas.

 Purdy, John R. Florida.

 Ross, G. L. Elected Captain at organization of company; served 12
 months and resigned; died since the war.

 Reed, John. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Roberson, Lewis. Killed at Shiloh.

 Rice, J. R. Elected Lieutenant; died since the war.

 Rice, Frank. Died since the war.

 Roberson, Winslow. Henderson, Tenn.

 Ross, S. R. Wounded at Shiloh; Henderson, Tenn.

 Rhodes, Jerry. Texas.

 Smith, A. J. Died in service, at hospital in Mississippi.

 Stone, R. R. Wounded at Shiloh; killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Starnes, John.

 Stewart, Wm. Lost a leg in service.

 Stone, Ike A. Badly wounded in the head at Murfreesboro, yet he bound
 up his wounds and fought gallantly in every charge during the day; was
 complimented at Richmond, Ky., by Gens. E. Kirby Smith and Cleburne
 for gallant conduct on the field; was so badly wounded at Jonesboro
 that he has to this day to be moved about in a chair; Jack's Creek,
 Tenn.

 Stone, W. C. Killed at Atlanta in a desperate charge; he crossed the
 enemy's works and fell, pierced by five balls.

 Stegall, Jasper. St. Louis, Mo.

 Stegall, M. J. Elected Third Lieutenant at Columbus, but had to resign
 for bad health; afterward joined Forrest's Cavalry; was captured and
 died in Alton prison.

 Snow, R. D. Wounded at Murfreesboro, Dec. 30, 1862; also at Atlanta,
 August, 1864; Morris Chapel, Tenn.

 Seemore, John. Died since the war.

 Tillman, D. R. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Thompson, J. P. Henderson Station.

 Thomas, Champ. Died since the war.

 Vandike, J. N. Killed at Shiloh.

 Vandike, A. M. Wounded at Shiloh in shoulder and then in right breast;
 Center Point, Tenn.

 Wilson, N. B. Died in service, July 5, 1861.

 Waggoner, H. N. Killed at Belmont.

 Ward, Minous. Illinois.

 Wheatly, Addy. Lexington, Tenn.

 Wilson, Van. Mississippi.


Roster of Company K.

 Aden, G. W. Wounded at Belmont.

 Albritton, James H.

 Anderson, L. W.

 Baker, Henry W.

 Brown, A. D. Sergeant; elected Lieutenant at reorganization; killed at
 the battle of Franklin.

 Buchanan, Thomas C. First Sergeant; promoted to Lieutenant in 1861;
 wounded at Shiloh.

 Bryant, John M.

 Blankinship, C.

 Brent, W. H. Died in service, February, 1862.

 Burnham, Joshua.

 Clany, Edwin S.

 Chitwood, C. A. Killed at Shiloh.

 Chrisman, J. H. Died in service, May, 1862.

 Clark, James W.

 Cole, James M.

 Cross, Marcellus A.

 Duke, Geo. T. Corporal; wounded at Shiloh.

 Duke, James F. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 DeBerry, N. E. Second Lieutenant; resigned on account of ill health;
 wounded at Belmont.

 Essary, William J.

 Espy, W. H.

 Espy, Robt. R. Discharged in 1861.

 Endaly, James T.

 Fields, W. B. Sergeant; wounded at Belmont; discharged.

 Featherston, W. V. Wounded at Shiloh.

 Ferrell, Thomas H. Appointed Sergeant in 1862.

 Forshell, Thomas V.

 Ferrell, Sam A.

 Fortner, Isaac.

 Gibson, John W.

 Gooch, Alex. Campbell. Died in Columbus Sept., 1861.

 Hall, Julius M. Discharged, having furnished substitute.

 Hall, Young W. Killed at Belmont.

 Hall, William. Substituted for J. M. Hall.

 Harden, W. C. Died in service, June, 1861.

 Hebbits, Joseph R. Elected Captain at reorganization in 1862;
 transferred to Forrest's Cavalry, and killed at Cross Roads.

 Holland, Joseph W. Discharged in 1862.

 Howard, James L. Died in service in 1862.

 Huffman, John A. Detailed as blacksmith in Government shop at
 Columbus, Ky.

 Halbrook, W. H.

 Kirk, M. R. Died in service, December, 1861.

 Jones, Richard M.

 Lemmett, Alfred.

 Lalspeich, David. Detailed.

 Lyons, W. J.

 Latta, Sam'l R. Elected Captain at organization of company; resigned
 at reorganization of army at Corinth; wounded at Belmont.

 McDavid, Sam'l. Second Sergeant.

 Mays, Thomas S.

 Madden, Jas. R. First Sergeant; died in service in 1862.

 Pierce, Joseph A. Elected First Lieutenant at organization of the
 company.

 Purcell, Joseph H. Elected Second Lieutenant December, 1861; wounded
 at Belmont.

 Parish, J. A. Killed at Belmont.

 Presgron, George W.

 Pitts, Theophilus.

 Prater, Frank. Died in service, January, 1861.

 Richardson, Jno. Corporal; wounded at Belmont; elected Lieutenant at
 reorganization; killed at Franklin.

 Robertson, Jesse R.

 Robertson, George W.

 Rush, William M.

 Recroft, R. W.

 Redding, Henry P. Died in service, November 20, 1861.

 Saunders, James C.

 Saunders, E. B. Wounded at Belmont.

 Saunders, W. H.

 Seats, William. Transferred to M. R. Hill's Regiment; elected Captain.

 Sampson, Frank P. Elected Lieutenant; severely wounded in the Dalton
 campaign; died since the war.

 Sengleterry, D. N.

 Skipwith, Carter E. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Smith, N. I.

 Smith, James Lowry. Killed at Belmont.

 Shouthel, French M.

 Scott, Thomas. Died in service in 1861.

 Skipper, James.

 Tansell, John B. Corporal.

 Tedford, James W. Wounded at Belmont.

 Warren, N. W. Corporal.

 Walker, S. B. Wounded at Belmont.

 Weakley, W. B.

 Williamson, J. K.

 Wriley, Green.

 Wilkerson, Felix.

 Woods, S. D. Brevet Second Lieutenant; resigned on account of ill
 health.

 Walker, James Archer. Died in service.

 Walker, Washington L. Died in service, October, 1861.


Roster of Company L.

 Acord, --.

 Askew, John. Died since the war.

 Askew, N. B. Died in service, November 11, 1862.

 Anderson, M. L. Elected Lieutenant at Shelbyville, Tenn., in 1863;
 LaGrange, Tenn.

 Arnitt, Dick. Died since the war.

 Adkinson, Thomas. Killed at Atlanta.

 Blakeslee, C. T. Wounded severely at Murfreesboro, which disabled him
 for field service, and was detailed in the commissary department;
 Hickory Flat.

 Bass, R. J. Died during the war.

 Bailey, R. J. Killed at the battle of Murfreesboro.

 Booth, Joe. Living.

 Batte, T. Died in service.

 Booth, F. Near Somerville, Tenn.

 Bennett, --. Killed at Murfreesboro.

 Bennett, --. Living.

 Collins, Samuel. Killed in service.

 Collins, John.

 Doyle, O. N. Died in service, August 15, 1862.

 Ewell, Dr. A. C. Died in 1878.

 Farmer, John. Died in service, May, 1862.

 Finch, B. H. Died since the war.

 Ferth, W. T. Died since the war.

 Farris, Walsh. Living in Fayette county.

 Gaugh, E. Died in service, December, 1862.

 Gates, John H. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Gordon, J. K. Died in service, January 1, 1863.

 Gray, H. A. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Gray, W. C. Captured and died in prison.

 Gates, W. H. Elected Lieutenant at organization of company; killed at
 Murfreesboro.

 Herndon, W. M. Member of the band and on infirmary corps; died since
 the war.

 Hodges, C. T. Little Rock, Ark.

 Jones, C. B. Elected Captain at organization of the company; severely
 wounded at Murfreesboro; resigned; died since the war.

 Jenkins, J. S. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Jenkins, S. T. Died in service, August 1, 1862.

 King, B. Died in service, May, 1862.

 Lax, R. M. Hickory Valley.

 Lloyd, T. P. Discharged in Kentucky for ill health.

 Lane, Tom. Severely wounded; arm shattered; died of yellow fever in
 1878.

 McNamee, C. E. Wounded and died at Atlanta, Ga.

 Milliken, W. A. Appointed Sergeant-Major after battle of Chickamauga;
 Washington City.

 Milliken, L. H. Appointed Chaplain after resignation of W. D. F.
 Hafford; appointed Brigade Chaplain; died since the war.

 Moody, R. E. Elected Captain to succeed C. B. Jones; died since the
 war.

 Mason, David. Wounded in battle; died in service from smallpox at
 Murfreesboro.

 Mason, Tom L. Seriously wounded in the foot at Atlanta; living in
 Mississippi.

 Morton, Wm. M. Died since the war.

 McCaskell, J. A. Died in service, August, 1862.

 McCaskell, --. Died since the war.

 McNeill, James A. Died since the war.

 Malone, Ben. Living.

 Oliver, John.

 Pledge, Wm. A. Died in 1896.

 Prewett, Mansfield. Grand Junction, Tenn.

 Prewett, Jerry. Killed at Resaca, Ga.

 Parham, Lee. Died since the war.

 Parham, App. Wounded; died from wound.

 Radford, John. Died since the war.

 Sutherland, W. A. Killed after the war.

 Shelton, Geo. P. Died in 1871.

 Scott, Reuben. Elected Lieutenant at organization of the company.

 Scott, Henry F. Died since the war.

 Shenault, Isaac. Died in service.

 Shenault, Joe. Tipton county.

 Shenault, Walter. Died in service.

 Sharp, John. Died in service, April 1, 1863.

 Sims, B. G. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Smart, John.

 Smith, J. M. Killed at Missionary Ridge.

 Ursery, John.

 Ursery, --.

 Waddell, Gray. Killed at Atlanta.

 Waddell, J. D. Elected Lieutenant; living.

 Wooten, Henry. Died in service at Knoxville, 1862.

 Wooten, Joe. Died at the close of the war.

 Winfield, M. R. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Wilkerson, W. W. Died in service, May, 1862.

 Wilkerson. B. W. Killed at Richmond, Ky.

 Winston, Ed. Middle Tennessee.

 Webster, B. Died in service, 1862.

 Winfield, W. W. (Tish.) Discharged for ill health on surgeon's
 certificate; died since the war.


Faithful Colored Servants.

The survivors of the Thirteenth Regiment, like the writer, remember
most gratefully the faithful body servants who followed us during the
dark and bloody period. I have endeavored to collect the names of these
colored men--slaves then, but freemen at the end--and add them here to
this roster, believing as I do that their personal loyalty and faithful
service entitle them to "honorable mention."

  Roach Howard, Company E.
  Berry Moore, Company E.
  Joe Farrow, Company C.
  Baltimore Tuggle, Company C.
  Ike Mullins, Company H.
  Dick Tuggle, Company C.
  Dave Thompson, Company H.
  Booker Hart, Company I.
  Durell Bailey, Company B.
  Granville Cash, Company B.
  Ike Jamison, Company C.
  Alf Ellis, Company C.
  Kelsey Mebane, Company B.
  Romeo Parham, Company G.
  Sam Falls, Company G.
  Mull Harrison, Company C.
  Ike Payne, Company C.
  Jack Mathes, Company B.
  Orange Donelson, Company H.
  Jack Farabee, Company H.
  Arthur Ecklin, Company H.
  Young Thurman, Fourth Tenn. Regt.
  Henry Morgan, Company C.
  Jack Dyer, Company E.
  Daniel Harwell, Company E.
  Josh Burnett, Company B.
  Miles Mewborn, Company B.
  Rufus Purdy, Company I.
  Daniel Jones, Company L.
  Ben Parham, Company L.
  Royal Winston, Company G.
  Frank Chrisman, Company G.
  Mat Elam, Company C.

In at least two instances proof was given by the slave of heroic
devotion to his master. Lieutenant Thurman was shot at Atlanta, and
his body servant, Young, taking charge of him, through all sorts of
hardships and deprivations, faithfully nursed him until he died. Young
then dug a grave with his own hands, buried his young master, and,
making his way across two States, came back to Shelby county, where the
stricken father and mother heard the pitiful story from his lips of how
their boy had passed away. They told Young that they wanted their boy
buried at their old home; so the negro, with a wagon and team, made
his way back to the unmarked grave he had dug and brought the body
all the way through a thousand difficulties and dangers to the old
master and mistress. I do not know that this negro is now living, but I
mention his deed that those of this generation may know something of a
faithfulness strong enough and great enough to command the admiration
of all the world.

Another: At Belmont one of the negroes, whose name I deeply regret
having lost, while the battle was yet raging, seeing his young master
fall, went into the storm of shot and shell and brought the body safely
back into our lines. In Edwards' beautiful story of "The Valley of
the Shadder" a similar episode is told--so eloquently, so tenderly
told--that it is difficult to read it without tears. The Thirteenth
Regiment saw the actual occurrence at Belmont, so can bear witness for
the negro to those who might think Mr. Edwards was speaking from his
fancy rather than from actual facts.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now my task is done. If this humble compilation will save from
obscurity some of my old comrades--if it will add anything to the
record of the fame which others have won--I have received all the
reward I ask.




APPENDIX.

Some Incidents of the War.


Some incidents and happenings took place during the war which, I think,
would interest or amuse, and which do not strictly form a part of this
brief compilation. I add some of them here in the hope that they may
not be found dull reading to those who have followed thus far my little
contribution.


A FLAG PRESENTATION.

This incident occurred just as the Dixie Rifles were on the eve of
leaving home to go into the army, and was swallowed up in the vortex
of the terrible war we then thought was to be of such short duration.
I think to mention it now, for its blending of the beautiful and
ludicrous will bring it back to the minds of the survivors and their
descendants of Company E of the old Thirteenth Regiment.

On a glorious June morning, with just that buoyancy in the air that
makes mere existence a pleasure, the company assembled in the little
village of Moscow, Fayette county, to receive a most beautiful and
elegant Confederate flag that the ladies of the village had made for
the company. The then Miss Fannie Steger (now Mrs. Dr. R. L. Knox of
Memphis) had been selected to make the presentation of the colors.
I do not know if she will thank me now for attempting to bring back
the speech that she, a winsome and lovely young lady, made to us on
that morning. Of course I cannot recall all that she said, but I can
remember enough to know that it sounded like the blast of a bugle,
like the playing of exquisite music, and inspired every member of the
company with intenser patriotism and with profound admiration for
the fair speaker. Feeling myself (then as now) utterly incapable
of making a speech, I called on a young member of the company to
receive the flag from the fair hands of those who had woven it. He
stepped on the platform with every appearance of self-confidence, but
to his surprise and to that of all the rest of us, he found himself
overwhelmed with embarrassment. Blushing, stuttering and stammering,
he began with, "Ladies and gentlemen, we accept," and then broke down.
After swallowing a glass or two of water, he began again, "Ladies and
gentlemen, we accept," and, still stammering and stuttering, once more
took water. This occurred a third time, when one of the boys called
out from the rear, "D--n it, say to her, We accept the flag, and will
follow it to h--l or to victory." Amid yells of applause the young man
reached for the flag and sat down. This flag was kept throughout the
whole war, and today, thirty-two years since the struggle ended, is
carefully preserved by my friend, Dr. T. B. Yancey, of Somerville, Tenn.


THE PRESENTATION OF A HORSE.

While the army was in winter quarters at Dalton, Ga., an incident
occurred in the Thirteenth Tennessee Regiment which has left a memory
that will linger with me until the "shadows gather for the eternal
night."

The regiment was reduced to less than two hundred men, and, in
generosity and love, these few men determined to make me (now promoted
to Brigadier-General) a present of a horse. It was difficult to find
such a horse as they wanted, but Dr. Yandell of Louisville, Ky., who
belonged to the medical department, had a magnificent Gray Eagle horse,
for which he wanted four thousand dollars, but said that, if the
regiment wanted it for their commander, he would take three thousand
dollars. These few men, drawing eleven dollars per month, with their
uniforms in rags, and living on half rations, agreed to buy the horse,
and absolutely refused to let anyone outside of the regiment give one
cent. The money was scraped up among themselves and the present made,
Captain Jerry Crook of Company I delivering the presentation speech,
and Captain R. F. Lanier of Company G, on behalf of his commander, the
reception speech. The horse was christened "Chickamauga." I have lived
to forget many things, but never will pass from my heart the gratitude
I felt that day when my war-worn soldiers in their ragged gray gathered
around me to show their love and confidence. If nothing else, that act
alone makes dear to my heart every soldier of the Thirteenth Tennessee
Regiment.


MY LOST LEG.

Among the most intimate friends of my evening time, I have found
infinite comfort and cheer in two, who for twenty years have been a
part of my life. These two, the Hon. James M. Greer and Mr. James F.
Hunter, having made me almost a part of their family lives, I wrote out
for their boys, Allen, Autry and Rowan Greer, and Douglass Hunter, this
account of how I lost my leg, and print it here without apology to my
readers.

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon after Sherman's army was so signally repulsed on the Kennesaw
line, he again commenced his flank movement, which forced our army to
fall back.

On the 4th of July, 1864, one of the hottest days of the season, our
army arrived at Vining Station, just below Marietta, Ga., where it was
formed in line of battle, with orders for each brigade to intrench and
throw up breastworks.

I was busily engaged all the morning in superintending the work, which
was about completed between 12 and 1 o'clock, when, with my staff, I
retired to a large spreading oak tree, about 150 or 200 yards in the
rear of my line of works, to rest and to eat my scanty rations. No
fighting was going on at this time except an artillery duel between a
Federal battery some distance off and a Confederate battery on my line.

After I had eaten up all the rations I had, I concluded I would take
a smoke. Matches in those days were very scarce and hard to get; so
I always carried with me a small sunglass to light my pipe with when
the sun was shining. After tilling my pipe I noticed that the sun was
shining through a small opening in the foliage of the tree under which
I was sitting, and I remarked to Colonel Dyer, my Inspector-General,
that I could light my pipe through the little opening. He replied that
he would bet me a drink of pine-top whisky that I could not. I accepted
the bet (as I was then not as punctilious about betting as I am now),
and just as I was in the act of drawing a focus on my tobacco, a shell
from the enemy's battery came whizzing through the air over my line and
exploded just as it struck my foot and the ground, tearing off my foot
and making a hole almost large enough to bury me in.

My staff were lying around under the shade of the tree, but none of
them were struck by the shell or any of its fragments. Col. Dyer, who
was standing over me at the time, had nearly all his clothing torn off,
not by the shell or its fragments, but by the gravel that was thrown up
against him. He received seventeen flesh wounds, none of which proved
very serious. As soon as the shell exploded he involuntarily started to
run to get behind a tree. A few days before this Col. Dyer and myself,
while walking in the rear of our line on Kennesaw Mountain, noticed
that a soldier with all the canteens of his company swung around him,
was going after water for his company, when a schrapnel shell came
over, exploded and riddled him with balls; yet he walked, or rather
ran, some little distance before falling, and then fell dead. Col. Dyer
told me that he had this man in his mind's eye while running, and he
expected every moment to fall dead.

The shock from the explosion of the shell was very severe, yet the
tearing away of my leg was accompanied by neither pain nor the loss of
much blood. In addition to the loss of my foot I received another wound
on my other leg which was rather remarkable. I had a cut below the knee
about four inches long and down to the bone, as smooth as if it had
been cut with a sharp knife, yet neither my pants nor underclothing
were torn. It was so smooth a cut that when pressed together it healed
by first intention. None of us were able to conjecture what made this
cut. Before I would allow my removal I made my staff find my sunglass
and my pipe. The rim of my sunglass was broken.

As soon as it was known that I was wounded, the surgeons of my brigade
and division came to my assistance, and bound up my wounds as best
they could, and gave me some morphine and whisky. I was then put in an
ambulance and started to the field hospital. In going to the hospital
I passed by Gen. Cheatham's headquarters, who, hearing that I was
wounded, came out to sympathize with me, and suggested that as I was
looking very pale he thought that some stimulant would do me good, and
gave me a stiff drink. I then began to feel pretty good and proceeded
on my way to the hospital. I had not gone very far when I passed Gen.
Hardee's headquarters. He had heard of my misfortune and came out to
see me. He also said I was looking very pale and that I ought to have
some stimulant, and gave me a big drink. I continued to feel better,
and again started toward the hospital, and in a short time passed Gen.
Joseph E. Johnston's headquarters. He came out to see me and also said
that I was looking very pale, and that some stimulant would do me good.
He happened to have some very fine apple brandy, and gave me a big
drink, and down it went. From this time on I knew nothing until I awoke
on the platform at Atlanta at sunrise next morning.

The amputation of my leg at the point selected was an unfortunate one
for me. My brigade surgeon, Dr. R. W. Mitchell, was absent at the time
of my arrival at the field hospital, and the point of selection for the
amputation was determined upon by a consultation of surgeons before he
returned. If my leg had been cut off higher up it would have relieved
me of the many days of suffering I have since experienced.

From Atlanta I was carried on a freight train in a box car, in the
hottest of weather, to Macon, Ga. Dr. Mitchell accompanied me, thinking
I would die before I reached the place. My sufferings were intense, but
I survived, and was taken to Mrs. Josie, the wife of a quartermaster of
my division of the army, who cared for and treated me as kindly as if I
had been her own child.

Thus I lost my leg, and I have never seen it since.




The Famous Snowball Battle

IN THE CONFEDERATE ARMY AT DALTON, GA., 1864.

BY GENERAL GEO. W. GORDON.

(By request.)


That subdivision of the Confederate forces, known as the "Army of
Tennessee," and then commanded by General Jos. E. Johnston, passed the
memorable winter of 1863-4 in camp at Dalton, Ga. The winter was one
of unprecedented severity--the thermometer registering in January,
1864, three degrees below zero. During the cold weather an unusual
amount of snow fell for that latitude; and the chief occupations of
the soldiers were getting wood, cooking, eating, and keeping warm. It
was too cold to drill or to indulge in the usual out-door games, "stag
dances," etc., tents being too small for these purposes. And as most
of the "boys" were _young_ men, naturally there was an accumulation of
physical energy that constantly sought issue in athletic exercises.
When the copious fall of snow came, it brought the opportunity not
only for exercise, but for royal sport as well. But before proceeding
further, let us explain that in selecting a camp, the subdivisions
of the same command are placed as near together as sanitation, water
supplies, the conformation of the ground and general convenience, will
allow. That is to say, the regiments of a brigade are located near each
other. So, the brigades of a division; and so the divisions of an army
corps. General B. F. Cheatham's Division of General Hardee's Corps,
was composed of four brigades of Tennesseeans,--Maney's, Vaughan's,
Carter's and Strahl's, and was camped on one side of a considerable
depression in the ground, not sharp enough to be called a ravine, but
through which a small branch ran during wet weather. On the opposite
summit and slope to this depression, and about three hundred paces
from the Tennesseeans, was camped Gen. Walker's Division of Georgia
troops--also of Gen. Hardee's Corps.

The day after the snow had ceased to fall, "snow-balling" first began
among the men of the same companies and camps, and many interesting,
exciting and clamorous contests were had for several hours. But
finally a body of Tennesseeans and Georgians became arrayed against
each other and very soon the contest became highly exciting. As the
news spread through the camps that a fight was on hand between the
Georgians and Tennesseeans, division pride and State pride became
excited, the small fights ceased, and reinforcements poured in to both
sides of the State forces until all interest was absorbed in one grand
battle between Georgians and Tennesseeans, in which several thousand
men were now engaged, making the heavens wild with shouts and the air
striped with the tracks of flying snow-balls. Charge after charge
was made and repulsed. Shout after shout rent the sky. For two hours
or longer the battle raged, with partially varying successes. The
prisoners who were captured in one charge would make their escape under
the excitement of the next, and rejoin their comrades in the fight.
Sometimes the assaulting columns would have to retreat because their
ammunition would give out, and would, in turn, be countercharged and
routed by the receiving forces who had held their ground and defended
their magazines (large piles of snow-balls as high as a man's head all
along the line and prepared beforehand) and were thus supplied with
ammunition. Sometimes these magazines would be charged and captured by
massing a force for that purpose. In these charges the supreme efforts
made by the defending forces to resist the momentum of the assaulting
mass, raised excitement to its wildest height. The place where a
magazine was captured was always retaken, but sometimes not until the
ammunition had been used up on those making it, or carried away by
the enemy into his own lines. Finally, after alternating successes of
a very partial and indecisive character, the battle ceased as if by
common consent and the weary combatants "rested upon their arms"--each
upon his original ground and upon opposite sides of the depression,
or small branch before referred to, and not more than a hundred paces
apart. Neither side seemed to be satisfied. Neither was whipped and
neither appeared inclined to leave the field. Besides, during this
cessation of hostilities, both armies were vigorously engaged in making
ammunition, which, with other demonstrations of a hostile character,
clearly indicated that the battle was soon to be renewed and upon a
much grander and more imposing scale than ever before.

Up to this juncture, the writer had been only a highly interested
spectator of the contest from a distance, and had not expected to take
any personal part in the fight. But at this moment, a messenger, and
one of my own command, came running to my quarters and said that he
had been sent by the Tennesseeans to ask me to come and command them,
and to come mounted; that with a mounted commander to lead them, they
thought they could win the fight. With my interest already highly
excited, it needed no persuasion, and I told my colored boy to saddle
my horse immediately. By the time he had done so, the messenger had
improvised a flag for me to carry, out of an old bandanna handkerchief,
about two feet and a half square, and the largest and dirtiest one, I
think, I ever saw. I mounted my horse, a beautiful dappled iron grey,
and with the bandanna flag in my hand, flying to the breeze, I charged
to the field--my horse leaping logs, ditches and other obstructions
and running faster as I approached the exciting scene. When I checked
up in front of the Tennesseeans, (now in battle array) and waving my
flag, such a tremendous shout shook the air that the very atmosphere
seemed to quiver around and above us. Excitement was now intense, and
the men wildly impatient to make the charge. Immediately after my
appearance on horse-back in front of the Tennesseeans, Major ----,
(whose name I regret to have forgotten) of Gen. Walker's staff,
appeared mounted at the head of the Georgians. His coming was greeted
with a tremendous shout from _his_ men, and was answered by mine with
another shout, as if to say: "We accept your challenge." Excitement
was now extreme. Non-combatants had assembled by hundreds on the
surrounding hills and house-tops to see the fight. General officers
and their staffs, at their headquarters, had mounted their horses or
ascended higher elevations to witness the impending struggle. All
was now ready. And after directing the men to fill their pockets,
bosoms and hands with balls, and the ordnance officers to follow the
line with all the ammunition their details could carry, I ordered
the charge. With a shout that signaled victory, and an impetuosity
that seemed irresistible, we dashed upon the brave Georgians, and
for a few minutes the struggle was fierce and furious, desperate and
doubtful. The air was white with whizzing and bursting balls; men were
tripped up, knocked down, covered with snow, or run over. The writer
was struck with at least a hundred balls, and his horse by as many
more. The momentum of the charging column was too great, however, to
be successfully resisted, more especially so when it outflanked both
wings of the enemy, which soon gave way. The center then being flanked,
and at the same time being sorely pressed in front, also gave way, and
his entire army fled in great confusion. The rout on the field was now
complete, and the enemy was not only driven therefrom, but through
his own camp and into the woods beyond. The object of the campaign
(victory) being now accomplished, I ordered the pursuit to cease and
the men to return to their camps. As they did so, however, some of
them stopped in the deserted camps of the Georgians and plundered
their mess chests, which had been well filled by supplies from their
friends at home. When I heard of this, and reproved it as not being a
legitimate object of the campaign, the reply and defense were in that
questionable old maxim, "All is fair in love and war."

       *       *       *       *       *

So far from this episode of camp life having been a source of unkind
feeling between Walker's Division of Georgians and Cheatham's Division
of Tennesseeans, it ever afterward seemed to be rather a bond of
sympathy and union. The writer never afterward passed or met the
Georgia Division, that its men did not greet him with shouts, often
with "Three cheers for the Snowball Colonel!" "Colonel" was my rank
at the time and "The Snowball Colonel" was the designation they ever
afterward gave me. This "snowball battle" seems to have made a deep
and indelible impression on all the soldiers who took part in, or who
witnessed it; for one of the first questions I am often asked by old
soldiers whom I have not seen since the close of the war, is: "General,
do you remember the snowball battle at Dalton, Ga.?" This, and the
additional fact that it is still so often a topic of conversation among
the old soldiers, is, I suppose, why Gen. Vaughan has requested me to
write an account of it as an appendix to his book.

       *       *       *       *       *

In concluding this report of the celebrated snowball fight, I suppose
the writer can say, without being charged with vanity, that he won
more "reputation" ("that idle and most false imposition; often got
without merit and lost without deserving") than in all the other
battles in which he participated during the war. He is said to have
performed prodigies of daring and desperation during the action, as
men can generally do when there is not much danger in front, and no
disgrace in defeat. With a bowed head (after the manner of a pugnacious
sheep) to protect his face and eyes from the balls of the enemy, he
rode right into and through their ranks, amid a deluging snowstorm
of flying missiles, and emerged therefrom with a floating flag, but
a hatless head. He congratulates his command and himself that though
the battle was intensely boisterous, it was practically bloodless--the
only casualties being a few blinded eyes and two or three broken arms,
during an action in which not fewer than five thousand men were engaged.

The Tennesseeans were so enthused with their great victory over the
Georgians, that they wanted another fight before the "weary sun," then
sinking low, "had made his golden set." But as there was not time to
seek it with troops in a distant camp and from a different State, they
concluded to fight each other. Accordingly an issue was joined between
Maney's Brigade, commanded by Col. Hume Field, mounted, and Vaughan's
Brigade, commanded by the writer, also mounted. The dispositions for
battle having been duly made, the charge was mutually sounded, and
when the opposing lines, advancing on each other with great speed and
impetuosity, clashed, the shock was tremendous. Men fell right and
left, in front and rear. Some were dragged from the field, hatless
and coatless, amid the greatest cheering and wildest shouts. "When
Greek meets Greek, then comes the _tug_ of war." The battle raged till
all the reserves had been brought into action, when a supreme effort
was made by both sides to close the fight with victory. The writer,
venturing too far into the enemy's ranks, had his horse seized by as
many of them as could get hold of him, and was thrown to the ground;
the rider was grabbed by the head and arms (his bandanna flag going
down in the wreck), and was being dragged to the enemy's rear, when a
large squad of his own men seized him by the other end in an effort to
recapture him, and he was raised from the ground and actually strung
up between the heavens and the earth by the pulling forces at each end
of him. At this moment he _felt_ that his situation was now serious
indeed, and that it was time to stop such "d--n foolishness." So, by
vigorous kicking, "cussing" and yelling to his men to release him,
they did so, and he was left a prisoner in the hands of the enemy,
but without any serious injury. In the meantime, however, his own men
had captured the commander of the enemy, and as neither side now had
a leader the men ceased fighting and entered into negotiations for an
exchange of prisoners. By the time the exchange was effected, the ardor
of the combatants had greatly cooled, and neither side seemed disposed
to renew the contest.

       *       *       *       *       *

As to the result of the fight, it may be called a drawn battle, or
described by an anecdote of a darkey attached as a servant to Gen.
Floyd's command in Virginia. When Gen. Floyd had been beaten and was
being pursued by the enemy, the darkey moved to the rear far in advance
of the retreating troops, and when he was met by a soldier going to
join the command and was asked what was the news from Gen. Floyd, he
did not want to admit that he had been defeated, but said: "When I lef
'em, our men wuz vancin backwards on de Yankees, and dey wuz retreatin
on us." As the last beams of the setting sun gilded the icy branches
of the leafless trees with the beauteous tints of the rainbow, the
soldiers returned to their camps from the white field of the great
"snowball battle," and retired that night with the fadeless memory of a
glorious day.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Omitted periods repaired.

Punctuation typos in rosters have been corrected for consistency.

Retained period spelling of 'intrench' and its derivatives
throughout.

Alphabetizing errors in the Roster listings
have been preserved.

Page 86: The spelling of 'schrapnel' has been retained as it
appears in the original publication. ["when a schrapnel shell
came over"]

Page 90: Changed 'hight' to 'height'. ["raised excitement to its
wildest height"]





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Personal record of the Thirteenth
Regiment, Tennessee Infantry, by A. J. Vaughan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PERSONAL RECORD--13TH REG. TENNESSEE ***

***** This file should be named 49898.txt or 49898.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/9/8/9/49898/

Produced by Alyssia Turner and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
produced from images generously made available by The
Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

