The Project Gutenberg EBook of Illustrated Edition of the Life and Escape
of Wm. Wells Brown from American Slavery, by William Wells Brown

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Illustrated Edition of the Life and Escape of Wm. Wells Brown from American Slavery
       Written by Himself

Author: William Wells Brown

Release Date: September 30, 2015 [EBook #50092]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE AND ESCAPE ***




Produced by David Widger from page images generously
provided by the Internet Archive







ILLUSTRATED EDITION OF THE LIFE AND ESCAPE OF WM. WELLS BROWN FROM
AMERICAN SLAVERY

By Wm. Wells Brown

Written By Himself.

Fourteenth Thousand.

London: C. Gilpin, 5, Bishopsgate Street Without

1851

One Shilling


[Illustration: 0001]


[Illustration: 0003]





TESTIMONIALS.

TO THE FRIENDS OF FREEDOM AND EMANCIPATION IN EUROPE.

Boston, July 17, 1849.

In consequence of the departure for England of their esteemed friend
and faithful co-labourer in the cause of the American slave, William W.
Brown, the Board of Managers of the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society
would commend him to the confidence, respect, esteem, and hospitality of
the friends of emancipation wherever he may travel:--

1. Because he is a fugitive slave from the American, house of bondage,
and on the soil which gave him birth can find no spot on which he can
stand in safety from his pursuers; protected by law.

2. Because he is a man, and not a chattel; and while as the latter
he may at any time be sold at public vendue under the American
star-spangled banner, we rejoice to know that he will be recognised and
protected as the former under the flag of England.

3. Because, for several years past, he has nobly consecrated his time
and talents, at great personal hazard, and under the most adverse
circumstances, to the uncompromising advocacy of the cause of his
enslaved countrymen.

4. Because he visits England for the purpose of increasing,
consolidating and directing British humanity and piety against that
horrible system of Slavery in America, by which three millions of human
beings, by creation the children of God, are ranked with fourfooted
beasts, and treated as marketable commodities.

5. Because he has long been in their employment as a lecturing agent
in Massachusetts, and has laboured to great acceptance and with great
success; and from the acquaintance thus formed, they are enabled
to certify that he has invariably conducted himself with great
circumspection, and won for himself the sympathy, respect, and
friendship, of a very large circle of acquaintance.

In behalf of the Board of Managers,

WM. LLOYD GARRISON.

ROBERT F. WALLCUT.

SAMUEL MAY, JUN.


Boston, July 18, 1849.

My dear friend,

To-day you leave the land of your nativity, in which you have been
reared and treated as a slave--a chattel personal--a marketable
commodity--though it claims to be a republican and Christian land,
the freest of the free, the most pious of the pious--for the shores of
Europe; on touching which, your shackles will instantly fall, your limbs
expand, your spirit exult in absolute personal freedom, as a man, and
nothing less than a man. Since your escape from bondage, a few years
since, you have nobly devoted yourself to the cause of the three
millions of our countrymen who are yet clanking their chains in hopeless
bondage--pleading their cause eloquently and effectively, by day and by
night, in season and out of season, before the people of the Free States
(falsely so called) of America, at much personal hazard of being seized
and hurried back to slavery. Not to forsake that cause, but still more
powerfully to aid it, by enlisting the sympathies, and consolidating
the feelings and opinions of the friends of freedom and universal
emancipation in the old world in its favour and against the atrocious
slave system, do you bid farewell to the land of whips and chains
to-day. God--the God of the oppressed, the poor, the needy, the
defenceless--be with you, to guide, strengthen, aid, and bless you
abundantly! Three millions of slaves are your constituents, and you are
their legitimate and faithful representative. With a mother, sister, and
three brothers, yet pining in hopeless servitude, with the marks of the
slavedriver's lash upon your body, you cannot but "remember them that
are in bonds as bound with them." Speak in trumpet tones to Europe, and
call upon the friends of "liberty, equality, and fraternity" there, to
cry, "Shame upon recreant and apostate America, which flourishes the
Declaration of Independence in one hand, and the whip of the negro
overseer in the other!" Challenge all that is free, all that is humane,
all that is pious, across the Atlantic, to raise a united testimony
against American slaveholders and their abettors, as the enemies of God
and the human race! So shall that cry and that testimony cause the knees
of the oppressor to smite together, the Bastile of slavery to tremble
to its foundation, and the hearts of the American Abolitionists to be
filled with joy and inspired afresh! Tell Europe that our watchword is,
"Immediate--unconditional emancipation for the slave," and the motto we
have placed on our anti-slavery banner is, "No Union with Slaveholders,
religiously or politically!"

You have secured the respect, confidence, and esteem of thousands of the
best portion of the American people; and may you continue faithful to
the end, neither corrupted by praise, nor cast down by opposition, nor
intimidated by any earthly power!

Accept the assurances of my warm personal regard, and believe me to be,

Your faithful co-labourer and unwearied advocate of the best of causes,

WM. LLOYD GARRISON,

President of the American Anti-Slavery Society.

WM. W. BROWN.


At a large and influential meeting of the coloured citizens of Boston,
U.S., held in the Washington Hall, on Monday evening, 16th of July,
1849, the following resolution was unanimously adopted:--That, in taking
a farewell of our brother, Wm. Wells Brown, we bid him God speed in his
mission to Europe, and we cordially commend him to the hospitality of
the friends of humanity.

From the Annual Report of the Massachusetts Anti-Slavery Society,
adopted at their meeting held in Boston, U.S., on the 26th of January,
1851:--"We have again to express our acknowledgment to the untiring
anti-slavery men and women of Great Britain for their continued
sympathy, encouragement, and assistance, which we have been happy to
acknowledge in former years. The kindness with which Wm. Wells Brown was
received on his first arrival seems to have met with no diminution. We
notice, with pleasure, meetings held for him, and attended by him,
in various parts of the United Kingdom, which appear to have had
an excellent effect in arousing and keeping alive the anti-slavery
sentiments of the British people; of these sentiments we have received
substantial results in the contributions which enrich the Annual Bazaar."

FRANCIS JACKSON, President

EDMUND QUINCY, Secretary

JOHN T. HILTON, Chairman

J. H. SNOWDON

WM. T. RAYMOND




PREFACE TO THE EIGHTH ENGLISH EDITION.


The present Narrative was first published in Boston (U.S.), in July,
1847, and eight thousand copies were sold in less than eighteen months
from the time of its publication. This rapid sale may be attributed to
the circumstance, that for three years preceding its publication, I had
been employed as a lecturing agent by the American Antislavery Society;
and I was thus very generally known throughout the Free States of the
Great Republic as one who had spent the first twenty years of his life
as a slave, in her southern house of bondage.

In visiting Great Britain I had two objects in view. Firstly, to attend
the Peace Convention held in Paris, in August, 1849, to which I had been
delegated by the American Peace Committee for a Congress of Nations.
Many of the most distinguished American Abolitionists considered it a
triumphant evidence of the progress of their principles, that one of the
oppressed coloured race--one who is even now, by the constitution of the
United States, a slave--should have been selected for this honourable
office, and were therefore very desirous that I should attend. Secondly,
I wished to lay before the people of Great Britain and Ireland the
wrongs that are still committed upon the slaves and the free coloured
people of America. The rapid increase of communication between the
two sides of the Atlantic has brought them so close together that the
personal intercourse between the British people and American slaveowners
is now very great; and the slaveholder, crafty and politic, as
deliberate tyrants generally are, rarely leaves the shores of Europe
without attempting at least to assuage the prevalent hostility against
his beloved "peculiar institution." The influence of the Southern States
of America is mainly directed to the maintenance and propagation of the
system of slavery in their own and in other countries. In the pursuit
of tins object, every consideration of religion, liberty, national
strength, and social order is made to give way; and hitherto they have
been very successful. The actual number of the slaveholders is small;
but their union is complete, so that they form a dominant oligarchy in
the United States. It is my desire, in common with every Abolitionist,
to diminish their influence; and this can only be effected by the
promulgation of truth and the cultivation of a correct public sentiment
at home and abroad. Slavery cannot be let alone. It is aggressive, and
must be either succumbed to or put down.

In putting forth the eighth edition of this little book, I cannot but
express a surprise that a work written hastily, and that too by one who
never had a day's schooling, should have met with so extensive a sale.

In committing my narrative once more to the public, I cannot do so
without returning my heartfelt thanks to the gentlemen connected with
the English press, for the very kind manner in which they have noticed
it, and thereby aided in getting it before the public.

WILLIAM WELLS BROWN.

22, Cecil Street, Strand. May, 1851.


[Illustration: 0014]




NARRATIVE.




CHAPTER I.


I was born in Lexington, Kentucky, one of the Western slave states. My
mother was the slave of Dr. John Young: my father was a slaveholder and
a relative of my master. Dr. Young was the owner of from forty to
fifty slaves, most of whom were field hands. I have no recollection of
Kentucky, as my master removed from that state, during my infancy, to a
large plantation, which he had purchased, near the town of St. Charles.

My master, being a politician, soon found those who were ready to put
him into office, for the favors he could render them; and a few
years after his arrival in Missouri he was elected to a seat in the
legislature. In his absence from home everything was left in charge of
Mr. Cook, the overseer, and he soon became more tyrannical and cruel.
Among the slaves on the plantation was one by the name of Randall. He
was a man about six feet high, and well-proportioned, and known as a
man of great strength and power. He was considered the most valuable and
able-bodied slave on the plantation; but no matter how good or useful
a slave may be, he seldom escapes the lash. But it was not so with
Randall. He had been on the plantation since my earliest recollection,
and I had never known of his being flogged.. No thanks were due to the
master or overseer for this. I have often heard him declare that no
white man should ever whip him--that he would die first.

Cook, from the time that he came upon the plantation, had frequently
declared that he could and would flog any nigger that was put into
the field to work under him. My master had repeatedly told him not to
attempt to whip Randall, but he was determined to try it. As soon as he
was left sole dictator, he thought the time had come to put his threats
into execution. He soon began to find fault with Randall, and threatened
to whip him if he did not do better. One day he gave him a very hard
task--more than he could possibly do; and at night, the task not being
performed, he told Randall that he should remember him the next morning.
On the following, morning, after the hands had taken breakfast, Cook
called out to Randall, and told him that he intended to whip him, and
ordered him to cross his hands and be tied. Randall asked why he wished
to whip him. He answered, because he had not finished his task the day
before. Randall said that the task was too great, or he should have done
it. Cook said it made no difference--he should whip him. Randall stood
silent for a moment, and then said, "Mr. Cook, I have always tried to
please you since you have been on the plantation, and I find you are
determined not to be satisfied with my work, let me do as well as I may.
No man has laid hands on me, to whip me, for the last ten years, and
I have long since come to the conclusion not to be whipped by any man
living." Cook, finding by Randall's determined look and gestures,
that he would resist, called three of the hands from their work,
and commanded them to seize Randall, and tie him. The hands stood
still;--they knew Randall--and they also knew him to be a powerful man,
and were afraid to grapple with him. As soon as Cook had ordered the men
to seize him, Randall turned to them, and said--"Boys, you all know me;
you know that I can handle any three of you, and the man that lays hands
on me shall die. This white man can't whip me himself, and therefore
he has called you to help him." The overseer was unable to prevail upon
them to seize and secure Randall, and finally ordered them all to go to
their work together.

Nothing was said to Randall by the overseer for more than a week. One
morning, however, while the hands were at work in the field, he came
into it, accompanied by three friends of his, Thompson, Woodbridge and
Jones. They came up to where Randall was at work, and Cook ordered
him to leave his work, and go with them to the barn. He refused to go;
whereupon he was attacked by the overseer and his companions, when he
turned upon them, and laid them, one after another, prostrate on the
ground. Woodbridge drew out his pistol, and fired at him, and brought
him to the ground by a pistol ball. The others rushed upon him with
their clubs, and beat him over the head and face, until they succeeded
in tying him. He was then taken to the barn, and tied to a beam. Cook
gave him over one hundred lashes with a heavy cowhide, had him washed.
with salt and water, and left him tied during the day. The next day he
was untied, and taken to a blacksmith's shop, and had a ball and chain
attached to his leg. He was compelled to labor in the field, and perform
the same amount of work that the other hands did. When his master
returned home, he was much pleased to find that Randall had been subdued
in his absence.




CHAPTER II.

Soon afterwards, my master removed to the city of St. Louis, and
purchased a farm four miles from there, which he placed under the charge
of an overseer by the name of Friend Haskell. He was a regular Yankee
from New England. The Yankees are noted for making the most cruel
overseers.

My mother was hired out in the city, and I was also hired out there to
Major Freeland, who kept a public house. He was formerly from Virginia,
and was a horse-racer, cock-fighter, gambler, and withal an inveterate
drunkard. There were ten or twelve servants in the house, and when he
was present, it was cut and slash--knock down and drag out. In his fits
of anger, he would take up a chair, and throw it at a servant; and in
his more rational moments, when he wished to chastise one, he would tie
them up in the smoke-house, and whip them; after which, he would cause
a fire to be made of tobacco stems, and smoke them. This he called
"Virginia play."

I complained to my master of the treatment which I received from Major
Freeland; but it made no difference. He cared nothing about it, so long
as he received the money for my labor. After living with Major Freeland
five or six months, I ran away, and went into the woods back of the
city; and when night came on, I made my way to my master's farm, but
was afraid to be seen, knowing that if Mr. Haskell, the overseer, should
discover me, I should be again carried back to Major Freeland; so I
kept in the woods. One day while in the woods, I heard the barking and
howling of dogs, and in a short time they came so near that I knew them
to be the bloodhounds of Major Benjamin O'Fallon. He kept five or six,
to hunt runaway slaves with.

As soon as I was convinced that it was them, I knew there was no chance
of escape. I took refuge in the top of a tree, and the hounds were soon
at its base, and there remained until the hunters came up in a half or
three quarters of an hour afterwards.

There were two men with the dogs, who, as soon as they came up, ordered
me to descend. I came down, was tied, and taken to St. Louis jail. Major
Freeland soon made his appearance, and took me out, and ordered me to
follow him, which I did. After we returned home, I was tied up in the
smoke-house, and was very severely whipped. After the major had flogged
me to his satisfaction, he sent out his son Robert, a young man eighteen
or twenty years of age, to see that I was well smoked. He made a fire of
tobacco stems, which soon set me to coughing and sneezing. This, Robert
told me, was the way his father used to do to his slaves in Virginia.
After giving me what they conceived to be a decent smoking, I was untied
and again set to work.

Robert Freeland was a "chip of the old block." Though quite young, it
was not unfrequently that he came home in a state of intoxication. He
is now, I believe, a popular commander of a steamboat on the Mississippi
river. Major Freeland soon after failed in business, and I was put on
board the steamboat Missouri, which plied between St. Louis and Galena.
The commander of the boat was William B. Culver. I remained on her
during the sailing season, which was the most pleasant time for me that
I had ever experienced. At the close of navigation I was hired to Mr.
John Colburn, keeper of the Missouri Hotel. He was from one of the free
states; but a more inveterate hater of the negro I do not believe ever
walked God's green earth. This hotel was at that time one of the largest
in the city, and there were employed in it twenty or thirty servants,
mostly slaves.

Mr. Colburn was very abusive, not only to the servants, but to his
wife also, who was an excellent woman, and one from whom I never knew
a servant to receive a harsh word; but never did I know a kind one to a
servant from her husband. Among the slaves employed in the hotel was one
by the name of Aaron, who belonged to Mr. John F. Darby, a lawyer. Aaron
was the knife-cleaner. One day, one of the knives was put on the table,
not as clean as it might have been. Mr. Colburn, for this offence, tied
Aaron up in the wood-house, and gave him over fifty lashes on the bare
back with a cow-hide, after which, he made me wash him down with rum.
This seemed to put him into more agony than the whipping. After being
untied he went home to his master, and complained of the treatment which
he had received. Mr. Darby would give no heed to anything he had to say,
but sent him directly back. Colburn, learning that he had been to his
master with complaints, tied him up again, and gave him a more severe
whipping than before. The poor fellow's back was literally cut to
pieces; so much so, that he was not able to work for ten or twelve days.

There was, also, among the servants, a girl whose master resided in the
country. Her name, was Patsey. Mr. Colburn tied her up one evening, and
whipped her until several of the boarders came out and begged him to
desist. The reason for whipping her was this. She was engaged to be
married to a man belonging to Major William Christy, who resided four
or five miles north of the city. Mr. Colburn had forbid her to see John
Christy. The reason of this was said to be the regard which he himself
had for Patsey. She went to meeting that evening, and John returned home
with her. Mr. Colburn had intended to flog John, if he came within the
inclosure; but John knew too well the temper of his rival, and kept at
a safe distance:--so he took vengeance on the poor girl. If all the
slave-drivers had been called together, I do not think a more cruel
man than John Colburn--and he too a northern man--could have been found
among them.

While living at the Missouri hotel, a circumstance occurred which caused
me great unhappiness. My master sold my mother, and all her children,
except myself. They were sold to different persons in the city of St.
Louis.

I turned to my bed, and found no consolation but in my tears. Experience
has taught me that nothing can be more heart-rending than for one to see
a dear and beloved mother or sister tortured, and to hear their cries,
and not be able to render them assistance. But such is the position
which an American slave occupies.




CHAPTER III.

I was soon after taken from Mr. Colburn's, and hired to Elijah P.
Lovejoy, who was at that time publisher and editor of the "St. Louis
Times." My work, while with him, was mainly in the printing office,
waiting on the hands, working the press, &c. Mr. Lovejoy was a very good
man, and decidedly the best master that I had ever had. I am chiefly
indebted to him, and to my employment in the printing office, for what
little learning I obtained while in slavery.

Though slavery is thought, by some, to be mild in Missouri, when
compared with the cotton, sugar and rice growing states, yet no part
of our slaveholding country is more noted for the barbarity of its
inhabitants than St Louis. It was here that Col. Harney, a United
States officer, whipped a slave woman to death. It was here that
Francis McIntosh, a free colored man from Pittsburg, was taken from the
steamboat Flora and burned at the stake. During a residence of eight
years in this city, numerous cases of extreme cruelty came under my
own observation;--to record them all would occupy more space than could
possibly be allowed in this little volume. I shall, therefore, give but
a few more in addition to what I have already related.

Capt. J. B. Brant, who resided near my master, had a slave named John.
He was his body servant, carriage driver, &c. On one occasion, while
driving his master through the city--the streets being very muddy, and
the horses going at a rapid rate--some mud spattered upon a gentleman by
the name of Robert More. More was determined to be revenged. Some three
or four months after this occurrence, he purchased John, for the express
purpose, as he said, "to tame the d------d nigger."

After the purchase he took him to a blacksmith's shop, and had a ball
and chain fastened to his leg, and then put him to driving a yoke of
oxen, and kept him at hard labor, until the iron around his leg was so
worn into the flesh, that it was thought mortification would ensue. In
addition to this, John told me that his master whipped him regularly
three times a week for the first two months:--and all this to "_tame
him_" more noblelooking man than he was not to be found in all St.
Louis, before he fell into the hands of More; and a more degraded and
spirit-crushed looking being was never seen on a southern plantation,
after he had been subjected to this "_taming_" process for three months.
The last time that I saw him, he had nearly lost the entire use of his
limbs.

While living with Mr. Lovejoy, I was often sent on errands to the office
of the "Missouri Republican," published by Mr. Edward Charless. Once,
while returning to the office with type, I was attacked by several large
boys, sons of slave-holders, who pelted me with snow-balls. Having the
heavy form of type in my hands, I could not make my escape by running;
so I laid down the type and gave them battle. They gathered around me,
pelting me with stones and sticks, until they overpowered me, and would
have captured me, if I had not resorted to my heels. Upon my retreat
they took possession of the type; and what to do to regain it I could
not devise. Knowing Mr. Lovejoy to be a very humane man, I went to the
office and laid the case before him. He told me to remain in the office.
He took one of the apprentices with him and went after the type,
and soon returned with it; but on his return informed me that Samuel
McKinney had told him he would whip me, because I had hurt his boy.
Soon after, McKinney was seen making his way to the office by one of the
printers, who informed me of the fact, and I made my escape through the
back door.

McKinney not being able to find me on his arrival, left the office in a
great rage, swearing that he would whip me to death. A few days after,
as I was walking along Main street, he seized me by the collar, and
struck me over the head five or six times with a large cane, which
caused the blood to gush from my nose and ears in such a manner that my
clothes were completely saturated with blood. After beating me to his
satisfaction he let me go, and I returned to the office so weak from the
loss of blood that Mr. Lovejoy sent me home to my master. It was five
weeks before I was able to walk again. During this time it was necessary
to have some one to supply my place at the office, and I lost the
situation.

After my recovery, I was hired to Capt. Otis Reynolds, as a waiter on
board the steamboat Enterprise, owned by Messrs. John and Edward Walsh,
commission merchants at St. Louis. This boat was then running on the
upper Mississippi.

My employment on board was to wait on gentlemen, and the captain being
a good man, the situation was a pleasant one to me;--but in passing from
place to place, and seeing new faces every day, and knowing that they
could go where they pleased, I soon became unhappy, and several times
thought of leaving the boat at some landing-place, and trying to make
my escape to Canada, which I had heard much about as a place where the
slave might live, be free, and be protected.

But whenever such thoughts would come into my mind, my resolution would
soon be shaken by the remembrance that my dear mother was a slave in St.
Louis, and I could not bear the idea of leaving her in that condition.
She had often taken me upon her knee, and told me how she had carried me
upon her back to the field when I was an infant--how often she had been
whipped for leaving her work to nurse me--and how happy I would appear
when she would take me into her arms. When these thoughts came over me,
I would resolve never to leave the land of slavery without my mother.
I thought that to leave her in slavery, after she had undergone and
suffered so much for me, would be proving recreant to the duty which I
owed to her. Besides this, I had three brothers and a sister there--two
of my brothers having died.

My mother, my brothers Joseph and Millford, and my sister Elizabeth,
belonged to Mr. Isaac Mansfield, formerly from one of the free states,
(Massachusetts, I believe.) He was a tinner by trade, and carried on
a large manufacturing establishment. Of all my relatives, mother was
first, and sister next. One evening, while visiting them, I made some
allusion to a proposed journey to Canada, and sister took her seat by my
side, and taking my hand in hers, said, with tears in her eyes--

"Brother, you are not going to leave mother and your dear sister here
without a friend, are you?"

I looked into her face, as the tears coursed swiftly down her cheeks,
and bursting into tears myself, said--

"No, I will never desert you and mother!"

She clasped my hand in hers, and said--

"Brother, you have often declared that you would not end your days in
slavery. I see no possible way in which you can escape with us; and now,
brother, you are on a steamboat where there is some chance for you to
escape to a land of liberty. I beseech you not to let us hinder you. If
we cannot get our liberty, we do not wish to be the means of keeping you
from a land of freedom."

I could restrain my feelings no longer, and an outburst of my own
feelings caused her to cease speaking upon that subject. In opposition
to their wishes, I pledged myself not to leave them in the hand of the
oppressor. I took leave of them, and returned to the boat, and laid down
in my bunk; but "sleep departed from mine eyes, and slumber from mine
eyelids."

A few weeks after, on our downward passage, the boat took on board,
at Hannibal, a drove of slaves, bound for the New Orleans market. They
numbered from fifty to sixty, consisting of men and women from eighteen
to forty years of age. A drove of slaves on a southern steamboat, bound
for the cotton or sugar regions, is an occurrence so common, that no
one, not even the passengers, appear to notice it, though they clank
their chains at every step. There was, however, one in this gang that
attracted the attention of the passengers and crew. It was a beautiful
girl, apparently about twenty years of age, perfectly white, with
straight light hair and blue eyes. But it was not the whiteness of her
skin that created such a sensation among those who gazed upon her--it
was her almost unparalleled beauty. She had been on the boat but a short
time before the attention of all the passengers, including the ladies,
had been called to her, and the common topic of conversation was about
the beautiful slave-girl. She was not in chains. The man who claimed
this article of human merchandise was a Mr. Walker--a well known
slave-trader, residing in St. Louis. There was a general anxiety among
the passengers and crew to learn the history of the girl. Her master
kept close by her side, and it would have been considered impudent
for any of the passengers to have spoken to her, and the crew were not
allowed to have any conversation with them. When we reached St. Louis,
the slaves were removed to a boat bound for New Orleans, and the history
of the beautiful slave-girl remained a mystery.

I remained on the boat during the season, and it was not an unfrequent
occurrence to have on board gangs of slaves on their way to the cotton,
sugar and rice plantations of the south.

Toward the latter part of the summer Captain Reynolds left the boat, and
I was sent home. I was then placed on the farm, under Mr. Haskell, the
overseer. As I had been some time out of the field, and not accustomed
to work in the burning sun, it was very hard; but I was compelled to
keep up with the best of the hands.

I found a great difference between the work in a steamboat cabin and
that in a corn-field.

My master, who was then living in the city, soon after removed to
the farm, when I was taken out of the field to work in the house as a
waiter. Though his wife was very peevish, and hard to please, I much
preferred to be under her control than the overseer's. They brought with
them Mr. Sloane, a Presbyterian minister; Miss Martha Tulley, a niece of
theirs from Kentucky; and their nephew William. The latter had been in
the family a number of years, but the others were all newcomers.

Mr. Sloane was a young minister, who had been at the South but a short
time, and it seemed as if his whole aim was to please the slaveholders,
especially my master and mistress. He was intending to make a visit
during the winter, and he not only tried to please them, but I think he
succeeded admirably. When they wanted singing, he sung; when they wanted
praying, he prayed; when they wanted a story told, he told a story.
Instead of his teaching my master theology, my master taught theology to
him. While I was with Captain Reynolds my master "got religion," and
new laws were made on the plantation. Formerly we had the privilege of
hunting, fishing, making splint brooms, baskets, &c., on Sunday; but
this was all stopped. Every Sunday we were all compelled to attend
meeting. Master was so religious that he induced some others to join him
in hiring a preacher to preach to the slaves.




CHAPTER IV.

My master had family worship, night and morning. At night the slaves
were called in to attend; but in the mornings they had to be at their
work, and master did all the praying. My master and mistress were great
lovers of mint julep, and every morning, a pitcher-full was made, of
which they all partook freely, not excepting little master William.
After drinking freely all round, they would have family worship, and
then breakfast. I cannot say but I loved the julep as well as any of
them, and during prayer was always careful to seat myself close to the
table where it stood, so as to help myself when they were all busily
engaged in their devotions. By the time prayer was over, I was about as
happy as any of them. A sad accident happened one morning. In helping
myself, and at at the same time keeping an eye on my old mistress, I
accidentally let the pitcher fall upon the floor, breaking it in pieces,
and spilling the contents. This was a bad affair for me; for as soon as
prayer was over, I was taken and severely chastised.

My master's family consisted of himself, his wife, and their nephew,
William Moore. He was taken into the family when only a few weeks of
age. His name being that of my own, mine was changed for the purpose
of giving precedence to his, though I was his senior by ten or twelve
years. The plantation being four miles from the city, I had to drive
the family to church. I always dreaded the approach of the Sabbath;
for, during service, I was obliged to stand by the horses in the hot,
broiling sun, or in the rain, just as it happened.

One Sabbath, as we were driving past the house of D. D. Page, a
gentleman who owned a large baking establishment, as I was sitting upon
the box of the carriage, which was very much elevated, I saw Mr. Page
pursuing a slave around the yard with a long whip, cutting him at every
jump. The man soon escaped from the yard, and was followed by Mr. Page.
They came running past us, and the slave, perceiving that he would be
overtaken, stopped suddenly, and Page stumbled over him, and falling on
the stone pavement, fractured one of his legs, which crippled him for
life. The same gentleman, but a short time previous, tied up a woman of
his, by the name of Delphia, and whipped her nearly to death; yet he
was a deacon in the Baptist church, in good and regular standing. Poor
Delphia! I was well acquainted with her, and called to see her while
upon her sick bed; and I shall never forget her appearance. She was a
member of the same church with her master.

Soon after this, I was hired out to Mr. Walker, the same man whom I
have mentioned as having carried a gang of slaves down the river on
the steamboat Enterprise. Seeing me in the capacity of a steward on the
boat, and thinking that I would make a good hand to take care of slaves,
he determined to have me for that purpose; and finding that my master
would not sell me, he hired me for the term of one year.

When I learned the fact of my having been hired to a negro speculator,
or a "soul driver," as they are generally called among slaves, no one
can tell my emotions. Mr. Walker had offered a high price for me, as I
afterwards learned, but I suppose my master was restrained from selling
me by the fact that I was a near relative of his. On entering the
service of Mr. Walker, I found that my opportunity of getting to a
land of liberty was gone, at least for the time being. He had a gang of
slaves in readiness to start for New Orleans, and in a few days we were
on our journey. I am at a loss for language to express my feelings on
that occasion. Although my master had told me that he had not sold
me, and Mr. Walker had told me that he had not purchased me, I did not
believe them; and not until I had been to New Orleans, and was on my
return, did I believe that I was not sold.

There was on the boat a large room on the lower deck, in which the
slaves were kept, men and women, promiscuously--all chained two and
two, and a strict watch kept that they did not get loose; for cases
have occurred in which slaves have got off their chains, and made their
escape at landing-places, while the boats were taking in wood;--and with
all our care, we lost one woman who had been taken from her husband and
children, and having no desire to live without them, in the agony of her
soul jumped overboard, and drowned herself. She was not chained.

It was almost impossible to keep that part of the boat clean.

On landing at Natchez, the slaves were all carried to the slave-pen, and
there kept one week, during which time several of them were sold.
Mr. Walker fed his slaves well. We took on board at St. Louis several
hundred pounds of bacon (smoked meat) and corn-meal, and his slaves
were better fed than slaves generally were in Natchez, so far as my
observation extended.

At the end of a week, we left for New Orleans, the place of our final
destination, which we reached in two days. Here the slaves were placed
in a negro-pen, where those who wished to purchase could call and
examine them. The negro-pen is a small yard, surrounded by buildings,
from fifteen to twenty feet wide, with the exception of a large gate
with iron bars. The slaves are kept in the buildings during the night,
and turned out into the yard during the day. After the best of the
stock was sold at private sale at the pen, the balance were taken to the
Exchange Coffee-House Auction Rooms, kept by Isaac L. McCoy, and sold
at public auction. After the sale of this lot of slaves, we left New
Orleans for St. Louis.




CHAPTER V.

On our arrival at St. Louis I went to Dr. Young, and told him that
I did not wish to live with Mr. Walker any longer. I was heartsick at
seeing my fellow-creatures bought and sold. But the Dr. had hired me for
the year, and stay I must. Mr. Walker again commenced purchasing another
gang of slaves. He bought a man of Colonel John O'Fallon, who resided in
the suburbs of the city. This man had a wife and three children. As soon
as the purchase was made, he was put in jail for safe keeping, until
we should be ready to start for New Orleans. His wife visited him while
there, several times, and several times when she went for that purpose
was refused admittance.

In the course of eight or nine weeks Mr. Walker had his cargo of human
flesh made up. There was in this lot a number of old men and women, some
of them with gray locks. We left St. Louis in the steamboat Carlton,
Captain Swan, bound for New Orleans. On our way down, and before we
reached Rodney, the place where we made our first stop, I had to prepare
the old slaves for market. I was ordered to have the old men's whiskers
shaved off, and the grey hairs plucked out where they were not too
numerous, in which case he had a preparation of blacking to color it,
and with a blacking brush we would put it on. This was new business to
me, and was performed in a room where the passengers could not see us.
These slaves were also taught how old they were by Mr. Walker, and after
going through the blacking process they looked ten or fifteen years
younger; and I am sure that some of those who purchased slaves of Mr.
Walker were dreadfully cheated, especially in the ages of the slaves
which they bought.

We landed at Rodney, and the slaves were driven to the pen in the back
part of the village. Several were sold at this place, during our stay
of four or five days, when we proceeded to Natchez. There we landed at
night, and the gang were put in the warehouse until morning, when they
were driven to the pen. As soon as the slaves are put in these pens,
swarms of planters may be seen in and about them. They knew when Walker
was expected, as he always had the time advertised forehand when he
would be in Rodney, Natchez, and New Orleans. These were the principal
places where he offered his slaves for sale.

When at Natchez the second time, I saw a slave very cruelly whipped. He
belonged to a Mr. Broadwell, a merchant who kept a store on the wharf.
The slave's name was Lewis. I had known him several years, as he was
formerly from St. Louis. We were expecting a steamboat down the river,
in which we were to take passage for New Orleans. Mr. Walker sent me
to the landing to watch for the boat, ordering me to inform him on its
arrival. While there I went into the store to see Lewis. I saw a slave
in the store, and asked him where Lewis was. Said he, "They have got
Lewis hanging between the heavens and the earth." I asked him what he
meant by that. He told me to go into the warehouse and see. I went in,
and found Lewis there. He was tied up to a beam, with his toes just
touching the floor. As there was no one in the warehouse but himself,
I inquired the reason of his being in that situation. He said Mr.
Broadwell had sold his wife to a planter six miles from the city, and
that he had been to visit her--that he went in the night, expecting to
return before daylight, and went without his master's permission. The
patrol had taken him up before he reached his wife. He was put in jail,
and his master had to pay for his catching and keeping, and that was
what he was tied up for.

Just as he finished his story, Mr. Broadwell came in, and inquired what
I was doing there. I knew not what to say, and while I was thinking what
reply to make he struck me over the head with the cowhide, the end of
which struck me over my right eye, sinking deep into the flesh, leaving
a scar which I carry to this day. Before I visited Lewis he had received
fifty lashes. Mr. Broad-well gave him fifty lashes more after I came
out, as I was afterwards informed by Lewis himself.

The next day we proceeded to New Orleans, and put the gang in the same
negro-pen which we occupied before. In a short time the planters came
flocking to the pen to purchase slaves. Before the slaves were exhibited
for sale, they were dressed and driven out into the yard. Some were set
to dancing, some to jumping, some to singing, and some to playing cards.
This was done to make them appear cheerful and happy. My business was to
see that they were placed in those situations before the arrival of the
purchasers, and I have often set them to dancing when their cheeks were
wet with tears. As slaves were in good demand at that time, they were
all soon disposed of, and we again set out for St. Louis.

On our arrival, Mr. Walker purchased a farm five or six miles from the
city. He had no family, but made a housekeeper of one of his female
slaves. Poor Cynthia! I knew her well. She was a quadroon, and one of
the most beautiful women I ever saw. She was a native of St. Louis, and
bore an irreproachable character for virtue and propriety of conduct.
Mr. Walker bought her for the New Orleans market, and took her down with
him on one of the trips that I made with him. Never shall I forget the
circumstances of that voyage! On the first night that we were on board
the steamboat, he directed me to put her into a state-room he had
provided for her, apart from the other slaves.

I had seen too much of the workings of slavery not to know what this
meant. I accordingly watched him into the state-room, and listened to
hear what passed between them. I heard him make his base offers, and her
reject them. He told her that if she would accept his vile proposals,
he would take her back with him to St. Louis, and establish her as his
housekeeper on his farm. But if she persisted in rejecting them, he
would sell her as a field hand on the worst plantation on the river.
Neither threats nor bribes prevailed, however, and he retired,
disappointed of his prey.

The next morning poor Cynthia told me what had passed, and bewailed
her sad fate with floods of tears. I comforted and encouraged her all
I could; but I foresaw but too well what the result must be. Without
entering into any further particulars, suffice it to say that Walker
performed his part of the contract at that time. He took her back to St.
Louis, established her as his mistress and housekeeper at his farm, and
before I left, he had two children by her. But, mark the end! Since I
have been at the North, I have been credibly informed that Walker has
been married, and, as a previous measure, sold poor Cynthia and her
four children (she having had two more since I came away) into hopeless
bondage!

He soon commenced purchasing to make up the third gang. We took
steamboat, and went to Jefferson City, a town on the Missouri river.
Here we landed, and took stage for the interior of the state. He bought
a number of slaves as he passed the different farms and villages. After
getting twenty-two or twenty-three men and women, we arrived at St.
Charles, a village on the banks of the Missouri. Here he purchased a
woman who had a child in her arms, appearing to be four or five weeks
old.

We had been travelling by land for some days, and were in hopes to have
found a boat at this place for St. Louis, but were disappointed. As no
boat was expected for some days, we started for St. Louis by land.
Mr. Walker had purchased two horses. He rode one, and I the other. The
slaves were chained together, and we took up our line of march, Mr.
Walker taking the lead, and I bringing up the rear. Though the distance
was not more than twenty miles, we did not reach it the first day. The
road was worse than any that I have ever travelled.

[Illustration: 0048]

Soon after we left St. Charles the young child grew very cross, and kept
up a noise during the greater part of the day. Mr. Walker complained
of its crying several times, and told the mother to stop the child's
d------d noise, or he would. The woman tried to keep the child from
crying, but could not. We put up at night with an acquaintance of Mr.
Walker, and in the morning, just as we were about to start, the child
again commenced crying. Walker stepped up to her, and told her to give
the child to him. The mother tremblingly obeyed. He took the child by
one arm, as you would a cat by the leg, walked into the house, and said
to the lady,

"Madam, I will make you a present of this little nigger; it keeps such a
noise that I can't bear it."

"Thank you, sir," said the lady.

The mother, as soon as she saw that her child was to be left, ran up to
Mr. Walker, and falling upon her knees, begged him to let her have her
child; she clung around his legs, and cried, "Oh, my child! my child!
master, do let me have my child! oh, do, do, do! I will stop its crying
if you will only let me have it again." When I saw this woman crying
for her child so piteously, a shudder--a feeling akin to horror--shot
through my frame. I have often since in imagination heard her crying for
her child:--

None but those who have been in a slave state, and who have seen the
American slave-trader engaged in his nefarious traffic, can estimate the
sufferings their victims undergo. If there is one feature of American
slavery more abominable than another, it is that which sanctions
the buying and selling of human beings. The African slave-trade was
abolished by the American Congress some twenty years since; and now, by
the laws of the country, if an American is found engaged in the African
slave-trade, he is considered a pirate; and if found guilty of such, the
penalty would be death.

Although the African slave-trader has been branded as a pirate, men
are engaged in the traffic in slaves in this country, who occupy high
positions in society, and hold offices of honor in the councils of the
nation; and not a few have made their fortunes by this business.

After the woman's child had been given away, Mr. Walker commanded her to
return into the ranks with the other slaves. Women who had children
were not chained, but those that had none were. As soon as her child was
disposed of she was chained in the gang.

The following song I have often heard the slaves sing, when about to be
carried to the far south. It is said to have been composed by a slave.

                   "See these poor souls from Africa

                   Transported to America;

                   We are stolen, and sold to Georgia--

                   Will you go along with me?

                   We are stolen, and sold to Georgia--

                   Come sound the jubilee!

                   See wives and husbands sold apart,

                   Their children's screams will break my heart;--

                   There's a better day a coming--

                   Will you go along with me?

                   There's a better day a coming,

                   Go sound the jubilee!

                   O, gracious Lord! when shall it be,

                   That we poor souls shall all be free!

                   Lord, break them slavery powers,

                   Will you go along with me?

                   Lord, break them slavery powers,

                   Go sound the jubilee!

                   Dear Lord, dear Lord, when slavery 'll cease,

                   Then we poor souls will have our peace;--

                   There's a better day a coming--

                   Will you go along with me?

                   There's a better day a coming,

                   Go sound the jubilee!"

We finally arrived at Mr. Walker's farm. He had a house built during
our absence to put slaves in. It was a kind of domestic jail. The slaves
were put in the jail at night, and worked on the farm during the day.
They were kept here until the gang was completed, when we again started
for New Orleans, on board the steamboat North America, Capt. Alexander
Scott. We had a large number of slaves in this gang. One, by the name of
Joe, Mr. Walker was training up to take my place, as my time was nearly
out, and glad was I. We made our first stop at Vicksburg, where we
remained one week and sold several slaves.

Mr. Walker, though not a good master, had not flogged a slave since I
had been with him, though he had threatened me. The slaves were kept in
the pen, and he always put up at the best hotel, and kept his wines in
his room, for the accommodation of those who called to negotiate with
him for the purchase of slaves. One day, while we were at Vicksburg,
several gentlemen came to see him for that purpose, and as usual the
wine was called for. I took the tray and started around with it, and
having accidentally filled some of the glasses too full, the gentlemen
spilled the wine on their clothes as they went to drink. Mr. Walker
apologized to them for my carelessness, but looked at me as though he
would see me again on this subject.

After the gentlemen had left the room, he asked me what I meant by my
carelessness, and said that he would attend to me. The next morning he
gave me a note to carry to the jailer, and a dollar in money to give
to him. I suspected that all was not right, so I went down near the
landing, where I met with a sailor, and, walking up to him, asked him
if he would be so kind as to read the note for me. He read it over, and
then looked at me. I asked him to tell me what was in it. Said he,

"They are going to give you hell."

"Wy?" said I.

He said, "This is a note to have you whipped, and says that you have a
dollar to pay for it."

He handed me back the note, and off I started. I knew not what to do,
but was determined not to be whipped. I went up to the jail--took a
look at it, and walked off again. As Mr. Walker was acquainted with
the jailer, I feared that I should be found out if I did not go, and be
treated in consequence of it still worse.

While I was meditating on the subject, I saw a colored man about my size
walk up, and the thought struck me in a moment to send him with my note.
I walked up to him, and asked him who he belonged to. He said he was a
free man, and had been in the city but a short time. I told him I had
a note to go into the jail, and get a trunk to carry to one of the
steamboats; but was so busily engaged that I could not do it, although I
had a dollar to pay for it. He asked me if I would not give him the job.
I handed him the note and the dollar, and off he started for the jail.

I watched to see that he went in, and as soon as I saw the door close
behind him, I walked around the corner, and took my station, intending
to see how my friend looked when he came out. I had been there but
a short time, when a colored man came around the corner, and said to
another colored man with whom he was acquainted--"They are giving a
nigger scissors in the jail."

"What for?" said the other. The man continued,

"A nigger came into the jail, and asked for the jailer. The jailer came
out, and he handed him a note, and said he wanted to get a trunk. The
jailer told him to go with him, and he would give him the trunk. So he
took him into the room, and told the nigger to give up the dollar. He
said a man had given him the dollar to pay for getting the trunk. But
that lie would not answer. So they made him strip himself, and then they
tied him down, and are now whipping him."

I stood by all the while listening to their talk, and soon found out
that the person alluded to was my customer. I went into the street
opposite the jail, and concealed myself in such a manner that I could
not be seen by any one coming out. I had been there but a short time,
when the young man made his appearance, and looked around for me. I,
unobserved, came forth from my hiding-place, behind a pile of brick, and
he pretty soon saw me, and came up to me complaining bitterly, saying
that I had played a trick upon him. I denied any knowledge of what the
note contained, and asked him what they had done to him. He told me in
substance what I heard the man tell who had come out of the jail.

"Yes," said he, "they whipped me and took my dollar, and gave me this
note."

He showed me the note which the jailer had given him, telling him to
give it to his master. I told him I would give him fifty cents for
it--that being all the money I had. He gave it to me and took his money.
He had received twenty lashes on his bare back, with the negro-whip.

I took the note and started for the hotel where I had left Mr. Walker.
Upon reaching the hotel, I handed it to a stranger whom I had not seen
before, and requested him to read it to me. As near as I can recollect,
it was as follows:--

"Dear Sir:--By your direction, I have given your boy twenty lashes. He
is a very saucy boy, and tried to make me believe that he did not belong
to you, and I put it on to him well for lying to me.

"I remain

"Your obedient servant."

It is true that in most of the slave-holding cities, when a gentleman
wishes his servants whipped, he can send him to the jail and have it
done. Before I went in where Mr. Walker was, I wet my cheeks a little,
as though I had been crying. He looked at me, and inquired what was the
matter. I told him that I had never had such a whipping in my life, and
handed him the note. He looked at it and laughed;--"And so you told him
that you did not belong to me?"

"Yes, sir," said I. "I did not know that there was any harm in that." He
told me I must behave myself, if I did not want to be whipped again.

This incident shows how it is that slavery makes its victims lying and
mean; for which vices it afterwards reproaches them, and uses them as
arguments to prove that they deserve no better fate. Had I entertained
the same views of right and wrong which I now do, I am sure I should
never have practised the deception upon that poor fellow which I did. I
know of no act committed by me while in slavery which I have regretted
more than that; and I heartily desire that it may be at some time or
other in my power to make him amends for his vicarious sufferings in my
behalf.




CHAPTER VI.

In a few days we reached New Orleans, and arriving there in the night,
remained on board until morning. While at New Orleans this time, I saw
a slave killed; an account of which has been published by Theodore D.
Weld, in his book entitled "Slavery as it is." The circumstances were as
follows. In the evening, between seven and eight o'clock, a slave came
running down the levee, followed by several men and boys. The whites
were crying out, "Stop that nigger! stop that nigger!" while the poor
panting slave, in almost breathless accents, was repeating, "I did not
steal the meat--I did not steal the meat." The poor man at last took
refuge in the river. The whites who were in pursuit of him, run on board
of one of the boats to see if they could discover him. They finally
espied him under the bow of the steamboat Trenton. They got a pike-pole,
and tried to drive him from his hiding place. When they would strike at
him he would dive under the water. The water was so cold, that it soon
became evident that he must come out or be drowned.

While they were trying to drive him from under the bow of the boat or
drown him, he would in broken and imploring accents say, "I did not
steal the meat; I did not steal the meat. My master lives up the river.
I want to see my master. I did not steal the meat. Do let me go home
to master." After punching him, and striking him over the head for some
time, he at last sunk in the water, to rise no more alive.

On the end of the pike-pole with which they were striking him was a
hook, which caught in his clothing, and they hauled him up on the bow of
the boat. Some said he was dead; others said he was "_playing possum_;"
while others kicked him to make him get up; but it was of no use--he was
dead.

As soon as they became satisfied of this, they commenced leaving, one
after another. One of the hands on the boat informed the captain that
they had killed the man, and that the dead body was lying on the deck.
The captain came on deck, and said to those who were remaining, "You
have killed this nigger; now take him off of my boat." The captain's
name was Hart. The dead body was dragged on shore and left there. I went
on board of the boat where our gang of slaves were, and during the whole
night my mind was occupied with what I had seen. Early in the morning I
went on shore to see if the dead body remained there. I found it in the
same position that it was left the night before. I watched to see what
they would do with it. It was left there until between eight and nine
o'clock, when a cart, which takes up the trash out of the streets, came
along, and the body was thrown in, and in a few minutes more was covered
over with dirt which they were removing from the streets. During the
whole time, I did not see more than six or seven persons around it, who,
from their manner, evidently regarded it as no uncommon occurrence.

During our stay in the city I met with a young white man with whom I was
well acquainted in St. Louis. He had been sold into slavery, under the
following circumstances. His father was drunkard, and very poor, with a
family of five or six children. The father died, and left the mother to
take care of and provide for the children as best she might. The eldest
was a boy, named Burrill, about thirteen years of age, who did chores
in a store kept by Mr. Riley, to assist his mother in procuring a living
for the family. After working with him two years, Mr. Riley took him to
New Orleans to wait on him while in that city on a visit, and when he
returned to St. Louis, he told the mother of the boy that he had died
with the yellow fever. Nothing more was heard from him, no one supposing
him to be alive. I was much astonished when Burrill told me his story.
Though I sympathized with him I could not assist him. We were both
slaves. He was poor, uneducated, and without friends; and, if living,
is, I presume, still held as a slave.

After selling out this cargo of human flesh, we returned to St. Louis,
and my time was up with Mr. Walker. I had served him one year, and it
was the longest year I ever lived.




CHAPTER VII.

I was sent home, and was glad enough to leave the service of one who
was tearing the husband from the wife, the child from the mother, and
the sister from the brother--but a trial more severe and heart-rending
than any which I had yet met with awaited me. My dear sister had been
sold to a man who was going to Natchez, and was lying in jail awaiting
the hour of his departure. She had expressed her determination to
die, rather than go to the far south, and she was put in jail for
safekeeping. I went to the jail the same day that I arrived, but as the
jailer was not in I could not see her.

I went home to my master, in the country, and the first day after my
return he came where I was at work, and spoke to me very politely. I
knew from his appearance that something was the matter. After talking to
me about my several journeys to New Orleans with Mr. Walker, he told me
that he was hard pressed for money, and as he had sold my mother and all
her children except me, he thought it would be better to sell me than
any other one, and that as I had been used to living in the city, he
thought it probable that I would prefer it to a country life. I raised
up my head, and looked him full in the face. When my eyes caught his he
immediately looked to the ground. After a short pause, I said,

"Master, mother has often told me that you are a near relative of mine,
and I have often heard you admit the fact; and after you have hired me
out, and received, as I once heard you say, nine hundred dollars for my
services--after receiving this large sum, will you sell me to be carried
to New Orleans or some other place?"

"No," said he, "I do not intend to sell you to a negro trader. If I
had wished to have done that, I might have sold you to Mr. Walker for a
large sum, but I would not sell you to a negro trader. You may go to the
city, and find you a good master."

"But," said I, "I cannot find a good master in the whole city of St.
Louis."

"Why?" said he.

"Because there are no good masters in the state."

"Do you not call me a good master?"

"If you were you would not sell me."

"Now I will give you one week to find a master in and surely you can do
it in that time."

The price set by my evangelical master upon my soul and body was
the trifling sum of five hundred dollars. I tried to enter into some
arrangement by which I might purchase my freedom; but he would enter
into no such arrangement.

I set out for the city with the understanding that I was to return in
a week with some one to become my new master. Soon after reaching the
city, I went to the jail, to learn if I could once more see my sister;
but could not gain admission. I then went to mother, and learned from
her that the owner of my sister intended to start for Natchez in a few
days.

I went to the jail again the next day, and Mr. Simonds, the keeper,
allowed me to see my sister for the last time. I cannot give a just
description of the scene at that parting interview. Never, never can
be erased from my heart the occurrences of that day! When I entered the
room where she was, she was seated in one corner, alone. There were
four other women in the same room, belonging to the same man. He had
purchased them, he said, for his own use. She was seated with her face
towards the door where I entered, yet she did not look up until I walked
up to her. As soon as she observed me she sprung up, threw her arms
around my neck, leaned her head upon my breast, and, without uttering a
word, burst into tears. As soon as she recovered herself sufficiently to
speak, she advised me to take mother, and try to get out of slavery. She
said there was no hope for herself--that she must live and die a slave.
After giving her some advice, and taking from my finger a ring and
placing it upon hers, I bade her farewell forever, and returned to my
mother, and then and there made up my mind to leave for Canada as soon
as possible.

I had been in the city nearly two days, and as I was to be absent only
a week, I thought best to get on my journey as soon as possible. In
conversing with mother, I found her unwilling to make the attempt to
reach a land of liberty, but she counselled me to get my liberty if I
could.

She said, as all her children were in slavery, she did not wish to leave
them. I could not bear the idea of leaving her among those pirates, when
there was a prospect of being able to get away from them. After much
persuasion I succeeded in inducing her to make the attempt to get away.

The time fixed for our departure was the next night. I had with me a
little money that I had received, from time to time, from gentlemen for
whom I had done errands. I took my scanty means and purchased some dried
beef, crackers and cheese, which I carried to mother, who had provided
herself with a bag to carry it in. I occasionally thought of my old
master, and of my mission to the city to find a new one. I waited with
the most intense anxiety for the appointed time to leave the land of
slavery, in search of a land of liberty.

The time at length arrived, and we left the city just as the clock
struck nine. We proceeded to the upper part of the city, where I had
been two or three times during the day, and selected a skiff to carry us
across the river. The boat was not mine, nor did I know to whom it did
belong; neither did I care. The boat was fastened with a small pole,
which, with the aid of a rail, I soon loosened from its moorings. After
hunting round and finding a board to use as an oar, I turned to the
city, and bidding it a long farewell, pushed off my boat. The current
running very swift, we had not reached the middle of the stream before
we were directly opposite the city.

We were soon upon the Illinois shore, and, leaping from the boat, turned
it adrift, and the last I saw of it it was going down the river at
good speed. We took the main road to Alton, and passed through just at
daylight, when we made for the woods, where we remained during the
day. Our reason for going into the woods was, that we expected that Mr.
Mansfield (the man who owned my mother) would start in pursuit of her as
soon as he discovered that she was missing. He also knew that I had been
in the city looking for a new master, and we thought probably he would
go out to my master's to see if he could find my mother, and in so
doing, Dr. Young might be led to suspect that I had gone to Canada to
find a purchaser.

We remained in the woods during the day, and as soon as darkness
overshadowed the earth, we started again on our gloomy way, having no
guide but the _north star_. We continued to travel by night, and secrete
ourselves in the woods by day; and every night, before emerging from
our hiding-place, we would anxiously look for our friend and leader--the
_north star_. And in the language of Pierpont we might have exclaimed,

                   "Star of the North! while blazing day

                   Pours round me its full tide of light,

                   And hides thy pale but faithful ray,

                   I, too, lie hid, and long for night.

                   For night;--I dare not walk at noon,

                   Nor dare I trust the faithless moon,

                   Nor faithless man, whose burning lust

                   For gold hath riveted my chain;

                   No other leader can I trust

                   But thee, of even the starry train;

                   For, all the host around thee burning,

                   Like faithless man, keep turning, turning.

                   In the dark top of southern pines

                   I nestled, when the driver's horn

                   Called to the field, in lengthening lines,

                   My fellows, at the break of morn.

                   And there I lay, till thy sweet face

                   Looked in upon my 'hiding place,'

                   Star of the North!

                   Thy light, that no poor slave deceiveth,

                   Shall set me free."

I




CHAPTER VIII.

As we travelled towards a land of liberty, my heart would at times leap
for joy. At other times, being, as I was, almost constantly on my
feet, I felt as though I could travel no further. But when I thought
of slavery, with its democratic whips--its republican chains--its
evangelical blood-hounds, and its religious slave-holders--when I
thought of all this paraphernalia of American democracy and religion
behind me, and the prospect of liberty before me, I was encouraged to
press forward, my heart was strengthened, and I forgot that I was tired
or hungry.

On the eighth day of our journey, we had a very heavy rain, and in a few
hours after it commenced we had not a dry thread upon our bodies. This
made our journey still more unpleasant. On the tenth day, we found
ourselves entirely destitute of provisions, and how to obtain any we
could not tell. We finally resolved to stop at some farmhouse, and try
to get something to eat. We had no sooner determined to do this, than
we went to a house, and asked them for some food. We were treated with
great kindness, and they not only gave us something to eat, but gave us
provisions to carry with us. They advised us to travel by day and lie by
at night. Finding ourselves about one hundred and fifty miles from St.
Louis, we concluded that it would be safe to travel by daylight, and
did not leave the house until the next morning. We travelled on that day
through a thickly settled country, and through one small village. Though
we were fleeing from a land of oppression, our hearts were still there.
My dear sister and two beloved brothers were behind us, and the idea of
giving them up, and leaving them, forever, made us feel sad. But with
all this depression of heart, the thought that I should one day be free,
and call my body my own, buoyed me up, and made my heart leap for joy.
I had just been telling my mother how I should try to get employment as
soon as we reached Canada, and how I intended to purchase us a little
farm, and how I would earn money enough to buy sister and brothers, and
how happy we would be in our own _free home_--when three men came up on
horseback, and ordered us to stop.

[Illustration: 0072]

I turned to the one who appeared to be the principal man, and asked
him what he wanted. He said he had a warrant to take us up. The three
immediately dismounted, and one took from his pocket a handbill,
advertising us as runaways, and offering a reward of two hundred
dollars for our apprehension and delivery in the city of St. Louis. The
advertisement had been put out by Isaac Mansfield and John Young.

While they were reading the advertisement, mother looked me in the face,
and burst into tears. A cold chill ran over me, and such a sensation
I never experienced before, and I hope never to again. They took out a
rope and tied me, and we were taken back about six miles, to the house
of the individual who appeared to be the leader. We reached there about
seven o'clock in the evening, had supper, and were separated for the
night. Two men remained in the room during the night. Before the family
retired to rest, they were all called together to attend prayers. The
man who but a few hours before had bound my hands together with a strong
cord, read a chapter from the

Bible, and then offered up prayer, just as though God had sanctioned the
act he had just committed upon a poor, panting, fugitive slave.

The next morning a blacksmith came in, and put a pair of handcuffs on
me, and we started on our journey back to the land of whips, chains and
Bibles. Mother was not tied, but was closely watched at night. We were
carried back in a wagon, and after four days' travel, we came in sight
of St. Louis. I cannot describe my feelings upon approaching the city.

As we were crossing the ferry, Mr. Wiggins, the owner of the ferry, came
up to me, and inquired what I had been doing that I was in chains.
He had not heard that I had run away. In a few minutes we were on the
Missouri side, and were taken directly to the jail. On the way thither,
I saw several of my friends, who gave me a nod of recognition as I
passed them. After reaching the jail, we were locked up in different
apartments.




CHAPTER IX.

I had been in jail but a short time when I heard that my master was
sick, and nothing brought more joy to my heart than that intelligence.
I prayed fervently for him--not for his recovery, but for his death. I
knew he would be exasperated at having to pay for my apprehension, and
knowing his cruelty, I feared him. While in jail, I learned that my
sister Elizabeth, who was in prison when we left the city, had been
carried off four days before our arrival.

I had been in jail but a few hours when three negro-traders, learning
that I was secured thus for running away, came to my prison-house and
looked at me, expecting that I would be offered for sale. Mr. Mansfield,
the man who owned mother, came into the jail as soon as Mr. Jones, the
man who arrested us, informed him that he had brought her back. He told
her that he would not whip her, but would sell her to a negro-trader,
or take her to New Orleans himself. After being in jail about one week,
master sent a man to take me out of jail, and send me home. I was taken
out and carried home, and the old man was well enough to sit up. He had
me brought into the room where he was, and as I entered, he asked me
where I had been? I told him I had acted according to his orders. He
had told me to look for a master, and I had been to look for one. He
answered that he did not tell me to go to Canada to look for a master. I
told him that as I had served him faithfully, and had been the means of
putting a number of hundreds of dollars into his pocket, I thought I had
a right to my liberty. He said he had promised my father that I should
not be sold to supply the New Orleans market, or he would sell me to a
negro-trader.

I was ordered to go into the field to work, and was closely watched by
the overseer during the day, and locked up at night. The overseer gave
me a severe whipping on the second day that I was in the field. I had
been at home but a short time, when master was able to ride to the city;
and on his return he informed me that he had sold me to Samuel Willi,
a merchant tailor. I knew Mr. Willi. I had lived with him three or four
months some years before when he hired me of my master.

Mr. Willi was not considered by his servants as a very bad man, nor was
he the best of masters. I went to my new home, and found my new mistress
very glad to see me. Mr. Willi owned two servants before he purchased
me--Robert and Charlotte. Robert was an excellent white-washer, and
hired his time from his master, paying him one dollar per day, besides
taking care of himself. He was known in the city by the name of Bob
Music. Charlotte was an old woman, who attended to the cooking, washing,
&c. Mr. Willi was not a wealthy man, and did not feel able to keep many
servants around his house; so he soon decided to hire me out, and as I
had been accustomed to service in steamboats, he gave me the privilege
of finding such employment.

I soon secured a situation on board the steamer Otto, Capt. J. B. Hill,
which sailed from St. Louis to Independence, Missouri. My former master,
Dr. Young, did not let Mr. Willi know that I had run away, or he would
not have permitted me to go on board a steamboat. The boat was not quite
ready to commence running, and therefore I had to remain with Mr. Willi.
But during this time, I had to undergo a trial for which I was entirely
unprepared. My mother, who had been in jail since her return until the
present time, was now about being carried to New Orleans, to die on a
cotton, sugar, or rice plantation!

I had been several times to the jail, but could obtain no interview
with her. I ascertained, however, the time the boat in which she was to
embark would sail, and as I had not seen mother since her being thrown
into prison, I felt anxious for the hour of sailing to come. At last,
the day arrived when I was to see her for the first time after our
painful separation, and, for aught that I knew, for the last time in
this world!

At about ten o'clock in the morning I went on board of the boat, and
found her there in company with, fifty or sixty other slaves. She was
chained to another woman. On seeing me, she immediately dropped her
head upon her heaving bosom. She moved not, neither did she weep. Her
emotions were too deep for tears. I approached, threw my arms around her
neck, kissed her, and fell upon my knees, begging her forgiveness, for
I thought myself to blame for her sad condition; for if I had not
persuaded her to accompany me, she would not then have been in chains.

She finally raised her head, looked me in the lace, (and such a look
none but an angel can give!) and said, "_My dear son, you are not to
blame for my being here. You have done nothing more nor less than your
duty. Do not, I pray you, weep for me. I cannot last long upon a cotton
plantation. I feel that my heavenly Master will soon call me home, and
then I shall be out of the hands of the slave-holders!_"

I could bear no more--my heart struggled to free itself from the human
form. In a moment she saw Mr. Mansfield coming toward that part of the
boat, and she whispered into my ear, "_My child, we must soon part to
meet no more this side of the grave. You have ever said that you would
not die a slave; that you would be a freeman. Now try to get your
liberty! You will soon have no one to look after but yourself!_" and
just as she whispered the last sentence into my ear, Mansfield came up
to me, and with an oath, said, "Leave here this instant; you have been
the means of my losing one hundred dollars to get this wench back"--at
the same time kicking me with a heavy pair of boots. As I left her, she
gave one shriek, saying, "God be with you!" It was the last time that I
saw her, and the last word I heard her utter.

I walked on shore. The bell was tolling. The boat was about to start.
I stood with a heavy heart, waiting to see her leave the wharf. As I
thought of my mother, I could but feel that I had lost

                        "------the glory of my life,

                        My blessing and my pride!

                        I half forgot the name of slave,

                        When she was by my side."

The love of liberty that had been burning in my bosom had well-nigh gone
out. I felt as though I was ready to die. The boat moved gently from the
wharf, and while she glided down the river, I realized that my mother
was indeed

                   "Gone--gone--sold and gone,

                   To the rice swamp, dank and lone!"

After the boat was out of sight I returned home; but my thoughts were so
absorbed in what I had witnessed, that I knew not what I was about half
of the time. Night came, but it brought no sleep to my eyes.

In a few days, the boat upon which I was to work being ready, I went on
board to commence. This employment suited me better than living in the
city, and I remained until the close of navigation; though it
proved anything but pleasant. The captain was a drunken, profligate,
hardhearted creature, not knowing how to treat himself, or any other
person.

The boat, on its second trip, brought down Mr. Walker, the man of whom I
have spoken in a previous chapter, as hiring my time. He had between one
and two hundred slaves, chained and manacled. Among them was a man that
formerly belonged to my old master's brother, Aaron Young. His name was
Solomon. He was a preacher, and belonged to the same church with his
master. I was glad to see the old man. He wept like a child when he told
me how he had been sold from his wife and children.

The boat carried down, while I remained on board, four or five gangs of
slaves. Missouri, though a comparatively new state, is very much engaged
in raising slaves to supply the southern market. In a former chapter,
I have mentioned that I was once in the employ of a slave-trader, or
driver, as he is called at the south. For fear that some may think that
I have misrepresented a slave-driver, I will here give an extract from
a paper published in a slave-holding state, Tennessee called the
"Millennial Trumpeter."

"Droves of negroes, chained together in dozens and scores, and
hand-cuffed, have been driven through our country in numbers far
surpassing any previous year, and these vile slave-drivers and dealers
are swarming like buzzards around a carrion. Through this county, you
cannot pass a few miles in the great roads without having every feeling
of humanity insulted and lacerated by this spectacle, nor can you go
into any county or any neighborhood, scarcely, without seeing or hearing
of some of these despicable creatures, called negro-drivers.

"Who is a negro-driver? One whose eyes dwell with delight on lacerated
bodies of helpless men, women and children; whose soul feels diabolical
raptures at the chains, and hand-cuffs, and cart-whips, for inflicting
tortures on weeping mothers torn from helpless babes, and on husbands
and wives torn asunder forever!"

Dark and revolting as is the picture here drawn, it is from the pen of
one living in the midst of slavery. But though these men may cant about
negro-drivers, and tell what despicable creatures they are, who is it,
I ask, that supplies them with the human beings that they are tearing
asunder?

I answer, as far as I have any knowledge of the state where I came from,
that those who raise slaves for the market are to be found among all
classes, from Thomas H. Benton down to the lowest political demagogue
who may be able to purchase a woman for the purpose of raising stock,
and from the doctor of divinity down to the most humble lay member in
the church.

It was not uncommon in St. Louis to pass by an auction-stand, and behold
a woman upon the auction-block, and hear the seller crying out,

"_How much is offered for this woman? She is a good cook, good washer, a
good obedient servant. She has got religion!_" Why should this man tell
the purchasers that she has religion? I answer, because in Missouri,
and as far as I have any knowledge of slavery in the other states, the
religious teaching consists in teaching the slave that he must never
strike a white man; that God made him for a slave; and that, when
whipped, he must not find fault--for the Bible says, "_He that knoweth
his master's will and doeth it not, shall be beaten with many stripes!_"
And slaveholders find such religion very profitable to them.

After leaving the steamer Otto, I resided at home, in Mr. Willi's
family, and again began to lay my plans for making my escape from
slavery. The anxiety to be a freeman would not let me rest day or night.
I would think of the northern cities that I had heard so much about;--of
Canada, where so many of my acquaintances had found a refuge. I would
dream at night that I was in Canada, a freeman, and on waking in the
morning, weep to find myself so sadly mistaken.

               "I would think of Victoria's domain,

                   And in a moment I seemed to be there!

               But the fear of being taken again,

                   Soon hurried me back to despair."

Mr. Willi treated me better than Dr. Young ever had; but instead of
making me contented and happy, it only rendered me the more miserable,
for it enabled me better to appreciate liberty. Mr. Willi was a man who
loved money as most men do, and without looking for an opportunity to
sell me, he found one in the offer of Captain Enoch Price, a steamboat
owner and commission merchant, living in the city of St. Louis. Captain
Price tendered seven hundred dollars, which was two hundred more than
Mr. Willi had paid. He therefore thought best to accept the offer. I was
wanted for a carriage driver, and Mrs. Price was very much pleased with
the captain's bargain. His family consisted of himself, wife, one child,
and three servants, besides myself,--one man and two women.

Mrs. Price was very proud of her servants, always keeping them well
dressed, and as soon as I had been purchased, she resolved to have a new
carriage. And soon one was procured, and all preparations were made for
a turn-out in grand style, I being the driver.

One of the female servants was a girl some eighteen or twenty years of
age, named Maria. Mrs. Price was very soon determined to have us united,
if she could so arrange matters. She would often urge upon me the
necessity of having a wife, saying that it would be so pleasant for me
to take one in the same family! But getting married, while in slavery,
was the last of my thoughts; and had I been ever so inclined, I should
not have married Maria, as my love had already gone in another quarter.
Mrs. Price soon found out that her efforts at this match-making between
Maria and myself would not prove successful. She also discovered (or
thought she had) that I was rather partial to a girl named Eliza,
who was owned by Dr. Mills. This induced her at once to endeavor the
purchase of Eliza, so great was her desire to get me a wife!

Before making the attempt, however, she deemed it best to talk to me a
little upon the subject of love, courtship, and marriage. Accordingly,
one afternoon she called me into her room--telling me to take a chair
and sit down. I did so, thinking it rather strange, for servants are not
very often asked thus to sit down in the same room with the master or
mistress. She said that she had found out that I did not care enough
about Maria to marry her. I told her that was true. She then asked me
if there was not a girl in the city that I loved. Well, now, this was
coming into too close quarters with me! People, generally, don't like
to tell their love stories to everybody that may think fit to ask about
them, and it was so with me. But, after blushing a while and recovering
myself, I told her that I did not want a wife. She then asked me if I
did not think something of Eliza. I told her that I did. She then said
that if I wished to marry Eliza, she would purchase her if she could.

I gave but little encouragement to this proposition, as I was determined
to make another trial to get my liberty, and I knew that if I should
have a wife, I should not be willing to leave her behind; and if I
should attempt to bring her with me, the chances would be difficult for
success. However, Eliza was purchased, and brought into the family.




CHAPTER X.

But the more I thought of the trap laid by Mrs. Price to make me
satisfied with my new home, by getting me a wife, the more I determined
never to marry any woman on earth until I should get my liberty. But
this secret I was compelled to keep to myself, which placed me in a
very critical position. I must keep upon good terms with Mrs. Price and
Eliza. I therefore promised Mrs. Price that I would marry Eliza; but
said that I was not then ready. And I had to keep upon good terms with
Eliza, for fear that Mrs. Price would find out that I did not intend to
get married.

I have here spoken of marriage, and it is very common among slaves
themselves to talk of it. And it is common for slaves to be married; or
at least to have the marriage ceremony performed. But there is no such
thing as slaves being lawfully married. There has never yet a case
occurred where a slave has been tried for bigamy. The man may have as
many women as he wishes and the women as many men; and the law takes
no cognizance of such acts among slaves. And in fact some masters, when
they have sold the husband from the wife, compel her to take another.

There lived opposite Captain Price's, Doctor Farrar, well known in St.
Louis. He sold a man named Ben, to one of the traders. He also owned
Ben's wife, and in a few days he compelled Sally (that was her name)
to marry Peter, another man belonging to him. I asked Sally "why she
married Peter so soon after Ben was sold." She said, "because master
made her do it."

Mr. John Calvert, who resided near our place, had a woman named Lavinia.
She was quite young, and a man to whom she was about to be married was
sold, and carried into the country near St. Charles, about twenty miles
from St. Louis. Mr. Calvert wanted her to get a husband; but she had
resolved not to marry any other man, and she refused. Mr. Calvert
whipped her in such a manner that it was thought she would die. Some of
the citizens had him arrested, but it was soon hushed up. And that was
the last of it. The woman did not die, but it would have been the same
if she had.

Captain Price purchased me in the month of October, and I remained with
him until December, when the family made a voyage to New Orleans, in a
boat owned by himself, and named the "Chester." I served on board as
one of the stewards. On arriving at New Orleans, about the middle of the
month, the boat took in freight for Cincinnati; and it was decided that
the family should go up the river in her, and what was of more interest
to me, I was to accompany them.

The long looked for opportunity to make my escape from slavery was near
at hand.

Captain Price had some fears as to the propriety of taking me near a
free state, or a place where it was likely I could run away, with a
prospect of liberty. He asked me if I had ever been in a free state. "Oh
yes," said I, "I have been in Ohio; my master carried me into that state
once, but I never liked a free state."

It was soon decided that it would be safe to take me with them, and what
made it more safe, Eliza was on the boat with us, and Mrs. Price, to try
me, asked if I thought as much as ever of Eliza.

I told her that Eliza was very dear to me indeed, and that nothing but
death should part us. It was the same as if we were married. This had
the desired effect. The boat left New Orleans, and proceeded up the
river.

I had at different times obtained little sums of money, which I had
reserved for a "rainy day." I procured some cotton cloth, and made me
a bag to carry provisions in. The trials of the past were all lost in
hopes for the future. The love of liberty, that had been burning in
my bosom for years, and had been well-nigh extinguished, was now
resuscitated. At night, when all around was peaceful, I would walk the
decks, meditating upon my happy prospects.

I should have stated, that, before leaving St. Louis, I went to an old
man named Frank, a slave, owned by a Mr. Sarpee. This old man was very
distinguished (not only among the slave population, but also the whites)
as a fortune-teller. He was about seventy years of age, something over
six feet high, and very slender. Indeed, he was so small around his
body, that it looked as though it was not strong enough to hold up his
head.

Uncle Frank was a very great favorite with the young ladies, who would
go to him in great numbers to get their fortunes told. And it was
generally believed that he could really penetrate into the mysteries of
futurity. Whether true or not, he had the _name_, and that is about half
of what one needs in this gullible age. I found Uncle Frank seated in
the chimney corner, about ten o'clock at night. As soon as I entered,
the old man left his seat. I watched his movement as well as I could by
the dim light of the fire. He soon lit a lamp, and coming up, looked me
full in the face, saying, "Well, my son, you have come to get uncle to
tell your fortune, have you?"

"Yes," said I. But how the old man should know what I came for, I could
not tell. However, I paid the fee of twenty-five cents, and he commenced
by looking into a gourd, filled with water. Whether the old man was a
prophet, or the son of a prophet, I cannot say; but there is one thing
certain, many of his predictions were verified.

I am no believer in soothsaying; yet I am sometimes at a loss to know
how Uncle Frank could tell so accurately what would occur in the future.
Among the many things he told was one which was enough to pay me for
all the trouble of hunting him up. It was that I _should be free!_ He
further said, that in trying to get my liberty I would meet with many
severe trials. I thought to myself any fool could tell me that!

The first place in which we landed in a free state was Cairo, a small
village at the mouth of the Ohio river. We remained here but a few
hours, when we proceeded to Louisville. After unloading some of the
cargo, the boat started on her upward trip. The next day was the first
of January. I had looked forward to New Year's day as the commencement
of a new era in the history of my life. I had decided upon leaving the
peculiar institution that day.

During the last night that I served in slavery I did not close my eyes
a single moment. When not thinking of the future, my mind dwelt on the
past. The love of a dear mother, a dear sister, and three dear brothers,
yet living, caused me to shed many tears. If I could only have been
assured of their being dead, I should have felt satisfied; but I
imagined I saw my dear mother in the cotton-field, followed by a
merciless taskmaster, and no one to speak a consoling word to her! I
beheld my dear sister in the hands of a slave-driver, and compelled to
submit to his cruelty! None but one placed in such a situation can for
a moment imagine the intense agony to which these reflections subjected
me.




CHAPTER XI.

At last the time for action arrived. The boat landed at a point which
appeared to me the place of all others to start from. I found that
it would be impossible to carry anything with me but what was upon my
person. I had some provisions, and a single suit of clothes, about
half worn. When the boat was discharging her cargo, and the passengers
engaged carrying their baggage on and off shore, I improved the
opportunity to convey myself with my little effects on land. Taking up
a trunk, I went up the wharf, and was soon out of the crowd. I made
directly for the woods, where I remained until night, knowing well that
I could not travel, even in the state of Ohio, during the day, without
danger of being arrested.

I had long since made up my mind that I would not trust myself in the
hands of any man, white or colored. The slave is brought up to look upon
every white man as an enemy to him and his race; and twenty-one years
in slavery had taught me that there were traitors, even among colored
people. After dark, I emerged from the woods into a narrow path, which
led me into the main travelled road. But I knew not which way to go. I
did not know north from south, east from west. I looked in vain for the
North Star; a heavy cloud hid it from my view. I walked up and down the
road until near midnight, when the clouds disappeared, and I welcomed
the sight of my friend--truly the slave's friend--the North Star!

As soon as I saw it, I knew my course, and before daylight I travelled
twenty or twenty-five miles. It being in the winter, I suffered
intensely from the cold; being without an overcoat, and my other clothes
rather thin for the season. I was provided with a tinder-box, so that
I could make up a fire when necessary. And but for this, I should
certainly have frozen to death; for I was determined not to go to any
house for shelter. I knew of a man belonging to Gen. Ashly, of St.
Louis, who had run away near Cincinnati, on the way to Washington,
but had been caught and carried back into slavery; and I felt that, a
similar fate awaited me, should I be seen by any one. I travelled at
night, and lay by during the day.

On the fourth day my provisions gave out, and then what to do I could
not tell. Have something to eat I must; but how to get it was the
question! On the first night after my food was gone, I went to a barn on
the road-side and there found some ears of corn. I took ten or twelve of
them, and kept on my journey. During the next day, while in the woods,
I roasted my corn and feasted upon it, thanking God that I was so well
provided for.

My escape to a land of freedom now appeared certain, and the prospects
of the future occupied a great part of my thoughts. What should be my
occupation, was a subject of much anxiety to me; and the next thing what
should be my name? I have before stated that my old master, Dr. Young,
had no children of his own, but had with him a nephew, the son of his
brother, Benjamin Young. When this boy was brought to Dr. Young, his
name being William, the same as mine, my mother was ordered to change
mine to something else. This, at the time, I thought to be one of the
most cruel acts that could be committed upon my rights; and I received
several very severe whippings for telling people that my name was
William, after orders were given to change it. Though young, I was
old enough to place a high appreciation upon my name. It was decided,
however, to call me "Sandford," and this name I was known by, not only
upon my master's plantation, but up to the time that I made my escape. I
was sold under the name of Sandford.

But as soon as the subject came to my mind, I resolved on adopting my
old name of William, and let Sandford go by the board, for I always
hated it. Not because there was anything peculiar in the name; but
because it had been forced upon me. It is sometimes common, at the
south, for slaves to take the name of their masters. Some have a
legitimate right to do so. But I always detested the idea of being
called by the name of either of my masters. And as for my father, I
would rather have adopted the name of "Friday," and been known as the
servant of some Robinson Crusoe, than to have taken his name. So I was
not only hunting for my liberty, but also hunting for a name; though I
regarded the latter as of little consequence, if I could but gain the
former. Travelling along the road, I would sometimes speak to myself,
sounding my name over, by way of getting used to it, before I should
arrive among civilized human beings. On the fifth or six day, it rained
very fast, and froze about as fast as it fell, so that my clothes were
one glare of ice. I travelled on at night until I became so chilled and
benumbed--the wind blowing into my face--that I found it impossible
to go any further, and accordingly took shelter in a barn, where I was
obliged to walk about to keep from freezing.

I have ever looked upon that night as the most eventful part of my
escape from slavery. Nothing but the providence of God, and that old
barn, saved me from freezing to death. I received a very severe cold,
which settled upon my lungs, and from time to time my feet had been
frostbitten, so that it was with difficulty I could walk. In this
situation I travelled two days, when I found that I must seek shelter
somewhere, or die.

The thought of death was nothing frightful to me, compared with that
of being caught, and again carried back into slavery. Nothing but the
prospect of enjoying liberty could have induced me to undergo such
trials, for

                   "Behind I left the whips and chains,

                   Before me were sweet Freedom's plains!"

This, and this alone, cheered me onward. But I at last resolved to seek
protection from the inclemency of the weather, and therefore I secured
myself behind some logs and brush, intending to wait there until some
one should pass by; for I thought it probable that I might see some
colored person, or, if not, some one who was not a slaveholder; for I
had an idea that I should know a slaveholder as far as I could see him.

The first person that passed was a man in a buggy-wagon. He looked too
genteel for me to hail him. Very soon another passed by on horseback. I
attempted to speak to him, but fear made my voice fail me. As he passed,
I left my hiding-place, and was approaching the road, when I observed
an old man walking towards me, leading a white horse. He had on a
broad-brimmed hat and a very long coat, and was evidently walking for
exercise. As soon as I saw him, and observed his dress, I thought
to myself, "You are the man that have been looking for!" Nor was I
mistaken. He was the very man!

On approaching me, he asked me, "if I was not a slave." I looked at him
some time, and then asked him "if he knew of any one who would help me,
as I was sick." He answered that he would; but again asked, if I was not
a slave. I told him I was. He then said that I was in a very pro-slavery
neighborhood, and if I would wait until he went home, he would get a
covered wagon for me. I promised to remain. He mounted his horse, and
was soon out of sight.

After he was gone, I meditated whether to wait or not; being
apprehensive that he had gone for some one to arrest me. But I finally
concluded to remain until he should return; removing some few rods to
watch his movements. After a suspense of an hour and a half or more, he
returned with a two-horse covered wagon, such as are usually seen under
the shed of a Quaker meetinghouse on Sundays and Thursdays; for the old
man proved to be a Quaker of the George Fox stamp.

He took me to his house, but it was some time before I could be induced
to enter it; not until the old lady came out, did I venture into the
house. I thought I saw something in the old lady's cap that told me
I was not only safe, but welcome, in her house. I was not, however,
prepared to receive their hospitalities. The only fault I found with
them was their being too kind. I had never had a white man to treat me
as an equal, and the idea of a white lady waiting on me at the table was
still worse! Though the table was loaded with the good things of
this life, I could not eat. I thought if I could only be allowed the
privilege of eating in the kitchen I should be more than satisfied!

Finding that I could not eat, the old lady, who was a "Thompsonian,"
made me a cup of "composition," or "number six;" but it was so strong
and hot, that I called it "_number seven!_" However, I soon found myself
at home in this family. On different occasions, when telling these
facts, I have been asked how I felt upon finding myself regarded as
a man by a white family; especially just having run away from one. I
cannot say that I have ever answered the question yet.

The fact that I was in all probability a freeman, sounded in my ears
like a charm. I am satisfied that none but a slave could place such an
appreciation upon liberty as I did at that time. I wanted to see mother
and sister, that I might tell them "I was free!" I wanted to see my
fellow-slaves in St. Louis, and let them know that the chains were no
longer upon my limbs. I wanted to see Captain Price, and let him learn
from my own lips that I was no more a chattel, but a man! I was anxious,
too, thus to inform Mrs. Price that she must get another coachman. And I
wanted to see Eliza more than I did either Mr. or Mrs. Price!

The fact that I was a freeman--could walk, talk, eat and sleep, as a
man, and no one to stand over me with the blood-clotted cow-hide--all
this made me feel that I was not myself.

The kind friend that had taken me in was named Wells Brown. He was a
devoted friend of the slave; but was very old, and not in the enjoyment
of good health. After being by the fire awhile, I found that my feet had
been very much frozen. I was seized with a fever, which threatened
to confine me to my bed. But my Thompsonian friends soon raised me,
treating me as kindly as if I had been one of their own children. I
remained with them twelve or fifteen days, during which time they made
me some clothing, and the old gentleman purchased me a pair of boots.

I found that I was about fifty or sixty miles from Dayton, in the State
of Ohio, and between one and two hundred miles from Cleaveland, on Lake
Erie, a place I was desirous of reaching on my way to Canada. This I
know will sound strangely to the ears of people in foreign lands, but it
is nevertheless true. An American citizen was fleeing from a democratic,
republican, Christian government, to receive protection under the
monarchy of Great Britain. While the people of the United States boast
of their freedom, they at the same time keep three millions of their own
citizens in chains; and while I am seated here in sight of Bunker Hill
Monument, writing this narrative, I am a slave, and no law, not even in
Massachusetts, can protect me from the hands of the slaveholder!

Before leaving this good Quaker friend, he inquired what my name was
besides William. I told him that I had no other name. "Well," said he,
"thee must have another name. Since thee has got out of slavery, thee
has become a man, and men always have two names."

I told him that he was the first man to extend the hand of friendship to
me, and I would give him the privilege of naming me.

"If I name thee," said he, "I shall call thee Wells Brown, after
myself,"

"But," said I, "I am not willing to lose my name of William. As it was
taken from me once against my will, I am not willing to part with it
again upon any terms.

"Then," said he, "I will call thee William Wells Brown."

"So be it," said I; and I have been known by that name ever since I left
the house of my first white friend, Wells Brown.

After giving me some little change, I again started for Canada. In
four days I reached a public house, and went in to warm myself. I there
learned that some fugitive slaves had just passed through the place. The
men in the bar-room were talking about it, and I thought that it must
have been myself they referred to, and I was therefore afraid to start,
fearing they would seize me; but I finally mustered courage enough, and
took my leave. As soon as I was out of sight, I went into the woods,
and remained there until night, when I again regained the road, and
travelled on until next day.

Not having had any food for nearly two days, I was faint with hunger,
and was in a dilemma what to do, as the little cash supplied me by my
adopted father, and which had contributed to my comfort, was now all
gone. I however concluded to go to a farm-house, and ask for something
to eat. On approaching the door of the first one presenting itself, I
knocked, and was soon met by a man who asked me what I wanted. I told
him that I would like something to eat. He asked me where I was from,
and where I was going. I replied that I had come some way, and was going
to Cleaveland.

After hesitating a moment or two, he told me that he could give me
nothing to eat, adding, "that if I would work, I could get something to
eat."

I felt bad, being thus refused something to sustain nature, but did not
dare tell him that I was a slave.

Just as I was leaving the door, with a heavy heart, a woman, who proved
to be the wife of this gentleman, came to the door, and asked her
husband what I wanted. He did not seem inclined to inform her. She
therefore asked me herself. I told her that I had asked for something to
eat. After a few other questions, she told me to come in, and that she
would give me something to eat.

I walked up to the door, but the husband remained in the passage, as if
unwilling to let me enter.

She asked him two or three times to get out of the way, and let me in.
But as he did not move, she pushed him on one side, bidding me walk in!
I was never before so glad to see a woman push a man aside! Ever since
that act, I have been in favor of "woman's rights!"

After giving me as much food as I could eat, she presented me with ten
cents, all the money then at her disposal, accompanied with a note to
a friend, a few miles further on the road. Thanking this angel of mercy
from an overflowing heart, I pushed on my way, and in three days arrived
at Cleaveland, Ohio.

Being an entire stranger in this place, it was difficult for me to find
where to stop. I had no money, and the lake being frozen, I saw that I
must remain until the opening of the navigation, or go to Canada by way
of Buffalo. But believing myself to be somewhat out of danger, I secured
an engagement at the Mansion House, as a table waiter, in payment for my
board. The proprietor, however, whose name was E. M. Segur, in a short
time, hired me for twelve dollars a month; on which terms I remained
until spring, when I found good employment on board a lake steamboat.

I purchased some books, and at leisure moments perused them with
considerable advantage to my-self. While at Cleaveland, I saw, for the
first time, an anti-slavery newspaper. It was the "_Genius of Universal
Emancipation_," published by Benjamin Lundy; and though I had no home,
I subscribed for the paper. It was my great desire, being out of slavery
myself, to do what I could for the emancipation of my brethren yet in
chains, and while on Lake Erie, I found many opportunities of "helping
their cause along."

It is well known that a great number of fugitives make their escape
to Canada, by way of Cleaveland; and while on the lakes, I always made
arrangement to carry them on the boat to Buffalo or Detroit, and thus
effect their escape to the "promised land." The friends of the slave,
knowing that I would transport them without charge, never failed to have
a delegation when the boat arrived at Cleaveland. I have sometimes had
four or five on board at one time.

In the year 1842 I conveyed, from the first of May to the first of
December, sixty-nine fugitives over Lake Erie to Canada. In 1843, I
visited Malden, in Upper Canada, and counted seventeen in that small
village, whom I had assisted in reaching Canada. Soon after coming north
I subscribed for the Liberator, edited by that champion of freedom,
William Lloyd Garrison. I had heard nothing of the anti-slavery movement
while in slavery, and as soon as I found that my enslaved countrymen had
friends who were laboring for their liberation, I felt anxious to join
them, and give what aid I could to the cause.

I early embraced the temperance cause, and found that a temperance
reformation was needed among my colored brethren. In company with a few
friends, I commenced a temperance reformation among the colored people
in the city of Buffalo, and labored three years, in which time a society
was built up, numbering over five hundred out of a population of less
than seven hundred.

In the autumn, 1843, impressed with the importance of spreading
anti-slavery truth, as a means to bring about the abolition of slavery,
I commenced lecturing as an agent of the western New York Anti-Slavery
Society, and have ever since devoted my time to the cause of my enslaved
countrymen.




CHAPTER XII.

During the autumn of 1836, a slaveholder by the name of Bacon Tate,
from the State of Tennessee, came to the north in search of fugitives
from slavery. On his arrival at Buffalo he heard of two of the most
valuable of the slaves that he was in pursuit of. They were residing in
St. Catharine's, in Upper Canada, some twenty-five miles from Buffalo.
After hearing that they were in Canada, one would have supposed that
Tate would have given up all hope of getting them. But not so. Bacon
Tate was a man who had long been engaged in the slave-trade, and
previous to that had been employed as a negro-driver. In these
two situations he had gained the name of being the most complete
"negro-breaker" in that part of Tennessee where he resided. He was as
unfeeling and as devoid of principle as a man could possibly be. This
made him the person, above all others, to be selected to be put on the
track of the fugitive slave. He had not only been commissioned to catch
Stanford and his wife, the two valuable slaves already alluded to, but
he had the names of some twenty others.

Many slaves had made their escape from the vicinity of Nashville, and
the slaveholders were anxious to have some caught, that they might make
an example of them. And Tate, anxious to sustain his high reputation
as a negro-catcher, left no stone unturned to carry out his nefarious
objects.

Stanford and his little family were as happily situated as fugitives
can be, who make their escape to Canada in the cold season of the year.
Tate, on his arrival at Buffalo, took lodgings at the Eagle Tavern, the
best house at that time in the city. And here he began to lay his
plans to catch and carry back into slavery those men and women who had
undergone so much to get their freedom. He soon became acquainted with a
profligate colored woman, who was a servant in the hotel, and who was as
unprincipled as himself! This woman was sent to St. Catharine's, to spy
out the situation of Stanford's family. Under the pretence of wishing to
get board in the family, and at the same time offering to pay a week's
board in advance, she was taken in. After remaining with them three or
four days, the spy returned to Buffalo, and informed Tate how they were
situated. By the liberal use of money, Tate soon found those who were
willing to do his bidding. A carriage was hired, and four men employed
to go with it to St. Catharine's, and to secure their victims during the
night.

The carriage, with the kidnappers, crossed the Niagara river at Black
Rock, on Saturday evening, about seven o'clock, and went on its way
towards St. Catharine's; no one suspecting in the least that they were
after fugitive slaves. About twelve o'clock that night they attacked
Stanford's dwelling by breaking in the door. They found the family
asleep, and of course met with no obstacle whatever in tying, gagging,
and forcing them into the carriage.

The family had one child about six weeks old That was kept at its
mother's breast, to keep it quiet. The carriage re-crossed the river, at
the same place, the next morning at sunrise, and proceeded to Buffalo,
where it remained a short time, and after changing horses and leaving
some of its company, it proceeded on its journey. The carriage being
closely covered, no one had made the least discovery as to its contents.
But some time during the morning, a man, who was neighbor to Stanford,
and who resided but a short distance from him, came on an errand; and
finding the house deserted, and seeing the most of the family's clothes
lying on the floor, and seeing here and there stains of blood, soon gave
the alarm, and the neighbors started in every direction, to see if they
could find the kidnappers. One man got on the track of the carriage,
and followed it to the ferry at Black Rock, where he heard that it had
crossed some three hours before. He went on to Buffalo, and gave the
alarm to the colored people of that place. The colored people of Buffalo
are noted for their promptness in giving aid to the fugitive slave.
The alarm was given just as the bells were ringing for church. I was in
company with five or six others, when I heard that a brother slave with
his family had been seized and dragged from his home during the night
previous. We started on a run for the livery-stable, where we found as
many more of our own color trying to hire horses to go in search of the
fugitives. There were two roads which the kidnappers could take, and
we were at some loss to know which to take ourselves. But we soon
determined to be on the right track, and so divided our company,--one
half taking the road to Erie, the other taking the road leading to
Hamburgh. I was among those who took the latter.

We travelled on at a rapid rate, until we came within half a mile of
Hamburgh Corners, when we met a man on the side of the road on foot, who
made signs to us to stop. We halted for a moment, when he informed us
that the carriage that we were in pursuit of was at the public house,
and that he was then in search of some of his neighbors, to assemble
and to demand of the kidnappers the authority by which they were taking
these people into slavery.

We proceeded to the tavern, where we found the carriage standing in
front of the door, with a pair of fresh horses ready to proceed on their
journey. The kidnappers, seeing us coming, took their victims into
a room, and locked the door and fastened down the windows. We all
dismounted, fastened our horses, and entered the house. We found four or
five persons in the bar-room, who seemed to rejoice as we entered.

One of our company demanded the opening of the door, while others went
out and surrounded the house. The kidnappers stationed one of their
number at the door, and another at the window. They refused to let us
enter the room, and the tavern-keeper, who was more favorable to us than
we had anticipated, said to us, "Boys, get into the room in any way
that you can; the house is mine, and I give you the liberty to break in
through the door or window." This was all that we wanted, and we were
soon making preparations to enter the room at all hazards. Those within
had warned us that if we should attempt to enter they would "shoot the
first one." One of our company, who had obtained a crow-bar, went to the
window, and succeeded in getting it under the sash, and soon we had
the window up, and the kidnappers, together with their victims, in full
view.

One of the kidnappers, while we were raising the window, kept crying
at the top of his voice, "I'll shoot, I'll shoot!" but no one seemed
to mind him. As soon as they saw that we were determined to rescue the
slaves at all hazards, they gave up, one of their number telling us that
we might "come in."

The door was thrown open, and we entered, and there found Stanford
seated in one corner of the room, with his hands tied behind him, and
his clothing, what little he had on, much stained with blood. Near him
was his wife, with her child, but a few weeks old, in her arms. Neither
of them had anything on except their night-clothes. They had both been
gagged, to keep them from alarming the people, and had been much beaten
and bruised when first attacked by the kidnappers. Their countenances
lighted up the moment we entered the room.

The most of those who made up our company were persons who had made
their escape from slavery, and who knew its horrors from personal
experience, and who had left near and dear relatives behind them. And we
knew how to "feel for those in bonds as bound with them."

The woman who had betrayed them, and who was in the house at the
time they were taken, had been persuaded by Tate to go on with him to
Tennessee. She had accompanied them from Canada, and we found her in the
same room with Stanford and his wife. As soon as she found that we were
about to enter the room, she ran under the bed.

We knew nothing of her being in the room until Stanford pointed to the
bed and said, "Under there is our betrayer." She was soon hauled out,
and it was as much as some of us could do to keep the others from
lynching her upon the spot. The curses came thick and fast from a
majority of the company. But nothing attracted my attention at the time
more than the look of Mrs. Stanford at the betrayer, as she sat before
her. She did not say a word to her, but her countenance told the
feelings of her inmost soul, and we could but think, that had she spoken
to her, she would have said, "May the world deny thee a shelter! earth a
home! the dust a grave! the sun his light! and Heaven her God!"

The betrayer begged us to let her go. I was somewhat disposed to comply
with her request, but I found many to oppose me; in fact, I was entirely
alone. My main reason for wishing to let her escape was that I was
afraid that her life would be in danger. I knew that, if she was taken
back to Buffalo or Canada, she would fall into the hands of an excited
people, the most of whom had themselves been slaves. And they, being
comparatively ignorant of the laws, would be likely to take the law into
their own hands.

However, the woman was not allowed to escape, but was put into the
coach, together with Stanford and his wife; and after an hour and a
half's drive, we found ourselves in the city of Buffalo. The excitement
which the alarm had created in the morning had broken up the meetings of
the colored people for that day; and on our arrival in the city we were
met by some forty or fifty colored persons. The kidnappers had not been
inactive; for, on our arrival in the city, we learned that the man who
had charge of the carriage and fugitives when we caught up with them,
returned to the city immediately after giving the slaves up to us, and
had informed Tate, who had remained behind, of what had occurred. Tate
immediately employed the sheriff and his posse to re-take the slaves.
So, on our arrival in Buffalo, we found that the main battle had yet
to be fought. Stanford and his wife and child were soon provided with
clothing and some refreshment, while we were preparing ourselves with
clubs, pistols, knives, and other weapons of defence. News soon come to
us that the sheriff, with his under officers, together with some sixty
or seventy men who were at work on the canal, were on the road between
Buffalo and Black Rock, and that they intended to re-take the slaves
when we should attempt to take them to the ferry to convey them to
Canada. This news was anything but pleasant to us, but we prepared for
the worst.

We returned to the city about two o'clock in the afternoon, and about
four we started for Black Rock ferry, which is about three miles below
Buffalo. We had in our company some fifty or more able-bodied, resolute
men, who were determined to stand by the slaves, and who had resolved,
before they left the city, that if the sheriff and his men took the
slaves, they should first pass over their dead bodies.

We started, and when about a mile below the city, the sheriff and his
men came upon us, and surrounded us. The slaves were in a carriage, and
the horses were soon stopped, and we found it advisable to take them
out of the carriage, and we did so. The sheriff came forward, and read
something purporting to be a "Riot Act," and at the same time called
upon all good citizens to aid him in keeping the "peace." This was a
trick of his, to get possession of the slaves. His men rushed upon us
with their clubs and stones, and a general fight ensued. Our company had
surrounded the slaves, and had succeeded in keeping the sheriff and his
men off. We fought, and at the same time kept pushing on towards the
ferry.

In the midst of the fight, a little white man made his appearance among
us, and proved to be a valuable friend. His name was Pepper; and he
proved himself a _pepper_ to the sheriff and his posse that day. He was
a lawyer; and as the officers would arrest any of our company, he would
step up and ask the officer if he had a warrant to take that man and as
none of them had warrants, and could not answer affirmatively, he would
say to the colored man, "He has no right to take you; knock him down."
The command was no sooner given than the man would fall. If the one who
had been arrested was not able to knock him down, some who were close
by, and who were armed with a club or other weapon, would come to his
assistance.

After it became generally known in our company that the "little man" was
a lawyer, he had a tremendous influence with them. You could hear them
cry out occasionally, "That's right, knock him down; the little man told
you to do it, and he is a lawyer; he knows all about the law; that's
right,--hit him again! he is a white man, and he has done our color
enough."

Such is but a poor representation of what was said by those who were
engaged in the fight. After a hard-fought battle; of nearly two hours,
we arrived at the ferry, the slaves still in our possession. On arriving
at the ferry, we found that some of the sheriff's gang had taken
possession of the ferry-boat. Here another battle was to be fought,
before the slaves could reach Canada. The boat was fastened at each end
by a chain, and in the scuffle for the ascendency, one party took charge
of one end of the boat, while the other took the other end. The blacks
were commanding the ferry man to carry them over, while the whites were
commanding him not to. While each party was contending for power, the
slaves were pushed on board, and the boat shoved from the wharf. Many
of the blacks jumped on board of the boat, while the whites jumped on
shore. And the swift current of the Niagara soon carried them off, amid
the shouts of the blacks, and the oaths and imprecations of the
whites. We on shore swung our hats and gave three cheers, just as a
reinforcement came to the whites. Seeing the odds entirely against us
in numbers, and having gained the great victory, we gave up without
resistance, and suffered ourselves to be arrested by the sheriff's
posse. However, we all remained on the shore until the ferry-boat had
landed on the Canada side. As the boat landed, Stanford leaped on shore,
and rolled over in the sand, and even rubbed it into his hair.

I did not accompany the boat over, but those who did informed us that
Mrs. Stanford, as she stepped on the shore, with her child in her arms,
exclaimed, "I thank God that I am again in Canada!" We returned to the
city, and some forty of our company were lodged in jail, to await their
trial the next morning.

And now I will return to the betrayer. On our return to Buffalo, she
was given over to a committee of women, who put her in a room, and put
a guard over her. Tate, who had been very active from the time that he
heard that we had recaptured the carriage with the slaves, was still
in the city. He was not with the slaves when we caught up with them at
Hamburgh, nor was he to be found in the fight. He sent his hirelings,
while he remained at the hotel drinking champagne. As soon as he found
the slaves were out of his reach, he then made an offer of fifty dollars
to any person who would find the betrayer. He pretended that he wished
to save, her from the indignation of the colored people. But the fact
is, he had promised her that if she would accompany him to the south,
that he would put her in a situation where she would be a lady. Poor
woman! She was foolish enough to believe him; and now that the people
had lost all sympathy for her, on account of her traitorous act, he
still thought that, by pretending to be her friend, he could induce her
to go to the south, that he might sell her. But those who had her in
charge were determined that she should be punished for being engaged in
this villanous transaction.

Several meetings were held to determine what should be done with
her. Some were in favor of hanging her, others for burning her, but a
majority were for taking her to the Niagara river, tying a fifty-six
pound weight to her, and throwing her in. There seemed to be no way in
which she could be reached by the civil law. She was kept in confinement
three days, being removed to different places each night.

So conflicting were the views of those who had her in charge, that
they could not decide upon what should be done with her. However, there
seemed to be such a vast majority in favor of throwing her into the
Niagara river, that some of us, who were opposed to taking life,
succeeded in having her given over to another committee, who, after
reprimanding her, let her go.

Tate, in the mean time, hearing that the colored people had resolved to
take vengeance on him, thought it best to leave the city. On Monday, at
ten o'clock, we were all carried before Justice Grosvenor; and of the
forty who had been committed the evening before, twenty-five were held
to bail to answer to a higher court. When the trials came on, we were
fined more or less, from five to fifty dollars each.

During the fight no one was killed, though there were many broken noses
and black eyes; one young man, who was attached to a theatrical corps,
was so badly injured in the conflict that he died some three months
after.

Thus ended one of the most fearful fights for human freedom that I ever
witnessed. The reader will observe that this conflict took place on the
Sabbath, and that those who were foremost in getting it up were officers
of justice. The plea of the sheriff and his posse was, that we were
breaking the Sabbath by assembling in such large numbers to protect
a brother slave and his wife and child from being dragged back into
slavery which is far worse than death itself.




THE AMERICAN SLAVE-TRADE.

From the Liberty Bell of 1848.

By William Wells Brown.


Of the many features which American slavery presents, the most cruel
is that of the slave-trade. A traffic in the bodies and souls of
native-born Americans is carried on in the slave-holding states to
an extent little dreamed of by the great mass of the people in the
non-slave-holding states. The precise number of slaves carried from the
slave-raising to the slave-consuming states we have no means of knowing.
But it must be very great, as forty thousand were sold and carried out
of the State of Virginia in one single year!

This heart-rending and cruel traffic is not confined to any particular
class of persons. No person forfeits his or her character or standing
in society by being engaged in raising and selling slaves to supply the
cotton, sugar, and rice plantations of the south. Few persons who have
visited the slave states have not, on their return, told of the gangs
of slaves they had seen on their way to the southern market. This trade
presents some of the most revolting and atrocious scenes which can
be imagined. Slave-prisons, slave-auctions, handcuffs, whips, chains,
bloodhounds, and other instruments of cruelty, are part of the furniture
which belongs to the American slave-trade. It is enough to make humanity
bleed at every pore, to see these implements of torture.

Known to God only is the amount of human agony and suffering which sends
its cry from these slave-prisons, unheard or unheeded by man, up to His
ear; mothers weeping for their children--breaking the night-silence
with the shrieks of their breaking hearts. We wish no human being to
experience emotions of needless pain, but we do wish that every man,
woman, and child in New England, could visit a southern slave-prison and
auction-stand.

I shall never forget a scene which took place in the city of St. Louis,
while I was in slavery. A man and his wife, both slaves, were brought
from the country to the city, for sale. They were taken to the rooms of
_Austin & Savage_, auctioneers.

Several slave-speculators, who are always to be found at auctions where
slaves are to be sold, were present. The man was first put up, and sold
to the highest bidder. The wife was next ordered to ascend the platform.
I was present. She slowly obeyed the order. The auctioneer commenced,
and soon several hundred dollars were bid. My eyes were intensely
fixed on the face of the woman, whose cheeks were wet with tears. But
a conversation between the slave and his new master attracted my
attention. I drew near them to listen. The slave was begging his new
master to purchase his wife. Said he, "Master, if you will only buy
Fanny, I know you will get the worth of your money. She is a good cook,
a good washer, and her last mistress liked her very much. If you will
only buy her how happy I shall be." The new master replied that he did
not want her but if she sold cheap he would purchase her. He watched the
countenance of the man while the different persons were bidding on his
wife. When his new master bid on his wife you could see the smile upon
his countenance, and the tears stop; but as soon as another would bid,
you could see the countenance change and the tears start afresh.

From this change of countenance one could see the workings of the inmost
soul. But this suspense did not last long; the wife was struck off to
the highest bidder, who proved not to be the owner of her husband. As
soon as they became aware that they were to be separated, they both
burst into tears; and as she descended from the auction-stand, the
husband, walking up to her and taking her by the hand, said, "Well,
Fanny, we are to part forever, on earth; you have been a good wife to
me. I did all that I could to get my new master to buy you; but he did
not want you, and all I have to say is, I hope you will try to meet me
in heaven. I shall try to meet you there." The wife made no reply,
but her sobs and cries told, too well, her own feelings. I saw the
countenances of a number of whites who were present, and whose eyes were
dim with tears at hearing the man bid his wife farewell.

Such are but common occurrences in the slave states. At these
auction-stands, bones, muscles, sinews, blood and nerves, of human
beings, are sold with as much indifference as a farmer in the north
sells a horse or sheep. And this great American nation is, at the
present time, engaged in the slave-trade. I have before me now the
Washington "_Union_," the organ of the government, in which I find
an advertisement of several slaves to be sold for the benefit of the
government. They will, in all human probability, find homes among the
rice-swamps of Georgia, or the cane-brakes of Mississippi.

With every disposition on the part of those who are engaged in it to
veil the truth, certain facts have, from time to time, transpired,
sufficient to show, if not the full amount of the evil, at least that it
is one of prodigious magnitude. And what is more to be wondered at, is
the fact that the greatest slave-market is to be found at the capital of
the country! The American slave-trader marches by the capitol with his
"coffle-gang,"--the stars and stripes waving over their heads, and the
constitution of the United States in his pocket!

The Alexandria Gazette, speaking of the slave-trade at the capital,
says, "Here you may behold fathers and brothers leaving behind them the
dearest objects of affection, and moving slowly along in the mute agony
of despair; there, the young mother, sobbing over the infant whose
innocent smile seems but to increase her misery. From some you will hear
the burst of bitter lamentation, while from others, the loud hysteric
laugh breaks forth, denoting still deeper agony. Such is but a faint
picture of the American slave-trade which is carried on in the
United States: yet there are those who are willing to fellowship the
slaveholder as a Christian, when they should know that whatever in
its proper tendency and general effect destroys, abridges, or renders
insecure human welfare, is opposed to the spirit and genius of
Christianity, and should be immediately abandoned.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Illustrated Edition of the Life and
Escape of Wm. Wells Brown from American Slavery, by William Wells Brown

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LIFE AND ESCAPE ***

***** This file should be named 50092.txt or 50092.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/0/9/50092/

Produced by David Widger from page images generously
provided by the Internet Archive


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

