The Project Gutenberg EBook of Representative Women of Deseret, by 
Augusta Joyce Crocheron

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Representative Women of Deseret
       A Book of Biographical Sketches

Author: Augusta Joyce Crocheron

Release Date: January 18, 2016 [EBook #50958]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPRESENTATIVE WOMEN OF DESERET ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(MormonTextsProject.org), with thanks to Renah Holmes and
Villate Brown McKitrick for proofreading.







REPRESENTATIVE

WOMEN OF DESERET,

A BOOK OF

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCHES,

TO ACCOMPANY THE PICTURE BEARING THE SAME TITLE.


COMPILED AND WRITTEN BY

AUGUSTA JOYCE CROCHERON,

_Author of "WILD FLOWERS OF DESERET;"_

AND DEDICATED TO

_The originals of this Picture and Book, their co-laborers in the
Church, and every true heart that will receive
their testimonies._

  O, Spirits dear! Ye light the path
  That else were lone and dim;
  I follow where your sainted feet
  Lead onward, up to Him,
  And hear above life's discords, still,--
  Your heav'n inspired hymn.

SALT LAKE CITY:
PRINTED BY J. C. GRAHAM & CO.
1884.



INTRODUCTORY.

In presenting this picture, REPRESENTATIVE WOMEN OF DESERET, before
the public, an explanation may be appropriate that the object may be
rightly understood. The picture is intended to represent the Latter Day
Saints Women's Organizations rather than to draw attention to those
intellectual gifts and acquirements which in this connection are but
secondary to the spiritual or missionary labors of those represented.
As in Salt Lake City is the head of these organizations, so these
spiritual laborers were selected by the precedence they hold.

Throughout our Territory, indeed beyond, are many as sincere and
faithful, noble women, well deserving of every honor contained herein,
but there is of necessity a limit in the present work and that which
would have been a pleasure to the author became an impossibility at
this time, but it is the purpose in due season to present another work
which will be of interest to our people.

It is not the purpose of the compiler of these sketches to present a
complete history of the subjects of the picture, to which this book is
merely an accompaniment to acquaint the many who are strangers to them
with their labors and their virtues, to show as it were, what manner
of people these "Mormons" are. To do full justice to the originals
would require more space and ability than are mine. But if the eyes
of the stranger may thereby be opened to a knowledge of their purity,
integrity and faith in God, their heroic firmness and the trials they
have endured without wavering in allegiance to their cause; if any may
be convinced that this people are in earnest and in the right, and
that God is with them; if they can realize that for men, Mormonism is
not a cloak, a subterfuge and a selfish system; that our women are not
from the dregs of civilization, led and controlled by stronger minds
without a knowledge within themselves for their course, it will prove a
joy and delight, a sweet return for my humble but earnest efforts. O,
that these truthful testimonies falling upon hearts that are as blocks
of ice toward us, might, like burning bullets melt their way therein,
until, like Joseph's brethren, they should weep for injuries these have
borne!

And to the young of our people, if this work shall cause them to
appreciate their honored parents more by the nobility they have proven;
if it shall cause them to weigh the object for which these sacrifices
were endured against the poor temptations of the present time; if they
shall question themselves, shall my parent's sacrifices count for
naught? shall their example and their labors be lost on me? their hopes
meet disappointment? If that command, "honor thy father and thy mother"
shall prevail, and the sweet testimony of the Holy Spirit convince and
strengthen them in the same service and faith unto their God, still
sweeter and richer shall be the reward.

That this work may go forth from my humble home as a missionary, a
silent worker of great good is my fervent hope.

A. J. C.



PREFACE.

In presenting the picture and book, REPRESENTATIVE WOMEN OF DESERET, to
the public, I desire to first express my thanks to the ladies of the
picture for their kindness and confidence.

I thank Sister Eliza R. Snow Smith for her approval and sanction;
Sister Emmeline B. Wells for her steadfast encouragement, and Bishop
Hiram B. Clawson for his kind interest and advice. Published, as it has
been, in part by subscription, I thank also my generous patrons.

Through a disappointment, so many embarrassments occurred that at one
time I felt that no inducement, however beautiful, could again tempt me
to so great (in my circumstances) an undertaking; but for me the Lord
in His goodness opened the way; and towards James R. Miller, Dr. A.
Farr and Zina D. H. Young, each, my heart thus expresses itself:

  As Hagar in her lone despair
  Gazed hopeless o'er the desert drear,
  Nor saw until her steps were led,
  The living waters, sweet and clear;
  So I who strove through tedious days
  'Mid hopes that fled and fears that frowned--
  Turned at thy name, and in thy heart,
  The boon I sought so long was found.

  Not hers alone the story old--
  The earth is thronged with hearts distressed
  That little dream how close beside
  The angel walks--to save and bless.

In compiling the brief sketches of Eliza R. Snow Smith, Zina D.
H. Young, M. I. Horne and Prescendia L. Kimball, I am indebted to
the editor of the _Woman's Exponent_, their biographer. Several
autobiographies follow, and looking it all over, the thought
rises--_how little I have done after all!_ I have scarcely more than
furnished the thread on which their gems were strung. Often I have
paused, sorrowful that this work must be so brief: so much remains to
be told. I have had sincerest joy in this labor, and if my efforts
should be regarded as conferring any honor upon these ladies, it has
been a greater honor to me to be accorded the privilege of tendering
it, and of enjoying their acquaintance and friendship.

In conclusion, I would again refer to our First Lady, E. R. S.
Smith; in a short time will appear her latest and largest book, an
autobiography and history with genealogical record of her family, and
dedicated to her noble brother, Apostle Lorenzo Snow. On her eightieth
birthday, January 21, 1884, Sister Eliza was the recipient of a large
surprise party given in honor of the day, in appreciation, love and
respect of herself and labors, in the Social Hall, a building of
histrionic association in the annals of Salt Lake City. It is wonderful
indeed to contemplate the still youthful spirit, energy and ability of
this lady; ever serene, gentle, forbearing with others; so carefully
hiding her own weariness and leaving unmentioned whatever might trouble
her; that the idea would never suggest itself to those not _intimately_
associated with her, that she has anything to do but preside, receive
and enjoy the loving expressions from her friends.

Hoping this volume may entertain and benefit the reader, and that all
errors in _book-making_ may be graciously pardoned, I will subscribe
myself, dear public--Your Servant and Friend, AUGUSTA JOYCE CROCHERON.



INDEX.

Eliza R. Snow Smith

Zina D. H. Young

Mary Isabella Horne

Sarah M. Kimball

Prescendia L. Kimball

Phoebe W. Woodruff

Bathsheba W. Smith

Elizabeth Howard

Elmina S. Taylor

Mary A. Freeze

Louie Felt

Ellen C. Clawson

Emmeline B. Wells

Romania B. Pratt

Elvira S. Barney

Emily Hill Woodmansee

Hannah T. King

Augusta Joyce Crocheron

Helen Mar Whitney

Zina Y. Williams

Louise M. Wells

Explanatory



ELIZA R. SNOW SMITH,

PRESIDENT OF THE WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF
LATTER DAY SAINTS.

"Eliza R. Snow was born in Becket, Berkshire Co., Mass. Her parents
were Oliver Snow of Mass., and Rosetta L. Pettibone, of Conn. They
were of English descent, their parents having emigrated to America
at an early period. In 1806, the family removed to Mantua, Portage
Co., Ohio." Mr. and Mrs. Snow bestowed great care upon the education
of their daughter, intellectual and domestic. She began her literary
labors when quite young, her contributions over a _nom de plume_
receiving much admiration.

Her grandfather was a revolutionary soldier, and his reminiscences
created impressions upon her youthful mind that became part of her
nature, developing into an intense national devotion.

"Two volumes of her 'Religious, Historical, Political' poems have been
published, the First in Liverpool, England, in 1856, the Second in
Salt Lake City." Her poems are life like and embody most of our Church
history. To select her best poems would make a volume. The one by which
she is best known, perhaps, is, "O, My Father, thou that dwellest,"
and ranks in its individuality and popularity as a Latter Day Saints'
doctrinal hymn, with "The Spirit of God like a fire is burning." It is
safe to say that these two hymns have wielded an influence beyond our
power to estimate, in conveying the spirit of the Gospel to the hearts
of the hearers. I have witnessed throngs of people standing outside a
"Mormon" place of worship, listening to the singing forgetful for the
time of their own personal affairs. They have fixed themselves upon the
memory of all who ever heard them. "O My Father" contains doctrine that
was new to the world, it was the essence of Mormonism. Every Mormon
child is familiar with it and would recognize it in any country. It has
been sung to many tunes, several have been composed for it. Of these, I
once heard Pres. Brigham Young, in the St. George Temple, designate his
preference thus: "Will the Parowan choir please sing 'O My Father,' to
that sweet, gentle air I love so well?" The air was "Gentle Annie," a
strange choice it sounded, but the effect proved the correctness of his
taste.

"Sister Eliza early devoted her attention to the Scriptures and in her
girlhood formed the acquaintance of the famous preacher and scholar,
Alexander Campbell, and other noted divines. In 1835, she went to
Kirtland, Ohio, and boarded in the family of the Prophet Joseph,
teaching a select school for young ladies. Miss Snow returned home to
visit her parents but on the 1st of January, 1837, bade farewell to her
paternal home, to share the joys or the afflictions of the Latter Day
Saints.

"She became a governess to the children of the Prophet, and was a
companion for Emma, his wife, for a number of years.

"From means she brought with her, Miss Snow gave freely toward building
the Kirtland Temple. Persecution soon arose and raged so that, with
her family who had now joined the Church, she left Kirtland, going
to Davies Co., Mo. On the 10th of December, 1838, Miss Snow with her
father's family, left Davies Co., the Mormons in that locality having
been ordered by the Governor to leave the county within ten days.

"They passed through almost unendurable sufferings, and reaching Far
West found the Prophet and many others had been dragged to jail leaving
their families destitute. March 1839, they left Far West leaving much
of their property behind. Eliza and her sister stopped in Quincy, Ill.,
awhile. In July 1839, Miss Snow went to Commerce, (since called Nauvoo)
to teach school. During her seven years' residence there she wrote much
and advanced rapidly in her knowledge of the principles of the Gospel.
Here, the Relief Society was organized by Joseph, March, 1842, and
Sister Eliza was chosen for secretary." There are now three hundred
branches of the Relief Society. "Eliza was at this time the wife of
the Prophet. In the latter part of July 1842, Mrs. Smith, President
of the Relief Society, proposed a petition to Governor Carlin, asking
his protection of Joseph. Sister Eliza, as secretary, wrote the
petition which was signed by several hundred ladies, and in company
with President Emma and Mrs. Warren Smith visited the Governor at his
residence in Quincy, Adams Co., Ill., where they were most cordially
received by the Governor. He replied to them, 'I believe Mr. Smith is
innocent.' Soon after their return home they learned that the Governor
in connection with Missouri officials was plotting the destruction of
the lives of those noble men.

"The Prophet and Patriarch were massacred! For awhile, thought of all
else was forgotten but this overwhelming woe. But God gave them his
sustaining love, and Eliza, widowed, turned again to the work Joseph
had established, consecrating even her life to its service. The Temple
was at length finished, and Sister Eliza then began another era,
ministering in the Temple in the holy rites that pertain to the House
of the Lord, as Priestess and Mother in Israel to hundreds of her sex.

"In Feb., 1846, she left Nauvoo, on her way to the Rocky Mountains.
At the middle Fork of Green River they stopped at one of the resting
places. Here Sister Eliza and friends with whom the latter traveled,
lived in a log house laid up like children's cob houses, with cracks
from one to four inches wide. A tent cloth stretched over the top,
blankets and carpets hung up inside as protection against the inclement
weather. On the 19th of August when they were leaving here, they were
minus a teamster. Sister Eliza undertook to drive ox team, and after
some experience became an adept. August 27th they crossed the Missouri
river, and on the 28th, arrived at Winter Quarters. From constant
exposure and continued hardships Sister Eliza broke down. Fever set in,
chills and fever followed; heavy rains came on and she was wet nearly
from head to foot. She felt that she stood at the gates of death, it
was but a step beyond, and once inside the portals she would be free
from pain and suffering. But the great lifework lay before her, and
she summoned courage and supreme faith to her aid. They moved into a
log house partly finished, no chinking, no chimney. The fire was built
on one side, and the room which had no floor was always filled with
smoke. The cooking had to be done out of doors, the intense cold being
preferable to the smoke." About the close of the year she received the
sad news of the death of her mother.

"April 7th, 1847, the pioneers under the direction of President Brigham
Young started to find a gathering place for the Pilgrim Saints. In June
Sister Eliza resumed her journey westward. Nursing the sick in tents
and wagons, and burying the dead by the wayside in the wild desert
were indeed mournful, yes, pitiful. On the 4th of August, several of
the Mormon Battallion returning to Winter Quarters, met the Pilgrim
Companies, and joyful indeed was the meeting for they were husbands,
fathers, brothers and sons of women who were in those companies. They
soon met the returning pioneers and heard of the resting place found,
and arrived safely in the valley in October. Here Sister Eliza took
up her abode with Mrs. Clara Decker Young. Shortly after, the Saints
numbering six hundred arrived in the valley, a pole was erected and the
_flag_ which had been preserved with the greatest care, was raised. *
* As time passed on a place was selected and consecrated in which holy
ordinances might be administered. Sister Eliza was called upon to take
part, in which calling she has officiated up to the present. When the
wards and settlements were pretty generally systematized, Pres. Young
re-organized the Relief Society. He called on Sister Eliza to assist,
and associate with her in the labor, Zina D. Young; this gave to them
the precedence which they have since held.

"At a Mass Meeting held in this city January 13th, 1870, in the Old
Tabernacle, (where the Assembly Hall now stands) by about 6,000 women
to protest against the 'Cullom Bill,' Sister Eliza made a strong
and brilliant speech. Politically this was the turning point in the
history of the women of Utah. A few weeks later and the women of Utah
received the right of franchise. They will ever hold Governor S. A.
Mann in special grateful remembrance. * * In 1854-5, the Lion House
was completed and Sister Eliza has ever since resided there. It was
some years later before the domestic spinning, dyeing and weaving were
discontinued, in these things Sister Eliza also excelled.

"In 1869, the Retrenchment Meetings were by the counsel of Pres. Young,
organized. An association with a presiding board of seven officers.
These meetings are still held in the Fourteenth Ward Assembly Rooms
semi-monthly, at the same hour, the same ladies presiding, excepting
Sister M. T. Smoot since removed to Provo. Here good instructions are
given, and here the Junior Associations' secretaries bring the minutes
of their respective Wards' Meetings, also the secretaries of the
Primary Associations, (girls under twelve years of age, generally,)
thus bringing together for mutual benefit an interchange of ideas,
experience and suggestions, the aged veterans, the younger matrons and
maidens, and little children.

"October 26th, 1872, Sister Eliza left Salt Lake City on a journey
to the Holy Land, her brother, Apostle Lorenzo Snow, joining her in
Ogden. Pres. George A. Smith and party met them in New York. They took
the steamer for Liverpool November 5th. In Rome Sister Eliza spent
five days, visited Naples, Corfu, Alexandria, Cairo, Suez, Joppa,
the plains of Sharon, the Valley of Ajelon became realized, and in
due time they beheld Jerusalem. This tour through the Holy Land was
a mission pertaining to the Latter Day Work. An account of the trip
was published in book form, entitled 'Palestine Tourists.' Sunday,
March 2nd, 1873, they ascended the Mount of Olives, and held service
there after the manner of the Holy Priesthood as revealed in this
dispensation. March 25th, embarked for Constantinople. Sister Eliza had
been enduring twenty-nine days of tent life, and twenty-one of riding
on horseback. And this in her seventieth year! At Athens they took
tea with the American Minister, and met the American Consul General
to Constantinople. They visited Munich then went to Vienna and thence
to Hamburg. May 16th, 1873, they took steamer for London, and met the
Saints in their Conference, May 25th. Embarked for home on the 28th.
Returning early in July, she visited many old scenes and friends of her
early life, received with honors from place to place. So quiet was her
return to Utah, that four days elapsed before her many friends became
aware of it. A brief rest sufficed, Sister Eliza could not be idle. She
visited Ogden and Provo in August, Cache Valley in September, holding
meetings in these and many other places.

"Just after the October Conference of 1876, Sister Eliza entered
upon the superintendency of the 'Woman's Store,' a Commission House
for Utah home made goods. Officers and employees were women. During
this year she prepared her second volume of poems for the press, also
assisted in selecting and preparing the manuscript for the 'Women of
Mormondom,' and in raising funds for its publication, and not least of
all, gave the proof her attention. Also still continued her labors in
the House of the Lord." At this time occurred the death of President
Brigham Young. To one so disciplined in order, with such continuity
of purpose, such adhesiveness to principle and friends, it would
seem that to ordinary persons, the loss of one in whose house she
had her place, and whose friendship and counsels she had shared for
over twenty-five years, would be an overwhelming shock. But the same
strength of mind which had risen from the martyrdom of the Prophet
and Patriarch supported her again, and she "renewed her diligence, if
it were possible, in her broad field of labor." Political events and
duties occupied her attention during December and January 1878. During
the ensuing summer she traveled hundreds of miles, holding generally
two meetings a day wherever they stopped. While attending a meeting at
Farmington, Davis Co., the efforts of Sister Aurelia Spencer Rogers
received her consideration and the Primary Associations, for children,
became part of our system. "The first Organization at Farmington dates
from September 7th, 1878; about this time an Association was organized
in the Eleventh Ward of this city, taking the lead." This new feature
so suggestive of great benefit to the children so enlisted her feelings
that she has visited most of the settlements and wards in this matter
organizing Associations. Sister Eliza returned from a long tour of
missionary labor just in time to preside at a grand Mass Meeting of
15,000 women, held in the Theatre, November 16th, 1878, in reply to
representations of the Anti-Polygamic Society. The year 1880 was spent
visiting the L. D. S. Women's Organizations, and the production of the
Childrens Primary Hymn Book, soon followed by a tune book to accompany
the above. On Saturday, July 17th, Fourteenth Ward Assembly Rooms,
President John Taylor ordained Sister Eliza to the office to which she
had been elected; President of Latter Day Saints' Women's Organizations
throughout the world, wherever our people are; also, Sister Zina D. H.
Young as her First Counselor, Elizabeth A. Whitney (since deceased)
Second Counselor, Sarah M. Kimball as Secretary, and Mary Isabella
Horne as Treasurer.

"In August Sister Eliza visited Sanpete Co., and in Thistle Valley
assisted the Bishop in organizing a Relief Society, with an Indian
sister as a counselor; the first Indian woman ordained and set apart to
an office in this dispensation. November 8th, Sister Eliza accompanied
by Sister Zina D. Young, left home for St. George to do a work in the
Temple. They traveled over one thousand miles in carriages and wagons,
doing missionary work among the Saints. In St. George the anniversary
of Sister Eliza's birthday was publicly celebrated, and on the same day
the people of Weber Stake paid a delicate tribute to the honorable lady
by a similar celebration at Ogden City.

"Sisters Eliza and Zina returned from St. George March 31st, and were
met at the depot by a party of thirty ladies who escorted them to the
Lion House, where a reception, a welcome home, awaited them. In 1881,
during the intervals of her many public duties, she prepared her new
book Bible Questions and Answers. In September, visited Thistle Valley,
organizing a Primary Association with ten little Indian children
enrolled as members. April 1883, the Relief Society was organized
among the Indians at Washakie, an Indian village in Box Elder Co.
After duly considering the long-felt necessity among our own people
of an institution for the sick and injured, where the ordinances of
faith might be administered freely and without restraint, in fact, one
that we might term our own, and as one of the links in our system of
organizations, the sisters took a course that led to the establishment
of the Deseret Hospital, at which institution the dedication services
were held, July 17th, 1882, by the First Presidency, Stake Presidency,
Apostles Wilford Woodruff and F. D. Richards; Mayor William Jennings,
C. W. Penrose, Editor _Deseret News_, L. John Nuttall and Joseph Horne
being present. Eliza R. S. Smith, President, E. B. Wells, Secretary."

I will conclude this brief sketch with one of her latest poems:

  BURY ME QUIETLY WHEN I DIE.

  When my spirit ascends to the world above,
  To smile with the choirs in celestial love,
  Let the finger of silence control the bell,
  To restrain the chime of a funeral knell,
  Let no mourning strain--not a sound be heard,
  By which a pulse of the heart is stirred--
  No note of sorrow to prompt a sigh;
  Bury me quietly when I die.

  I am aiming to earn a celestial crown--
  To merit a heavenly; pure renown;
  And, whether in grave or in tomb I'm laid,
  Beneath the tall oak or the cypress shade;
  Whether at home with dear friends around;
  Or in distant lands upon stranger ground--
  Under wintry clouds or a summer sky;
  Bury me quietly when I die.

  What avail the parade and the splendor here,
  To a legal heir to a heavenly sphere?
  To the heirs of salvation what is the worth,
  In their perishing state, the frail things of earth?
  What is death to the good, but an entrance gate
  That is placed on the verge of a rich estate
  Where commissioned escorts are waiting by?
  Bury me quietly when I die.

  On the "iron rod" I have laid my hold;
  If I keep the faith, and like Paul of old
  Shall have "fought the good fight" and Christ the Lord
  Has a crown in store with a full reward
  Of the holy priesthood in fulness rife,
  With the gifts and the powers of an endless life,
  And a glorious mansion for me on high;
  Bury me quietly when I die.

  Like a beacon that rises o'er ocean's wave,
  There's a light--there's a life beyond the grave;
  The future is bright and it beckons me on
  Where the noble and pure and the brave have gone;
  Those who have battled for truth with their mind and might,
  With their garments clean and their armor bright;
  They are dwelling with God in a world on high:
  Bury me quietly when I die.



ZINA D. H. YOUNG,

FIRST COUNSELOR TO THE PRESIDENT OF THE L. D. S. WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS.

"And he shall turn the hearts of the fathers to the children, and the
hearts of the children to their fathers, lest I come and smite the
earth with a curse." How fitting are these sacred words to the subject
of this sketch and her family. In obedience to this command renewed in
this dispensation, searching through their genealogical records for ten
generations back, they have brought forth to light, and to eternal life
in the celestial kingdom of God, the forgotten and unknown ancestry of
their family, finding now and then some noble representative of their
race linked with even a kingdom's honor, and at last, far back, upon
the throne of England.

Sister Zina's career of religious devotion and service is not a new
feature in the Huntington family, nor America a new field of labor to
them. One hundred years ago Lady Salina Huntington, saving to herself
only sufficient for the real needs of life, devoted a great portion
of her vast fortune to missionary service, for the introduction of
Christianity among the North American Indians, by the founding of
schools for the natives and the support of ministers and teachers.
"She allowed herself but one dress a year. Lady Salina Huntington was
the second daughter of the Earl of Ferrars. She was born in 1707, and
was the co-laborer of Whitefield and Wesley. 'The pedigree of Lady
Huntington and her husband, and of George Washington, first President
of the United States, (as traced by Mapleson in his researches) meet in
the same parentage.' 'Lady Huntington and her chaplains often journeyed
during the summer, making their presence a means of religious revivals
wherever they went. A church needed. With her, to resolve was to
accomplish. Her jewels she determined to offer to the Lord. They were
sold for six hundred and ninety-eight pounds, and with this she erected
a house of worship in 1760. Her daughter, Lady Salina, was one of the
six earls daughters chosen to assist the Princess Augusta to bear the
train of Queen Charlotte on her coronation day." Did it foreshadow an
era of revelations dawning upon the world, when she prayed "that God
would give us new bread, not stale, but what was baked in the oven that
day." Lady Huntington built seven chapels, her private property, beside
aiding sixty others. At the age of eighty-four a few hours before
the last struggle she whispered joyfully, "I shall go to my Father
tonight," and so she went home, June 17th, 1791.

Thus by birthright and by heritage is the land of Freedom the
Huntingtons' field of religious labor. The mantles of Lady Huntington
and remoter noble ancestors have at last been lifted from the silence
and the shadows of departed centuries to the shoulders of worthy
descendants and representatives, who are doing works of greater
magnitude than they ever comprehended. Superintended by Dimock B.
Huntington, and assisted by the family, Zina and her sister Prescinda
have been baptized for ten generations, numbering nearly five thousand.

By permission I select from matter collected and published by Emmeline
B. Wells, in _Woman's Exponent_ the following portions of biography:

"Zina Diantha Huntington was born January 31st, 1821, at Watertown. Her
father was William Huntington, her mother Zina Baker, whose father was
one of the first physicians in New Hampshire. Her grandmother on the
mother's side was Dorcas Dimock, 'descended from the noble family of
Dimocks, whose representatives held the hereditary knight-championship
of England; instance: Sir Edward Dymock, Queen Elizabeth's champion.'

"The father of Mrs. Zina D. H. Young was also a patriot and served
in the war of 1812. Samuel Huntington, one of the signers of the
Declaration of Independence, was the uncle of this old revolutionary
soldier. She says: 'My father's family is directly descended from
Simon Huntington, the Puritan immigrant who sailed for America in
1633. He died at sea, but left three sons and his widow, Margaret.
The church records of Roxbury, Mass., contain the earliest record of
the Huntington name known in New England, and is in the handwriting
of the Rev. John Elliot himself, the pastor of that ancient church.
This is the record: 'Margaret Huntington, widow, came in 1633, her
husband died by the way of small pox. She brought children with her.'
'My grandfather, Wm. Huntington, the revolutionary soldier, married
Prescinda Lathrop, and was one of the first settlers in the Black River
Valley, Northern New York. The Huntingtons and Lathrops intermarried,
and my sister Prescinda Lathrop Huntington, bears the family name
of generations.' The Huntingtons embraced the Gospel at Watertown,
New York, and Zina D., when only fifteen years old was baptized by
the Patriarch Hyrum Smith, August 14th, 1835, and soon after went to
Kirtland with her father's family. In this year she received the gift
of tongues. On one occasion in the Kirtland Temple she heard a whole
invisible choir of angels singing, till the house seemed filled with
numberless voices. At Kirtland she received the gift of interpretation.
She was also at the memorable Pentecost when the spirit of God filled
the house like a mighty, rushing wind. Zina was also a member of the
Kirtland Temple Choir, of whom but few are now living.

Sister Zina experienced the persecutions in Missouri, during which the
mother died from fatigue and privation, and only two of their family
were able to follow her remains to their resting place. She says; "Thus
died my martyred mother."

Sister Zina was married in Nauvoo, and had two sons, but this not
proving a happy union, she subsequently separated from her husband.
Joseph Smith taught her the principle of marriage for eternity, and she
accepted it as a divine revelation, and was sealed to the Prophet for
time and eternity, after the order of the new and everlasting Covenant.

Sister Zina was a member of the first organization of the Relief
Society at Nauvoo, and when the Temple was ready for the ordinances to
be performed, received there her blessings and endowments. After the
martyrdom of the Prophet Joseph and Hyrum, she was united in marriage
for time to Brigham Young, and with the Saints left Nauvoo in the month
of February, crossing the Mississippi on the ice. Arriving at Mt.
Pisgah, a resting place for the exiles, Father Huntington was called
to preside and Zina D., with her two little boys remained with him
temporarily. Sickness visited the camp, and deaths were so frequent
that help could not be obtained to make coffins. Many were buried with
split logs at the bottom of the grave and brush at the sides, that
being all that could be done by mourning friends. Her father was taken
sick, in eighteen days he died. After these days of trial she went to
Winter Quarters, and was welcomed into the family of Brigham Young.
With them, she in May 1848, began the journey to this valley, walking,
driving team, cooking beside camp-fires, and in September arrived here,
living in tents and wagons until log houses could be built. Here, April
3rd, 1850, was born Zina, daughter of Brigham Young and Zina D. Young.

When the Relief Society was reorganized in Utah by President Brigham
Young, Sister Zina was one of the first identified with that work, as
Treasurer, and when Sister Eliza was called to preside over all the
Relief Societies, she chose Zina as her Counselor.

One of the most useful fields of her labor, has been sericulture. She
has raised cocoons, attending to them with her own hands, and had
charge of a large cocoonery and mulberry orchard belonging to President
Young. When the Silk Association was organized, June 15th, 1876, she
was chosen President. Great good was accomplished, mulberry trees were
planted and cocoons raised in every part of the Territory where the
climate would permit. A good article of silk was manufactured with
home machinery." Sister Zina also took a course of medical studies,
being perhaps the first to adopt the wish of President Young, for
as many of the sisters as would be useful for the practice in the
many settlements, among their own sex; to qualify themselves. Ladies
came from different settlements, stimulated by her example. "In all
departments of woman's labor for the public good, Sister Zina had been
found at her post doing her share of active work in the best manner
possible. She has traveled among the different settlements visiting
organized societies, or assisting Sister Eliza or the local authorities
in organizing. "At a Mass Meeting of ladies held in this city, November
16th, 1878, Sister Zina delivered a very eloquent impromptu address."
I was one of the reporters on that occasion, and noting the increasing
earnestness in her voice and words, raised my eyes to her standing just
before the table we were using. Suddenly, as though her words struck
home like an electric shock, several gentlemen sitting at my right
hand, clutching the arms of their chairs, started as though they would
rise to their feet; their faces burning with the truths they heard,
their eyes fixed upon her fearless face and uplifted hands. I can never
forget that moment. It was more than eloquence, it was inspiration. I
will quote that portion of her address.

"The principle of our religion that is assailed is one that lies
deep in my heart. Could I ask the heavens to listen; could I beseech
the earth to be still, and the brave men who possess the spirit of
a Washington to hear what I am about to say. I am the daughter of a
Master Mason! I am the widow of a Master Mason, who, when leaping from
the window of Carthage Jail pierced with bullets, made the Masonic sign
of distress; but, gentlemen, (addressing the representatives of the
press that were present) those signs were not heeded except by the God
of heaven. That man, the Prophet of the Almighty, was massacred without
mercy! Sisters, this is the first time in my life that I have dared to
give utterance to this fact, but I thought I could trust my soul to
say it on this occasion; and I say it now in the fear of Israel's God,
and I say it in the presence of these gentlemen and I wish my voice
could be heard by the whole brotherhood of Masons throughout our proud
land. That institution I honor. If its principles were practiced and
strictly adhered to would there be a trespass upon virtue? No indeed.
Would the honorable wife or daughter be intruded upon with impunity?
Nay, verily. Would that the ladies of America, with the honorable Mrs.
Hayes at their head; would that the Congress of the United States,
the law makers of our nation, could produce a balm for the many evils
which exist in our land through the abuse of virtue, or could so
legislate that virtue could be protected and cherished as the life
which heaven has given us. We in common with many women throughout
our broad land would hail with joy the approach of such deliverance,
for such is the deliverance that woman needs. The principle of plural
marriage is honorable; it is a principle of the Gods, it is heaven
born. God revealed it to us as a saving principle; we have accepted it
as such, and we know it is of him for the fruits of it are holy. Even
the Saviour, Himself, traces his lineage back to polygamic parents.
We are proud of the principle because we know its true worth, and we
want our children to practice it, that through us a race of men and
women may grow up possessing sound minds in sound bodies, who shall
live to the age of a tree." "During the summer of 1879, Sister Zina
decided to take a trip to the Sandwich Islands for her health, and was
accompanied by Miss Susa Young. She had the opportunity of meeting many
persons of note to whom she imparted correct information regarding
our people; distributing tracts and books. Great respect was paid her
and many ovations. She assisted the native members of our church in
getting an organ for their meetings, and contributed liberally for
other benevolent purposes." "On her return she spent most of her time
attending meetings of the various organizations. Sericulture was not
forgotten or neglected. She also continued her labors in the House
of the Lord. In the fall of 1880, Sisters Zina and Eliza went to St.
George, to labor in the Temple, and visit the organizations of the
women and children, wherever practicable. They held meetings by the
way, often camped out over night, and traveled thus over one thousand
miles. Returning March 31st, 1881, they were met at the depot by a
party of thirty ladies, in carriages, who escorted them to the Lion
House where a reception of welcome home awaited them.

August 20th, 1881, Sister Zina, accompanied by her foster son, Lieut.
Willard Young, started for New York to gather up the records of her
relatives. Dr. E. B. Ferguson was going to pursue her medical studies
further in some branches, to be of greater service among the people.
Previous to their going, they were blest and set apart by the First
Presidency of the Church, to speak upon the principles of our faith if
opportunity presented.

Sister Zina was cordially received by her relatives, and invited to
speak in Sunday School and Temperance Meetings. Visited New York City,
and listened to many celebrated divines. Attended the Woman's Congress
at Buffalo, N. Y., but was refused five minutes to represent the women
of Utah. Visited Watertown, N. Y., then to Vermont, and thence to
Albany Co., and spoke in several meetings. Sister Zina returned to
New York to attend the N. W. S. A. Convention, without opportunity
of addressing them. She however assisted the brethren in organizing
a Relief Society in New York. With Lieut. Willard Young she visited
West Point. Mrs. Young returned to this city March 7th, received by
her daughters and many friends, the return being the occasion for a
most delightful party. On the Friday following, the Relief Society
Conference convened, and her many friends had the opportunity of
welcoming her home.

Picture and words are alike powerless to convey the beauty of her
face, her spirit and her life. Each succeeding year adds a tenderer
line to her face, a sweeter, gentler intonation to her voice, a more
perceptible power to her spirit from the celestial fountains of faith;
widens the circle of her friends, strengthens and deepens their love
for her, and brings a richer harvest of noble labors to her name. Could
I say more? I could not say less of her who has for eighteen years been
my most intimate friend, my counselor, my second mother. A mother, not
to me alone, to her belongs in its sweetest, widest sense, the name--a
"mother in Israel."



MARY ISABELLA HORNE,

TREASURER OF THE PRESIDING BOARD OF THE L. D. S. WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS.

"I was born November 20th, 1818, in the town of Rainshaw, County
of Kent, England. I am the daughter of Stephen and Mary Ann Hales,
and the eldest daughter of a large family. My parents were honest,
industrious people. I was taught to pray when very young, to be honest
and truthful, to be kind to my associates, and to do good to all around
us. My early years were spent in attending school and in assisting my
mother in domestic duties."

"Mrs. Horne's father was a Methodist, and her mother a member of the
Church of England. Mrs. Horne as a child, had very strong religious
tendencies, and when requested by her Sabbath School teacher to commit
to memory two or three verses from the Bible, she would learn a whole
chapter or perhaps two, and recite without being prompted.

"When only in her eleventh year, she became so fascinated with the
Bible that her leisure hours after the labors of the day were over,
were employed in reading and studying the history and incidents,
the sublime parables and teachings contained in that sacred work;
thus prepared to receive in due time the Gospel of the new and last
dispensation. In 1832, Mrs. Horne's parents decided to emigrate, and
concluded to go to upper Canada. April 6th, they left England with a
family of five sons and two daughters.

"One little boy died upon the way. On the 16th of June, they arrived in
York, strangers in a strange land, where the cholera was making fearful
ravages, but the Lord preserved them all in health. The following
spring, 1833, the family removed to the country, about eight miles from
York. Mrs. Hales' health was delicate and the care of the whole family
devolved upon Mary Isabella, only fifteen years of age.

"In the spring of 1834, she attended a Methodist camp meeting in the
neighborhoood, where she first met Mr. Joseph Horne, and two years
afterward, Joseph Horne and Mary Isabella were united in marriage on
the 9th of May, 1836."

Only about one month of their wedded life had passed when they heard a
rumor that a man professing to be sent of God, to preach to the people
would hold a meeting about a mile distant.

Mr. and Mrs. Horne attended this meeting and there they first heard
the Gospel, proclaimed by Elder Orson Pratt, but little knew how the
course of their life would be changed by receiving this great light.
Mrs. Horne was baptized in July, 1836, by Elder Orson Hyde, and ever
after her house was a home for the elders, and a place where meetings
were held. In the latter part of the summer of 1837, she first saw the
Prophet Joseph, also Sidney Rigdon and Thomas B. Marsh." She says: "On
shaking hands with the Prophet Joseph Smith, I received the holy spirit
in such great abundance that I felt it thrill my whole system from the
crown of my head to the soles of my feet. I had never beheld so lovely
a countenance, nobility and goodness were in every feature. I said to
myself, 'O Lord, I thank thee for granting the desire of my girlish
heart in permitting me to associate with prophets and apostles.'" "In
March 1838, while the weather was still wintry, Mr. and Mrs. Horne
bade farewell to their home, and with a few saints started for the
gathering-place of the people of God.

"At Huntsville, Mrs. Horne was introduced to Father and Mother Smith;
Father Smith was the Patriarch of the church, and under his hands she
received a patriarchal blessing. In August, with a babe less than a
month old, they removed to Far West, and were obliged to go into a
log house without doors or windows. It was about this time that the
excitement in Missouri raged, and persecution was at its height. Mrs.
Horne was alone much night and day, her husband being on guard. In the
spring of 1839, Mrs. Horne and family left Missouri as exiles, and
sought an asylum in Quincy, Ill., where for awhile they had peace.
While in Quincy, Mrs. Horne was one of those favored ones who had the
privilege of entertaining and waiting upon the Prophet Joseph and
Hyrum, the Patriarch. In the month of March, Mr. and Mrs. Horne moved
to Nauvoo by wagon, over the then wild prairies. They lived in a lumber
shanty for eight months, and in November Mr. Horne moved his family
into his own house, still unfinished. Here in 'Nauvoo the beautiful,'
Mr. Horne through diligent labor at last succeeded in establishing a
flourishing business and his family were looked upon by the Saints as
quite well situated. On the 2nd of April, 1844, Mrs. Horne received a
patriarchal blessing under the hands of Hyrum Smith, the patriarch of
the Church." On the 27th of the June following, occurred the martyrdom
of Joseph and Hyrum. Mrs. Horne says, "On the 28th day of June, I took
my last look on earth of Joseph and Hyrum Smith! May I never experience
another day similar to that. I do not wish to recall the scene." On the
9th of July was born her fifth son. In January, 1846, Mrs. Horne went
into the Nauvoo Temple, receiving the ordinances of the House of the
Lord, and assisted in administering to others. In February Mr. Horne
closed his business and bade adieu to their home and camped with the
Saints on Sugar Creek, Iowa.

In March moved on to Garden Grove, and then to Mt. Pisgah. Here, Mrs.
Horne had born to her a daughter, born in a wagon. When the babe was
three days old, Mrs. Horne started again on her way, arriving at
Council Bluffs about the last of June, moving into a log cabin. Here
she was so sick it was feared she would not recover. Elder Orson Pratt
administered to her and prophesied she would do a good work in Israel.
In June of the same year, she left with the first company across the
plains that followed the pioneers to the valley of Salt Lake. That
was indeed a remarkable journey and all those who traveled hither
at that time deserve the title of pioneers. They opened the way and
braved the perils of the desert and the experience of living in this
sterile land. They ploughed and planted and fought against the fearful
odds of crickets, grasshoppers and death. The company in which Mrs.
Horne traveled, arrived here October 6th, 1847, and as soon as the
Fort was completed she moved into it, and lived in a log cabin two
years, enduring all the exigencies incident to the settling of a new
Indian country, among which were living on short rations, a part of
which was roots and thistles. On the 16th of January, 1849, another
daughter was added to the family. As soon as possible after arriving
in a new and destitute country, Mr. and Mrs. Horne made themselves a
home in the Fourteenth Ward, which they still retain. "In speaking of
her first knowledge of the order of celestial marriage, she says, she
has had strong testimony for herself that it is of God. Mrs. Horne has
borne herself nobly in all the different phases of plural domestic
relations." Mrs. Horne was a member of the Relief Society in Nauvoo,
and in the first organization of the Fourteenth Ward in this city, was
a counselor to President Phoebe W. Woodruff.

In May, 1858, Mrs. Horne moved as far south as Parowan, her husband
being called on a mission still further south, in "Dixie." Against
every disadvantage, Mrs. Horne performed this journey of two hundred
and fifty miles, this mother with her ten children, the youngest a
babe of six months. In September their mission was fulfilled and Mrs.
Horne returned home, Mr. Horne returning from his mission soon after.
December 12th, 1867, Mrs. Horne was chosen by Bishop A. Hoagland, of
the Fourteenth Ward, to preside over the Relief Society in that ward.
It was a great surprise to her, she was at that time very timid.

Under the wise management of the President, the society increased in
numbers, great good was accomplished in the relief of the poor and
afflicted, and means multiplied in the Treasury. A two story brick
building has been erected by the society, part of which is rented for
a store, and the upper story used for meetings. The society also own
a good granary and a quantity of wheat. Mrs. Horne's success as a
leader was so apparent and her course so consistent, President Young
had such confidence in her, he gave her a very important mission among
the sisters; this was called Retrenchment. In due time a meeting was
held in the Fifteenth Ward Schoolhouse, and from there adjourned to the
Fourteenth Ward Assembly Rooms, and from that time until the present,
Mrs. Horne has presided at these regular semi-monthly meetings of
the Ladies' General Retrenchment Associations. When President Young
instructed Sister Eliza to go through the Territory and organize the
young ladies into associations for mutual improvement, Mrs. Horne
was called to assist. She has organized many of the Young Ladies
Associations, also Primary Associations. At the time of the passage
of the Cullom Bill in January, 1876, a grand Mass Meeting was called
to convene in the Old Tabernacle, Salt Lake City. Mrs. Horne took an
active part in the proceedings, being one of the committee to draft
resolutions. In February following, the bill was passed, granting
suffrage to the women of Utah. Mrs. Horne was one of a committee of
ladies who waited upon Governor S. A. Mann to express the gratitude of
Mormon women for his signing of the document. December 1877, Mrs. Horne
was chosen to preside over the Relief Societies of this stake of Zion.
She was elected a delegate from Salt Lake County, to the Territorial
Convention held in this city, commencing October 9th, and was called
upon to address them. Mrs. Horne was one of the committee appointed to
wait upon the delegate nominated at the Convention, and inform him of
the honor conferred upon him.

When Mrs. Horne was sixty years of age, upon the demise of her
daughter-in-law, Mrs. Lydia Weiler Horne, she took the babe six weeks
old to raise. This after rearing a family, and seeing each take honored
places in the world.

Mrs. Horne has been an officer and worker in the silk industry from the
beginning. At the organization of the board of officers for the Deseret
Hospital, May 1882, Mrs. Horne was elected Chairman of the Executive
Committee.

November 20th, 1882, was the forty-sixth anniversary of Mr. and Mrs.
Horne's wedding day. At the reception they held, an elegant photograph
album was presented from lady friends, each of whom was to contribute
her picture. Congratulations from children, Mayor Jennings and Judge
Miner, with loving and sincere good wishes from all, for the future,
made this a day long to be remembered."

I am indebted to the pen of Emmeline B. Wells, editor of the "Woman's
Exponent," for the points I have selected for this sketch, to whom
the original referred me as possessing all I would wish to obtain.
Perhaps, it would be no more than justice to the author, to quote
also from the same source, the record her family have so far, made,
thereby reflecting credit upon their noble parents. It will also give
to the world the history in brief of _one_ Mormon family, reared in the
teachings, examples and associations of Mormonism, not omitting the
system of celestial marriage.

"By their fruits ye shall know them."

"Henry, the eldest son, was for eleven years Bishop in Paris, Idaho, in
1880, moved to Arizona, to assist in colonizing there.

"Joseph, when about twenty years of age, was called on a mission to
Switzerland, where he obtained a thorough knowledge of the German
language. Returned, and was for ten years Bishop of Gunnison, Sanpete
Co., again called to Switzerland to preside over the Swiss and German
missions and edit the _Stern_. In 1878, he was called to the Bishopric
in Richfield, Sevier Co., is also mayor of that city.

"Richard is a teacher; was superintendent of Sunday-schools in Beaver,
and has filled several home missions.

"John, the youngest son, was the first President of the Young Men's
Mutual Improvement Association in the Fourteenth Ward. Her eldest
daughter, Mrs. Elizabeth Webb, lives in Millard Co., a lady who might
grace any society.

"Nora married George, son of Orson Spencer, somewhat famous in Church
history for his valuable writings and great missionary work in America
and Europe.

"Julia married Wm. Burton, and died one year after marriage, leaving a
baby daughter. She was the first President of the Young Ladies Mutual
Improvement Association of the Fourteenth Ward.

"Cornelia was later made the President. Miss Cornelia was also for
three or four years business manager of the _Woman's Exponent_. She is
the wife of James Clayton.

"Minnie, her twin sister, was for several years Secretary of the Young
Ladies Mutual Improvement Association and the Sunday-school. Since her
marriage with Wm. James, she is President of the Seventh Ward Primary
Association.

"Mattie is a counselor to the President of all the Young Ladies Mutual
Improvement Associations of the Church. When the _Woman's Exponent_ was
first published, Miss Mattie was the first girl to go into the printing
office and learn type setting.

"Clara, the youngest, is accomplished, gifted spiritually, and an
active worker. As her mother is often called from home by public
duties, the charge of the home rests much of the time with her, a
position she fills with dignity and ability."

Three babes died in infancy. And the mother of these children now
honored among men and women, drove team hundreds of miles, not one
journey, but many, and nearly always with a babe in her arms.

Resting now in the afternoon of life with comforts, honors and love
surrounding her, Mrs. Horne must look back with satisfaction and
gratitude upon her life. A few years ago, when I, a timid Secretary of
the Fourteenth Ward Meetings, used to steal a look at her noble face,
I used mentally to compare it to that of Washington, and I think still
I was not mistaken; we, to-day, are struggling for "liberty to worship
God according to the dictates of our own consciences," and the spirit
of such as he and his co-laborers are with us and are ours, to counsel
and to lead, through difficulties unto victory.



SARAH M. KIMBALL,

SECRETARY OF THE L. D. S. WOMEN'S ORGANIZATIONS.

"I am the daughter of Oliver Granger and Lydia Dibble Granger, was born
December 29th, 1818, in the town of Phelps, Ontario Co., New York.
Of my parents, eight children, only myself and two younger brothers,
Lafayette and Farley, remain. My father, Oliver Granger, had an
interesting experience in connection with the coming forth of the Book
of Mormon. He obtained the book a few months after its publication,
and while in the city of New York, at Prof. Mott's Eye Infirmary he
had a 'heavenly vision.' My father was told of a personage who said
his name was Moroni, that the Book of Mormon, about which his mind was
exercised, was a true record of great worth, and Moroni instructed
him (my father) to testify of its truth and that he should hereafter
be ordained to preach the everlasting Gospel to the children of men.
Moroni instructed my father to kneel and pray; Moroni and another
personage knelt with him by the bedside. Moroni repeated words and
instructed my father to repeat them after him. Moroni then stepped
behind my father, who was still kneeling, and drew his finger over
the three back seams of my father's coat, (which my father felt very
perceptibly) and said, 'A time will come when the Saints will wear
garments made without seams.' Moroni told my father that he might
ask for what he most desired and it would be granted. He asked for
an evidence by which he might know when he was approved of God. The
evidence or sign was given, and remained with him until his dying hour,
being more particularly manifest when engaged in prayer and meditation.
I love the memory of my father. He died in Kirtland, Ohio, August 1843,
aged forty-seven.

I was married in Kirtland, Orange Co., Ohio, by Warren Cowdery, Esq.,
September 23rd, 1840, to Hiram Kimball, eldest son of Phineas and
Abigail Kimball, of West Fairley, Orange Co., Vermont. My parents had
previously spent a year in Nauvoo, Hancock Co., Ill.; their present
stay in Ohio was considered only temporary; my father sickened and
died there the next year. I returned with my husband to his home in
Nauvoo, Ill., three weeks after my marriage. We boarded six months in
the family of Dr. Frederick Williams, then went to housekeeping. My
eldest son was born in Nauvoo, November 22nd, 1841; when the babe was
three days old a little incident occurred which I will mention. The
walls of the Nauvoo Temple were about three feet above the foundation.
The Church was in need of help to assist in raising the Temple walls.
I belonged to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints; my
husband did not belong to the Church at that time. I wished to help on
the Temple, but did not like to ask my husband (who owned considerable
property) to help for my sake. My husband came to my bedside, and as
he was admiring our three days' old darling, I said, "What is the
boy worth?" He replied, "O, I don't know, he is worth a great deal."
I said, "Is he worth a thousand dollars?" The reply was, "Yes, more
than that if he lives and does well." I said, "Half of him is mine,
is it not?" "Yes, I suppose so." "Then I have something to help on
the Temple." He said pleasantly, "You have?" "Yes, and I think of
turning my share right in as tithing." "Well, I'll see about that."
Soon after the above conversation Mr. Kimball met the Prophet Joseph
Smith, President of the Church, and said, "Sarah has got a little the
advantage of me this time, she proposes to turn out the boy as Church
property. "President Smith seemed pleased with the joke, and said,
"I accept all such donations, and from this day the boy shall stand
recorded, _Church property_." Then turning to Willard Richards, his
secretary, he said, "Make a record of this, and you are my witness."
Joseph Smith then said, "Major, (Mr. Kimball was major in the Nauvoo
Legion) you now have the privilege of paying $500 and retaining
possession, or receiving $500 and giving possession." Mr. Kimball asked
if city property was good currency, President Smith replied that it
was. Then said Mr. Kimball, "How will that reserve block north of the
Temple suit?" President Smith replied, "It is just what we want." The
deed was soon made out and transferred in due form. President Smith
said to me, "You have consecrated your first born son, for this you
are blessed of the Lord. I bless you in the name of the Lord God of
Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob. And I seal upon you all the blessings
that pertain to the faithful. Your name shall be handed down in
honorable remembrance from generation to generation.

"Your son shall live and be a blessing to you in time, and an honor and
glory to you throughout the endless eternities (changes) to come. He
shall be girded about with righteousness and bear the helmet and the
breast-plate of war. You shall be a blessing to your companion, and the
honored mother of a noble posterity. You shall stand as a savior to
your father's house, and receive an everlasting salvation, which I seal
upon you by the gift of revelation and by virtue and authority of the
holy priesthood vested in me, in the name of Jesus Christ."

"Early in the year 1842, Joseph Smith taught me the principle of
marriage for eternity, and the doctrine of plural marriage. He said
that in teaching this he realized that he jeopardized his life; but God
had revealed it to him many years before as a privilege with blessings,
now God had revealed it again and instructed him to teach it with
commandment, as the Church could travel (progress) no further without
the introduction of this principle. I asked him to teach it to some
one else. He looked at me reprovingly, and said, 'Will you tell me who
to teach it to? God required me to teach it to you, and leave you with
the responsibility of believing or disbelieving.' He said, 'I will not
cease to pray for you, and if you will seek unto God in prayer you will
not be led into temptation.'"

"In the summer of 1843, a maiden lady (Miss Cook) was seamstress for
me, and the subject of combining our efforts for assisting the Temple
hands came up in conversation. She desired to be helpful but had no
means to furnish. I told her I would furnish material if she would
make some shirts for the workmen. It was then suggested that some of
our neighbors might wish to combine means and efforts with ours, and
we decided to invite a few to come and consult with us on the subject
of forming a Ladies' Society. The neighboring sisters met in my parlor
and decided to organize. I was delegated to call on Sister Eliza R.
Snow and ask her to write for us a constitution and by-laws, and submit
them to President Joseph Smith prior to our next Thursday's meeting.
She cheerfully responded, and when she read them to him he replied that
the constitution and by-laws were the best he had ever seen. 'But,'
he said, 'this is not what you want. Tell the sisters their offering
is accepted of the Lord, and He has something better for them than a
written constitution. I invite them all to meet me and a few of the
brethren in the Masonic Hall over my store next Thursday afternoon,
and I will organize the sisters under the priesthood after the pattern
of the priesthood.' He further said, 'The Church was never perfectly
organized until the women were thus organized.'" He wished to have
Sister Emma Smith elected to preside in fulfillment of the revelation
which called her an Elect Lady.

"In the wanderings and persecutions of the Church I have participated,
and in the blessings, endowments and holy anointings and precious
promises I have also received. To sorrow I have not been a stranger;
but I only write this short sketch to instruct and happify, so I will
skip to Salt Lake City, September, 1851, with my two sons, Hiram and
Oliver, my widowed mother, Lydia Dibble Granger, Anna Robbins, a girl
that lived with me nine years and married my youngest brother, and my
two brothers, Lafayette and Farley B. Granger. My husband was detained
in New York City, and had become financially much embarrassed. The next
year he came to me financially ruined and broken in health. I engaged
in school teaching in the Fourteenth Ward to sustain and educate my
family. My salary was only $25.00 per month, but that was much to us at
that time.

"April 1st, 1854, my youngest son was born. I discontinued school three
months, then opened school in my home. I taught eight years. I should
have stated that on arriving here I sold our fitout (team, etc.) for a
comfortable little home, this I have always considered providential.
The Indian agent gave me a nine-year-old wild Indian girl, whom I
educated and raised. She died at nineteen. I named her Kate.

"My mother who had lived with me twenty years, died in 1861, aged
seventy-three. My husband was drowned March 1st, 1863, in the Pacific
Ocean by the wreck of the steamer, _Ada Hancock_, off the coast of San
Pedro, on his way to the Sandwich Islands; aged sixty-two.

"I was elected President of the Fifteenth Ward Relief Society February
7th, 1857. In December, 1865, a little girl was brought to me whom I
adopted.

"November 13th, 1868, a silver trowel and mallet were furnished me and
assisted by a Master Mason, and surrounded by an assemblage of people,
I had the honor of laying the corner stone of the first Relief Society
building erected in this dispensation."

Sister Sarah M. Kimball possesses a tall, commanding figure, a face of
remarkable dignity and sincerity in expression. Her manner of speaking
is original in its strength of reason, rare in its eloquence, precise
and delicate in selection of words and tone of voice. A phrenologist
once said of her, that "if she were seated in a railway carriage with
parties on one hand discussing fashions, and politics to be heard on
the other, she would turn to the discussion on politics." A statesman,
a philanthropist, a missionary, in her very nature, she is none the
less the noble mother and true, fond friend, to those who have known
her longest and best.



PRESCENDIA L. KIMBALL.

In attempting a brief sketch of this noble woman's life, it is not
necessary for me to state in regard to her ancestry, more than to say
she is the elder sister of Mrs. Zina D. Young, the same genealogical
references will suffice for both.

"Prescendia Lathrop Huntington was the fourth child of her parents,
and was born in Watertown, Jefferson County, New York, September
10th, 1810. Mrs. Kimball is said to be the exact counterpart of the
Eliza Huntington whose likeness is in the book, the record of the
Huntingtons, as a type of the race. Sister Prescendia is a woman to
see once, is to remember always. She reminds one of the dames of olden
times, large, tall, grand and majestic in figure, dignified in manner,
yet withal so womanly and sympathetic that she seems the embodiment of
the motherly element to a degree that would embrace all who came under
her influence."

"Prescendia Huntington was married at the age of seventeen to Mr.
Norman Buell. Their first child, George, was born in Mannsville,
December 12th, 1823. Soon after they moved to Pinbury, Lewis County,
where they made a comfortable home. Here their second son was born,
December 25th, 1831, and in November 1833, by an accident was so
severely burned that he died. In 1835, her mother came to visit her,
and brought her the first intelligence of the Prophet Joseph and the
record from the hill Cumorah. They sold their property the following
winter and by spring reached Kirtland, Ohio. June 1st, 1836, Sister
Prescendia was baptized and confirmed by Oliver Cowdery, and on the
9th her husband received the same ordinance. April 24th, 1838, her
first daughter was born in a tumble-down dwelling on the Fishing River,
Clay County, Mo., but lived only four hours. Here on two occasions
she without protection, encountered an armed mob, but was saved from
their hatred; they left her. Her husband had by this time apostatized.
The Huntingtons were obliged to leave Far West at the time of the
driving of the Saints from Missouri in the spring of 1839, and Sister
Prescendia felt entirely alone and forsaken. She says, 'there was not
at this time, one Saint in Missouri, to my knowledge.' About this time
was born her son Oliver, just after the dreadful outrages perpetrated
against the Saints in Missouri. In the fall of 1840 Mrs. Buell moved
from Missouri and settled between Quincy and Nauvoo. During the ensuing
five or six years she made frequent visits to the Saints, among others
the families of Joseph and Hyrum, and Father and Mother Smith. Joseph
himself taught her the principle of plural marriage. The sisters who
had entered into these covenants were in one sense separate and apart
from all others. No tongue can describe, or pen portray the peculiar
situation of these noble, self-sacrificing women, who through the
providence of God helped to establish the principle of celestial
marriage. The crisis came when the Prophet and Patriarch were foully
murdered.

"The time came for the performances of the ordinances in the Temple
at Nauvoo. Sister Prescendia availed herself of the privilege to go
and receive her blessings. Hereafter we recognize her as the wife of
the Apostle, Heber C. Kimball. The next great event in the history of
this people was the exodus from Nauvoo. The Saints had nearly all left
for the West; Sister Prescendia felt as if she were at the mercy of
the mob, and indeed, plans were laid to destroy her. As if in answer
to her prayers, her brother, William, sent her a messenger telling
her to leave all and come. On the 2nd of May, 1846, she walked out
of her house leaving all behind her, taking her little boy who was
sick and not able to be up but she was flying for her life. With the
help of her son, George, she got away. She traveled all night, and
reached a friend, Dr. Spurgeon, by daybreak. Took some refreshment
and went into the woods with her little boy, staying all day, fasting
and praying for deliverance. She says: 'I picked flowers for him and
gave him water from the running stream. At night I went back to the
doctor's, sleeping with my sick boy on a little bed on the floor.
Next day I hid in a wagon. When we arrived at Nashville, I saw a man
whom I knew, looking for me. I learned afterward he intended taking
my child from me. My brother, Dimick, sent his sons to see me safely
out of Illinois. I stayed in a deep ravine while some things were
brought to me, and slept on a buffalo robe on the ground at night
with my little child. No tongue can tell my feelings in those days of
trial; but I had considered well, and felt I would rather suffer and
die with the Saints, than live in Babylon as I had lived before. We
arrived at Bonaparte. The excitement and exposure brought on fever and
I was very ill. We at last arrived at Mt. Pisgah; there I found my
father, my sister, Zina, and her children. They were in a log house
without chimney or floor; sickness prevailed. Very soon men were sent
by the Government to get volunteers to march to Mexico; to fight for
a Government that had suffered us to be driven out at the point of
the bayonet. * * I saw the five hundred men enrolled as volunteers to
take up the line of march to Mexico. My brother, Dimick, brave-hearted
and strong, with his family, among the number. His wife, Fanny, had a
daughter born under most trying and painful circumstances. I was left
behind at what was then called Cutler's Park. My father and Zina were
at Mt. Pisgah. My brother, Dimick, in Mexico, my brother, William,
in St. Louis, my brother, Oliver, on a mission in Europe; then came
the news that my father had died at Pisgah; my friend, my counselor,
my own dear parent, to whom I had looked for counsel for the future
that stretched out before me like a great, unknown desert, unrelieved
and barren. I had only my Heavenly Father left, and I reached out in
faith to the One above to open the heavens for me and aid me in my
loneliness. I was in a new, wild country without means. Joseph and
Henry Woodmansee wanted me to keep house for them. As soon as I was
settled their father wrote for them, and I was left in charge of their
house. I started a school which was a great blessing to the children.
The house was built of logs and covered with dirt and straw, with a
little straw upon the floor.'

"Here Sister Prescendia toiled with scanty fare, teaching the children,
and when school was closed for the night her voice would leave her,
from weakness, but she loved the children and gained their affection.
It was an ague country, provisions were scarce, lack of vegetables and
fruit caused sickness. After a painful and dangerous illness, Sister
Prescendia recovered her health. About this time three brethren who
went with the Mormon Battallion, came back to Winter Quarters, having
been sent on special business from Pueblo. Says Sister Prescendia,
'I never saw such a pitiful sight before as these poor, worn-out
travelers presented. Their clothing hung in rags, their faces burned,
and with sun and snow they were nearly blind. Their feet were wrapped
in rawhide from the buffalo. I sat and heard them tell how fearfully
they had suffered crossing the prairies in the dead of winter, and
all this in defence of a Government that had driven us defenceless
women and children into a strange wilderness. I could not refrain from
weeping when I looked upon these my brethren and realized how they had
suffered.'

"Early in the spring a few pioneers left to search out a haven of
refuge for the Saints. The sisters left almost alone, lived near to
God. They used often to meet together and pray. The gifts of tongues,
interpretation and prophecy were given them at this time for their
consolation. In May, 1846, Sister Prescendia and her little son,
Oliver, left Winter Quarters. She, like many others, had to drive team,
yoke cattle, &c., though in delicate health. She arrived in Salt Lake
Valley September 22nd, and moved into the old Fort. January 6th, 1848,
Sister Prescendia had born to her a daughter. The baby was a great
comfort to the lonely mother who had left her home and come thousands
of miles away. No daughter was ever more fondly loved than this little
one.

"She was named Prescendia Celestia, and was rightly named Celestia,
for she was more like a celestial being than a mortal one. President
Young once asked her name; quick as thought, he said, _'Celestial
Prescendia.'_ Coming here as the Saints did provided with only the
barest necessities, there was much privation to contend against. The
families of Brigham and Heber shared in these respects equally with
the others. When Sister Prescendia's babe was quite small, she had to
put up an umbrella over them in bed to protect them from the rain.
Sister Prescendia was patient and thanked her Father in heaven that he
had permitted her to gather to the Rocky Mountains, and also that she
had been permitted to become a mother under the new and everlasting
covenant of marriage." Nothing could be more affecting than her story
of the loss of this lovely child. She dressed her for a visit, and gave
her in charge of her brother, while she finished her preparations. He
took her to the family of President Young, and as they were seated at
table, each gave her a kiss, admiring her beauty, President Young last.

"Returning to the mother, he sat her down a moment to cut a willow from
the water's edge, and turning to her--she was gone. The sweet face,
that going out smiled such a tender good-bye, was brought in cold in
death. Vilate, the first wife of Heber, said, "The flower of the flock
is gone." Years have passed since then, but the beauty of that little
face is undimmed in her mother's memory."

Sister Prescendia was for fifteen years secretary of the Sixteenth Ward
Relief Society.

Sister Prescendia's labors have been in the House of the Lord, and
annointing and administering to the sick. Hundreds have asked for her
presence at their bedside--the name, Prescendia--has been almost like
that sweet word, _mother_. I reflect upon the lonely, trial path that
she has trod, the wounds her heart has borne; and listening to the
tender pathos of her voice, the sublimity of her words; the nobility of
her life commanding my love and reverence.

If I could choose the picture which should be historical, it should
be as I have seen her; standing, her grand figure becomingly wrapped
in a large, circular cloak, a handsome, large black bonnet shielding
her venerable and beloved face from the falling flakes of snow.
Looking upon her I thought her the very picture of a Puritan exile, a
revolutionary ancestress, and a Latter-Day Saint veteran and pioneer.
I shall always remember her thus, it is an ineffaceable picture in my
memory.

Since writing the above, the following appears in the _Deseret News_ of
September 11th:

"MANIFESTATION OF RESPECT.

"Yesterday being the anniversary of the birthday of Sister Prescendia
L. Kimball, a party of ladies numbering about thirty, of her personal
friends, mostly of very long standing, assembled at her residence.
A lunch was partaken of about noon, and subsequently the gathering
took the form of a meeting, at which all present expressed themselves
appropriately to the occasion. The sisters also presented the venerable
and respected lady, a handsome black satin cloak, trimmed with fur and
lined with crimson plush, for winter wear. We are pleased to be able to
state that Sister Kimball's health has considerably improved during the
last few days."



PHOEBE W. CARTER WOODRUFF.

WIFE OF WILFORD WOODRUFF, PRESIDENT OF THE TWELVE APOSTLES, OF THE
CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

"I, Phoebe W. Carter, wife of Apostle Wilford Woodruff, was born
in Scarboro, in the State of Maine, March 8th, 1807. My father was
of English descent, coming to America at about the close of the
seventeenth century. My mother, Sarah Fabyan, was also of England, and
of the third generation from England. The name of Fabyan is ancient,
and of a noble family. My father's family, also, much of the old
Puritan stamp.

"In the year 1834, I embraced the Gospel, as revealed through the
Prophet Joseph Smith, and, about a year after, I left my parents and
kindred, and journeyed to Kirtland, Ohio, a distance of one thousand
miles, a lone maid, sustained only by my faith and trust in Israel's
God. My friends marvelled at my course, as did I, but something within
impelled me on. My mother's grief at my leaving home was almost more
than I could bear; and had it not been for the spirit within I should
have faltered at the last. My mother told me she would rather see me
buried than going thus alone into the heartless world, and especially
was she concerned about my leaving home to cast my lot among the
Mormons. 'Phoebe,' she said, impressively, 'will you come back to me if
you find Mormonism false?' I answered thrice, 'Yes, mother, I will.'
These were my words well remembered to this day; she knew I would keep
my promise. My answer relieved her trouble; but it cost us all much
sorrow to part. When the time came for my departure I dared not trust
myself to say farewell, so I wrote my good-bye to each, and leaving
them on my table, ran down stairs and jumped into the carriage. Thus I
left my beloved home of childhood to link my life with the Saints of
God.'

"When I arrived in Kirtland I became acquainted with the Prophet Joseph
Smith, and received more evidence of his divine mission. There in
Kirtland I formed the acquaintance of Elder Wilford Woodruff, to whom
I was married in 1836. With him I went to the 'Islands of the Sea' and
to England, on missions. Here I will bear my testimony to the power of
God which I have often seen manifested among the Latter-Day Saints. The
following is one notable instance:

"When the Saints were settling Nauvoo, the unhealthy labor of breaking
new land on the banks of the Mississippi for the founding of the city,
invited pestilence. Nearly everyone was attacked with fever and ague.
The Prophet had the sick borne into his house and dooryard until the
place was like a hospital. At length even he succumbed to the deadly
contagion and for several days was as helpless as the rest of our
people, who were all nearly exhausted by their extermination from
Missouri. But the spirit of the Lord came down upon Joseph, commanding
him to arise and stay the pestilence. The Prophet arose from his bed
and the power of God rested upon him. He commenced in his own house
and dooryard, commanding the sick in the name of Jesus Christ to arise
and be made whole; and they were healed according to his word. He then
continued to travel from house to house, and from tent to tent, upon
the bank of the river, healing the sick as he went, until he arrived at
the upper stone house, where he crossed the river in a boat accompanied
by several of the Quorum of the Twelve, whom he had bade to follow him,
and landed in Montrose. He walked into the cabin of Brigham Young, who
was lying sick, and commanded him in the name of Jesus Christ to arise
and be made whole, and follow him, which he did. They came to our house
next, and Joseph bade Mr. Woodruff, also, to follow, and then they went
to the house of Brother Elijah Fordham, who was supposed by his family
and friends to have been dying, for two weeks. The Prophet stepped to
his bedside, took him by the hand, and commanded him in the name of
Jesus Christ to arise from his bed and be made whole. His voice, Joseph
Smith's, was as the voice of God. Brother Fordham instantly leaped from
his bed, called for his clothing and dressed himself, and followed
the Apostles into the street. They then went into the house of Joseph
B. Nobles, who lay very sick, and he was healed in like manner. And
when by the power of God granted unto him, Joseph had healed all the
sick, he recrossed the river and returned to his own house. Thousands
of witnesses bear testimony of the miracle. It was a day never to be
forgotten. Hearing of the case of Brother Fordham, whom I with the rest
had believed to be dying, I thought I would go and see with my own
eyes. I found him very happy, sitting in his chair. He told me he had
been out to work in his garden. This was only a few hours after the
miracle. From that day I never doubted that this was the work of God.

"It will be expected that I should say something on polygamy. I have
this to say. When the principle of plural marriage was first taught,
I thought it was the most wicked thing I ever heard of; consequently
I opposed it to the best of my ability, until I became sick and
wretched. As soon, however, as I became convinced that it originated as
a revelation from God through Joseph, knowing him to be a prophet, I
wrestled with my Heavenly Father in fervent prayer, to be guided aright
at that all-important moment of my life. The answer came. Peace was
given to my mind. I knew it was the will of God; and from that time to
the present I have sought to faithfully honor the patriarchal law.

"Of Joseph, my testimony is that he was one of the greatest prophets
the Lord ever called, that he lived for the redemption of mankind and
died a martyr for the truth. The love of the Saints for him will never
die.

"It was after the martyrdom of Joseph that I accompanied my husband to
England in 1845. On our return the advance companies of the Saints had
left Nauvoo under President Young and others of the Twelve. We followed
immediately and journeyed to Winter Quarters. The next year my husband
went with the pioneers to the mountains while the care of the family
rested on me. After his return and the re-organization of the First
Presidency, I accompanied my husband on his mission to the Eastern
States. In 1850 we arrived in the Valley and since that time Salt Lake
City has been my home.

"Of my husband, I can truly say I have found him a worthy man with
scarcely his superior on earth. He has built up a branch of the Church
wherever he has labored. He has been faithful to God and his family,
every day of his life. My respect for him has increased with our years,
and my desire for an eternal union with him will be the last wish of my
mortal life."

At the first organization of the Relief Society in the Fourteenth
Ward, in the spring of 1857, Mrs. Woodruff was chosen by Bishop A.
Hoagland as President, which position she held until by the "move"
south, the society was discontinued. After their return she was invited
to resume her position, but so much of the family care and management
of business devolved upon her as her husband's faithful partner, that
she felt she could not do justice to that object, and Bishop Hoagland
asked her to nominate her successor. She chose her first counselor,
Mary Isabella Horne. Mrs. Woodruff is also one of the presiding board
of six, over the General Retrenchment Meetings, held semi-monthly in
the Fourteenth Ward. In May, 1882, Mrs. Woodruff was elected one of
the Executive Board of the Deseret Hospital. She often accompanies
Apostle Wilford Woodruff on his visits among the settlements, holding
meetings with the sisters, who look upon her as one of the wisest
women in the knowledge of the Scriptures and in her counsels among her
sisters in the _Church_. The record of her life and labors would make
a deeply interesting volume which could not fail to inspire the youth
of Zion with a desire to emulate her worthy example, and the hearts of
older ones with admiration and reverence. The eighteen years of our
acquaintance have served to strengthen and beautify my friendship for
Phoebe W. Woodruff, as wife, mother and Saint. It seems but fitting, to
record here that the mother and father of Sister Woodruff were baptized
by Apostle Wilford Woodruff. Thus ended all the fears of the Puritan
mother.

Quoting an historian of note (himself an occupant of part of the
Woodruff residence for a long period): "Sister Phoebe W. Woodruff is
one of the noblest examples of her sex,--truly a mother in Israel; and
in her strength of character, consistency and devotion, she has but few
peers in the Church."



BATHSHEBA W. SMITH.

WIFE OF APOSTLE GEORGE A. SMITH, OF REVERED MEMORY, WHO WAS ONE OF THE
FIRST PRESIDENCY OF THE CHURCH OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

Bathsheba W. Smith is the daughter of Mark and Susannah Bigler, and
was born at Shirnsten, Harrison Co., West Virginia, on May 3rd, 1822.
Her father was from Pennsylvania, her mother from Maryland. The school
facilities in her vicinity were limited. The county of Harrison was
hilly, and the roads of primitive character; the mode of travel was
chiefly on horseback riding, in which few could excel her.

In her girlhood she was religiously inclined, loved virtue, honesty,
truthfulness and integrity; attended secret prayers, studied to be
cheerful, industrious and happy, and was always opposed to rudeness.

During her fifteenth year some Latter-Day Saints visited the
neighborhood, she heard them preach and believed what they taught. She
knew by the spirit of the Lord, in answer to her prayer, that Joseph
Smith was a prophet of the Lord, and that the Book of Mormon was a
divine record. On the 21st of August, 1837, Bathsheba W. Bigler was
baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ, and the most of her father's
family also, about the same time. They soon felt a desire to gather
with the rest of the Saints in Missouri, her sister, Nancy, and family
sold their property, intending to go in the fall, and Bathsheba was
very anxious to go with them. Her father having not yet sold out his
property, she was told she could not go. This caused her to retire very
early, feeling very sorrowful. While weeping, a voice said to her,
"Weep not, you will go this fall." She was comforted and perfectly
satisfied, and the next morning testified to what the voice had said to
her.

Soon after, her father sold his home and they all went to Missouri, to
her great joy, but on their arrival there found the State preparing to
war against the Saints. A few nights before they reached Far West, they
camped with a company of eastern Saints, but separated on account of
each company choosing different ferries. The company Sister Bathsheba
and her family were in, arrived safely at their destination, but the
others were overtaken by an armed mob; seventeen were killed, others
were wounded, and some maimed for life. In a few days after their
arrival there was a battle between the Saints and the mob, in which
David W. Patten (one of the first Twelve Apostles,) was wounded, and
he was brought to the house where they were stopping. Sister Bathsheba
witnessed his death a few days after, and saw thousands of mobbers
arrayed against the Saints, and heard their dreadful threats and savage
yells, when our Prophet Joseph and his brethren were taken into their
camp. The Prophet, Patriarch and many others were taken to prison;
and the Saints had to leave the State. In the spring they had the joy
of having the prophet and his brethren restored to them at Quincy,
Illinois.

In the spring of 1840, the family of Sister Bathsheba moved to Nauvoo,
where she had many opportunities of hearing the Prophet Joseph preach,
and tried to profit by his instructions, and also received many
testimonies of the truths which he taught.

On the 25th of July, 1841, Bathsheba W. Bigler was married to George
A. Smith, the then youngest member of the Twelve Apostles, Elder Don
Carlos Smith (brother of the prophet) officiating. George A. Smith
was own cousin to the Prophet Joseph. When Sister Bathsheba first
became acquainted with George A. Smith he was the junior member of the
First Quorum of Seventies. On the 26th of June, 1838, he was ordained
a member of the High Council of Adam Ondi Ahman, in Davis County,
Missouri. Just about the break of day on the 26th of April, 1834, while
kneeling on the corner stone of the foundation of the Lord's House at
Far West, Caldwell County, Missouri, he was ordained one of the Twelve
Apostles, and from thence started on a mission to Europe, from which he
returned ten days previous to their marriage.

As the 4th of July, 1842, came on the Sabbath day, they celebrated the
anniversary on Monday the 5th. There was a military display of the
Nauvoo Legion, and a sham battle fought. George A. Smith was in the
general's staff in the uniform of a chaplain. Sister Bathsheba watched
the proceedings with great interest. On the 7th of July a son was born
to them; they named him George Albert. Two months after, George A., as
the Saints loved to call him, went on a mission to the Eastern States.
On his previous mission (to England,) he injured his left lung, causing
hemorrhage. In the fall of 1843, George A. and Bathsheba received their
endowments and were united under the holy order of celestial marriage.
Sister Bathsheba heard the Prophet Joseph charge the Twelve with the
duty and responsibility of the ordinances of endowments and sealing,
for the living and the dead. Sister Bathsheba met many times with her
husband, Joseph and others who had received their endowments, in an
upper room dedicated for the purpose, and prayed with them repeatedly
in those meetings. In the spring of 1844, Mr. Smith went on another
mission, and soon after he left persecution began in the city of Nauvoo
which ended in the martyrdom of our beloved prophet and patriarch. Mr.
Smith returned about the 1st of August, and on the 14th a daughter was
born, and they named her Bathsheba.

Having become thoroughly convinced that the doctrine of plurality of
wives was from God, and firmly believing that she should participate
with him in all his blessings, glory and honor, Sister Bathsheba gave
to her husband different wives during the year of his return home. She
says of this; "Being proud of my husband and loving him very much,
knowing him to be a man of God, and having a testimony that what I had
done was acceptable to my Father in heaven, I was as happy as I knew
how to be."

It would be in vain to describe how they traveled through snow,
wind and rain, how roads had to be made, bridges built and rafts
constructed, how our poor animals had to drag on day after day with
scanty food; nor how we suffered from poverty, sickness and deaths, but
the Lord was with us, His power was made manifest daily. Quoting from
her, "My dear mother died on the 11th of March, 1844, and on the 4th of
April I had a son born who lived but four hours." They arrived in Salt
Lake Valley (now city) in October, 1849, after traveling over sterile
deserts and plains, over high mountains and through deep canyons,
ferrying some streams and fording others, but all was joy now. Sister
Bathsheba went to her sister's house, and O, how delightful it did
seem to be once more in a comfortable room with a blazing fire on the
hearth, where the mountain's rude blasts nor the desert's wild winds
could not reach them.

In March, 1850, Sister Bathsheba moved into their own house. In
December, 1850, George A. Smith was called to go south to found a
settlement in Little Salt Lake Valley, two hundred and fifty miles
from home. In 1851, he returned, having been elected a member of the
Legislature from Iron Co. In 1856, he was sent to Washington to ask for
the admission of Utah as a State. In May, 1857, he returned to Utah. In
1858, they went south, bidding farewell to their home, feeling as they
did on leaving Nauvoo; that they should never see it again, fleeing as
they were, before the approaching army.

However, President Buchanan sent out his Peace Commissioners who
brought his Proclamation, declaring a general amnesty to all offenders.
Peace being restored, they returned to Salt Lake City in July, having
been gone three months. When they entered the city it was almost
sundown; all was quiet, every door was boarded up. From only two or
three chimneys smoke was rising. How still and lonely, yet the breath
of peace wafted over the silent city, and it was home! They had left
a partly finished house, and resuming work upon it, by October it was
finished. Sister Bathsheba says: "It was so comfortable and we were so
happy! We had plenty of room. My son and daughter took great pleasure
in having their associates come and visit them frequently. They would
have a room full of company, and would engage in reading useful books,
singing, playing music, dancing, &c. My son played the flute, flutina
and was a good drummer. My son and daughter were good singers, they
made our home joyous with song and jest." In 1860, this son was sent
on a mission to the Moquois Indians. He was interested in this and apt
in learning the language. After being set apart by the authorities for
that mission, he started on the 4th of September, and had traveled
about seven hundred miles, when on the 2nd of November he was killed by
Navajo Indians. On the 3rd of January the daughter was married.

In 1873, Sister Bathsheba made a tour with her husband and President
Young and party, to the Colorado and up the Rio Virgin as far as
Shonesberg. In 1872, they made another tour with President Young and
party, visiting at St. George, Virgen City, Long Valley and Kanab. In
1873, went again with her husband, President Young and company and
spent the winter in St. George, going by way of San Pete and Sevier
counties. During this journey Sister Bathsheba attended several
meetings with the sisters, returning home April, 1874. She has visited
the Saints as far south as the junction of the Rio Virgen with the
Colorado, has visited the settlements on the Muddy River, and also the
Saints as far north as Bear Lake and Soda Springs. On their travels
they have often been met by bands of music, and thousands of children
bearing banners and flags; and singing songs of welcome. Sister
Bathsheba has enjoyed these tours very much. She has accompanied many
explorations down into deep gulches to see the water pockets, over
beautiful plains in carriages or cars, and over mountains and deserts.

In reference to her position in duties of a public and spiritual
character, we find the following: Returning from a tour, February 19th,
1878, they arrived in Salt Lake City, finding all safe at home. I quote
again from Sister Bathsheba's journal, written in her own hand:

"My dear husband was not well; I thought I could soon nurse him up to
health, but my efforts were all in vain, he expired on the first of
September after a long sickness." The departure was a shock to many.
For many months prayers had been offered up through all parts of the
Territory, for the restoration to health of this great and good man.
Seated in his chair, his faithful wife beside him, he turned from his
conversation with President Young and others who constantly attended
him, and leaning upon her devoted heart breathed his last.

Sister Bathsheba W. Smith belonged to the first Relief Society which
was organized at Nauvoo, and was present when it was organized, the
Prophet Joseph presiding. Officiated as Priestess in the Nauvoo Temple.
Was Secretary in the Seventeenth Ward Relief Society, Salt Lake City;
had been First Counselor to President Rachel Grant in the Relief
Society of the Thirteenth Ward, Salt Lake City, for many years. Is
a Counselor to M. I. Horne in the General Retrenchment Association,
Fourteenth Ward, and is also Treasurer of the Relief Society of the
Salt Lake Stake. Has officiated in the holy ordinances of the House of
the Lord in Salt Lake City for many years. Is also one of the Board
of Directors in the Deseret Hospital. She says, "I have attended many
meetings of the sisters and had many seasons of rejoicing."

Sister Bathsheba is often reverently spoken of as "the beloved wife
of George A. Smith." To her, in one sense, this would be the dearest
praise that could be spoken. But yet a loftier, holier, than even the
earth-love seems to hover around her very presence. A little child
once said, "When I look at Sister Bathsheba, I do not see her with her
bonnet on, I see her as she will look when she wears that crown that is
waiting for her." Such is the impression her face, her gentle voice and
manner convey. To the record of her life, and this, I could add nothing.



ELIZABETH HOWARD.

SECRETARY OF THE RELIEF SOCIETIES OF THE SALT LAKE STAKE OF ZION.

Mrs. Howard furnishes a very brief sketch for one whose life and labors
among the people and faith of her adoption, have been so extended,
important and interesting, to all who have ever come within the
influence of her noble, generous spirit; who have received the stimulus
to failing spirits and energy which emanated from her animated face, so
good and motherly, her voice so cheerful and sympathetic, and her every
movement like an inspiration of strength, happiness and life.

She writes she was "descended from Scotch parentage on her father's
side, Irish on her mother's, Websters and Wards. Was born on July
12th, 1823, at Carlow, Carlow County, Ireland." Was the first child
of her parents and says she "had a glorious childhood and girlhood,"
which can be easily believed, judging by her ever buoyant spirits. She
was "married to William Howard, the eldest son of Stott and Catherine
Howard, June 9th, 1841. Heard the Gospel in 1851, and came to America
in 1853, with husband, two sons, four daughters, two hired girls and
two hired men." They arrived in Utah, September, 1853.

At the organizations of the Relief Society in 1867-68, she was
appointed Secretary of the Big Cottonwood Ward, which office she filled
until she accompanied her husband to England in 1868, returned in 1869
and resumed the same office. During their mission in England, Mrs.
Howard was often called upon to explain the principles of our doctrines
and answer many questions regarding our people, etc. Divines and others
found Mrs. Howard quite ready and able to meet and answer them on
every point. In fact her part of the mission has often been referred
to as something exceptionally creditable and important. It was at a
time, too, when woman had scarcely been heard to speak upon our faith,
outside the home circle.

About 1871, when Mrs. M. A. Smoot removed to Provo, Mrs. Howard was
chosen Counselor to Mrs. M. I. Horne in the General Retrenchment
Association, which position she still holds. When the Relief Societies
were organized into Stakes, Mrs. Howard was appointed Secretary of the
Salt Lake Stake of Zion, which position she holds at the present time.
Mrs. Howard has traveled much throughout our Territory in company with
other sisters, visiting the different societies and associations in
a missionary capacity, giving instructions and infusing cheerfulness
and energy by her whole-souled and genial manner. There is something
wonderfully earnest and sincere in all she says and does, and it has
a most convincing effect upon the hearers who delight to welcome her
visits, who is herself a most delightful entertainer and hostess at her
own beautiful country home a few miles ride out from the city.

Mrs. Howard is the mother of ten children, eight living; and
thirty-seven grand-children.



ELMINA S. TAYLOR.

PRESIDENT OF THE YOUNG LADIES' MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATIONS, OF THE
CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

I was born at Middlefield, Otsego County, State of New York, September
12th, 1830. My parents are Daniel Shepard and Rozita Bailey Shepard.
Three daughters were all the children that were born to them, I being
the eldest. My parents were staunch Methodists, and I was brought up
in that faith. I united myself with that church when about twenty
years of age, and during some six years was a zealous and consistent
member of the same. At the time I joined the Church I was desirous to
be baptized by immersion as I considered that the pattern set by our
Savior; although I had always been taught that baptism was not a saving
ordinance, but only to answer a good conscience, otherwise, an outward
sign of an inward grace. To this my many friends were so much opposed
that after some time elapsed I consented, and was admitted a member of
the church, by sprinkling; but there were many doctrines and tenets
with which I never was satisfied, and when I went to my minister to
have them explained I was more beclouded and found myself more in the
dark than before; though I sought to the Lord earnestly to be guided
aright.

"In the year 1854, circumstances induced me to go to Haverstraw, a
large town situated in southern New York, on the banks of the beautiful
Hudson River, to engage in teaching. One of the trustees, John Druce,
was a Mormon elder, who had a very interesting and intelligent family.
My cousin and I frequently visited there, but for a long time they
never mentioned religion to us, fearing to frighten us away, but one
night, just as I was leaving, he asked me if I would read some Mormon
books. I answered, 'O, yes! You know the Bible says prove all things
and hold fast that which is good.' His earnestness impressed me. Before
opening the books I bowed before the Lord and fervently implored Him to
give me His spirit that I might understand if they were true or false.
My interest was awakened, and the more I investigated and compared the
doctrines with the Scriptures, the more I was convinced of their truth.
I fought against my convictions, for I well knew how it would grieve
my dear parents to have me unite myself with that despised people; and
I also thought I should lose my situation which was a very lucrative
one. However, I could not silence my convictions, and as the promise
was given, 'If you will obey the doctrine, you shall know whether it is
of God or man;' I went forth and was baptized July 5th, 1856. When I
was confirmed by the laying on of hands I received the testimony of its
truth which I have never lost from that day to this.

"I was united in marriage to George Hamilton Taylor, August 31st, 1856,
by Apostle, now President, John Taylor, and in 1859, April fifteenth,
we left New York for Utah, where we arrived September 16th of the same
year, after a long tedious journey with ox teams. In the spring of
1860 we located in the Fourteenth Ward, where we have since resided,
and where our first child, a son, was born July 16th of the same year.
While in the States we were never blessed with children, but it was
prophesied upon my head that I should go to Zion and should there be
blessed with them, which has been fulfilled, for I am now the mother of
seven.

"Through the gift of tongues, it was also promised that all my family
should come to me, which was verified after we had been here nearly
fifteen years, and my father is still with us, having reached the
advanced age of seventy-nine years, but none of them ever received the
Gospel.

"At the organization of the Relief Society of the Fourteenth Ward,
December 12th, 1867, I was elected Secretary, an office which I still
occupy. September 23rd, 1874, by request of Sister E. R. S. Snow, I
was appointed Superintendent of the Young Ladies' Association of the
same ward. I was chosen First Counselor to Sister M. I. Horne, Stake
President of Salt Lake County, December 22nd, 1879, and have traveled
considerably in that capacity.

"At a Conference held in the Assembly Hall, Salt Lake City, June 19th,
1880, was appointed President of the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement
Association of Zion.

"July 4th, 1877, we entered into the celestial order of marriage, and
have since all lived under the same roof, and eaten at the same table,
ever in the enjoyment of peace and harmony."

All who are acquainted with the writer of the above autobiographical
sketch, can cheerfully add testimony to its concluding paragraph. "Love
at Home" might be graven upon a tablet of stone within their door, so
indelibly seems that sacred principle to have been impressed upon the
hearts within that household.

By example, by attainments, and the spiritual refinement and elegance
in bearing which would denote the Christian lady, under any or all
circumstances, it seems peculiarly appropriate that Mrs. Elmina S.
Taylor was called to preside over the young ladies of Zion. May they
emulate their standard, spiritually and socially. The simplicity and
modesty of her sketch cannot convey to the mind of the reader those
delicate attributes of character, so well understood by those who, like
myself, have been recipients of her kindly counsels and encouragement,
and recognized in a wider sense by those who have listened to her
addresses, dictated by the spirit of our sacred and holy religion.



MARY A. FREEZE.

PRESIDENT OF THE Y. L. M. I. A. OF THE SALT LAKE STAKE OF ZION.

Mary A. Freeze is the daughter of James Lewis Burnham and his wife,
Mary Ann, who were born in Vermont. In 1837, with their one child
they emigrated to McHenry County, Illinois, where they made them a
home, leaving there in 1843 for Beauro County in the same State. In
the latter place they heard and obeyed the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Mr. Burnham was a minister of the Church called Christians, but after
hearing the elders explain the principles of this Gospel, could not but
acknowledge that he had no legal authority to preach, and consequently
was baptized into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints,
whose doctrines he preached and advocated faithfully until the day of
his death, from bleeding of the lungs, caused by preaching in the open
air. In 1843, Mr. and Mrs. Burnham had moved to Nauvoo. They there had
four children, the youngest, a little girl, died in 1844. Mr. Burnham
labored as much as his failing strength would permit, quarrying rock
for the Temple. In the summer of 1845 he grew worse. Mrs. Freeze says,
"This was four days previous to my birth. This was a trying time for
my mother, being left in sorrow and very destitute of worldly goods,
with no relatives near to help her; but the Saints were very kind to
her in her affliction. Her relatives in the East would gladly have
sent means to take her back, but she had cast her lot with the Saints
of God and preferred to remain with them in the depths of poverty than
to have the wealth of the whole world, elsewhere. After the Temple was
finished she entered therein, partaking of the ordinances, and was
sealed to President Joseph Young, (brother of President Brigham Young,)
he performing this ordinance for my father, who had died before the
opportunity of this privilege. She afterwards had two daughters who are
now the wives of Robert N. Russell and Jasper Conrad.

"In February, 1846, the famous exodus began, but my mother had no way
of going so remained until after the battle took place and the Saints
were driven out on pain of losing their lives. Mother received a wagon
for her city property and was lent a yoke of oxen, that she might begin
that memorable, toilsome journey with her four little children. I have
heard her tell of the mobs searching the wagons for arms, the obscene
language they used, and how terribly she suffered from fear. She
arrived at Winter Quarters late in the fall, where she remained a year
and a half, when they were compelled by the Government to move back on
the east side of the river, because they were on Indian Territory. Soon
after this she let her second and third sons, Wallace and George, go
on to the valley with Brother Daniel Woods. This was a severe trial to
my loving mother, but there seemed to be no other way for them to be
taken care of as the Saints were in the deepest poverty. I have often
heard her and Brother Luther also, rehearse the want and distress they
endured, sometimes nearly amounting to starvation. We were compelled to
remain there until 1852, when through the kindness of the brethren we
were enabled in June to cross the plains, arriving in Salt Lake City,
October 8th, last day of Conference. I was too young to remember much
about the journey, but one circumstance impressed itself upon my mind.
While climbing into the wagon I fell, and was run over by both wheels
and very badly hurt, but through the administration of the elders
was almost instantly healed and felt no bad effects from the injury
afterward.

"We located in Bountiful, Davis County, ten miles north of Salt Lake
City, where we lived until I was sixteen years old. I was baptized
when nine years of age and felt happy in the assurance that I was a
'Mormon' in very deed. At the time of the Reformation, I was full
of the inspiration of the times although only eleven years old, and
was very much in earnest in repenting of my sins, and making new
covenants to serve the Lord more faithfully in the future. During my
early years I attended school the entire season, until old enough to
assist my mother, when I attended during the winter only. Being very
assiduous I acquired a good common school education. In 1861 we moved
to Richmond, Cache Valley, my brothers having taken up land and made a
home there. It was there I became acquainted with James Perry Freeze,
whom I assisted in teaching school six months, not dreaming of the
relationship I was destined to sustain to him. My girlhood days were
not as happy as might have been, on account of our exceeding poverty,
but I have many times since thought that it was for my greatest good
that I was reared in want and loneliness; that it was a means of
keeping me humble, the good spirit thereby finding a receptacle in
my heart, giving me a desire to seek after truth and learn of the
things of God. Had I possessed wealth and my mind been filled with the
follies and fashions of the world, I might not have had such a desire
to make the Lord my friend. At an early age I read in the Doctrine and
Covenants, that God is no respecter of persons, but in all countries
those who fear Him and work righteousness are accepted of Him. This was
a great comfort to me, a guiding star to my whole future life; that
by leading a righteous life I should be loved of my Father in heaven
equally with the richest and most highly born; that possessing His love
and favor I possessed everything worth caring for.

"In March, 1863, I was married to James P. Freeze, whom, I felt assured
was a noble man, one that I could trust as the guardian of my life.
I am the mother of eight children. We resided in Richmond six months
after our marriage, when we came to Salt Lake City, where he has since
followed the mercantile business. In 1864, we became identified with
the Eleventh Ward where we still live. In 1871, I was called to preside
over the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association of this Ward,
accepting it with great reluctance, feeling my incapability, but have
filled it to the best ability which God has given me, and have proven
that all who seek the Lord in humility, will surely receive a blessing
at His hand. Through the blessing of the Almighty, I have now the love
and confidence of the members who have manifested the same in various
ways.

"In the spring of 1871, my husband, a faithful man, desirous of keeping
all the commandments of God, saw fit, with my full consent, to take
to himself another of the daughters of Eve, a good and worthy girl,
Jane Granter by name. It tried my spirit to its utmost endurance, but
I always believed the principle to be true, and felt that it was time
we obeyed that sacred order. The Lord knew my heart and desires, and
was with me in my trial and assisted me to overcome the selfishness and
jealousy of my nature. With his help, added to the great kindness of
my husband, who has ever stood at the head of his family as a wise and
just man, I soon obtained peace. While undergoing the severest trial to
my feelings, I was inspired with the following lines which the Lord was
not slow to answer:

  "'Father, help me to do Thy will,
  Command my troubled heart be still;
  Cause my soul with peace to flow,
  While I sojourn here below,
  Help me still to realize
  Thou'rt the giver of the prize
  That I would win through faithfulness.
  Then, Father, O look down and bless
  Thine erring child that cries to Thee
  For help, amid life's stormy sea.'

"My husband has since taken two other wives, and I praise the Lord that
I had so far overcome, that instead of feeling it to be a trial, it
was a source of joy and pride that we were counted worthy to have such
noble girls enter our family. The two last were my Counselors in the
Young Ladies' Improvement Association of our Ward. I have loved the
wives of my husband as I would have my own sisters, realizing that the
power of the Holy Priesthood that has bound us together for time and
eternity is stronger than kindred ties. Sophia lived with me nearly
seven years; she died December, 1879, which was one of the greatest
trials of my life. I could as willingly have parted with one of my own
daughters. She left me a beautiful boy who seems as near to me as my
own. I wish to bear testimony to my descendants, and to all who may
read this sketch, that I know by the power of the Holy Ghost which
bears testimony to my spirit, that the Patriarchal Order of Marriage is
from God and was revealed for the exaltation and salvation of the human
family, also that I have had peace, joy and satisfaction in living in
that Order such as I had never known before; and have had many proofs
that God will pour out His blessings upon those who keep His laws,
seeking Him with full purpose of heart, for He will be sought after by
His children.

"September 14, 1878, the authorities having considered it necessary to
institute a Stake Organization of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement
Association, I was chosen as President of these Associations in this
Salt Lake Stake of Zion. I chose Louie Felt, and Clara Y. Conrad, my
half-sister, as my Counselors. We have visited the Associations as far
as practicable, have enjoyed the spirit of our mission and feel assured
we have been instrumental in the hands of God of doing much good.

"I am striving to purify myself, and keep all of the commandments of
God, to be diligent in the performance of every duty assisting to roll
forth the great work our Father has established in the last days, that
I may be worthy to receive the blessings which have been pronounced
upon my head; for they are great and many, and I know I shall receive
them if found worthy. I know the fruits of this Gospel are peace, joy
and happiness, and all who obey its precepts will have in this life
that peace which passeth all understanding, that which the world cannot
give nor take away, and having finished their labors, and are called
to another sphere, will be crowned with life eternal, which is the
greatest of all gifts. It has been the greatest desire of my life that
my children should become bright and shining lights in the church of
God, and knowing that much depends upon parents, I have ever striven to
set them an example worthy of imitation, teaching them true principles,
that I might not come under condemnation for my neglect of duty.

"I realize that heaven would not be heaven to me if my children,
through sin and transgression, could not have a place there; that my
glory would be dimmed forever.

"I will now say good-bye, until we meet where there is neither sorrow
nor mourning, but our joy will be perfect; and trust my descendants may
all keep the laws of God, and be worthy to sit down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, Joseph Smith, Brigham Young and all the faithful in the
kingdom of God, to go no more out."

Mrs. Freeze says, "We have traced our lineage back to the year 1200,
and have the record of the same. We descended from the Normans. Our
family was at one time very wealthy and numerous in England; there
is a town which bears their name. Three brothers came to America at
an early date, one settled in Vermont, and two in Massachusetts.
Their descendants took part in the Revolutionary War, and among them
according to the 'Burnham Record' were many Doctors of Divinity,
Doctors of Law, and one Mary Burnham, writes of the 'service of gold,
their equipages and household appointments, of that grandeur brought
with them from their ancient and noble halls of England.' Several of
the Burnham descendants were officers in the late Civil War in America."

Mrs. Freeze is of that class of spirits that (in religion or justice)
opposition would animate, persecution, inspire her. I have often
thought, looking into her eyes, that in their depths slumbered the
embers (scarcely covered by the ashes of dead years) of the fires of
patriot's and martyr's souls.



LOUIE FELT.

PRESIDENT OF THE PRIMARY ASSOCIATIONS OF THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF
LATTER-DAY SAINTS.

Louie Felt was the daughter of Joseph and Mary Bouton, was born in
South Norfolk, Conn., May 5, 1852. Was baptized when eight years old
and came to Utah in September, 1866. On December 29th of same year was
married to Joseph H. Felt. At the October Conference of 1867, they
were called to go on the Muddy River Mission and started the 9th of
November following. They remained there between two and three years,
enduring many hardships; the heat in summer being particularly trying
to those used to a Northern clime. "Ninety degrees in the shade" is
considered high in our eastern cities, but at the Muddy, for months it
would rise above one hundred degrees at midnight. The buildings were
new, low adobe houses, lumber scarce, and often the wife was asked,
"where would you prefer to have the boards, over your head or under
your feet?" Those who had babies to rock took the choice of a floor,
and put up with a thatched roof. The winds blew with great violence,
and the tender shoots of the trees, vines, and other things they
planted were often cut off clean by the sharp sand in the driving wind.
They were surrounded by friendly Indians who were willing to work and
learn civilization, but who were so hungry they could not resist the
temptation to pluck the young watermelons and squashes planted by the
missionaries, as fast as they approached the size of walnuts. Once,
when visiting the Muddy settlement of St. Joseph, the Indian visitors
were delighted with the rice my mother was preparing to cook. They
called it the "snow-white wheat" and begged for some, saying they would
plant and cultivate it with great care. She humored them, but showed
them how the germ was destroyed, and advised them to cook it, and plant
corn and melons.

In a brief time the Missionaries were short of the good things they
had provided; there were no stores, freight trains seldom came that
way, and they were a long distance, three day's travel from St.
George, itself a pioneer settlement in an alkali desert. President
Erastus Snow, with fatherly kindness, sent beef, cattle and flour to
the Indians, to stay their increasing instincts for self-preservation
by way of appropriation. Another misfortune befell the Missionaries;
their dwellings were as dry as tinder, and in some way a fire started,
and some lost their all, everyone lost something. President Erastus
Snow called upon the people of St. George, and if I remember right,
of Washington and Santa Clara also and with all possible haste sent
the willing contributions of their brethren and sisters. President
Brigham Young had two daughters, a son and a niece on the same mission.
He visited them and was filled with compassion for their situation,
and as it seemed vain to hope for an amelioration of some of their
disadvantages, the Mission was broken up. Mrs. Felt's health was
poor but, she says, "I never felt to murmur, but to stay as long
as required." In 1869, Mrs. Felt went on a visit to her father in
Connecticut, as he was not expected to live. He had gone back for the
recovery of his health but was no better. She remained with him three
months, then returned to Utah. In 1872 they moved to the Eleventh Ward,
"and then," she says, "began some of the happiest days of my life.
I soon became a member of the Y. L. M. I. A., and thereby received
a better understanding of my religion, which brought me peace and
happiness, such as I had never known before. I also became thoroughly
convinced of the truth of the principle of celestial marriage, and
having no children of my own was very desirous my husband should take
other wives that he might have a posterity to do him honor, and after
he took another wife and had children born to him, the Lord gave me a
mother's love for them; they seemed as if they were indeed my own, and
they seem to have the same love for me they do for their own mother."
I have witnessed the real mother in this family, rocking her babe to
sleep, and the other mother--Louie--would sit beside her and hold one
little hand, or lay her own upon its little head, and it would quietly
resign itself to sleep, so closely were all these three true hearts
united in love. "In September, 1878, I was appointed to the position
of President of the P. A. of the Eleventh Ward, which position I still
hold. In December of the same year. Mrs. Freeze chose me as her First
Counselor, in the stake organization of the Young Ladies' Association,
and I immediately started with President Freeze, visiting these wards,
and I enjoyed my labor. In September, 1879, I was appointed to fill
the position of Territorial President of the Primary Improvement
Associations, and have visited the different stakes of Zion as much as
circumstances would permit, and now feel more firm in my religion, and
more determined to magnify my calling whereunto I have been appointed,
hoping thereby to bring honor to the cause of Zion and also to myself."

In person, Mrs. Felt is very tall and slender, her health always
being very delicate. Her face is pale, refined and spiritual in its
expression; her spirit buoyant and cheerful, and her animated manner
and smile as frank as a child's; the beholder would never take her for
"a sorrowing Mormon woman," such as we read about. Whether presiding
in gentle dignity over a conference of several thousands of parents
and children, whether happily mingling in a reunion of cherished and
appreciative friends, or whether in that closer, dearer circle of which
she is not the least the builder, her face is that of innocence and
purity; her heart is an altar to her God; her life a monument to all.



ELLEN C. S. CLAWSON.

PRESIDENT OF THE PRIMARY ASSOCIATION OF THE SALT LAKE STAKE OF ZION.

Ellen Curtis Spencer Clawson was born in Saybrook, Conn., Nov. 1,
1832. She is the eldest daughter of Spencer Clawson, A. B., and
Catherine Curtis, and grand daughter of Daniel Spencer, who fought
in the Revolutionary War. Her father graduated at Union College,
Schenectady, New York, and also at the Theological College at Hamilton,
as a minister of the Baptist denomination. He received the gospel when
his daughter was seven years old. He immediately sold his effects and
went to Nauvoo, where he became intimately associated with the Prophet
Joseph. At the age of nine years, she was baptized in the Mississippi
river. During the exodus from Nauvoo her mother died from exposure
and exhaustion, through leaving a comfortable house to camp out in
mid-winter. Six months later her father was sent to Great Britain to
take charge of the mission there. It was there he wrote the celebrated
"Spencer's Letters," a little volume well known among the church works.
He also became editor of the _Millennial Star_, which position he held
for three years. He was obliged to leave his five remaining children
in Ellen's care, she being now only thirteen years of age. During
his absence the little family crossed the plains with ox teams, in
President Brigham Young's company, taking five months to complete the
journey, and suffering all the privations and hardships with the rest
of the Saints.

Miss Ellen C. Spencer was married in March 1850, by President Brigham
Young, to Hiram B. Clawson, who soon after became to President
Young, business manager, a position he held for a number of years;
subsequently superintendent of the Z. C. M. I., and is at present
Bishop of the Twelfth Ward, Salt Lake City. Mrs. Clawson is the mother
of fourteen children, four sons and ten daughters, seven daughters
and two sons of whom are now living. In April, 1879, Mrs. Clawson was
called to preside over the Primary Association of the Twelfth Ward,
Salt Lake City, and later was ordained to preside over all the Primary
Associations of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion.

Think of this noble girl, hardly more than a child, taking upon her
young life the duties and cares of a loved and lost, a martyred mother!
Surely she was precious in God's sight; and his arm must have sustained
her through that long and lonely journey through the wilderness. That
same strength of character, that same sweet patience of spirit, gentle
manner, have upborne her through later eventful periods. A prominent
and beautiful feature in her life, one that has won to her the truest
respect, the unperishable love of her friends is the position she has
maintained amid her husband's family, like a loving queen mother, in
his home circle.

Mrs. Clawson's two sons, H. B. and Spencer Clawson, are in the
mercantile business, the latter a wholesale merchant, both men of high
social and business standing, and an honor to their parents.



EMMELINE B. WELLS.

EDITOR OF "WOMAN'S EXPONENT."

This lady, like most of our representative women, was born in
New England, February 29, 1828, at Petersham, Worcester County,
Massachusetts. Her maiden name was Woodward. The forefathers of
her family came in 1830, settled in and around Boston, were large
landowners, and by profession were mathematicians, surveyors, etc. Mrs.
Wells' ancestry, both on the father and mother's side, were purely of
English extraction, and fought for freedom in the Revolutionary War,
as well as that of 1812, some of them being officers of high rank.
Her brothers and other relations fought in the late Civil War also.
Mrs. Wells has had an eventful history in many respects, and somewhat
romantic; were it to be published as a story and strictly true, it
would be stranger than fiction.

In her early life she gave promise of unusual talent, her memory was
quite wonderful, storing up the many incidents and points of beauty
around her to be brought forth in after years in faithful portraiture
amid far off valleys and places then unbuilt and undiscovered. It was
the expectation of her family and friends that she would make a mark
in the world and do them honor; this was to be verified, but in a way
undreamed of by them. The place and work God had chosen for her had
not in her childhood, even a name. The child of destiny, straying
alone yet not lonely, with her busy fancies finding companionship
in fields, woods and brooks, the haunts of nature in their rudest,
wildest form; listening to the songs of birds and sighing of the forest
leaves, touching with caressing hand the flowers and moss-grown rocks,
searching through shrubbery and tangled vines, or looking up through
alcoves green and dim, feasted her eyes upon the wondrous sky where
moving clouds passed on in endless changes 'neath that world, where she
was taught the home and throne of God forever are. These surroundings
and influences developed and moulded that individuality of character
during her childhood to the degree, that at eight years of age she
commenced composing in rhyme, choosing instinctively the beautiful and
harmonious method of expression which is poetry. This element cannot
be possessed by anyone, old or young, but that it casts an influence
recognized at once, and men and women gray haired now, say, that
watching the thoughtful child they knew there was a special destiny for
her, undefined, but nevertheless felt as something grand and great. So,
hovered the spirit of her mission around her through her childhood, and
at ten years of age she became a member of the church choir, happy in
lifting her full heart in hymns of worship and of praise.

How many have found sweet joy in singing; that expression of
supplication, faith and gratitude, which in any and every religion is,
we feel, true and acceptable adoration.

In November, 1841, the Gospel was preached in her native village; and
her mother believed and was baptized. Immediately a branch of the
Church was organized and some excitement in regard to Mormonism sprang
up among the worldly-wise and learned. Mrs. Wells' mother persuaded her
to go and hear the Mormon elders, and told her she knew it was the true
Gospel that the ancient Apostles taught, and that she had been looking
forward to such a dispensation. She was a woman of very strong mind, of
practical capabilities, yet withal very spiritual in her nature, had
been for many years a staunch Congregationalist, and had her children
brought up in that church. Ministers, lawyers, judges and influential
men came with their profound learning and logic to convince Mrs. Wells'
mother that Mormonism was a delusion, but all in vain. On the young and
inexperienced daughter they expected to be able to make an impression,
and no means was left untried. Everything that could be said or done
was brought to bear, and when she had decided to receive the ordinance
of baptism all the powers of darkness seemed to conspire to hinder it.
She affirms that a power she had no knowledge of heretofore, seemed
to possess her at this momentous time to help her to withstand the
intercessions and pleadings of those who had been her friends, and who
now so vigorously sought to keep her from going down into the waters of
baptism.

On the 1st day of March, 1842, when a little group of Latter-Day Saints
was assembled to perform the ordinance of baptism on her mother's own
ground, just near her home, zealous friends sent messengers down to ask
her if she was _sure_ she was acting of her own free will and choice,
otherwise they would take her by force and she should never lack for
means of a higher education, but if she accepted the Mormon faith and
gathered at Nauvoo she _must_ renounce not only her friends but also
all the advantages of literary culture she had so ardently hoped to
attain, and be forever disgraced. Not knowing but that it was true that
her hopes for further advancement must be resigned, she laid them on
the altar of her faith, willing to yield up her future entirely to the
will and care of her Creator. Some power potent indeed buoyed her up
and she went through this trying ordeal and though her delicate nerves
were somewhat shaken yet she told her mother and friends then what
proved true afterwards, that the crisis was past, she had renounced all
she had before looked forward to, henceforth she desired to dedicate
herself entirely to the work in which she had enlisted.

During the year after her coming into the Church she pursued her
studies at the same school, yet she had to endure a great deal of
ridicule on account of being a Mormon, and her teacher never wearied
of persuading and entreating her to give up such foolish ideas, and
resume her place among her associates. But though she was as one alone,
for there was not another in the school that believed in the peculiar
faith she had embraced, and she understood very little herself, still
she had an innate conception of the entire consecration necessary for a
Latter-Day Saint. The next year she taught a country school, receiving
her certificate as readily as any of the other young ladies; and early
in the spring of 1844, in the month of April, she went up to Nauvoo,
where she had the privilege of hearing Joseph Smith preach his last
discourses. After reaching Nauvoo she received strong testimony, not by
any spiritual manifestations, but that which convinced her reason and
intelligence.

We cannot attempt to give in detail the changes and trials of Nauvoo,
but suffice it to say that through sickness, sorrow and severe trial
she kept the faith.

In the winter of 1844-45, she was taught the principle of celestial
marriage by Bishop Newel K. Whitney and his wife, whose acquaintance
she had formed through having been introduced to the family by a cousin
of Sister Whitney's. This cousin was one of the company in which she
had traveled to Nauvoo, and who because of her delicate health, her
youth and inexperience, had been attracted towards her.

She accepted the principle in its sacred phase and entered into the
order or covenant of celestial marriage with the same purity of motive
that had influenced her in going down into the waters of baptism. The
ceremony was performed by Brigham Young in one of the upper rooms
of the Bishop's house in Nauvoo, in the evening of the 14th day of
February, 1845, the only witness being the Bishop's first wife, who
not only had consented but actually urged the matter, and gave her to
her husband; and the most sincere friendship existed forever afterward
between the two, who really lived like mother and daughter, and though
so intimately associated in the same family, and sometimes under
circumstances the most trying, yet no jar or contention ever marred
their true friendship for each other. To those who doubt the fact of
women living happily together no better illustration can be given
than such practical ones as these. Here were two refined, sensitive
natures in harmony with that condition of marriage, but it was from
the fact that they accepted it from divine authority as a part of
their religion, and a higher law which would secure to them a future
exaltation; never losing sight of the exalted nature of their mission,
having undertaken to live lives of self-sacrifice and purity. The
false assertion made by the world that women of marked character and
attainments would never submit to live in the order of plural marriage
is disproved by such instances as this one. Both were women of high
social attainments, and possessing superior qualities of mind and heart.

It is the higher nature that must be aroused to inspire women to carry
out practically this exalting, refining principle, and through this
crucible many have come forth like gold seven times purified, tried as
by fire yet without the smell upon their garments.

Mrs. Wells received the ordinances and the blessings of the Temple with
her husband in Nauvoo, and came out in the month of February, crossing
the Mississippi River on the ice. Her mother, who had been a staunch
Latter-Day Saint from her first hearing the Gospel preached, died of
hardships and fatigue when the Saints were driven from Nauvoo.

In Winter Quarters she taught school and came with the Bishop and his
family to the valley, leaving the Missouri River towards the last of
May, 1845, and arrived in the valley early in October. On the 2nd day
of November, after, her eldest daughter was born in a wagon, during one
of those cold piercing wind and sleet storms that often occur at that
season. September 23, 1850, Bishop Whitney died, leaving her a widow at
twenty-two with two children, the eldest not then two years of age, the
youngest a babe five weeks old. Many of her friends feared she would
sink beneath her trials, but she rallied those forces of her nature,
which under a husband's care had never been called into requisition,
and turned to the ways and means of providing for her little ones. Left
as it were alone, bereft and so helpless, the young mother was like one
in a dream, she had trusted to her husband so entirely, and knew so
little herself of the practical realities of life; she had not thought
he could die. He was one to lean upon, and she had looked up to him as
a little child looks up to a true loving parent with a reverence almost
more than human. To her he had shown the utmost tenderness, helping
and encouraging in times of severe trial, making every burden lighter
because of the intense sympathy of his spiritual nature. This was one
of the eventful epochs of her life. She awakened to know that for her,
duty must be first, and she became in course of time accustomed to
acting for herself instead of leaning upon another.

It was a hard lesson, but she studied it carefully, and sought
earnestly for divine help upon her efforts; but we are simply giving
a few facts and not minute details, therefore suffice it to say after
something more than two years of widowhood she married again.

During the Bishop's life, he frequently prophesied to her of the future
and what her work would yet be, and although she could not then imagine
how such changes could possibly be wrought, (as much on account of the
condition of the country and the circumstances of the people,) yet
looking back over it now, she realizes how prophetic his words were,
and the promises made concerning her future have many of them been
fulfilled.

Mrs. Wells often says she was born a woman's rights advocate,
inheriting it from her mother, who was a staunch advocate for woman's
emancipation, and when left a widow with a large family, realized more
fully the injustice of the laws in regard to women, their property
rights and guardianship of children. Mrs. Wells has been the mother of
six children, one son and five daughters, and during their childhood
devoted herself almost exclusively to their care and education.

Mrs. Wells has always had a great desire to see others advance, and in
her home before she entered upon public duties ever sought to stimulate
those around her to efforts of development of the higher nature. She
has given much genuine encouragement to those who would shrink from
criticism and would consequently, unless aroused, bury their talents or
fold them away in a napkin. She is exceedingly frank in her nature and
generous to a fault, and possesses an admirable faculty of entertaining
those with whom she is from time to time associated. She has drawn
around her people of taste, ability and culture; the secret of her
winning friends is perhaps in her almost total forgetfulness of self,
and her intense wish to make others happy. Perhaps, among her friends,
few are fonder or more sincere than those who have received both
sympathy, encouragement and advice from her who has not feared that
other lights might dim her own, she has rejoiced in the progress and
victories of others as though they were her own achievements.

It is truly wonderful to contemplate the public work accomplished by
Mrs. Wells in the comparatively brief opportunity of time since her
labors began. In the Eastern States prominent women have pursued these
objects for nearly fifty years, but the women of Utah have stood afar
and alone with no part in matters of a political nature until about
thirteen years ago. They have exercised their privileges with respect,
caution and wisdom, holding neither lightly or boastfully the freedom
of the ballot. Many have read law and studied parliamentary rules,
and have on occasions of public character endeavored to profit by
observation in the presentation and discussion of such matters.

Mrs. Wells has traveled much among our people, speaking and assisting
in organizing. She has good executive ability and is well adapted to
this kind of work.

In political matters she takes great interest, and since the women
of Utah have had the ballot she has taken a prominent part in that
direction and done much active work.

Mrs. Wells went to Washington as a delegate from the women of Utah in
January, 1879, to attend the Convention of the National Woman Suffrage
Association, accompanied by Mrs. Zina Young Williams and while there
they had the opportunity of speaking before committees of House and
Senate, and also had an audience with President Hayes and several
of the leading men of the nation on the Mormon question. They also
prepared a memorial to Congress and succeeded in getting it presented.

In November, 1874, Mrs. Wells went into the office of the _Woman's
Exponent_ to assist the editor, Mrs. Lula Greene Richards, a little
in her labors, and gradually grew interested in the work, and in May,
1875, her labors became regular and constant, continuing so until in
July, 1877, when she assumed the entire responsibility, Mrs. Richards
withdrawing on account of increased domestic cares. Mrs. Wells never
seems to tire of journalistic duty.

In November, 1876, she was chosen President of the Central Grain
Committee for the storing of grain by women, against a day of famine.
At the Mass Meeting in the Theatre to protest against the Woman's
Anti-Polygamic Association she took an active part in the proceedings.
In September, 1882, Mrs. Wells went to Omaha with Mrs. Zina D. H.
Young, to attend the convention of the National Woman's Suffrage
Association again. Mrs. Wells was appointed Secretary of the Deseret
Hospital Association; in fact her time is almost constantly employed in
the performance of public duties and benevolent work.

Looking retrospectively upon the life of Emmeline B. Wells and
noting the constant upward progress she has made through the adverse
circumstances common to a pioneer life, and the establishing of a new
order of religion and social life amid the opposition and persecution
of our own nation; the result is calculated to testify strongly
against the assertions made that, in our isolation and subservience
to religious authority, woman is repressed in her abilities and
privileges; for it is in that mental atmosphere which is the very
essence of Mormonism, that hers have been developed and brought into
prominence as an exemplar to the young. If in the very stronghold of
Mormonism the standard of progress is upheld by woman's hand as well
as man's, the inference is that the next generation will show a marked
advance. Knowledge is power, and this with virtue and wisdom united,
guided by inspiration, ignorance and tyranny will alike be impotent
against the growing hosts of Israel. And, knowing this, all excellences
of acquirements and attainments are stimulated and promoted among
the old and young by our leaders, misrepresentation to the contrary
notwithstanding.

The quality of statesmanship is of high order and rare among women, but
it has been declared by the lips of prophecy that positions of power
would await the women of Zion faster than they would be qualified for
them. Mrs. Wells is by nature one of those prepared for the advent of
such an era.

And still, the songs whispered from nature to the heart of the child
chime on, and the woman repeats them in clear, sweet utterances to the
world; the intuitions of the Deity and his work she may now declare
in knowledge, and the maiden that with timid feet went down at the
Gospel's call into the waters of baptism, has become a strength, an
inspiration and a guide to women in the same path.

President Young gave Mrs. Wells a mission to record in brief the
biographies of the most prominent women of our Church, in the _Woman's
Exponent_. A part of this work has already been performed, which is an
important addition to our home literature.

I give below one selection from the lady's many beautiful poems:

  REAL AND IDEAL.

  At times, sweet visions float across my mind,
  And glimpses of the unknown bright and fair,
  Where all the objects seem so well defined--
  Tasteful in color, and in beauty rare,
  That I must pause and think if they be real,
  Or only what the poets call ideal.

  I well remember when a little child,
  I had these same strange, wand'ring fancies;
  And I was told my thoughts were running wild,
  That I must not indulge in such romances.
  Wasting in idle dreams the precious hours,
  Building air castles and gazing from the towers.

  E'en then I seemed to see familiar friends,
  Pertaining to a dim, uncertain past;
  And to my recollection faintly clings,
  A sense of something which the shadows cast,
  That showed me what my future life would be,
  A prophecy, as 'twere, of destiny.

  There was an intuition in my heart,
  An innate consciousness of right and wrong,
  That bade me choose a wiser, better part,
  Which, in rough places helped to make me strong:
  And though my path was oft bereft of beauty,
  Still urged me on to fulfill ev'ry duty.

  O, happy childhood, bright with faith and hope;
  Enchantment dwells within thy rosy bowers,
  And rainbow tints gild all within thy scope;
  And youth sits lightly on a bed of flowers,
  His cup of happiness just brimming o'er,
  Unconscious of what life has yet in store.

  What glowing aspirations fill the mind--
  Of noble work designed for man to do!
  What purity of purpose here we find--
  What longing for the beautiful and true;
  Ere know we of the toil, and grief and woe;
  Or dream that men and women suffer so.

  Though all along life's toilsome, weary way,
  We meet with disappointments hard to bear;
  Yet strength is given equal to our day,
  And joy is of'nest mixed with pain or care;
  But let us not grow weary in well-doing,
  Still persevere, the upward path pursuing.

  Thus ever struggle on, 'mid doubts and fears;
  While changing scenes before our gaze unfold,
  Till, through the vista of long weary years,
  We see Heaven's sunshine thro' its gates of gold;
  And feel assured it is an answering token,
  Aye! though our earthly idols have been broken.

  Tho' those we've cherished most have been untrue,
  And fond and faithful ones have gone before,
  Still let us keep the promises in view,
  Of those who're pleading on "the other shore,"
  Whose tender messages are with us yet,
  The words of love, we never can forget.

  And while we muse and ponder, shadows fall,
  And a sweet spirit whispers, "Peace, be still;"
  What of the past--'tis now beyond recall:
  The future, we with usefulness may fill.
  Yet sometime we shall find in regions real
  Those dreams fulfilled we only term ideal.



MRS. ROMANIA B. PRATT, M. D.

Romania Bunnell Pratt, daughter of Luther B. and Esther Mendenhall
Bunnell, was born August 8, 1839, in Washington, Wayne County, Indiana.
In her seventh year she went with her parents to Nauvoo, and had the
privilege of visiting the Temple, and went with the Church to Winter
Quarters. She says: "While there I well remember being present when
the martial band was marching round and the call was made for the
Mormon Battallion for Mexico. Although too young to appreciate the
severe ordeal our devoted and persecuted people were subject to, I can
never forget the feeling of grief which oppressed my little heart, as
one after one the brave-hearted men fell into the ranks." From Winter
Quarters her parents moved to Ohio where her whole time was spent in
attending school, the last year and a half at the Crawfordsville Female
Seminary. In 1855, her mother then being a widow, with her family of
two girls and two boys and their worldly effects, again joined the
Saints at Atchison, now Omaha, where she was first baptized into the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, on the last of May, 1855,
just before commencing their journey with ox teams across the plains
to Salt Lake City, where they arrived September 3d of the same year.
The summer journey of these months was a series of changing panoramic
scenes as enchanting to the free, careless heart of a child, as it was
arduous to those of maturer years. Their arrival in the city of the
Saints was during the grasshopper famine, when flour was twenty-five
dollars per hundred weight, sugar forty cents per pound and everything
in proportion, and although they had left plenty behind them, in the
hands of guardians who refused to allow them any money, (the children
all being minors) to come away among the Mormons, saying; "They
will rob you of it all as soon as you get there." In consequence of
this prejudice they arrived in Salt Lake City penniless and at a
time when they with thousands of others had to learn the sweetness
of the coarsest kind of bread. Romania taught day school and gave
music lessons on the piano at intervals until she entered the medical
profession. This lady was married to Parley P. Pratt, son of the
Apostle, Parley P. Pratt, by President Brigham Young, and has had seven
children; Parley P. Pratt, Luther B., Louis L., Corinne T., Mark C.,
Irwin E. and Roy B. Pratt. Her second son died in infancy, and her
lovely daughter died when twenty months old.

Through a love of literary pursuit and surrounding circumstances her
attention was turned to the medical profession which she entered in
1873 and graduated in the Woman's Medical College of Philadelphia in
March, 1877. After graduating she remained in Philadelphia and took
special courses on the eye and ear at Wills' Hospital and a dispensary
on Chestnut Street, conducted by Dr. George Strawbridge. Leaving
Philadelphia she spent a few weeks visiting Hydropathic institutions to
learn something of the mode of administration and especially of water
treatment.

Immediately on her arrival home she by request commenced giving
lectures to ladies and agitated the question of a hospital for women
and children, and by counsel on account of great demand of obstetrical
aid needed in the numerous settlements, soon instituted a school of
midwifery, and has taught two classes a year since, except when absent
for special study in the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary where she spent
eight months in 1881-2.

In 1874, when Eliza R. S. Smith organized the Young Ladies' Mutual
Improvement Association of the Twelfth Ward, Mrs. Pratt was appointed
President, which position she held though absent a portion of the time,
until professional work compelled her resignation. She now holds the
office of Treasurer of the Salt Lake Stake organization of the Young
Ladies Mutual Improvement Association, and is also one of the Board
of Executors and medical attendant of the Deseret Hospital, organized
1882, beside having a busy practice. Luther B. Bunnell, her father,
was the inventor of a repeating fire arm, and at a critical period in
the persecutions of the Saints, donated to them five hundred dollars
in arms and ammunition. Tracing her family record a few years back,
we find in her mother's line the names of Bayard Taylor and Benjamin
West among her relatives. About the year 1837, a small pamphlet was
published in Philadelphia giving the genealogy of her family, tracing
them back to a Russian nobleman. Captain Mendenhall was the grandson
of Benjamin, brother to John Mendenhall, the Puritan emigrant. Colonel
Richard Thomas, brother to her great grandmother, was a member of
Congress from Chester County, Pa., for many years. Of medical members,
Dr. Pratt's family certainly has had a goodly number, and of these we
select--Dr. Mendenhall, of Richmond, Indiana, her mother's cousin,
Dr. Marmaduke Mendenhall, of North Carolina, her cousin, Dr. Paris
Mendenhall, her brother, Dr. James R. Mendenhall, of Richmond, Indiana,
her cousin, Nereus Mendenhall, professor in New Garden Quaker College,
also George D. and William Mendenhall, physicians. Beside these,
many others of note occur, too many for less than a special volume.
Her eldest son, Parley P. Pratt, also entered the New York School of
Pharmacy, from which he expects to graduate in the spring of 1885.

Dr. Pratt is in appearance the very embodiment of health and happiness,
her blooming cheeks, abundant loose ringlets without a line of gray,
her dark eyes inspiring the dispirited with cheerfulness and hope, the
cordial clasp of hand, a hand gentle, but somehow suggestive of the
nerve, firmness, self-possession and power the true healer holds, the
intuition one receives of her sympathy and benevolence, if needed; all
these are conveyed as upon an open page by the very presence of Dr.
Pratt. Also, that other influence is felt that she too leans upon a
higher power than human skill, the same Giver of life and health as the
tenderest child looks up to.

Dr. Romania B. Pratt was the first "Mormon" woman graduate. Following
her return as graduate, next came Dr. Ellis R. Shipp, 1878, Mattie
Paul Hughes, M. D., 1883, Elvira S. Barney, M. D., 1883, and Margaret
C. Shipp, M. D., 1883. Drs. R. B. Pratt, Ellis R. Shipp and Elvira S.
Barney are connected with the Deseret Hospital, founded in 1882.

  THE LADY DOCTOR.

  For her, from darkened rooms
  What blessings softly rise,
  Who brings relief to pain and fear
  And soothes the watcher's cries.

  On her, the skies look down
  As fearless, swift she goes
  Through lonely paths, past rude alarms,
  And oft through blinding snows.

  'Tis hers, to see the smile
  The new blest mother gives;
  And hers to hear their answering joy--
  "Hush all thy fears, he lives."

  The record of her works
  In volumes ne'er is known,
  'Tis written as on marble carved
  In grateful hearts alone.



DR. ELVIRA S. BARNEY.

Although in this book Dr. Barney is classed among the medical
fraternity her labors and history have been interwoven with those of
the Latter Day Saints from her childhood, in so many varied and useful
fields of labor, that I am compelled to pause at the very beginning
of this sketch, (necessarily brief) knowing I must omit so many
particulars, both valuable and instructive.

If Dr. Barney had, in her childhood, possessed the advantages of
obtaining a thorough education, and opportunities for the best
development of those many abilities which have manifested themselves
under the most dispiriting surroundings, it would be difficult at
present to estimate what she might have accomplished. She represents
the practical, domestic, experience of a Latter Day Saint; orphaned,
and almost alone, but possessing that indomitable spirit that rises
above every obstacle, and turns to account every available means no
matter how humble, that cultivates every inherent power to its best
uses; an upbuilder in everything pertaining to the interests of her
people, ready to aid on the right and on the left, forgetful of self.

Elvira S. Barney was born March 17, 1832, in Gerry, Chawtawque County,
New York, being the daughter of Samuel C. Stevens, a merchant, and his
wife, Minerva Althea Field, a school teacher. Her great grand-father,
Joseph Stevens, took an active part in the Revolutionary War; her
grand-father, Simon Stevens, was a doctor; her uncles were doctors
and lawyers. When twelve years old Elvira heard the gospel preached
by a Mormon Elder, and from that time daily prayed in secret till the
Lord gave her a testimony that satisfied her heart. She was baptized
in 1844, and went with her parents to Nauvoo, where her father died
after a brief illness, on October 4th. In the January following Elvira
and her mother were preparing for the journey across the wilderness,
parching corn, etc.; but her mother, overcome by toil, grief and
exhaustion, died on the 6th of the month. Their farm, household goods,
etc., were sold, and the five children received ten dollars each to fit
them out for a western journey. Elvira parted with her twin brother,
fourteen years old, with tears in his eyes, and she never saw him
again. He died six years after. Elvira was taken some twenty-five miles
across the prairie among strangers, and there spent the winter. There
were no children for her to mate with, no one to feel tenderly for the
lonely, quiet aching heart of this orphan girl. When spring approached
she rejoined her married sister to wait upon her, traveling west with
her, sometimes living in a brush-house (while recruiting) and sleeping
under a wagon while traveling, and once awoke to find several inches
of snow covering them. Exposure brought her to death's door, but she
lived after long suffering. She witnessed the solemn separation of the
"Mor-Battallion" from their families and friends. During one winter
she lived in a dug-out in a side hill on the Missouri River, and was
forced to live on corn bread and water; their tallow candles they could
not afford to burn, but used them to grease their bake-kettles. Here,
however, willing to be useful she helped to teach school, studying
nights by a chip-fire to keep in advance of her pupils. Many of our
public speakers of today, can date their first lessons in elocution and
arithmetic to her training.

Elvira crossed the mountains in the first company in 1848, and arrived
in this valley by the side of two yoke of oxen, with a sick sister
and a brother-in-law with a broken arm, in her care. Her first lesson
in surgery was the helping to set this arm, and her first practice in
medicine was the breaking up of her sister's fever. Soon after this
Elvira made herself a pair of buck-skin moccasins. The first meeting
she attended was in a bowery, and her best calico dress had patches
on the elbows. Before the next winter she worked six weeks for a pair
of leather shoes. There was not much aristocracy here in those days.
They held meetings in tents, sang praises to God, and danced with as
much sincerity and purity of heart as even King David did before the
Lord, for they knew God was with them. Said her sister, who afterward
turned from the faith: "If God had not been with us when we were
driven out at the battle of Nauvoo, we should have perished, but when
we were starving he sent quails, and they were so tame they came into
our tents where the sick were lying, and they even took them in their
hands." Thousands witnessed the miracle. After they arrived in the
valley, crickets large and numerous threatened their crops, (their only
recourse) but the Lord in answer to prayers sent sea-gulls in such
flocks that the air was darkened, and they destroyed the crickets. The
heavens were not as brass above their heads; they helped and loved each
other, and God heard and loved them. Their laws were few and simple; in
a Bishop's court a brother forgave his brother.

In the summer of 1849, Elvira earned fifty dollars at different kinds
of work, and making straw hats for the emigrants going to California
to get gold the Battallion boys were the first to find. In the spring
of 1849, Elvira had been appointed to go on a mission to the Society
Islands; this was postponed, and in the spring of 1851, with her
husband, she started in the company of Apostle Parley P. Pratt on his
mission to Chili. They were harassed by Indians while crossing the
deserts, and Elvira arrived in Los Angelos sick with a fever, and laid
sixteen days in a tent made of sheets. Her sister here buried her
babe; took steamer and landed in San Francisco, Elvira contracting
inflammatory rheumatism on the voyage, and was stiff and helpless four
days. Parley P. Pratt administered to her, and the next morning she
helped to get breakfast. Through some trouble between the Islanders
and the French the Mission was changed to the Sandwich Islands. Having
been left behind to recruit her health, Sister Elvira went to work in
a hotel as waiter at one hundred dollars a month, and soon was able
to pay her passage to the Sandwich Islands, besides having means to
support her while there. On arriving at Lahaiva, on the island of
Mai, the captain gave her his arm and they walked through the streets
in quest of her husband followed by the natives, old and young, they
to admire and be friendly, the strangers feeling mortified with such
honors. Remained a month there then embarked on the ship Hulumann.
The previously mentioned captain came on board and treated them to a
Christmas dinner. After four days sail landed at Kawhow, Hawaii, in
the fall of 1851. Sister Elvira lived six months among the natives
on their island food, mostly of taro and sweet-potatoes made into a
batter and soured, short rations at that, yet attained the weight of
one hundred and fifty pounds. Says she: "Don't smile when I tell you
I often thought of Alexander Selkirk who said he was 'Monarch of all
he surveyed.' Here months passed, living on the lava strewn island, no
ships came to bring tidings, I was left to view the rolling billows
that separated me from all I held dear, country and friends. Fancy
the loneliness of those long months, not a white woman to speak to in
my own tongue. Here I was studying a foreign language and teaching
the natives to speak my own." In the mean time sister Elvira acquired
the art of swimming, which means enabled her afterwards, to all
appearances, to save one of the ladies of this book from drowning in a
bottomless spring in Utah. During eleven months spent on four islands,
Sister Elvira wrote a letter to a native lawyer in his own tongue,
and although over thirty years have elapsed she is able to converse
fluently with the natives who have gathered to this city.

Leaving all her means but five dollars with her husband, she arrived
penniless at Honolulu _en route_ for San Francisco, by counsel of
Phillip B. Lewis, President of the Sandwich Islands Mission. Here, in
answer to prayer, after all other efforts had failed to procure means,
a stranger she never saw before nor since, called upon her. In answer
to his few questions he learned her situation as a missionary's wife
preaching the Gospel without purse or scrip. He handed her the money,
eighty dollars, to pay her passage to San Francisco, and she gave him
her note for it, and embarked. Three times she escaped shipwreck, the
last time, just outside the Golden Gate of the Bay of San Francisco. On
her arrival there she borrowed the money of a friend and returned it
to the stranger, and repaid this by making fine shirts at ten dollars
apiece. The wife of the gentleman for whom she made them presented her
with a complete set of clothing, the outer garment being a new silk
dress. Sister Elvira says: "The Lord knew I needed them and I thanked
Him and the giver also." Of the San Francisco Saints she says, "The
welcome I received by the remaining Saints there, and the heavenly
influence we enjoyed together is the one most marked oasis of my life,
for truly they blessed me and God blessed them." Sister Elvira wasted
no time, but in various ways earned means, part of which she sent to
assist the Sandwich Islands Mission. In 1856 she returned to Salt Lake
City, riding seven hundred miles on horseback, and here resumed school
teaching. In 1859, she assisted in the amputation of a dear friend's
arm. In 1860, traveled east to visit kindred and rode sixteen days by
stage. In 1864, went to Wheaton College and returned home after nearly
two years absence. From 1859 to 1863 had taught school in ten different
places, generally four terms a year. Had during these previous years
taken at different times four homeless children into her care until
other ways opened for them. In 1873 adopted a boy whom she schooled
and provided for for ten years. In this year also began writing up her
genealogical record which she has traced back to the year 1600. In
1876 wrote a pamphlet on seri-culture, and suggested the appointment
of a meeting on that subject. Advanced as a loan the first fifty
dollars to establish the "home made straw hat industry." Canvassed the
Thirteenth Ward and traveled in the interest of the _Woman's Exponent_.
Was appointed agent for and canvassed the city for the _Women of
Mormondom_, and raised fifty shares ($25.00 each) in one day. Was
appointed a committee for purchasing grain for the Grain Association
(President E. B. Wells). In 1876 traveled south and held forty-five
meetings in twenty-seven days, in the interest of Women's Work in
Utah. In 1878 attended the Deseret University. Up to date of February,
1879, had earned over nine thousand dollars by her own labors, and
built a good commodious house, her home. October, 1879, started East
to continue her medical studies which she had prosecuted at home for
several years, and attended three complete courses; returning home in
the spring of 1883, prepared to pursue this her chosen vocation after a
long and eventful experience in many fields of usefulness.

Realizing her own early desires for knowledge and the inconvenience of
limited privileges, Dr. Barney fitted up her large house to accommodate
lady boarders, thus affording them the convenience of home and college
under one roof, with the privilege of boarding themselves, and
receiving gratuitous medical instructions for one year.

She has crossed the Pacific Ocean twice, the western deserts twice, the
eastern plains five times: has wrought at different humble occupations
belonging to a new country, learning later fine embroidery, pencil
work, draughting in architecture, delivering lectures, &c., one tenth
cannot be told in these pages. Sister Barney also has received the
gifts of prophecy, tongues and interpretation of tongues, as the writer
can testify.

Her step is as quick as ever, her carriage erect; she says; "My life
has been real, my life has been earnest, and now if any of my works
praise me then truly I am praised. If any one has done better I should
be happy to read their chapter; yet I realize many of our Mormon
ladies' lives have been similar, and it is such women that will teach
and train sons for the nation."



EMILY HILL WOODMANSEE.

Emily Hill Woodmansee, daughter of Thomas and Elizabeth Slade Hill, was
born in the south-west of England, near Warminster, Wilts, March 24,
1836. Quoting her own words:

"Of my pedigree I will simply say that my parents were honorable,
hard-working people, too independent in spirit to stoop to mean
actions, much less to sully their conscience to curry favor. The
youngest living of eleven children, I fully enjoyed the privileges
often accorded the youngest member of a family, (ie) of having things
my own way. My parents as well as my brothers and sisters were very
kind to me, and I can truly say--slightly reversing a word in the lines
of one of our poets, that,

  'I never knew what trouble was
  Till I became a Mormon.'

"When but a mere child I was much concerned about my eternal salvation
and felt that I would make any sacrifice to obtain it. I asked all
kinds of questions of my mother and sisters, seeking how to be saved,
but could get no satisfaction from them nor from the religious body
(Wesleyans) to which they belonged.

"Hungry and thirsty for truth, I searched the Scriptures, invariably
turning to the lives of ancient apostles or to the beautiful writings
of the Prophet Isaiah. I was never weary of reading his prophecies, the
glory of a Latter-Day Zion that burthened his inspirations possessed
for me a charm irresistible. Truly I was waiting for something, I knew
not what, that came to me sooner than I expected.

"When I was about twelve years old, my cousin, Miriam Slade,
(afterward the wife of Edward Hanham,) came to visit us; she was very
merry-hearted and we had anticipated her visit, expecting a good deal
of fun; but she was too full of a 'new religion' to do anything but
preach. 'God,' she said, 'had spoken from the heavens to a man named
Joseph Smith; the Gospel was restored to the earth, the honest in heart
were commanded to gather to the land of Zion for safety, for this was
the last Dispensation, and the hour of God's judgment had come!'

"Right faithfully she testified to her knowledge of these things,
much to the surprise of our family, who were considerably amused
at her earnestness as well as at the novelty of her belief, and
notwithstanding I listened attentively, I thought her assertions
too good to be true. The next Sunday my cousin informed us that the
Latter-Day Saints had appointed a meeting for that day at an adjoining
village called Chalford, and invited us to go. As it was a distance
of five or six miles, making a long walk there and back, none of my
brothers cared to go, and my elder sisters considered themselves
altogether too respectable (?) to attend an outdoor meeting of such a
primitive sect, therefore they declined to go, and no one thought of
sending me till I suggested it. Turning to my father, my sisters said,
(laughingly,) 'Yes, send Em, she will tell us all about it.'

"In five minutes Miriam Slade and myself were on the road, accompanied
by Mr. Wm. Bowring, (brother to Henry E. Bowring of Brigham City,) and
by Edward W. Tullidge, then a youth, but now well-known as a talented
writer and also as the proprietor and editor of _Tullidge's Quarterly
Magazine_. Never, never shall I forget that day, surely it was the
turning point of my whole life. A few devoted worshippers of truth met
together in a small house, to bear their testimony to one another and
to worship God! And He was in their midst and that to bless them. Even
as in the Day of Pentecost, they spake in tongues and prophesied, which
prophecy I have seen fulfilled. Unlike the Jews who were 'pricked in
their hearts,' I did not even ask, 'What shall I do to be saved.' 'The
way' was open before me, and simple and young as I was I instinctively
knew that 'I could not err therein.'

  The Eternal! spake, and honest hearts discerning
  The voice and message of the holiest One!
  Hail it as though their souls had e'en been yearning
  For light and truth, e'en since their lives begun.

"It was indeed as though I had been brought 'out of darkness into
marvelous light,' and I could not shut my eyes against it.

"In the evening I attended an out door 'Mormon Meeting,' and though
naturally sensitive to ridicule, I did not care the least for the
sneers of the crowd but joined in the songs of the Saints as well as
I could, for in my childish way I wanted it understood that I was not
ashamed to count one with the peculiar people called Latter-Day Saints.

"Many a time since, when 'offences' have come in my way, over which
with mortal weakness I have almost stumbled, the testimony of that
eventful day has been to me a precious recollection which nothing could
obliterate. I was so overjoyed at finding what I had so long desired,
and so eager to convince my friends that I could hardly wait to get
home. As soon as I was inside the house and almost before anyone else
could speak, I astounded them all by the emphatic declaration that I
knew the Latter-Day Saints were the right people; and I would join them
as soon as I was big enough. I was never sent to 'take notes' of the
'Mormons' again, but on the contrary was closely watched lest I should
be led away by a 'sect that was everywhere spoken against.' My early
study of the Scriptures now stood me in good stead, and I searched the
Bible more diligently than ever, so that I might give a good reason
for my faith to the hosts that assailed me, (right reverends among the
number,) who, finding it easier to cry 'delusion' than to prove it,
generally wound up by informing me that I wasn't old enough to know my
own mind, and was altogether too young to judge of so grave a matter.
Meantime my persistent faith invoked such a tempest of wrath over my
head, that I could not even get an opportunity to be baptized, and the
elders did not think it wisdom (because of my tender years) to perform
the ceremony without my parents' consent. I well remember looking
forward to a period when I should be old enough to act for myself, and
it seemed a lifetime.

"About this time one of the elders brought Brother John Halliday
(brother to Bishop Halliday of Santaquin) to our house, who bore such
a powerful testimony to the divine mission of Joseph Smith, that my
sister, Julia, (now Mrs. Ivins of St. George) exclaimed, 'If ever
there was a man of God I'm sure he is one, and I'll be a Latter-Day
Saint, too!' From that time I had a friend in the family, and we were
both determined that cost what it might we would be true to the light
within us. Only once in a great while could we steal away and meet with
the Saints, but although we were not yet baptized we partook of the
sacrament and paid out our pocket money to the Church funds like actual
members.

"On one of these occasions Brother Halliday blessed me and confirmed
upon me the promise that I should write in prose and in verse and
thereby comfort the hearts of thousands. After this I was baptized
March 25, 1858, I was then sixteen, but had virtually been a Latter-Day
Saint for four years.

"Denied the privilege of freely meeting with the Saints, I all the more
earnestly desired to gather to Zion; but fearing I might be forcibly
detained if I attempted to leave home directly for America, I obtained
my parents' consent to visit my sister, Julia--who had already gone to
Northampton (quite a long distance from home) hoping that the way would
open up, so we might earn enough to emigrate. There for the first time
I enjoyed religious freedom and there also I took my lessons of hard
times; preparing me for greater hardships in store.

"In the month of May, 1856, we sailed for America on the ship,
_Thornton_, Captain Collins, commander; Brother James G. Willie had
charge of the Saints, (a company of eight hundred) and a good captain
he was. We had a pleasant trip with the exception of one heavy storm
which I would not have missed for a great deal.

"From New York we traveled by rail and by way of Lake Erie to the
camping ground in the neighborhood of Iowa City; there we were obliged
to wait till the companies were ready to start, and surely if we had
been natural or unnatural curiosities we could not have been commented
on or stared at any more by the people surrounding us. 'Mormons, men,
women and children, and worse, a lot of young girls, bound for Salt
Lake and going to pull 'hand carts!' Shocking!'

"Yet, for the potent reason that no other way seemed open, and on the
principle of 'descending below all things,' I made up my mind to pull
a hand cart. 'All the way to Zion,' a foot journey from Iowa to Utah,
and pull our luggage, think of it! Anonymous letters, and warnings
from sympathizing outsiders were mysteriously conveyed to us, setting
forth the hardships and impossibilities of such a journey, and offering
us inducements to stay. Many who started out with us backed out in a
few days; my sister broke down and was unable to walk and I remember
asking myself (footsore and weary with the first week of walking and
working) if it was possible for me, faith or no faith, to walk twelve
hundred miles further. The flesh certainly was weak but the spirit
was willing, I set down my foot that I would try, and by the blessing
of God I pulled a hand cart a thousand miles and never rode one step.
Some thrilling scenes I could relate incident to that journey, but must
forbear for want of space. Suffice it to say that after a long and
wearisome journey, being entirely out of provisions, we halted for want
of strength to proceed, and never should I have beheld (with mortal
eyes) 'the city of the Saints' had not the compassionate people of Utah
sent out a number of brave-hearted brethren with food and clothing to
our relief. May they all be everlastingly blessed.

"In the month of June, 1857, firmly believing in the principle of
plural marriage I entered into it. The result of this marriage was one
child only, for a little more than three years after said marriage,
my husband went on a mission to England, and after I had worked for
upwards of four years to maintain myself and little one, my husband
himself sent me word that he never intended to set foot in Utah again.
And here I must be allowed to say in behalf of myself and other true
women who have endured such separations, and to whom, perhaps, it is
counted as nothing, no one can realize what such an ordeal is, unless
they have passed through it. All that I had hitherto suffered seemed
like child's play compared to being deserted by the one in whom I
had chosen to place the utmost confidence, who himself had fixed an
impassable gulf between us by ignoring the very principles by which he
had obtained me, leaving myself and my little one (for all he knew) to
sorrow and destitution. Harder still, was it for me to believe that
this abandonment had been deliberately planned. I could not accept the
fact till President Young, (speaking to me of my husband), emphatically
said, 'Don't you know he asked for his mission? If he hadn't I wouldn't
have sent him till the day of his death!' That was enough for me, I
comprehended all that it meant, and independent of Brigham Young's word
I was forced to believe it.

"I had striven hard to keep out of debt,--determined to do my part
as a missionary's wife, that when my husband came back he might not
be hampered on my account. Nevertheless 'hard times' stared me in
the face, and I was almost overwhelmed by circumstances beyond my
control. During the winter season of 1863-4, (owing to the war and many
circumstances combined) provisions and other necessaries commanded
almost fabulous prices, and I could not see how I should ever be able
to keep 'the wolf from the door.' To add to my trouble, the house I
occupied (and to which I had been led to believe I had some claim,) was
sold over my head and thus I had the prospect of being homeless, at a
time when rents were going up double and treble. One night when I was
so weary with overwork and anxiety, pondering what to do, these words
impressed me as if audibly spoken, TRUST IN GOD AND THYSELF. Instantly
I arose and composed the following lines:

  A priceless boon! is a friend indeed
  Greet him as such when his face you see;
  But those who fail thee in time of need--
  Shun them, as false friends should shunned be.
  They proffer this, and they promise that,
  But promise, alas, is a doubtful elf.
  So would'st thou weather the storms of life--
  Trust thou in God! and thyself.

  Keep a brave heart, though the waves roll high,
  Let thine aim be true as the magnet's steel;
  Look unto God! with a steadfast eye,
  And trust Him always, in woe or weal.
  Man may deceive, but God! is true;
  Mortals may pander to love of pelf,
  Like "Angel's visits" firm friends are few,
  Trust thou in God! and thyself,

  Should friends, nor fortune, nor home be thine--
  Cringe not for this, nor beg for that;
  The earnest seekers will surely find
  Something to thoroughly labor at.
  'Tis a cheering maxim to keep in view--
  That diligence leads to plenty's shelf;
  And whatsoever thy hands pursue--
  Trust thou in God! and thyself.

  What! though thy flesh and thy strength should fail?
  Surely 'were better to wear than rust;
  Than never to try, 'twere better to die,
  In striving bravely to fill our trust,
  But fear not thou, for God! is good--
  He is the giver of strength and wealth.
  When faithless feelings or friends intrude--
  Trust thou in God! and thyself.

"Immediately after this my way opened up before me, almost within the
week I secured another home, which if not very commodious had for me
the satisfying charm of being _my own_.

"On May 7, 1864, I again entered into plural marriage, and was sealed
by Heber C. Kimball to Joseph Woodmansee, to whom I have borne four
sons and four daughters. Two of these died in infancy, leaving me a
family of seven, including my first born.

"Nearly twenty years have rolled by since my second marriage, during
which time I have seen many changes of fortune which I cannot now
relate, but I will say this much of my children's father. Misfortunes
that have befallen him have never affected his faith, he has proven
his allegiance to the principles and priesthood of God at considerable
sacrifice to himself and family, enduring reverses uncomplainingly.

"Of my children I need say but little, but I fervently hope that each
and all of them may seek and obtain for themselves a knowledge of
the truth, (called Mormonism) for I know it can make them wise unto
salvation, and may they be willing if needs be to endure reproach and
privation for principle's sake. I doubt not that all my troubles have
been for my good, and to-day I am more than thankful for my standing in
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints."

  And wherefore should I cease to sing
  Of Zion and the Latter Day?
  I could not find a nobler theme,
  Nor choose a lovelier, loftier lay.
  Too insignificant is my praise--
  Too feeble is my lyre and tongue,
  For of these longed for, Latter Days
  Have royal bards and prophets sung.

  Ne'er shall our hearts ungrateful be;
  Ne'er shall our songs be void of praise,
  For God has suffered us to see
  "The Zion" of the Latter Days.
  Though all the world in scorn deride--
  Our numbers shall not cease to flow;
  Our soul's sincerest, purest love
  Thrills unto Zion's weal or woe.

  When she is sad, then I am sad;
  When she is bound I am not free;
  When she is glad then I am glad
  And all things prosper well with me.
  I love to see her power extend,
  Her influence and her reign increase--
  Then wonder not, "for Zion's sake--
  Will I not hold my peace."

"I desire to live to make up for past short-comings by future
diligence, that I may help (in my humble way) to build up 'the kingdom
whose dominion, power and greatness shall be given to the Saints of the
most High! who shall possess it forever and ever.'"

  The faith of the Saints shall astonish the world
  And puzzle the wise to explain it;
  Hosannah! hosannah! Truth's flag is unfurled,
  And the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth.



HANNAH T. KING.

"The University town of Cambridge, England, I am proud to say, is the
place of my nativity. I was reared among its classic shades and bowers.
For the last thirty years America has been my adopted country, and I
love her with a loyal and devoted appreciation, but the home and the
haunts of childhood and youth leave on every mind indelible impressions
and when brought to a focus upon the past as at the present moment,
'The distant spires and antique towers' rise up before me in all their
vividness by the power of that most wonderful faculty, MEMORY.

"I was born and reared in the High Church of England, and nothing but
the high Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints could have caused
me to secede from its high tenets and truly liberal principles; it
stands second to none of the churches of the world.

"Any son or daughter might have been proud of such parents as mine,
they were fine in person, highly moral, and intellectual, were
descended from a highly born family, and were honored and respected
by all who knew them; they reared their children with great care and
watchfulness, giving them such an education as would fit them for all
good society of whatever grade. Blessed be their memory!

"I was married at the early age of seventeen, but in my mind and
character I was older than many girls at twenty. I have lived long
enough to authorize the woman to sit in judgment on the girl.

"I had a sweet, happy home, for I had the faculty to make it so; I
had ten beautiful children but death robbed me of several. We gave
the surviving ones a liberal education with accomplishments; as
they grew up they repaid us in being all we desired. From a child I
had been accustomed to write much--keeping a journal and a book for
choice extracts, etc. My father was unavoidably much away from home
on business, but he enjoined me to write frequently to him, and to
do _his_ bidding was my delight, for he was my _beau ideal_ of all
that was good. Since at nine or ten I became a letter writer, and the
thousands I have written in my long life would form a towering paper
pillar. After some years of my married life I became a writer for the
local papers and also wrote two books, one for my girls and the other
for the boys, 'The Toilet' and the 'Three Eras,' dedicating them to
each. These books were patronized by the aristocracy of England. I also
wrote considerable poetry all my life.

"In 1849, 'a change came o'er the spirit of my dream.' I had a young
woman who had worked for me eleven years as dressmaker, she was highly
respectable, conscientious and good. In September, 1849, she was in the
house at work, and on the evening of the 4th, when work was laid aside,
she told me she wished to speak to me privately, as she had something
she wished to communicate to me. I at once gave her the audience she
requested and she then laid before me the organization of the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, with the first principles of the
same. Of course I was startled! But the spirit of God witnessed to my
spirit that she spoke _truth_! I compared all she told me by the Bible
which had ever been my standard of truth--it _endorsed_ all she said! I
studied, I prayed,--she gave me to read 'Spencer's Letters'--they made
me a willing convert. I read many other prominent works with which my
teacher furnished me. Fifteen months passed, and yet I had not attended
the Latter-Day Saint Meetings, or seen a single member, but this young
woman, yet even at that time I was a confirmed Latter-Day Saint. I then
was introduced to an elder from America, and after his first sermon I
was baptized by him in the classic waters of the Camm, my native river.

"Soon I began to see the antagonisms I had to meet. I, a member of the
Church of England. My grandfather a rector in the same, my father and
my mother, my family and friends! All had to be met, could I bring
the gray hairs of my parents in sorrow to the grave? Could I reduce
my family to comparative poverty and reverses of every kind? Could
I _so_ lay my all upon the altar of my God? Could I like Abraham of
old, arise and go to a far country--even the wilds of America? It
would take more than I have space to elaborate this subject--suffice,
strength was given me--I passed under 'the car of Juggernaut,' which is
no _overstrained_ flower of language but a veritable simile. Suffice,
the votary lived! and I came out _convinced_, _determined_, and the
calm, as it were, of a summer morning was upon me! A conviction had
been given me that it was indeed the work of the last days, when all
dispensations should be gathered in one, when that people I had all
my life prayed for in the Church of England should be 'prepared for
the second coming of the Savior,' were indeed organized upon the earth
by the voice of God Himself and His Son, Jesus Christ, appearing to a
youth, even Joseph Smith, and appointing him as the prophet of the last
dispensation, under the immediate direction of the Lord Jesus Himself.
The Church was organized with six members, on the 6th of April, 1830.

"Of this Church I became a member by the requisite act of baptism by
immersion, under the hands of the American missionary. From that time
I had the spirit of 'gathering,' and in June, 1853, I left my home and
many that were dear to me, my own immediate family accompanying me--and
as I stood on the deck of the _Golconda_ I said, 'My native land, good
night.' Ox teams conveyed us over the prairies, and on the 19th of
September, 1853, we entered Salt Lake City. Here we built a home which
has been my sanctuary. I _know_ God was with me, and my loved ones also
were with me. The union of my family was remarkable, that, and the
Spirit of God enabled us to 'remove mountains.'

"In a brief sketch like this it is impossible to give even the outline,
but could I place in a book, first our _antecedents_, and then the
marvelous events of those three years, the laying aside our Lares and
Penates, surely the skeptic would agree that there was a power with
us that the world knows nothing of! for even though we _knew_ we were
the agents it was 'marvelous in our eyes.' Perhaps I have filled the
brief space allotted me for the purpose for which I was called upon to
write, surely my few words will be a testimony that I rejoice I am a
Latter-Day Saint. I have passed through many reverses and tribulations,
but in my darkest hours the Gospel has been a light upon my path and a
lamp for my feet, and I realize day by day the smile and approbation of
God upon me.

"It has been my delight to write for the Saints since I have lived in
Salt Lake City, and my reward has been their love and rich appreciation
of my writings. I have been a constant writer for the _Woman's
Exponent_, a paper got up and entirely carried on by the women of our
people. President Young desired me to write for it and I have done so
with pleasure to the best of my ability, both in prose and in verse.

"For two years I had a school in my own house, and it promised
to be a success, but my health failed, and to my sorrow I had to
relinquish it. I was appointed to preside over the Young Ladies Mutual
Improvement Association of the Seventeenth Ward, which position I held
for one year, but resigned from feeble health. I was then appointed
First Counselor to Marinda Hyde, President of the Relief Society of
the Seventeenth Ward, which office I still have the honor to hold.
My desire has ever been to be useful 'in my day and generation,'
especially in the work of the last days, for in that I have joy and
ample satisfaction.

"The history of the people of God as we read it in the Bible, repeats
itself in a remarkable manner in the Church of Jesus Christ upon the
earth to-day, and those who need a testimony of its truth, I advise
them to compare and observe the workings of the self-same spirit of
antagonism, and they will hardly need another."

I select a portion of one of Mrs. King's poems; her prose and verse
are alike, always lofty in character; her prose writings would form
more than one valuable volume for the libraries of the Saints, or
indeed those not of our faith. Historical and character sketches seem
a peculiar gift with her. Among the many admirers of her poems the
English Saints regard her with special fondness, for is she not their
own? and they anticipate her contributions, as we look forward to
flowers of spring, to summer's wealth of fruits, to autumn's harvest
time.

  REST.

  "I've fought the battle all my life
  Of outward foes and inward strife;
  The strife which flesh and spirit feel
  As keenly as the barbed steel;
  For ah! my soul has longed to be
  A perfect thing for God to see!
  And feels impatient for the time
  When I the heavenly heights shall climb,
  The good, in all the ages past,
  My eyes in love I've ever cast,
  Would imitate, admire, and aim
  Their glorious pinnacles to gain;
  A pedestal to call my own,
  One which my form might rest upon;
  My spirit feet cannot yet stand
  Upon the platform they command,
  But well I know I have been blest,
  And shall, in time, attain the rest;
  And I have sometimes felt ere while
  I moved 'neath God's effulgent smile
  That shed around me warmth and peace,
  And gave my captive mind release.
  The earth and every living thing
  Did tribute to my spirit bring;
  And then my soul was born anew,
  Begotten by the warmth and dew
  Which God's own spirit cast around,
  And placed my feet on holy ground.
  All things seemed tinged with light of heaven,
  My friends most loved, my foes forgiven!
  The fountain in my heart, to me
  Brought 'living water,' ecstacy!

  * * * * * * * * * *

  A little Goshen was my home,
  For joy and peace around it shone;
  And labor's self became delight,
  Making all healthy, strong and bright;
  And loving spirits gathered there
  As angels faithful, fond and fair.
  Was I not blest? Yes, I WAS blest,
  And truly 'twas a time of rest;
  Yes, rest from sorrow I had known,
  In youth, my sun but rarely shone,
  But, oh! I fought for joy and peace,
  And God, in mercy, sent release.
  And blest me with so bright a time
  That's rarely known in earthly clime!
  And grateful did my soul arise
  To Him who gave this paradise.
  But, oh! this picture! its reverse!
  A mighty contrast did disperse;
  The light and warmth would be withdrawn
  And I left freezing and forlorn;
  The heavens seemed brass above my head,
  The earth looked dark as molten lead;
  My God was hid beneath a cloud
  And I, like corse within its shroud!
  Alone, forsaken, desolate thing
  Hoarding my sorrows like a sting
  That probed and barbed my stranded soul,
  And well-nigh crushed all self-control;
  The loved and loving were away,
  And I to foes was left a prey;
  It seemed all blessings were withdrawn,
  And I left stranded and forlorn,
  To see if I would faithful stand
  And still hold on to virtue's hand.
  Yes, many such ordeal I've passed,
  And know I have not seen the last.
  Oh! Father! take my shrinking soul
  Beneath Thy love and sweet control;
  Thy feeble, trembling child, oh spare!
  Lay on no more than I can bear.
  May I endure unto the end,
  Whatever trials may portend;
  But Thou alone must bear me up,
  Or I shall fail to drain the cup."



AUGUSTA JOYCE CROCHERON.

"In the original design of the picture Representative Women of Deseret,
I did not include myself, but by the request of those whose wishes
I have always endeavored to fulfill, now do so, although there are
several to whom I would prefer giving place.

"I was born in Boston, Massachusetts, October 9, 1844. My father was
John Joyce, from St. John, New Brunswick--his parents were both from
England. I have heard my mother say that my uncle, Oliver Joyce,
planted the English flag on the Chinese wall at the time of the war
(about 1840) between those countries. I do not know whether he was an
officer, color bearer or ordinary private.

"My mother, Caroline A. Joyce, was the eldest daughter of John
Perkins, a sea captain, and his wife, Caroline Harriman. The Perkins
and Harriman families were among the early Puritan emigrants, the
property they first built upon still being in the possession of their
descendants. I have heard my mother speak of the oak stairs and floors
being so worn with age that they bent beneath the tread even when
she was a child. My mother's mother was the daughter of Elder John
Harriman, well known in New Hampshire as the occasional traveling
companion of Lorenzo Dow, but more particularly as the founder of a
sect called the 'New Light Christian Baptists.' He was the son of John
Harriman and the daughter of a Penobscot chief who was friendly to the
white people, and permitted his only daughter to receive Christian
baptism, and she was afterwards married to him publicly in church.
This union afforded peace and security to the settlers and gave them
the alliance if needed, of a powerful tribe. The son of this marriage
received an education and married. A few weeks after, and at the age of
twenty-one, he 'received a visit from a personage who gave him a new
doctrine to preach to the children of men.' He awoke his wife, Ruth,
told her the vision and she believed him. In the morning he began to
arrange his worldly affairs so as not to interfere with his call and
began to preach, accompanied by his young wife, who rose when he had
done speaking and bore her testimony to what he had said. He traveled
a certain circuit, holding two and three days' meetings wherever he
stopped, building up quite a large church in his locality. He preached
seventy-one years and died at the age of ninety-two. He never cut his
hair from the time of his call to the ministry, and sometimes wore it
braided in a queue, sometimes flowing in waves upon his shoulders,
as in his portrait. His wife, Ruth, lived beyond her one hundredth
birthday. His son, John, became a minister, but his daughter (my
grandmother) was more worldly minded. Once when he entered the room she
was standing before a mirror surveying her appearance, being attired
for some special occasion. He quietly stepped up to her and with a pair
of scissors cut off the long black ringlets that fell like a mantle
upon her bare shoulders, saying; 'These come between you and your God.'
This did not, however, quench the worldly spirit within her, for she at
the age of sixteen eloped with and was married to John Perkins, a young
sea captain, a God-fearing man but not a church member then or ever
afterwards in this life. She was very industrious, however, and had
at that age spun all her bed and table linen, etc. She became quite a
politician and used to write articles of that character, and the young
men of the town used to gather round her hearth and ask her opinion
on political matters. She also composed for them campaign songs, both
words and music. My mother has told me the only dancing she ever saw
in her childhood was when her mother, inspired by the patriotic songs
she would be singing, would dance to and fro at her spinning, instead
of stepping--improvising step and figure. She had eight sons that she
said she was 'raising for her country.' Sure enough two of them went
to the war (twenty years ago) and laid down their lives; Warren and
Andrew Jackson, (so named because he was born on the day of President
Jackson's second inauguration.) Grandma was an Andrew Jackson Democrat,
he was her very _beau ideal_ of a man. Charles served two terms and
returned safe. Lawrence, my patriot grandmother's youngest boy,
enlisted at seventeen and was sent back; 'Too young,' they told him,
but he waited one year and went again and this time they took him, and
he too was spared to return home.

"Thaddeus sailed to Labrador through many years, and John to the West
Indies. Her eldest daughter was my mother. When my mother heard and
received the Gospel in Boston, she hastened home to bear the good
tidings and obtain their permission for her baptism. She found them
bitterly opposed to this, her father reticent, her mother reproachful.
Just at this time Elder John Harriman arrived to hold a three days'
meeting. Preparations had been made for his coming, and on his arrival
my grandmother received him in her best parlor and after the usual
salutations were over, unfolded to him the story of my mother's
conversion, that she had gone insane and wanted to join the Mormons.
He asked, 'Where is Caroline?' adding, reflectively, 'if the Lord has
any more light for the children of men, I for one am willing to receive
it.' His grandchild, overhearing this, was filled with joy. Her mother
came out and told her to put on her bonnet and shawl. Not knowing what
was wanted of her to perform she obeyed, and by the time she was ready,
found her brother, John, waiting with a horse and sleigh, and seating
herself therein was rapidly whirled away to some relatives several
miles distant, to remain there until sent for. Said she, 'I never saw
my grandfather again.' This was a specimen of my grandma's executive
ability; no circumlocution about her.

"I will give her own account of her receiving the Gospel, from a
portion of her manuscripts:

"'In the year 1842, I was living in the city of Boston, State of
Massachusetts. One day I heard that a strange sect were preaching in
Boylston Hall, they professed to believe in the same Gospel as taught
by Jesus Christ and the ancient Apostles. I went to hear them. As we
entered the hall they were singing a new song--the words were:

  'The Spirit of God like a fire is burning,
  The Latter Day Glory begins to come forth,
  The visions and blessings of old are returning,
  The angels are coming to visit the earth.' &c.

"After the song a young man [A] arose and taking for his text these
words--'And in the last days it shall come to pass that the Lord's
House shall be established in the tops of the mountains and all
nations shall flow unto it,' said the time for the fulfillment of this
prophecy was near at hand, an angel had appeared unto a man named
Joseph Smith, having the keys of the Everlasting Gospel to be preached
to this generation, that those who obeyed it would gather out from the
wicked, and prepare themselves for the coming of the Son of Man. He
spoke of the great work already commenced in these the last days, and
while I listened, his words were like unto a song heard in my far off
childhood, once forgotten but now returning afresh to my memory, and I
cried for very joy. I went home to tell my father the good news, but my
words returned to my own heart, for both my parents thought me insane,
and talked to each other sadly of my condition and what to do with me.
My heart was filled with sorrow and disappointment. I asked for the
privilege of being baptized but was answered with these words by my
father: 'You must leave home if you join those Mormons.' I went away
and was baptized for the remission of my sins, but still with regret
and an uncertainty as to the _right_ to disobey my parents. Soon after,
my father left the city, and my mother came and took me with her, to
care for me, as she was fearful I would be 'ruined by those deceivers.'
One night I had been to meeting where the Spirit of God seemed to
fill the house, and returned home thankful to my Heavenly Father that
I ever heard the Gospel. I laid down to rest beside my mother who
commenced upbraiding me, and instantly I was filled with remorse that
I was the cause of her unhappiness. I did not know what to say, and
was hesitating, when, just over my head, a _voice_, not a whisper, but
still and low, said these words: 'If you will leave father and mother,
you shall have Eternal Life,' I asked, 'Mother, did you hear that?'
She answered, '_You are bewitched!_' I knew then _she_ had not heard
the voice, but my mind was at rest and I went to sleep. I have heard
the same voice since, not in dreams, but in daylight, when in trouble
and uncertain which way to go; and I _know God lives_ and guides this
people called 'Mormons,' I know also the gifts and blessings are in the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, and that same faith once
delivered to the Saints is also ours, if we _live_ for it.

[Footnote A: Elder Erastus Snow. He afterward married her to her
husband, and blessed her children's children.]

"'In the month of February, 1845, I left home, my native land and all
the friends of my youthful days, and sailed in the ship, _Brooklyn_,
for California. Before starting I visited my parents, then living in
New Hampshire. I told them of my determination to follow God's people,
who had already been notified to leave the United States, that our
destination was the Pacific Coast, and we should take materials to
plant a colony.

"'When the hour came for parting, my father could not speak. My mother
asked, 'When shall we see you again, my child?' I answered, '_When
there is a railroad across the continent_.' God grant that prophecy may
be fulfilled and her life be spared to see it. I _knew_ it would be
there, even the 'highway cast up that the eagle's eye had never seen,
nor the lion's foot had ever trod.'

"'I turned my back on all once dear, for the memory of that voice
was in my ears--'If you will leave father and mother, you shall have
eternal life,' and selling my household treasures, wrapped my child
in my cloak (for the weather was bitter cold) and started on my long
journey around the Horn.

"'Of all the unpleasant memories, not one half so bitter as that dreary
six months' voyage in an emigrant ship. We were so closely crowded
that the heat of the Tropics was terrible, but 'mid all our trials the
object of our journey was never forgotten. The living faith was there
and was often manifested. I remember well one dreadful storm during
which we had to be hatched below, as the waves broke over the ship, and
filled our staterooms.

"'While the elements were raging above, and we below were being tossed
about like feathers, the good old captain came down among us wearing a
solemn countenance. We tried to gather around him; he said to us: 'My
friends, there is a time in a man's life when it is fitting to prepare
to die, and that time has come to us; I have done all I _can do_, but,
unless God interposes _we must go down_.' A good sister answered,
'Captain, we _were sent to California and we shall go there_.' He went
up stairs, saying, '_These people have a faith I have not_.' And so
it proved. We outrode the storm, we endured another off Cape Horn; we
stopped and buried one of our dear sisters, a mother of seven children,
(Mrs. Goodwin) at Juan Fernandez, and at last reached our new home,
the last day of July, 1846, to find a country at war with our own
government, a country barren and dreary, so unlike the California of
to-day, but we trusted in God and he heard our prayers; and when I
soaked the mouldy ship bread purchased from the whaleships lying in
the harbor, (returned from a four years' cruise) and fried it in the
tallow taken from the rawhides lying on the beach, God made it sweet to
me and to my child, for on this food I weaned her. I used to think of
Hagar and her babe, and of the God who watched over them, and again I
remembered the voice and the words it spoke unto me--and took courage.

"'From that day to this, I can bear my testimony to all the world that
I have known, and still know, this is the work of God and will exalt us
if we seek to know His will, and knowing it, do it.'

"My mother's testimony, written at my request, was the last work
performed by her hand. After finishing, she accompanied a caller to
the gate, the chill night air penetrated her frame and morning found
her sick with pneumonia. From that bed she was borne seven days later,
from the earthly gaze of children and friends forever. They called it
death, but to her it was the reward promised, and recorded by her own
hand--'Eternal Life.'

"My mother had kept a daily journal on the ship, _Brooklyn_, also the
first five or six years in San Francisco, calling it 'The Early Annals
of California.' This I considered invaluable from the reliability and
the fullness of its historic matter and data, and after her demise I
searched for it but it was gone. This I thought strange indeed, for she
had assured me of its preservation about eighteen months before her
last illness. I have heard her relate many incidents of those times.
Once when nearly famished, (hostilities not yet being concluded between
Mexico and the United States,) two men ventured outside the town to
lasso one of the cattle browsing so near them, but were themselves
caught by cruel Mexicans in ambush, and killed and quartered, their
bodies left lying on the sand in view of the wretched inhabitants.
At another time a Mexican was intercepted and searched. In one boot
was found an order from General Castro, to attack by night and kill
everything above four years old that could speak English. The messenger
was buried in the sand. After awhile the native women became curious,
and some of them ventured past the guard after dark, and being touched
with compassion, returned in the same cautious manner, with bottles of
_leche_ (milk) slung around their waists under their flounced dress
skirts, and _tortillas_ (flour and water cakes) concealed beneath their
_revosas_ (mantles,) for the women and children. Soon after the landing
the brethren strayed around, glad to be on land and looking to see what
they could find. 'Any fruit?' asked one of a returning comrade. 'Yes,'
said he, 'grape, lots of 'em.' There was a rush off in that direction
and a fruitless search. Being sharply questioned, he pulled a handful
of grape shot out of his pocket, which he had picked up from the scene
of a recent engagement. The same day a gentleman passenger, traveling
for pleasure, brought a bouquet of wild flowers to me, saying: 'Little
lady, I herewith present you the first bouquet ever offered by a white
man to a white woman in Yerba Buena.' Yerba Buena was the original name
of San Francisco, and means 'good herb'--from a kind of pennyroyal
growing wild there at that time. My mother kept the flowers many years
and told me the story over their odorless ashes. My father and mother
with many of the Saints, (sixteen families) moved from the ship into
the 'old adobie,' partitioned off with quilts. Soon after he rented a
house, but the largest room was required of him as a hospital for the
wounded soldiers; the next largest for a printing office. The press
was an old Spanish press, and there being no W in that alphabet, they
used to turn the M upside down. My mother used to help decipher the
dispatches, many of them being written on the battlefield with a burnt
stick or coal.

"Her first Christmas dinner in San Francisco consisted of a quart of
beans and a pound of salt pork, which the hospital steward brought
to her; he told her he would be flogged if it became known. In after
days he became her steward. One day Dr. Poet, surgeon of the navy,
brought my mother a slice of ham, a drawing of tea and a lump of butter
about the size of a walnut. Dr. Poet had told my father where he could
purchase half a barrel of flour. After baking some flour and water
cakes between two tin plates in the ashes, my mother brought her dear
friend, Mrs. Robbins, (now in this city,) to share the repast. Said
Mrs. Robbins: 'Mrs. Joyce, isn't this like Boston?' This was just after
living for six months on mouldy shipbread. I have heard her say that
often she was so hungry she would willingly have walked ten miles to
obtain a slice of bread. Soon after this my mother helped to take care
of the 'Donner Party,' who were found partly frozen and so famished
that they were eating their dead companions. The girl she tended, told
her that they grew to like it, and she had helped eat her brother. The
true stories they told are too dreadful to repeat, particularly as
some of them are still living. The Mormon Battallion came; peace was
declared, the gold mines were discovered, and the circumstances of the
Saints were changed from isolation and famine to wealth and grandeur.
My father became very wealthy, but prosperity caused his apostacy. My
grandfather, and uncle, John Perkins, both sea captains, came to see
my mother. I well remember sitting on grandpa's knee and learning my
alphabet from the large family Bible spread before him, he being my
teacher. I often recall also the long evenings when Uncle John held me
on his knee and sang the strange, pathetic, old-fashioned sea songs of
which he knew so many and sang them so sweetly; I used to nestle closer
to him, half frightened, and at last fall asleep. I remember one was,
''Twas down in the lowlands a poor boy did wander,' and I have never
heard it since.

"In Boston my mother was called 'The Mormon nightingale.' Strangers
indifferent to the Gospel would say, 'Let us go to Boylston Hall and
hear the singing.' A gentleman of fortune offered to take her to Italy
and educate her in singing, at the same time that Adelaide Philips
(his protege) went, but her destiny was upon another stage, to sing
the hymns of the newly-restored Gospel; and many have thought that
she sang them as one inspired. Her rendering of Wm. Clayton's hymn,
'The Resurrection Day,' will be remembered by all who ever heard it.
She purchased the first melodeon brought to San Francisco, (by a Mr.
Washington Holbrook,) thereby causing a sensation among the wives of
the ministers of five denominations, who each wanted it for their
church. She went, during the ravages of the cholera, in San Francisco,
and gathered together sixty orphan children, providing for them until
a building spot, material and means were collected by subscription;
and was one of the Board of managers of the Protestant Orphan Asylum
thus originated and founded. I remember going with her and hearing
the children sing, 'The Watcher,' a song of poverty and death. At the
expiration of one year some of the ladies objected to having a Mormon
officer among them, 'not considering Mormonism a religion at all,'
although quite willing to accept the continuance of her contributions.
She however found a larger and more congenial field of labor; brethren
going on their missions, their families left behind in Utah, received
her prompt remembrance. Also seeds, trees, &c., she sent to Utah spring
and fall, through more than twenty years. My only sister was born in
San Francisco, August, 1847, and died in St. George, Mrs. Helen F.
Judd, one of the truest Saints I ever knew. In San Francisco Parley
P. Pratt was a guest at my mother's house. She had loaned the Book of
Mormon to a gentleman belonging to the Custom House; Colonel Alden A.
M. Jackson. He had been in the Mexican War, at the battle of Buena
Vista, and was with General Scott and Zachary Taylor through that
campaign. He had two horses killed under him and received injuries
that lasted throughout his life. When he returned the book he said he
had read it day and night until finished, and wished to know where he
could find a minister of the Mormon Church. She invited him to come
that evening and meet the Apostle, author and poet, Parley P. Pratt.
The gentlemen became so interested in their theme that my mother left
the room without disturbing them, and giving a servant instructions to
attend to Mr. Pratt's room, etc., retired. Descending the stairs next
morning she heard Brother Pratt conversing, the lamp still burning.
'Good morning, gentlemen,' said she; Brother Pratt looked up--'Is
it morning?' Colonel Jackson walked to the window--'Yes,' said he,
'another day has dawned, and another day has dawned for me--a beautiful
one.' Brother Pratt looked out upon the garden and said significantly,
'It only needs water to complete the picture.' Colonel Jackson replied,
'I understand you, I am ready.' Turning to my mother Brother Pratt
asked, 'Sister Joyce, have you renewed your covenants? A number are
going to the North Beach to-morrow, will you go?' and she answered
thoughtfully, 'Ten years ago last night I was baptized in the Atlantic
at midnight; to-morrow I will be baptized in the Pacific.'

"My own parents had been separated since my father's apostacy. A few
months after her baptism she moved to San Bernardino and there began
building a beautiful home. Colonel Jackson, on his way to Utah was
delayed, waiting for a train to cross the deserts, and my mother
being his only acquaintance, he often sought her society, and at last
determined to win her if possible, and some three years after their
first acquaintance they were married. Never was a kinder father than
he. Years added to years drew us all nearer to each other.

"In 1856, at the time of the Utah War, an armed mob of twenty-two men
visited the four remaining Mormon families in San Bernardino, and
calling father out from breakfast, ordered him to leave town with
his family by nine o'clock. He replied he would not do it, prefacing
and concluding the reply in language more forcible than elegant.
They planted an old cannon on the public square, fired it off, rode
around and threatened a great deal. Father's law office fronted the
square; he went as usual to it, and in the afternoon they made a
bonfire outside and coming in to him told him they intended to burn
him alive. He continued writing, only telling them if they disturbed
his papers he would send daylight through them. They left. When we
were all ready to start for Utah, enemies obtained a writ from the
court prohibiting my sister and I from leaving the State before we
were of age. We were among enemies and powerless. My mother said, 'If
we can't go, our property shall,' and with father's consent divided
goods, provisions, arms and ammunition with the poor who could go. In
1864, my mother, sister and I came to Utah on a visit, returned here
in 1867. In 1868 I was appointed Secretary of the Relief Society in
St. George. In 1869 our parents brought us 'to the city' to receive
our endowments, for which our joy and gratitude was beyond expression.
I remained here, they returned to St. George where my sister married.
In 1870 I became the second wife of George W. Crocheron. I believed I
should better please my Heavenly Father by so doing than by marrying
otherwise. Any woman, no matter how selfish, can be a first and only
wife, but it takes a great deal more Christian philosophy and fortitude
and self-discipline to be a wife in this order of marriage; and I
believe those who choose the latter when both are equally possible,
and do right therein, casting out all selfishness, judging self and
not another, have attained a height, a mental power, a spiritual plane
above those who have not. To do this is to overcome that which has its
roots in selfishness, and it can be done if each will do what is right.
In November, 1870, I was appointed Secretary of the Young Ladies Mutual
Improvement Association of the Ninth Ward, which position I filled
till home duties compelled my resignation. At times during thirteen
years I have reported, in the sisters' meetings, chiefly those of the
Fourteenth Ward. In 1876 our father died, and in five weeks after our
mother followed him. Their graves are side by side in the valley of St.
George, as beautiful as we could make them.

"In 1878 I was appointed, and later, set apart and blessed to labor
as Secretary of the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement Association for
the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, which position I strive to honorably
fill. In 1880, by the advice and aid of my friends I published a
volume of poems, 'Wild Flowers of Deseret,' which was kindly received,
the entire edition being sold within two years. The design of the
picture Representative Women of Deseret, appeared to me one night
as I rose from family prayers. I had not thought of it before. This
book of biographical sketches to accompany it was an after thought.
Many suppose that Mormon women are not encouraged in their abilities,
are perhaps repressed. This has not been so in my case, or in my
observations of others. Both encouragement and help have been given me
by friends, by those in authority, and my husband has also encouraged
and assisted me in every way in his power.

"I am the mother of three boys and two girls, born in the New and
Everlasting Covenant, and consecrated to my Creator before I ever held
them in my arms or pressed a mother's kiss upon their little faces.
Myself and all that are mine to give are dedicated to the service of
God, praying that He will help us to be worthy of His acceptance."



HELEN MAR WHITNEY.

Helen Mar Whitney was the third child of Heber Chase Kimball and his
wife, Vilate Murray, and was born in Mendon, Munro County, New York,
August 22, 1828. Their ancestors were among the Pilgrims and her
kindred prided themselves that they were descended from a noble stock.
Though they cared little for nobility and rank, they were proud to know
that their grandsires who would not submit to tyranny and oppression,
helped to gain them independence, and that their descendants were
noble, hard working, self-sacrificing and conscientious people, who
believed in rising by their own merits. Many of her ancestors died
fighting for the liberty which is denied to some of their children,
by men who have usurped authority and become oppressors. She was five
years old when her parents removed to Kirtland, Ohio. In the winter of
1837, she was baptized by Brigham Young, her father cutting the ice for
that purpose.

She inherited a reverence for the Supreme Being and always received the
best teachings from her parents. Her father's time was mostly spent in
the ministry. On his return from a European mission, he heard Joseph
teach the principle of celestial marriage, and was commanded by Joseph
to take a certain lady for his second wife. He felt as though he could
not obey this and live in it, and must be released from the command,
and he expressed the same to Joseph, who went and inquired of the
Lord, and receiving an answer, commanded him the third time before he
obeyed. Her mother bore testimony that she also went to the Lord and
plead with Him to show her the cause of her husband's trouble, which
his haggard face and wretched days and nights betrayed and he dared
not tell her. He told her to go to the Lord and she did so, and He
answered their prayers. She saw a vision and the principle was revealed
to her in all its glory. She saw the woman that he had taken, and she
went to him and told him what the Lord had shown her. She said she
never saw him so happy, and he cried for joy. She took the second wife
to her bosom, and from that time an unkind word never passed between
them. Helen knew nothing of the order till June, 1843, when her father
revealed it to her. She says of this: "Had I not known he loved me too
tenderly to introduce anything that was not strictly pure and exalting
in its tendencies, I could not have believed such a doctrine. I could
have sooner believed that he would slay me, than teach me an impure
principle. I heard the Prophet teach it more fully, and in the presence
of my father and mother.

"On the 3rd of February, 1846, I was married to H. K. Whitney, eldest
son of N. K. Whitney, by Brigham Young. We were the last couple sealed
in the Temple at Nauvoo. We were among the exiles who crossed the
river on the 16th of the same month, intending to go over to the Rocky
Mountains that year. But when the government demanded the strength of
our companies to fight for them, we had to seek a place to quarter
for the winter. I was sick most of the time while there. Some of the
journey we had to walk, and our food being poor and scant, the infant
and the aged, all classes, were swept off by death--the latter by
scurvy and sheer exhaustion. The next year my husband was one of those
chosen to go as a pioneer, and he had to go though the day of trial was
upon me.

"Our first born, a lovely girl baby, was buried there--we could not
both live; but during those dark hours I had friends and the Lord was
there. We had but few men, mostly aged and disabled, but to see the
union of the sisters; the fasting and prayers for the preservation
of our battallion and the pioneers; and for the destroyer to be
stayed; the great and marvelous manifestations, even the power of the
resurrection, experienced there--proved that they were encircled by a
mighty power, and that 'the prayers of the righteous availeth much.' I
will mention one circumstance to show the heavenly spirit that dwelt
with us there, and also the power of the destroyer, which none who
witnessed could misunderstand.

"We were struggling with the evil one who had laid his grasp upon the
babes--one was my mother's, the other, Sarah Ann's, (one of my father's
wives). We all felt that we must part with one, as one would no sooner
get relief than the other would be worse, and after a time mother asked
the Lord, if agreeable to His will, to take hers and spare the other,
as she had other children, and Sarah Ann had but this one. But He chose
to take the latter. Should not this teach us a lesson? and where could
such love be found, only in the hearts of _Saints?_

"Many weeks I remained feeble, but I had received the promise that I
should be healed, and one morning Sister Perris Young, on whom the
spirit had rested all night, to come and administer to me; came and
under her administration, with my mother, I was made whole.

"Those were trying days, when one meal was eaten we knew not where
we were to get the next, but we neither wanted for food nor raiment.
We had not heard from the pioneers since they left till they were
returning, and the news was that they were short of teams and without
breadstuff, and a long way from home. Our feelings can better be
imagined than described, for we had little enough ourselves, but
we lifted our hearts to God, and I can call it nothing less than
miraculous, a supply was soon furnished and men and teams started
to meet them. The next spring all were preparing to move, and as I
was helping to put on my wagon cover I came near fainting and was
prostrated on my bed from that time. I had a baby boy born on the 17th
of August, but he was buried on the 22nd, my twentieth birthday. This
was the worst part of our journey, the roads being rough and rocky. I
mourned incessantly, and that with my intense bodily sufferings soon
brought me to death's door, but it was shorn of its sting. I was cold,
but oh, how peaceful, as I lay there painless and my breath passing so
gently away; I felt as though I was wafting on the air and happy in the
thought of meeting so soon with my babes where no more pain or sorrow
could come. I had talked with my husband and father who were weeping
as I took a parting kiss from all but my poor mother, who was the last
one called and had sunk upon her knees before me. This distressed me,
but I bade her not mourn for she would not be long behind me. My words
struck father like a sudden thunderbolt, and he spoke with a mighty
voice and said--'Vilate, Helen _is not dying!_" but my breath which by
this time had nearly gone, stopped that very instant, and I felt his
faith and knew that he was holding me; and I begged him to let me go as
I thought it very cruel to keep me, and believed it impossible for me
to live and ever recover. The destroyer was then stirred up in anger at
being cheated out of his victim and he seemed determined to wreak his
vengeance upon us all. No one but God and the angels to whom I owe my
life and all I have, could know the tenth part of what I suffered. I
never told anybody and I never could. A keener taste of misery and woe,
no mortal, I think, could endure. For three months I lay a portion of
the time like one dead, they told me; but that did not last long. I was
alive to my spiritual condition and dead to the world. I tasted of the
punishment which is prepared for those who reject any of the principles
of this Gospel. Then I learned that plural marriage was a celestial
principle, and saw the difference between the power of God's priesthood
and that of Satan's and the necessity of obedience to those who hold
the priesthood, and the danger of rebelling against or speaking lightly
of the Lord's annointed.

"I had, in hours of temptation, when seeing the trials of my mother,
felt to rebel. I hated polygamy in my heart, I had loved my baby
more than my God, and mourned for it unreasonably. All my sins and
shortcomings were magnified before my eyes till I believed I had sinned
beyond redemption. Some may call it the fruits of a diseased brain.
There is nothing without a cause, be that as it may, it was a keen
reality to me. During that season I lost my speech, forgot the names of
everybody and everything, and was living in another sphere, learning
lessons that would serve me in future times to keep me in the narrow
way. I was left a poor wreck of what I had been, but the Devil with
all his cunning, little thought that he was fitting and preparing my
heart to fulfill its destiny. My father said that Satan desired to
clip my glory and was quite willing I should die happy; but when he
was thwarted he tried in every possible way to destroy my tabernacle.
President Young said that the mountains through which we passed were
filled with the spirits of the Gadianton robbers spoken of in the Book
of Mormon. The Lord gave father faith enough to hold me until I was
capable of exercising it for myself. I was so weak that I was often
discouraged in trying to pray, as the evil spirits caused me to feel
that it was no use: but the night after the first Christmas in this
valley, I had my last struggle and resolved that they should buffet me
no longer. I fasted for one week, and every day I gained till I had won
the victory and I was just as sensible of the presence of holy spirits
around my bedside as I had been of the evil ones. It would take up too
much room to relate my experience with the spirits, but New Year's eve,
after spending one of the happiest days of my life I was moved upon to
talk to my mother. I knew her heart was weighed down in sorrow and I
was full of the holy Ghost. I talked as I never did before, I was too
weak to talk with such a voice (of my own strength), beside, I never
before spoke with such eloquence, and she knew that it was not myself.
She was so affected that she sobbed till I ceased. I assured her that
father loved her, but he had a work to do, she must rise above her
feelings and seek for the Holy Comforter, and though it rent her heart
she must uphold him, for he in taking other wives had done it only in
obedience to a holy principle. Much more I said, and when I ceased, she
wiped her eyes and told me to rest. I had not felt tired till she said
this, but commenced then to feel myself sinking away. I silently prayed
to be renewed, when my strength returned that instant.

"New Year's day father had set apart to fast and pray, and they
prepared a feast at evening. I had prayed that I might gain a sure
testimony that day that I was acceptable to God, and my father, when
he arose to speak, was so filled with His power, that he looked
almost transfigured! He turned to me and spoke of my sufferings and
the blessings I should receive because of the same. He prophesied of
the great work that I should do, that I should live long and raise
honorable sons and daughters that would rise up and call me blessed,
and should be a comfort to my mother in her declining years, and many
more things which I have fulfilled. Many who knew me then have looked
at me and seen me working with my children around me, with perfect
amazement and as one who had been dead and resurrected.

"I lost three babes before I kept any, (two boys and girl). My first
to live was Vilate, she grew to womanhood and was taken. Orson F. was
my next, who has been appointed Bishop of the Eighteenth Ward. I had
four more daughters, then a son, my last a little girl who died at
five years of age; being eleven in all. My parents have left me and my
heart has been wrung to the utmost, yet I have said--_Thy will O God,
be done_. Persons have sometimes wondered at my calmness and endurance,
but I think they would not had they passed through the same experience.

"I have encouraged and sustained my husband in the celestial order of
marriage because I knew it was right. At various times I have been
healed by the washing and annointing, administered by the mothers in
Israel. I am still spared to testify to the truth and Godliness of this
work; and though my happiness once consisted in laboring for those
I love, the Lord has seen fit to deprive me of bodily strength, and
taught me to 'cast my bread upon the waters' and after many days my
longing spirit was cheered with the knowledge that He had a work for me
to do, and with Him, I know that all things are possible.

"Almost my first literary effort was inspired by the reading of
the various opinions of men published in our dailies, upon woman's
disabilities, etc.; and my continuing is due to the advice and urgent
wishes of many of my sisters.

"On March 10, 1882, I was chosen by Sister M. I. Horne and nominated
to act as her Counselor in the Relief Society of this stake of Zion
in place of Sister S. M. Heywood (deceased) and God grant that I may
come up to her standard and be able to labor faithfully with my sisters
yet many years, in relieving and comforting the tried and afflicted,
and enlightening the minds of those who are in darkness concerning the
things of God and His people."

It is but appropriate and just to add to the brief sketch of Helen Mar
Whitney's life, a brief record of her son, the eldest of her living
children.

Orson F. Whitney was born in Salt Lake City, July 1, 1855. Was called
on his first mission during the October Conference of 1876. Left home
for Pennsylvania November 6th following. Remained in Pennsylvania about
five months, laboring with Elder A. M. Musser, and visited Washington
just prior to the inauguration of President Hayes. Early in the spring
of 1877 went alone down to Ohio, where he remained about one year,
preaching and baptizing, and visiting relatives in and around Kirtland,
(his father's birthplace). Was released from his mission in the spring
of 1878, and returned home early in April. Was appointed a home
missionary immediately on his return, and also obtained a situation in
the _Deseret News_ office.

July 14th, was ordained a High Priest, (previously was a Seventy)
and set apart to preside as bishop of the Eighteenth Ward, being the
youngest bishop in the Salt Lake Stake of Zion, succeeding Bishop L.
D. Young, resigned. August 10th of same year succeeded Elder John
Nicholson as city editor of the _Deseret News_, he having been called
to Europe on a mission. Before this he had labored as a collector and
under-clerk in the business office of that establishment. During his
sojourn in the States he had corresponded with the _Salt Lake Herald_,
the _Woman's Exponent_ and the _News_, to the latter by the direct
invitation of President Brigham Young, who had noticed his writings
to the other papers and urged him to cultivate his literary ability.
Previously he had scarcely dared to hope he possessed any. He says of
this; "I owe much to the kind encouragement of President Young for what
little I have yet achieved in that direction."

December 18, 1879, was married to Zina B. Smoot, daughter of President
A. O. and Mrs. Emily Smoot. In February, 1880, was elected to the
City Council and held the office of a Councilor until called on his
second mission, whither he went before his office term had expired.
In July, 1880, was appointed by a committee having in charge the
arrangement of a programme to celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of
the Church (year of jubilee,) to write a poem for the occasion. The
poem--"Jubilee of Zion," was read in the Tabernacle by Colonel David
McKenzie, on the 24th of July, the Jubilee Celebration and the regular
Pioneer Day Celebration being blended. Prior to this he had published a
pamphlet containing two poems, "Land of Shinehah" and the "Women of the
Everlasting Covenant," and had contributed various efforts in verse to
our local papers, besides other articles in prose to the _Contributor_
and _Herald_, at the same time laboring regularly upon the _News_ as
local editor. April, 1880 (antedating the above), the Home Dramatic
Club was organized with O. F. Whitney as President.

October, 1880, the first child of Bishop Whitney, a son, was born. June
20, 1881, at a meeting of the General Committee on celebration of the
4th of July, Bishop Whitney was chosen Orator of the Day, and prepared
the oration, the assassination of President Garfield on the 2nd of July
put a stop to the celebration, and consequently to the carrying out of
the programme. October Conference, 1881, was called on a mission to
England and left October 24th; sailed from New York November 1st, and
landed on the 10th. Appointed to the London Conference, labored there
four months; then called to Liverpool to succeed Elder C. W. Stayner
in the editorial department of the _Millennial Star_. Labored there
nearly a year, then was released to travel in the ministry. Released to
return home with the June company, 1883. Visited Scotland and France
and sailed for home June 20th. Landed in New York Sunday, July 1st,
the very day and date of his birth, twenty-eight years before. Reached
home July 7, 1883, and has resumed his position as city editor of the
_Deseret Evening News_.



LETTERS OF HEBER C. KIMBALL.

For the consideration of those unacquainted with him, who through
misreport have been led to regard Heber C. Kimball as a man of stern
rule and cold nature, I append two letters written by him to his
beloved first wife, Vilate, (a name that is revered in our people's
remembrance) showing in true light his own feelings upon the principle
of plural marriage and vindicating and honoring him by this testimony
from his own secret heart and lips, better than the words of another,
no matter how faithful or true or ardent that friend might be. Thus
will be shown to the world three generations of a family who are
representatives of our people and faith; Heber, one whom God chose
as one of the first to aid in founding and upbuilding His Church and
Kingdom in the last dispensation; Helen, his cherished and heroic
daughter, and Orson, her son, worthy representative of his mother
and grandfather. The inspiration in Heber's life has not died out in
theirs, the work has not slackened, the line of march is still onward
and upward. The first copy bears date of

"OCTOBER 23, 1842. "_My Dear Vilate:_

"I am at Brother Evan Green's. We have held all our conferences, have
had two meetings to-day, it being the Sabbath. Some have been added to
the Church and prejudice is considerably laid. Monday we shall go to
Jacksonville, then on to Springfield. I shall be home in two or three
weeks if the Lord wills it so. Since I left you it has been a time of
much reflection. I felt as though I was a poor weak creature in and of
myself, and only on God can I rely for support. I have been looking
back over my past life before I heard the Gospel. It makes me shrink
into nothing and to wish I had always been a righteous man from my
youth, but we have an advocate with the Father, and I can look back
since I came into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints, with
a degree of pleasure, but I can see if I had more knowledge I could
have done better in many points. * * I feel as though I had rather die
to-day than be left to transgress one of His laws, or to bring disgrace
upon the cause which I have embraced, or a stain upon my character; and
my prayer is day by day that God would take me to Himself rather than I
should be left to sin against Him, or betray my dear brethren who have
been true to me and to God the Eternal Father, and I feel to pray to
Thee, O Lord, to help thy poor servant to be true to Thee all the days
of my life, that I may never be left to sin against Thee or against Thy
annointed, or any that love thee, that I may have wisdom and knowledge
how to gain Thy favor at all times, for this is my desire, and that
these blessings may rest upon my dear companion, and when we have done
Thy work on this Thy footstool, that Thou wouldst receive us into that
kingdom where Abraham, Isaac and Jacob and all the holy prophets have
gone, that we may never be separated any more, and before I should be
left to betray my brethren in any case, let Thy servant come unto Thee
in Thy Kingdom and there have the love of my youth, and the little
ones Thou has given me. * * Now, my dear Vilate, stand by me even unto
death, and when you pray, pray that I may hold out to the end. * * My
heart aches for you and sometimes I can hardly speak without weeping,
and that before my brethren: for I have a broken heart and my head is a
fountain of tears. My life in this world is short at the longest, and
I do not desire to live one day only to do good and to make you happy
and bring up our little children in the ways of the Lord, and my prayer
is that they may be righteous from the least to the greatest. * * The
world has lost its charms for me, and I want to seek for that rest
which remains for the people of God. I never had a greater desire to be
a man of God than at the present, that I may know my acceptance with
Him."

"SPRINGFIELD, October 25th. "_My Dear Companion:_

"I have just returned from the office where I found a letter from you,
and I need not tell you that it was a sweet morsel to me. I could weep
like a child if I could get away by myself, to think that I for one
moment have been the means of causing you any sorrow; I know that you
must have many bad feelings and I feel to pray for you all the time,
I assure you that you have not been out of my mind many minutes at a
time since I left you. My feelings are of that kind that it makes me
sick at heart, so that I have no appetite to eat. My temptations are
so severe it seems sometimes as though I should have to lay down and
die, I feel as if I should sink beneath it. I go into the woods every
chance I have, and pour out my soul before God that He would deliver
me and bless you, my dear wife, and the first I would know I would be
in tears, weeping like a child about you and the situation I am in;
but what can I do but go ahead? My dear Vilate, do not let it cast you
down, for the Lord is on our side; this I know from what I see and
realize and I marvel at it many times. You are tried and tempted and I
am sorry for you, for I know how to pity you. I can say that I never
suffered more in all my life than since these things came to pass; and
as I have said so say I again, I have felt as if I should sink and die.
Oh my God! I ask Thee in the name of Jesus to bless my dear Vilate and
comfort her heart and deliver her from temptation and sorrow, and open
her eyes and let her see things as they are, for Father Thou knowest
our sorrow; be pleased to look upon Thy poor servant and handmaid, and
grant us the privilege of living the same length of time that one may
not go before the other, for Thou knowest that we desire this with all
our hearts. * * * And then, Father, when we have done with our career
in this probation, in the one to come may we still be joined in one
to remain so to all eternities, and whatever we have done to grieve
Thee be pleased to blot it out, and let us be clean and pure before
Thee at all times, that we may never be left to sin or betray anyone
that believes on Thy name; save us from all this and let our seeds be
righteous; incline their hearts to be pure and virtuous, and may this
extend from generation to generation, let us have favor in Thy sight
and before Thine angels that we may be watched over by them and have
strength and grace to support us in the day of our temptation that we
may not be overcome and fall. Now my Father, these are the desires of
our hearts, and wilt Thou grant them to us for Jesus' sake and to Thy
name will we give all the glory forever and ever."



ZINA Y. WILLIAMS.

DAUGHTER OF BRIGHAM YOUNG.

It would be strange indeed, if after the life and labors of Brigham
Young, a work of this character should appear, lacking the name
and record of his descendants. The sons of noble men have greater
opportunities of adding lustre to their father's name by reason of the
advantages which sons possess over daughters; yet among our people,
women have their acknowledged province in which they may distinguish
themselves, in which their position is not borrowed from the other
sex, or an infringement upon them; and yet may adorn the memory of
even Brigham Young. Such a daughter is Zina Y. Williams, the original
of this sketch. Born in plural or celestial marriage, and with an
understanding of this condition, as much as any young girl can possess,
a wife in the same order of marriage.

Some have said, "Let us see the workings of this system, let us see
how the next generation will receive it." The time has come when they
can see, and learn that those who understand it best fear it least.
The words of the daughter herself, it seems to me, should go farther
in effect than mine could for her. Here is a true picture in the home
life of the earliest advocates of that ancient principle, restored
through Joseph Smith, the prophet. I have known Mrs. Williams beneath
her father's roof and in her own married home, intimately, for eighteen
years, and knew the union and love of the band of sisters.

"I was born April 3rd, 1850, in Salt Lake City. My mother, Zina H.
Young, was made glad by my presence, her only daughter. My father,
President Brigham Young, made me welcome; though he was the father of
many others he was as much pleased as many men are over their only
girl. My childhood was clouded with sickness, and one of my earliest
recollections is of my loving mother holding me in her arms, singing a
sweet song; with the moonlight streaming over me and gazing out upon
the full moon I sank to sleep, soothed from suffering by her magic
care. I was the pet of my two brothers and of all my mother's friends.
I knew nothing of want or care till the year of famine, (1856) which
gave me a faint idea of what want was. (All through the Territory
families were on short rations.)

"My father's family lived in a world of their own, there being ten
girls with not more than four years' difference in their ages. Our
father affectionately called us his 'big ten,' and nowhere on the
earth could be found a happier, merrier set of children. We attended
school and were instructed in music and dancing on our own premises.
Our mothers taught us to respect each other's rights, as they always
set the example by treating one another according to the golden rule.
A person entering the room where we were assembled would be at a loss
to tell which were the own children of the sisters present. We carried
out the proverb--'Love thy neighbor as thyself,' literally. When the
memorable exodus of 1858 took place, my mother was the first woman who
left Salt Lake City. In company with another of my father's wives,
Lucy B., (as she is called,) we started south. This was my first trip
from home, it seemed like a pleasure trip to me and it was a matter of
surprise that my dear mother and auntie were not as much delighted with
the change as we children were; but the subsequent discomforts we were
subjected to, and our lonely hours spent away from our dearly loved
sisters caused many a heart pang and we began to realize something of
the sacrifices made by our people when our enemies came and invaded
our homes. My mother was the last of father's family to leave Provo,
after the return of the people to their former homes. On our arrival,
after a year's absence, father asked mother to take charge of four of
his little ones whose mother was dead. She consented, and this event
entirely changed my after life; from being the pet and only child I
now had to share with these motherless children. It was a trial in
many ways, but my precious mother taught me to be unselfish and thank
God for all His blessings and not complain, and I am thankful to say,
following her advice without once alluding to the fact that my mother
was not their own. Thus it proved to be the best lesson of my life, and
a great blessing.

"My life flowed on in peaceful current, going to school, but going upon
the stage when quite young greatly impaired my health. I married when
eighteen. My husband, Thomas Williams, had been in my father's employ
in his office, for several years; then in the Theatre, where I saw him
frequently, but, as he was much older than I, it never occurred to me
to fall in love with him. 'None knew him but to love him,' the bard
wrote, which is true of my husband. I was his second wife, and here let
me testify that in entering into the order of plural marriage, both
my husband and myself did so from the purest and holiest motives. For
six years I was his loving wife, bearing two sons, Sterling and Thomas
Edgar. In July, 1873, my dear husband was called home. None but those
who are called upon to pass through similar circumstances can know
the sorrow and anguish it is to part from a loving, noble husband and
father.

"My time now was given principally to my Church duties and to the
support of my dear children. In all my trials my dear mother was my
comfort and support. By the advice of my father, I went to Sevier
County and took up a quarter section of land. I went to St. George at
the completion of the Temple, and met many dear friends and relatives;
my father was there, and those who were present, will, I believe,
never forget the heavenly intercourse enjoyed by the Saints while thus
convened. Shortly after our return to the city, our honored father was
stricken down with his last sickness. Never was there a more solemn
scene than that witnessed at his death, his family were there, also
the head men of the Church. Physicians with their futile skill were
standing round, the faith and anxiety of the whole Church were centered
around that dying form and departing soul of God's Prophet at that
trying hour. His body unconscious now to pain, was there before us,
but his noble spirit already saw behind the veil which screens from us
the immortal spheres. 'Joseph! Joseph!' were his last words, and when
he breathed his last his face became radiant as if molten sunbeams
had been poured into his veins, giving him an unearthly and celestial
appearance never to be forgotten by those who surrounded his dying
couch. After a settlement of our father's estate I removed to Provo in
order to give my dear children and myself the advantages of attending
the Brigham Young Academy. In January of this same year, President
Taylor sent me, in company with Sister Emmeline B. Wells, to visit
the Woman's Suffrage Convention held in Washington. After my return
I began teaching in the Brigham Young Academy, taking charge of the
young ladies and organizing a work class; also the primary department
in which position I have been actively engaged ever since. The
Brigham Young Academy was endowed by inspiration by him whose name it
bears. Professor Karl G. Maeser was called to act as principal at the
commencement, and when he asked for instruction from its noble founder,
he received only this: 'Ask God to guide you in all things and carry it
on under His directions; this is all I have to say.'

"From that time Professor Maeser has faithfully lived to fulfill the
wishes of its founder. How he has succeeded is demonstrated every year
by the hundreds of young men and women who there receive for the first
time a knowledge and testimony of this Gospel. Too much praise cannot
be bestowed upon the Honorable Board: President A. O. Smoot, Harvey
Cluff, Wilson H. Dusenberry, Bishop Myron Tanner, Bishop Harrington,
Bishop Bringhurst and Sister Coray for their energy and labor to make
this school all that Brigham Young intended it should be.

"In the deeds bestowing a grant upon this institution it is plainly
stated that the young men be taught mechanism, and the young ladies
domestic duties. In accordance with this a young ladies' department
has been organized and we have endeavored to carry out this peculiar
feature desired by President Young, my beloved father.

"I have occupied the position of advisor and director to the young
ladies for the past four years. I have now the advantage of a fine
large room built expressly for this branch of education. Was called to
preside over the Primary Associations of Provo, am a Counselor to the
President of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association also; and
an officer in the Provo Silk Association."

While living in Salt Lake City, Mrs. Zina Y. Williams was one of the
committee superintending the decoration of the great Tabernacle. Large
classes were taught artificial flower making, and thousands of yards
of festoons and hanging baskets, interspersed with appropriate mottoes
and flags made the vast ceiling a bower of beauty for many months. She
has taught decorative work of different kinds in several towns of our
Territory, possessing a special gift in this direction.

An energetic spiritual laborer, a loving daughter and faithful wife
and mother, she has also a wide circle of sincere friends. She was
the first of President Young's daughters to manifest prominently
in the face of opposition, her willingness to unite with the
associations organized for the repression of extravagance in dress,
table expenditure and frivolity, and for the cultivation of spiritual
knowledge, and mutual improvement. These meetings were regarded with
aversion and even ridicule, by many, as tending to bring women into too
great publicity. This proved to be an incorrect idea. Sister Williams
was one of the earliest spiritual laborers and has never faltered or
deviated from her line of duty. President Young has other daughters
also, who have later become officers and actively interested in the
Women's Organizations among this people; and they will without doubt,
develop many of those abilities, which, combined and made subservient
to the will of God made the name of Brigham Young immortal in history.



LOUISE M. WELLS.

SECRETARY OF CENTRAL ORGANIZATION OF THE YOUNG LADIES' MUTUAL
IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATIONS.

The fact that most of the ladies of this work are of mature, and
some even advanced years, suggests the thought--what of the "rising
generation" of this people? How have the practical workings of this
system which the world can judge of only from report and occasional
glimpses into its operations, but which with the youth of the people is
a literal and sole experience--affected their ideas and purposes?

Time, steadfast determination and spiritual progress have adjusted all
mingled and varied elements of individualities and nationalities in
those who received the Gospel in scattered homes in different parts
of the earth, have overcome those obstacles (which were such through
inexperience in newly restored truths and laws,) and brought all to
the proper level of their individual sphere of action and usefulness.
What a piece of master-work has this been! Order out of confusion,
brotherhood created between stranger races.

It has been often said, "that when the old stock dies out," the world
can better judge the worth of our doctrines; if they survive and grow
in the hearts of the succeeding generation their parents did not plant
the spiritual tree in lack of wisdom, and it will after this test of
years prove worthy of the serious consideration of those who now deem
it beneath their thoughtful attention.

More than fifty years have passed since the glorious message was first
proclaimed to the world; many of those true, noble Saints who toiled
as builders of their Master's Kingdom have finished their work, and
with years filled with honors have passed on to their rest and reward.
A few years more, and the witnesses who lived in the days of Joseph
and Hyrum will be gone, we shall be left to ourselves, their record
and our God. Who will replace them? Are their posterity following in
their footsteps? Yes, beneath the seeming swift current of youthtime's
careless indifference runs an undercurrent of earnestness, integrity
and--yes--royalty of soul. There can be found many of our young people
who bear the impress of their destiny in their daily lives, their
numbers are increasing, their works assuming prominence and recognition.

In connection with the young people's organizations it is due to Miss
Louise M. Wells, that a brief record of her history and position form
part of this work.

This young lady was born in Salt Lake City, August 27, 1862. On both
her father and mother's side she is descended from families of the old
Puritan stock. General Wells' record in Church history is one that
earth's greatest men might be proud to possess, and he has received
such a tribute of respect and love from our people as has rarely been
recorded. Her mother is the editor of the _Woman's Exponent_, but
has during her lifetime written constantly, amounting indeed to many
volumes were her writings published; and is exceptionally gifted as a
poetic writer. With such parents it may be reasonably expected that
with her inherent endowments trained in the influence of the Gospel,
with a fine spiritual nature, conscientious principles, an amiable
disposition and quiet, gentle manner, Miss Wells will do credit to her
parents and her people.

Of Louie, as she is familiarly called, it is said that when she was
very young she gave evidence of musical talent by rendering in an
original style, plaintive melodies admirably suited to her voice,
and rich in that pathos that always touches the heart. With many,
singing is an acquired accomplishment, with her it is as natural as
to the nightingale. Also in her childhood she unconsciously disclosed
artistic taste by gathering the autumn tinted leaves and grasses from
the garden, which she arranged in quaint and pretty devices for home
adornments. This talent was later cultivated under competent teachers,
when she soon became qualified to give lessons privately and in
classes, in drawing and painting. Already artists of distinction have
pronounced her oil paintings of sufficient merit to entitle her to
enter the Academy of Design in New York, and she has been advised to
adopt art as a life vocation. On the occasion of the Church Jubilee,
on Pioneer Day, 1880, Miss Wells was selected by the committee to
represent Art. In 1882, in company with some of her relatives, she
visited California, and there for the first time saw the ocean, one
of nature's grandest pictures. During this visit she went through the
art galleries of San Francisco. In 1883, she with her sister, Mrs.
Sears, made a trip to the Eastern States, and visited the art galleries
and museums of St. Louis, Chicago, Cleveland, New York, Boston,
Philadelphia and Washington. Also had the opportunity of attending the
World's Exposition at Boston. While visiting in the East she attended
a reunion of the Dickinson's held at Amherst, Massachusetts, as a
representative of the name, from whom her father descended through his
grandmother, Experience Dickinson. Arriving at College Hall, where
the reunion was celebrated, she met many hundreds of her kindred. Of
this family I quote: "It is now almost two hundred and fifty years
since Nathaniel Dickinson landed at Boston, and prior to 1634 found a
home at Wethersfield, forty or fifty miles below Amherst. In 1659 he
planted the permanent seat of our family, and deeply rooted the name
of Dickinson, and here nine succeeding generations have risen to call
him blessed. Nathaniel Dickinson died at Hadley, June 16, 1676. No
pencil or artist has preserved to us the semblance of his features, no
gravestone marks his resting-place. We only know that he sleeps in the
only burying-ground at Hadley."

At this reunion, which was quite an elaborate affair, a congratulatory
letter was read from her father, General D. H. Wells, which elicited
considerable applause, and the President, who had seen the General when
visiting Salt Lake City, spoke of him in the highest terms.

Miss Wells was very cordially received by the hundreds of Dickinson's
and succeeded in getting the names of many of the relatives of the
family who are now sleeping in the old graveyard at Hadley, and from a
"roll of honor" which hung upon the wall in the hall where the meeting
was held, on which were inscribed the names of those who had made
themselves distinguished. It was singular that this great meeting of
the Dickinson's should have convened at the time when Miss Louie was
visiting her mother's relatives only a few miles from Amherst, giving
her an opportunity of meeting her father's kindred.

Louie visited Nauvoo, also Kirtland, where she went through the Temple.
She has also proved herself to be a most charming press correspondent,
by contributions to the _Exponent_ that touched the heart of every
Saint; letters that were as beautiful, fresh and sweet as spring-time.
She has been connected with the _Exponent_ for some time; is a writer
for the _Contributor_, has been a member of the Tabernacle Choir for
several years, and taught a department of Miss Cook's school in 1880
and 1881.

In June, 1880, Miss Wells was appointed Secretary to the Central
Organization of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations, Mrs.
Elmina S. Taylor, President, a position of honor and importance, and
which she fulfils with dignity and ability. As a Latter-day Saint, the
young lady is worthy of her position and the love and confidence of her
friends; and we look forward to her future with happy anticipations of
beautiful works from her spirit and hand.

As in this work are represented the venerable silver-haired matrons,
and the younger wife and mother, it seems beautifully appropriate that
Miss Louie, in her youth and purity, should represent the daughters of
Israel, looking towards the future with eyes of faith and confidence.



Explanatory of the Picture

REPRESENTATIVE WOMEN OF DESERET.

The first portrait in the first group of the picture, is that of
ELIZA R. SNOW SMITH, President of the Latter-Day Saints' Women's
Organizations. The second, on the left-hand side of the same group,
ZINA D. H. YOUNG, First Counselor. Third, on the right-hand side, MARY
ISABELLA HORNE, Treasurer. Fourth, SARAH M. KIMBALL, Secretary.

The above are the Presiding Board over all the Latter-Day Saints
Women's Organizations.

At the head of the "Association Group" is, first, ELMINA S. TAYLOR,
President of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations. Second,
MARY A. FREEZE, President of the Young Ladies Mutual Improvement
Association of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. Third, left-hand side, is
LOUIE FELT, President of the Primary Associations. Fourth, ELLEN C.
CLAWSON, President of the Primary Associations of the Salt Lake Stake
of Zion.

At the head of the picture, left-hand corner, PHOEBE W. WOODRUFF, wife
of President Wilford Woodruff. At the right-hand corner, BATHSHEBA W.
SMITH, wife of President George A. Smith. At the left-hand corner,
PRESCENDIA L. KIMBALL, a veteran Saint and pioneer. At the right-hand
lower corner, ELIZABETH HOWARD, Secretary of the Relief Society of the
Salt Lake Stake of Zion.

At the head of the fourth group is, EMMELINE B. WELLS, editor of
_Woman's Exponent_. At the right-hand, same group, is ROMANIA B. PRATT,
M. D.

Turning now to the four ladies on the left-hand side of the picture,
the first is EMILY HILL WOODMANSEE, poet. Second, right-hand side,
HANNAH T. KING, poet and prose author. Third, on the left, AUGUSTA
JOYCE CROCHERON, author, and Secretary of the Young Ladies' Mutual
Improvement Association of the Salt Lake Stake of Zion. Fourth, HELEN
MAR WHITNEY, daughter of Heber C. Kimball, and writer of Church history
and biographies; also First Counselor of the Relief Society of the Salt
Lake Stake of Zion.

Returning to the fourth group: third portrait on the left, ZINA Y.
WILLIAMS, daughter of Brigham Young, and President of the Primary
Associations of the Utah Stake of Zion. Fourth, is LOUIE M. WELLS,
daughter of President D. H. Wells; Secretary of Central Organizations
of the Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations. Vocalist and
artist.

FINIS.



Transcriber's Note

Various obvious typographical errors have been corrected as seemed
reasonable, e.g. "coronatiion" for "coronation" and various similar
spelling issues, missing periods, and so forth.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Representative Women of Deseret, by 
Augusta Joyce Crocheron

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK REPRESENTATIVE WOMEN OF DESERET ***

***** This file should be named 50958.txt or 50958.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/0/9/5/50958/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(MormonTextsProject.org), with thanks to Renah Holmes and
Villate Brown McKitrick for proofreading.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

