The Project Gutenberg EBook of Heroines of Mormondom, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Heroines of Mormondom
       The Second Book of the Noble Women's Lives Series

Author: Various

Release Date: February 1, 2016 [EBook #51097]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEROINES OF MORMONDOM ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Rachel
Helps and Villate Brown McKitrick for proofreading.








HEROINES OF

"MORMONDOM,"

THE SECOND BOOK OF THE

NOBLE WOMEN'S LIVES SERIES

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH.

PUBLISHED AT THE JUVENILE INSTRUCTOR OFFICE.

1884.



PREFACE.

IT affords us much pleasure to be able to present a second book of
the "NOBLE WOMEN'S LIVES SERIES" to the public. It will, we feel
confident, prove no less interesting than its predecessor, and the
lessons conveyed by the articles herein contained will doubtless be as
instructive to its readers as any ever given.

The remarkable events here recorded are worthy of perusal and
remembrance by all the youth among this people, as they will tend
to strengthen faith in and love for the gospel for which noble men
and women have suffered so much. The names, too, of such heroines as
these, the sketches of whose lives we herewith give, should be held
in honorable remembrance among this people, for no age or nation can
present us with more illustrious examples of female faith, heroism and
devotion.

We trust that this little work may find its way in the homes of all
the Saints and prove a blessing to all who scan its pages. This is the
earnest desire of

                                                  THE PUBLISHERS.



CONTENTS.

A NOBLE WOMAN'S EXPERIENCE.

Chapter I.

Chapter II.

Chapter III.

A REMARKABLE LIFE.

Chapter I.

Chapter II.

Chapter III.

Chapter IV.

Chapter V.

Chapter VI.

A HEROINE OF HAUN'S MILL MASSACRE.

Chapter I.



A NOBLE WOMAN'S EXPERIENCE.



CHAPTER I.

Hyrum Smith, the Patriarch, married Jerusha Barden, November 2, 1826.
They had six children, viz: Lovina, Mary, John, Hyrum, Jerusha and
Sarah. Mary died when very young, and her mother died soon after the
birth of her daughter, Sarah. Hyrum, the second son, died in Nauvoo,
in 1842, aged eight years. The Patriarch married his second wife,
Mary Fielding, in the year 1837, she entering upon the important duty
of stepmother to five children, which task she performed, under the
most trying and afflictive circumstances, with unwavering fidelity.
She had two children, Joseph and Martha. Thus, you see, Hyrum Smith,
the Patriarch of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, was
really a polygamist many years before the revelation on celestial
marriage was written, though, perhaps, about the time it was given to
the Prophet Joseph Smith; but not exactly in the sense in which the
word is generally used, for both his wives were not living together
on the earth; still they were both alive, for the spirit never dies,
and they were both his wives--the mothers of his children. Marriage is
ordained of God, and when performed by the authority of His Priesthood,
is an ordinance of the everlasting gospel and is not, therefore, merely
a legal contract, but pertains to time and all eternity to come,
therefore it is written in the Bible, "What God hath joined together
let no man put asunder."

There are a great many men who feel very bitter against the Latter-day
Saints, and especially against the doctrine of plural marriage, who
have married one or more wives after the death of their first, that,
had their marriages been solemnized in the manner God has prescribed
and by His authority, they themselves would be polygamists, for they,
as we, firmly believe in the immortality of the soul, professing to
be Christians and looking forward to the time when they will meet, in
the spirit world, their _wives_ and the loved ones that are dead. We
can imagine the awkward situation of a man, not believing in polygamy,
meeting two or more wives, with their children, in the spirit world,
each of them claiming him as husband and father. "But," says one, "how
will it be with a woman who marries another husband after the death of
her first?" She will be the wife of the one to whom she was married
for time and eternity. But if God did not "join them together," and
they were only married by mutual consent until death parted them, their
contract, or partnership ends with death, and there remains but one way
for those who died without the knowledge of the gospel to be united
together for eternity. That is, for their living relatives or friends
to attend to the ordinances of the gospel for them. "For, in the
resurrection, they neither marry nor are given in marriage;" therefore
marriage ordinances must be attended to here in the flesh. Hyrum Smith,
however, was a polygamist before his death, he having had several women
sealed to him by his brother, Joseph, some of whom are now living.

At the death of the Patriarch, June 27th, 1844, the care of the family
fell upon his widow, Mary Smith. Besides the children there were two
old ladies named respectively, Hannah Grinnels, who had been in the
family many years, and Margaret Brysen. There was also a younger one,
named Jane Wilson, who was troubled with fits and otherwise afflicted,
and was, therefore, very dependent, and an old man, named George Mills,
who had also been in the family eleven years, and was almost entirely
blind and very crabbed. These and others, some of whom had been taken
care of by the Patriarch out of charity, were members of the family
and remained with them until after they arrived in the valley. "Old
George," as he was sometimes called, had been a soldier in the British
army, had never learned to read or write, and often acted upon impulse
more than from the promptings of reason, which made it difficult,
sometimes, to get along with him; but because he had been in the family
so long--through the troubles of Missouri and Illinois--and had lost
his eye-sight from the effects of brain fever and inflammation, caused
by taking cold while in the pineries getting out timbers for the temple
at Nauvoo, Widow Smith bore patiently all his peculiarities up to the
time of her death. Besides those I have mentioned, Mercy R. Thompson,
sister to Widow Smith, and her daughter, and Elder James Lawson were
also members of the family.

On or about the 8th of September, 1846, the family, with others, were
driven out of Nauvoo by the threats of the mob, and encamped on the
banks of the Mississippi River, just below Montrose. There they were
compelled to remain two or three days, in view of their comfortable
homes just across the river, unable to travel for the want of teams,
while the men were preparing to defend the city against the attack
of the mob. They were thus under the necessity of witnessing the
commencement of the memorable "Battle of Nauvoo;" but, before the
cannonading ceased, they succeeded in moving out a few miles, away from
the dreadful sound of it, where they remained until they obtained, by
the change of property at a great sacrifice, teams and an outfit for
the journey through Iowa to the Winter Quarters of the Saints, now
Florence, Nebraska. Arriving at that point late in the Fall, they were
obliged to turn out their work animals to pick their living through
the Winter, during which some of their cattle, and eleven out of their
thirteen horses died, leaving them very destitute of teams in the
Spring.

In the Fall of 1847, Widow Smith and her brother, Joseph Fielding, made
a trip into Missouri, with two teams, to purchase provisions for the
family. Joseph, her son, accompanied them as teamster; he was then nine
years of age. The team he drove consisted of two yokes of oxen, one
yoke being young and only partially broke, which, with the fact that
the roads were very bad with the Fall rains, full of stumps in places,
sometimes hilly, and that he drove to St. Joseph, Missouri, and back, a
distance of about three hundred miles, without meeting with one serious
accident, proves that he must have been a fair teamster for a boy at
his age.

At St. Joseph they purchased corn and other necessaries, getting their
corn ground at Savannah, on their return journey. Wheat flour was
a luxury beyond their reach, and one seldom enjoyed by many of the
Latter-day Saints in those days. On their journey homeward they camped
one evening at the edge of a small prairie, or open flat, surrounded
by woods, where a large herd of cattle, on their way to market, was
being pastured for the night, and turned out their teams, as usual, to
graze. In the morning their best yoke of cattle was missing, at which
they were greatly surprised, this being the first time their cattle
had separated. Brother Fielding and Joseph at once started in search,
over the prairie, through the tall, wet grass, in the woods, far and
near, until they were almost exhausted with fatigue and hunger, and
saturated to the skin; but their search was vain. Joseph returned first
to the wagons, towards mid-day, and found his mother engaged in prayer.
Brother Fielding arrived soon after, and they sat down to breakfast,
which had long been waiting.

"Now," said Widow Smith, "while you are eating I will go down towards
the river and see if I can find the cattle."

Brother Fielding remarked, "I think it is useless for you to start out
to hunt the cattle; I have inquired of all the herdsmen and at every
house for miles, and I believe they have been driven off." Joseph
was evidently of the same opinion, still he had more faith in his
mother finding them, if they could be found, than he had either in
his uncle or himself. He knew that she had been praying to the Lord
for assistance, and he felt almost sure that the Lord would hear her
prayers. Doubtless he would have felt quite sure had he not been so
disheartened by the apparently thorough but fruitless search of the
morning. He felt, however to follow her example: he prayed that his
mother might be guided to the cattle, and exercised all the faith
he could muster, striving hard to feel confident that she would be
successful. As she was following the little stream, directly in the
course she had taken on leaving the wagons, one of the drovers rode up
on the opposite side and said, "Madam, I saw your cattle this morning
over in those woods," pointing almost directly opposite to the course
she was taking. She paid no attention to him, but passed right on. He
repeated his information; still she did not heed him. He then rode
off hurriedly, and, in a few moments, with his companions, began to
gather up their cattle and start them on the road towards St. Joseph.
She had not gone far when she came upon a small ravine filled with
tall willows and brush; but not tall enough to be seen above the high
grass of the prairie. In a dense cluster of these willows she found
the oxen so entangled in the brush, and fastened by means of withes,
that it was with great difficulty that she extricated them from their
entanglement. This was evidently the work of these honest (?) drovers,
who so hurriedly disappeared--seeing they could not turn her from her
course--perhaps in search of estray honesty, which it is to be hoped
they found.

This circumstance made an indelible impression upon the mind of the
lad, Joseph. He had witnessed many evidences of God's mercy, in answer
to prayer, before; but none that seemed to strike him so forcibly as
this. Young as he was, he realized his mother's anxiety to emigrate
with her family to the valley in the Spring, and their dependence
upon their teams to perform that journey, which, to him, seemed a
formidable, if not an impossible, undertaking in their impoverished
circumstances. It was this that made him so disheartened and sorrowful
when he feared that the cattle would never be found. Besides, it seemed
to him that he could not bear to see such a loss and disappointment
come upon his mother, whose life he had known, from his earliest
recollection, had been a life of toil and struggle for the maintenance
and welfare of her family. His joy, therefore, as he looked through
tears of gratitude to God for His kind mercy extended to the "widow and
the fatherless" may be imagined, as he ran to meet his mother driving
the oxen towards the wagons.



CHAPTER II.

Joseph was herd-boy. One bright morning sometime in the Fall of 1847,
in company with his herd-boy companions, whose names were Alden
Burdick, (almost a young man, and very sober and steady), Thomas
Burdick, cousin to Alden, about Joseph's size, but somewhat older,
and Isaac Blocksome, younger, he started out with his cattle as usual
for the herd grounds, some two miles from Winter Quarters. They had
two horses, both belonging to the Burdicks, and a pet jack belonging
to Joseph. Their herd that day comprised not only the cows and young
stock, but the work oxen, which for some cause were unemployed.

Alden proposed to take a trip on foot through the hazel, and gather
nuts for the party, and by the "lower road" meet the boys at the spring
on the herd ground, while they drove the herd by the "upper road" which
was free from brush. This arrangement just suited Joseph and Thomas,
for they were very fond of a little sport, and his absence would afford
them full scope; while his presence served as an extinguisher upon
the exuberance of their mirth. Joseph rode Alden's bay mare, a very
fine animal; Thomas, his father's black pony, and Isaac the pet Jack.
This Jack had deformed or crooked fore-legs, and was very knowing in
his way; so "Ike" and the Jack were the subjects chosen by Joseph and
Thomas for their sport. They would tickle "Jackie," and plague him, he
would kick up, stick his head down, hump up his back and run, while
Isaac struggled in vain to guide or hold him by the bridle reins, for
like the rest of his tribe he was very headstrong when abused. No harm
or even offense to Isaac was intended; but they carried their fun too
far; Isaac was offended, and returned home on foot, turning loose the
Jack with the bridle on. We will not try to excuse Joseph and Thomas in
this rudeness to Isaac, for although they were well-meaning boys, it
was no doubt very wrong to carry their frolics so far as to offend or
hurt the feelings of their playmate, and especially as he was younger
than they; but in justice to them it is fair to say they were heartily
sorry when they found they had given such sore offense.

When Joseph and Thomas arrived at the spring they set down their dinner
pails by it, mounted their horses again, and began to amuse themselves
by running short races, jumping ditches and riding about. They would
not have done this had Alden been there. They had not even done such a
thing before, although the same opportunity had not been wanting; but
for some reason--ever fond of frolic and mischief--they were more than
usually so this morning. It is said that not even a "sparrow falls to
the ground" without God's notice, is it unreasonable to suppose that He
saw these boys? And as He overrules the actions of even the wicked, and
causes their "wrath to praise Him;" would it be inconsistent to suppose
that the Lord overruled the frolics of these mischievous, but not
wicked boys on this occasion for good, perhaps for their deliverance
and salvation? We shall see.

While they were riding about and the cattle were feeding down the
little spring creek toward a point of the hill that jutted out into the
little valley about half a mile distant, the "leaders" being about half
way to it, a gang of Indians on horseback, painted, their hair daubed
with white clay, stripped to the skin, suddenly appeared from behind
the hill, whooping and charging at full speed toward them. Now, had
these boys turned out their horses, as under other circumstances they
should, and no doubt would, have done, they and the cattle would have
been an easy prey to the Indians, the boys themselves being completely
at their mercy, such mercy, as might be expected from a thieving band
of savages. In an instant, Thomas put his pony under full run for home,
crying at the top of his voice, "Indians, Indians!" At the same instant
Joseph set out at full speed for the head of the herd, with a view to
save them if possible.

He only could tell the multitude of his thoughts in that single moment.
Boy as he was, he made a desperate resolve. His mother, his brother and
sisters and their dependence upon their cattle for transportation to
the Valley in the Spring, occupied his thoughts and nerved him to meet
the Indians half-way, and risk his life to save the cattle from being
driven off by them. At the moment that he reached the foremost of the
herd, the Indians, with terrific yells reached the same spot, which
frightened the cattle so, that with the almost superhuman effort of the
little boy to head them in the right direction, and at the same time
to elude the grasp of the Indians, in an instant they were all on the
stampede towards home. Here the Indians divided, the foremost passing
by Joseph in hot pursuit of Thomas, who by this time had reached the
brow of the hill on the upper road leading to town, but he was on foot.
He had left his pony, knowing the Indians could outrun--and perhaps
would overtake him. And thinking they would be satisfied with only the
horse, and by leaving that he could make good his escape.

Joseph's horse was fleeter on foot, besides, he was determined to
sell what he had to, at the dearest possible rate. The rest of the
Indians of the first gang, about half a dozen, endeavored to capture
him; but in a miraculous manner he eluded them contriving to keep
the cattle headed in the direction of the lower road towards home,
until he reached the head of the spring. Here the Indians who pursued
Thomas--excepting the one in possession of Thomas' horse, which he had
captured and was leading away towards the point--met him, turning his
horse around the spring and down the course of the stream, the whole
gang of Indians in full chase. He could outrun them, and had he now,
freed from the herd, been in the direction of home he could have made
his escape; but as he reached a point opposite the hill from whence the
Indians came, he was met by another gang who had crossed the stream for
that purpose; again turning his horse. Making a circuit, he once more
got started towards home. His faithful animal began to lose breath and
flag. He could still, however, keep out of the reach of his pursuers;
but now the hindmost in the down race began to file in before him, as
he had turned about, by forming a platoon and veering to the right or
left in front, as he endeavored to pass, they obstructed his course,
so that those behind overtook him just as he once more reached the
spring. Riding up on either side, one Indian fiercely took him by the
right arm, another by the left leg, while a third was prepared to close
in and secure his horse. Having forced his reins from his grip, they
raised him from the saddle, slackened speed till his horse ran from
under him, then dashed him to the ground among their horses' feet while
running at great speed. He was considerably stunned by the fall, but
fortunately escaped further injury, notwithstanding, perhaps a dozen
horses passed over him. As he rose to his feet, several men were in
sight on the top of the hill, with pitchforks in their hands at the
sight of whom the Indians fled in the direction they had come. These
men had been alarmed by Thomas' cry of Indians, while on their way to
the hay fields, and reached the place in time to see Joseph's horse
captured and another incident which was rather amusing. The Jack,
which did not stampede with the cattle, had strayed off alone toward
the point of the hill, still wearing his bridle. An old Indian with
some corn in a buckskin sack was trying to catch him; but "Jackie" did
not fancy Mr. Indian, although not afraid of him, and so would wheel
from him as he would attempt to take hold of the bridle. As the men
appeared, the Indian made a desperate lunge to catch the Jack, but was
kicked over, and his corn spilt on the ground. The Indian jumped up
and took to his heels, and "Jackie" deliberately ate up his corn. By
this time the cattle were scattered off in the brush lining the lower
road, still heading towards town. The men with the pitchforks soon
disappeared from the hill continuing on to the hay-fields, and Joseph
found himself alone, affording him a good opportunity to reflect on
his escape and situation. The truth is, his own thoughts made him more
afraid than did the Indians. What if they should return to complete
their task, which he had been instrumental in so signally defeating?
They would evidently show him no mercy. They had tried to trample him
to death with their horses, and what could he do on foot and alone?
It would take him a long time to gather up the cattle, from among
the brush. The Indians might return any moment, there was nothing to
prevent them doing so. These were his thoughts; he concluded therefore
that time was precious, and that he would follow the example, now, of
Thomas, and "make tracks" for home. When he arrived the people had
gathered in the old bowery, and were busy organizing two companies,
one of foot and the other of horsemen, to pursue the Indians. All was
excitement, his mother and the family were almost distracted, supposing
he had been killed or captured by the Indians. Thomas had told the
whole story so far as he knew it, the supposition was therefore
inevitable; judge, therefore, of the happy surprise of his mother and
sisters on seeing him, not only alive, but uninjured. Their tears of
joy were even more copious than those of grief a moment before.

But Joseph's sorrow had not yet begun. He and Thomas returned with
the company of armed men on foot to hunt for the cattle, while the
horsemen were to pursue the Indians, if possible, to recover the
horses. When they arrived again at the spring no sign of the cattle
could be seen; even the dinner pails had been taken away. On looking
around, the saddle blanket from the horse Joseph rode was found near
the spring. Was this evidence that the Indians had returned as Joseph
had suspected? And had they, after all, succeeded in driving off the
cattle? These were the questions which arose. All that day did they
hunt, but in vain, to find any further trace of them; and as they
finally gave up the search and bent their weary steps towards home, all
hope of success seemingly fled. Joseph could no longer suppress the
heavy weight of grief that filled his heart, and he gave vent to it in
bitter tears, and wished he had been a man.

It is said, "calms succeed storms," "and one extreme follows another,"
etc. Certainly joy followed closely on the heels of grief more than
once this day, for when Joseph and Thomas reached home, to their
surprise and unspeakable joy, they found all their cattle safely
corraled in their yards where they had been all the afternoon. Alden,
it seems, reached the herd ground just after Joseph had left. He
found the cattle straying off in the wrong direction unherded, and he
could find no trace of the boys or horses, although he discovered the
dinner pails at the spring as usual. When he had thoroughly satisfied
himself by observations that all was not right, and perhaps something
very serious was the matter, he came to the conclusion to take the
dinner pails, gather up the cattle and go home, which he did by the
lower road, reaching home some time after the company had left by the
upper road in search of them. He of course learned the particulars of
the whole affair, and must have felt thankful that he had escaped. A
messenger was sent to notify the company of the safety of the cattle,
but for some reason he did not overtake them.

In the Spring of 1847, George Mills was fitted out with a team and went
in the company of President Young as one of the Pioneers to the Valley;
and soon, a portion of the family in the care of Brother James Lawson,
emigrated from "Winter Quarters," arriving in the Valley that Fall.

In the Spring of 1848, a tremendous effort was made by the Saints to
emigrate to the Valley on a grand scale. No one was more anxious than
Widow Smith; but to accomplish it seemed an impossibility. She still
had a large and comparatively helpless family. Her two sons, John and
Joseph, mere boys, being her only support; the men folks, as they were
called, Brothers J. Lawson and G. Mills being in the Valley with the
teams they had taken. Without teams sufficient to draw the number of
wagons necessary to haul provisions and outfit for the family, and
without means to purchase, or friends who were in circumstances to
assist, she determined to make the attempt, and trust in the Lord for
the issue. Accordingly every nerve was strained, and every available
object was brought into requisition. "Jackie" was traded off for
provisions; cows and calves were yoked up, two wagons lashed together,
and team barely sufficient to draw one was hitched on to them, and in
this manner they rolled out from Winter Quarters some time in May.
After a series of the most amusing and trying circumstances, such
as sticking in the mud, doubling teams up all the little hills and
crashing at ungovernable speed down the opposite sides, breaking wagon
tongues and reaches, upsetting, and vainly endeavoring to control wild
steers, heifers and unbroken cows, they finally succeeded in reaching
the Elk Horn, where the companies were being organized for the plains.

Here, Widow Smith reported herself to President Kimball, as having
"started for the Valley." Meantime, she had left no stone unturned or
problem untried, which promised assistance in effecting the necessary
of preparations for the journey. She had done to her utmost, and still
the way looked dark and impossible.

President Kimball consigned her to Captain ----'s fifty. The captain was
present; said he,

"Widow Smith, how many wagons have you?"

"Seven."

"How many yokes of oxen have you?"

"Four," and so many cows and calves.

"Well," says the captain, "Widow Smith, it is folly for you to start
in this manner; you never can make the journey, and if you try it, you
will be a burden upon the company the whole way. My advice to you is,
go back to Winter Quarters and wait till you can get help."

This speech aroused the indignation of Joseph, who stood by and heard
it; he thought it was poor consolation to his mother who was struggling
so hard, even against hope as it were, for her deliverance; and if he
had been a little older it is possible that he would have said some
very harsh things to the captain; but as it was, he busied himself with
his thoughts and bit his lips.

Widow Smith calmly replied, "Father ----" (he was an aged man,) "I will
beat you to the Valley and will ask no help from you either!"

This seemed to nettle the old gentleman, for he was high metal. It is
possible that he never forgot this prediction, and that it influenced
his conduct towards her more or less from that time forth as long as he
lived, and especially during the journey.

While the companies were lying at Elk Horn, Widow Smith sent back to
Winter Quarters, and by the blessing of God, succeeded in buying on
credit, and hiring for the journey, several yokes of oxen from brethren
who were not able to emigrate that year, (among these brethren one
Brother Rogers was ever gratefully remembered by the family). When
the companies were ready to start, Widow Smith and her family were
somewhat better prepared for the journey and rolled out with lighter
hearts and better prospects than favored their egress from Winter
Quarters. But Joseph often wished that his mother had been consigned
to some other company, for although everything seemed to move along
pleasantly, his ears were frequently saluted with expressions which
seemed to be prompted by feelings of disappointment and regret at his
mother's prosperity and success--expressions which, it seemed to him,
were made expressly for his ear. To this, however, he paid as little
regard as it was possible for a boy of his temperament to do. One cause
for annoyance was the fact that his mother would not permit him to
stand guard at nights the same as a man or his older brother John, when
the Captain required it. She was willing for him to herd in the day
time and do his duty in everything that seemed to her in reason could
be required of him; but, as he was only ten years of age, she did not
consider him old enough to do guard duty at nights to protect the camp
from Indians, stampedes, etc., therefore, when the captain required him
to stand guard, Widow Smith objected. He was, therefore, frequently
sneered at as being "petted by his mother," which was a sore trial to
him.



CHAPTER III.

One day the company overtook President Kimball's company, which was
traveling ahead of them; this was somewhere near the north fork of the
Platte River. Jane Wilson, who has been mentioned as being a member
of the family of Widow Smith, and as being troubled with fits, etc.,
and withal very fond of snuff, started ahead to overtake her mother,
who was in the family of Bishop N. K. Whitney, in President Kimball's
company, supposing both companies would camp together, and she could
easily return to her own camp in the evening. But, early in the
afternoon, our captain ordered a halt, and camped for that night and
the next day. This move, unfortunately, compelled poor Jane to continue
on with her mother in the preceding company.

Towards evening the captain took a position in the center of the corral
formed by the wagons, and called the company together, and then cried
out:

"Is all right in the camp? Is all right in the camp?"

Not supposing for a moment that anything was wrong, no one replied.
He repeated the question again and again, each time increasing his
vehemence, until some began to feel alarmed. Old "Uncle Tommie"
Harrington replied in good English style, "Nout's the matter wi me;
nout's the matter wi me;" and one after another replied, "Nothing is
the matter with me," until it came to Widow Smith, at which, in a
towering rage, the captain exclaimed, "All's right in the camp, and a
poor woman lost!"

Widow Smith replied, "She is not lost; she is with her mother, and as
safe as I am."

At which the captain lost all control of his temper, and fairly
screamed out, "I rebuke you, Widow Smith, in the name of the Lord!"
pouring forth a tirade of abuse upon her. Nothing would pacify him till
she proposed to send her son John ahead to find Jane. It was almost
dark, and he would doubtless have to travel until nearly midnight
before he would overtake the company; but he started, alone and
unarmed, in an unknown region, an Indian country, infested by hordes of
hungry wolves, ravenous for the dead cattle strewn here and there along
the road, which drew them in such numbers that their howlings awakened
the echoes of the night, making it hideous and disturbing the slumbers
of the camps.

That night was spent by Widow Smith in prayer and anguish for the
safety of her son; but the next day John returned all safe, and
reported that he had found Jane all right with her mother. Widow
Smith's fears for his safety, although perhaps unnecessary, were not
groundless, as his account of his night's trip proved. The wolves
growled and glared at him as he passed along, not caring even to get
out of the road for him; their eyes gleaming like balls of fire through
the darkness on every hand; but they did not molest him; still, the
task was one that would have made a timid person shudder and shrink
from its performance.

Another circumstance occurred, while camped at this place, which had
a wonderful influence, some time afterwards, upon Captain ----'s mind.
There was a party of the brethren started out on a hunting expedition
for the day. A boy, that was driving team for Widow Smith, but little
larger than Joseph, although several years his senior, accompanied
them, riding with the captain in his carriage, which they took along
to carry their game in. This boy (he is now a man, and no doubt a good
Latter-day Saint) was a very great favorite of the captain's; and
was often cited by him as a worthy example for Joseph, as he stood
guard, and was very obliging and obedient to him. During the day the
captain left him in charge of his carriage and team, while he went some
distance away in search of game, charging W---- not to leave the spot
until he returned. Soon after the captain got out of sight, W---- drove
off in pursuit of some of the brethren in another direction, and when
he overtook them, strange to say, he told a most foolish and flimsy
story, which aroused their suspicion. They charged him with falsehood,
but he unwisely stuck to his story. It was this: "Captain ---- had sent
him to tell them to drive the game down to a certain point, so that he
(the captain) might have a shot as well as they." Having done this he
started back to his post, expecting to get there, of course, before the
captain returned. But unfortunately for his good reputation with the
captain, he was too late. The captain had returned, but the carriage
was gone, not knowing the reason he doubtless became alarmed, as he
immediately started in search, instead of waiting to see if it would
return. He missed connection, and was subjected to a tedious tramp and
great anxiety, until he fell in with those brethren, who related the
strange interview they had had with W---- and the mystery was explained.
Returning again, there he found the carriage and W---- all right, looking
innocent and dutiful, little suspecting that the captain knew all,
and the storm that was about to burst upon his devoted head. But like
a thunder-clap the storm came. At first W---- affected bewilderment,
putting on an air of injured innocence, but soon gave way before the
avalanche of wrath hurled upon him. Poor fellow! he had destroyed the
captain's confidence in him, and would he ever regain it? The reader
can readily imagine this would be a difficult matter. Sometime after
this, the captain went out from camp with his carriage to gather
saleratus, and on the way overtook Joseph on foot. To Joseph's utter
astonishment, the captain stopped and invited him to ride. There was
another brother in the carriage with him. As they went along the
captain told this story, and concluded by saying, "Now, Joseph, since
W---- has betrayed my confidence so that I dare not trust him any more,
you shall take his place. I don't believe you will deceive me." Joseph,
in the best manner he possibly could, declined the honor proffered to
him.

Passing over from the Platte to the Sweetwater, the cattle suffered
extremely from the heat, the drought, and the scarcity of feed, being
compelled to browse on dry rabbit brush, sage brush, weeds and such
feed as they could find, all of which had been well picked over by
the preceding companies. Captain ----'s company being one of the last,
still keeping along, frequently in sight of, and sometimes camping with
President Kimball's company which was very large. One day as they were
moving along slowly through the hot sand and dust, the sun pouring down
with excessive heat, toward noon one of Widow Smith's best oxen laid
down in the yoke, rolled over on his side, and stiffened out his legs
spasmodically, evidently in the throes of death. The unanimous opinion
was that he was poisoned. All the hindmost teams of course stopped, the
people coming forward to know what was the matter. In a short time the
captain, who was in advance of the company, perceiving that something
was wrong, came to the spot.

Perhaps no one supposed for a moment that the ox would ever recover.
The captain's first words on seeing him, were:

"He is dead, there is no use working with him; we'll have to fix up
some way to take the Widow along, I told her she would be a burden upon
the company."

Meantime Widow Smith had been searching for a bottle of consecrated
oil in one of the wagons, and now came forward with it, and asked her
brother, Joseph Fielding, and the other brethren, to administer to
the ox, thinking the Lord would raise him up. They did so, pouring a
portion of the oil on the top of his head, between and back of the
horns, and all laid hands upon him, and one prayed, administering the
ordinance as they would have done to a human being that was sick. Can
you guess the result? In a moment he gathered his legs under him, and
at the first word arose to his feet, and traveled right off as well as
ever. He was not even unyoked from his mate. The captain, it may well
be supposed, now heartily regretted his hasty conclusions and unhappy
expressions. They had not gone very far when another and exactly
similar circumstance occurred. This time also it was one of her best
oxen, the loss of either would have effectually crippled one team,
as they had no cattle to spare. But the Lord mercifully heard their
prayers, and recognized the holy ordinance of anointing and prayer, and
the authority of the Priesthood when applied in behalf of even a poor
dumb brute! Sincere gratitude from more than one heart in that family,
went up unto the Lord that day for His visible interposition in their
behalf. At or near a place called Rattlesnake Bend, on the Sweetwater,
one of Widow Smith's oxen died of sheer old age, and consequent
poverty. He had been comparatively useless for some time, merely
carrying his end of the yoke without being of any further service in
the team; he was therefore no great loss.

At the last crossing of the Sweetwater, Widow Smith was met by James
Lawson, with a span of horses and a wagon, from the Valley. This
enabled her to unload one wagon, and send it, with the best team, back
to Winter Quarters to assist another family the next season. Elder
Joel Terry returned with the team. At this place the captain was very
unfortunate; several of his best cattle and a valuable mule laid down
and died, supposed to have been caused by eating poisonous weeds.
There was no one in the camp who did not feel a lively sympathy for
the Captain, he took it to heart very much. He was under the necessity
of obtaining help, and Widow Smith was the first to offer it to him,
but he refused to accept of it from her hands. Joseph sympathized with
him, and would gladly have done anything in his power to aid him; but
here again, it is painful to say, he repulsed his sympathy and chilled
his heart and feelings more and more by insinuating to others, in his
presence, that Widow Smith had poisoned his cattle! Saying, "Why should
my cattle, and nobody's else, die in this manner? There is more than a
chance about this. It was well planned," etc., expressly for his ear.
This last thrust was the severing blow. Joseph resolved, some day, to
demand satisfaction not only for this, but for every other indignity he
had heaped upon his mother.

On the 22nd of September, 1848, Captain--'s fifty crossed over the
"Big Mountain," when they had the first glimpse of Salt Lake Valley.
It was a beautiful day. Fleecy clouds hung round over the summits of
the highest mountains, casting their shadows down the valley beneath,
heightening, by contrast, the golden hue of the sun's rays which fell
through the openings upon the dry bunchgrass and sage-bush plains,
gilding them with fairy brightness, and making the arid desert to
seem like an enchanted spot. Every heart rejoiced and with lingering
fondness, wistfully gazed from the summit of the mountain upon the
western side of the valley revealed to view--the goal of their
wearisome journey. The ascent from the east was gradual, but long and
fatiguing for the teams; it was in the afternoon, therefore, when they
reached the top. The descent to the west was far more precipitous and
abrupt. They were obliged to rough-lock the hind wheels of the wagons,
and, as they were not needed, the forward cattle were turned loose
to be driven to the foot of the mountain or to camp, the "wheelers"
only being retained on the wagons. Desirous of shortening the next
day's journey as much as possible--as that was to bring them into the
Valley--they drove on till a late hour in the night, over very rough
roads much of the way, and skirted with oak brush and groves of trees.
They finally camped near the eastern foot of the "Little Mountain."
During this night's drive several of Widow Smith's cows--that had been
turned loose from the teams--were lost in the brush. Early next morning
John returned on horseback to hunt for them, their service in the teams
being necessary to proceed.

At an earlier hour than usual the Captain gave orders for the company
to start--knowing well the circumstances of the Widow, and that
she would be obliged to remain till John returned with the lost
cattle--accordingly the company rolled out, leaving her and her family
alone. It was fortunate that Brother James Lawson was with them, for
he knew the road, and if necessary, could pilot them down the canyon
in the night. Joseph thought of his mother's prediction at Elk Horn,
and so did the Captain, and he was determined that he would win this
point, although he had lost all the others, and prove her prediction
false. "I will beat you to the Valley, and ask no help from you
either," rang in Joseph's ears; he could not reconcile these words
with possibility, though he knew his mother always told the truth,
but how could this come true? Hours, to him, seemed like days as they
waited, hour after hour, for John to return. All this time the company
was slowly tugging away up the mountain, lifting at the wheels, geeing
and hawing, twisting along a few steps, then blocking the wheels for
the cattle to rest and take breath, now doubling a team, and now a
crowd rushing to stop a wagon, too heavy for the exhausted team, and
prevent its rolling backward down the hill, dragging the cattle along
with it. While in this condition, to heighten the distress and balk
the teams, a cloud, as it were, burst over their heads, sending down
the rain in torrents, as it seldom rains in this country, throwing the
company into utter confusion. The cattle refused to pull, would not
face the beating storm, and to save the wagons from crashing down the
mountain, upsetting, etc., they were obliged to unhitch them, and block
all the wheels. While the teamsters sought shelter, the storm drove
the cattle in every direction through the brush and into the ravines,
and into every nook they could find, so that when it subsided it was a
day's work to find them, and get them together. Meantime Widow Smith's
cattle--except those lost--were tied to the wagons, and were safe. In a
few moments after the storm, John brought up those which had been lost,
and they hitched up, making as early a start as they usually did in the
mornings, rolled up the mountain, passing the company in their confused
situation, and feeling that every tie had been sundered that bound them
to the captain, continued on to the Valley, and arrived at "Old Fort,"
about ten o'clock on the night of the 23rd of September, all well and
thankful. The next morning was Sabbath, the whole family went to the
bowery to meeting. Presidents Young and Kimball preached. This was the
first time that Joseph had ever heard them, to his recollection, in
public; and he exclaimed to himself: "These are the men of God, who
are gathering the Saints to the Valley." This was a meeting long to be
remembered by those present. President Young spoke as though he felt:
"Now, God's people are free," and the way of their deliverance had been
wrought out. That evening Captain ---- and his company arrived; dusty and
weary, too late for the excellent meetings and the day of sweet rest
enjoyed by the Widow and her family. Once more, in silver tones, rang
through Joseph's ears. "Father ----, I will beat you to the Valley, and
will ask no help from you either!" J. F. S.



A REMARKABLE LIFE.

BY "HOMESPUN".



CHAPTER I.

Many of the noblest lives have been lived in obscurity and in poverty.
Nobility and virtue are never dependent upon surroundings. And when you
have read the simple little chronicle which I am about to relate, I
think you will agree with me that even though humble and retiring, the
subject of this sketch was one of nature's own heroines.

In a little cottage in Bravon, Lees-Mersem, England, lived an old lady
named Harris. She was given to study although very meagrely educated.
She was feeble and sat a great deal of her time poring over her Bible.

One day her granddaughter came to visit her, bringing her little
daughter, Mary, with her. The old lady had been reading her Bible, and
as her daughter came in she said:

"My dear, I have been reading some of the great prophecies concerning
the last days, and I feel sure that either you or yours will live to
see many of them fulfilled."

"Not so, grandmother," answered the woman, whose name was Mrs. Dunster,
"thou wast always visionary; put by such thoughts. Our religion's good
enough for the like of us."

The old lady arose, unheeding her granddaughter's warm reply, and
placing her hands on the little girl's head, said solemnly:

"Here's Mary; she shall grow up and wander away from you all and break
her bread in different nations."

The solemnity of her great-grandmother's manner and the peculiar spirit
that accompanied the words made a vivid impression on the little girl's
mind. How well that strange prophecy has been fulfilled you and I, my
reader, can tell hereafter.

The little girl, whose name was Mary Dunster, and who was born in
Lympne, Kent, December 26, 1818, grew up and when sixteen years of age
was asked in marriage by William Chittenden, who was a laborer on an
adjoining farm. She did not feel very willing, but the young man urged
her so warmly that she hesitated before refusing him. She had always
had an irresistible desire to go to America, where many emigrants were
then going from England.

At last she consented to be his wife on one condition: that he would
take her to America. Very bravely promised the lover, but not until
forty-two years afterwards did he fulfill that promise.

After they were married they settled down to work and lived, William as
farm laborer, in Lympne for four years. Two children were born to them
in this place, Mary Ann, born June 15, 1836, and Henry, born August 18,
1838.

Four years after their marriage, at which time the introduction of
convicts into Australia was prohibited and the government of England
offered good inducement to skilled laborers to settle up the country,
William Chittenden concluded to go to Australia. Previous to this time
the English convicts, who were under life sentence, had been sent
down to Australia, landing generally at Botany Bay. These convicts
were brought down and sold as life slaves to those freeholders who
were willing and able to purchase their labor. Sometimes they escaped
from their masters and made their way into the interior of the
country. These escaped convicts herded together in small parties or
bands, and are called "bush-rangers." They have now become a powerful
tribe, fierce, vindictive and unlawful. They resemble very nearly, in
occupation and temperament, the wild Bedouins of Asia and the wild
tribes of Arabs or Berbers of northern Africa.

Between the years of 1840 and 1850, England transported many skilled
laborers and artizans to Australia to build up and colonize her
possessions in the southern seas. Numbers of the husband's countrymen
were going down to the "new country," and he resolved to go too.
Mary objected; she wanted to go to America. I think, between you
and me, that she used sometimes to remind her husband sharply of
his unfulfilled promise. But his was a calm, kind, but essentially
self-willed disposition, that listened good-naturedly to all Mary might
and did say, but was no whit moved thereby to give up his own way. And
so, after much controversy, the removal to Australia was decided upon
and accomplished.

The young couple had determined to engage a farm on shares, and so
went, immediately upon their arrival, to a country part near Botany
Bay. Here they remained a short time and then went up to Camden, which
is about one hundred miles from Sydney. William took a farm and then
commenced a long career of farming in Australia. Most of their children
were born there.

And now let me tell you something of the character of this same Mary,
ere I relate to you two strange dreams which she had while living at
Camden.

She was a medium-sized, well-built woman, with kind, gray eyes and
a pleasant but firm mouth. Her step was quick, and her manner was
full of warm-hearted simplicity. She it was who ruled the children,
administering with firm justice the rod of correction. Her husband
contented himself by controlling his wife, leaving the whole of the
remainder of the domestic regimen entirely in her hands. She was never
disobeyed by her children. But withal "father" was a tenderer name
to their large flock of girls than was "mother." But with all her
firmness, she was far too womanly to possess one grain of obstinacy.
When it was her duty to yield she could do so gracefully. With these
qualities Mary united a sound business capacity, economy, thrift
and extreme cleanliness. She was, and always has been, a remarkably
healthy woman. With these gifts she had something of the visionary or
semi-prophetic character of her great-grandmother Harris.

She has been a dreamer, and her dreams have been of a prophetic
character. Most of them require no interpretation, but are simple
forecasts, as it were, of the future.

One dream, which was indelibly impressed upon her mind, occurred to
her just before the birth of her eighth daughter, Elizabeth. It was as
follows:

She dreamed she had to travel a long way. At last she reached a stately
white building, with projecting buttresses and towers. Going up the
broad steps she entered a room filled with beautiful books. Seeing a
door ajar, she walked into the adjoining room. There sat twelve men
around a large table, and each man held a pen. They were looking up as
though awaiting some message from above. She drew back, so as not to
attract attention, when a voice said distinctly to her: "You will have
to come here to be married." The thought passed through her mind, "I
_am_ married and why, therefore, should I come here to be married?"

She went on out of the building and walked through the streets of the
city that were near the building. The streets were straight and clean,
with little streams of water running down under the shade-trees that
bordered the foot-paths. Everything was clean and beautiful to look
upon. Footbridges spanned the little streams, and the houses were clean
and comfortable. She saw just ahead of her a woman driving a cow, with
whom she felt a desire to speak, but before she could reach her, the
woman had gone in at one of the gates. She walked on, pleased with all
she saw. Raising her eyes she saw in the distance, coming to the city,
what looked like an immense flock of sheep. But as they came nearer she
saw they were people, all clothed in white raiment. They passed by and
went on to the white building. "Ah!" thought Mary, "if I was there now,
that I might know what it all meant!" But she felt compelled to go the
other way. And so the dream ended.

When she awoke she related the strange episode to her husband and told
him she believed her coming confinement would prove fatal. She thought
the beautiful place she had seen could only be in heaven, as she had
never seen anything like it upon the earth. William comforted her, but
the spirit of the dream never left her.

However her little babe was born and she resumed her household duties.



CHAPTER II.

Two years passed away, and ere they are passed let us stop a moment and
see a little of this new country which lies away on the opposite side
of the earth from America.

Australia, as you may all see, my readers, by getting out your
geographies, is in the Pacific Ocean, down in the tropics and lying
south-east of Asia. It is generally called a continent; but it looks
very small, does it not, compared to Asia or either of the Americas?
Now, look down on the south-east coast of this little continent and you
will see Botany Bay and the city of Sydney lying close together. Look a
little to the south-west of Sydney and you will find Goulburn. Camden,
which is a comparatively new town, is not marked on the old maps, lies
between Sydney and Goulburn.

This region you will find marked as the "gold region." But gold was not
discovered until 1857, eleven years after the Chittendens settled in
their new home.

The country in New South Wales is good for farming and grazing; with
the exception that it is subject to extremes of drouth and floods.
There are no high mountain ranges, and very few rivers. There is no
snow there, and the Winter season is a rainy season instead of being
cold and freezing like our Winters. There are trees in that country
which shed their bark instead of their leaves. I shall speak of these
trees and the uses to which their bark is put further on. Then, there
grows a native cherry, which has the pit on the outside, and the fruit
inside. Wouldn't that be queer?

There are many precious stones found in this country, and also
considerable gold; but the discovery of gold failed to excite William
Chittenden, or turn him from the even tenor of his way.

On the 15th of April, 1853, a son was born to the Chittendens, who was
christened William John, but who only lived a few weeks.

Some time after his death Mary dreamed that she was lying in her bed
asleep. It was, as you might say, a dream within a dream. As she lay
sleeping two men, each carrying a satchel in one hand and a cane in the
other, came to the foot of her bed. She dreamed then that she awoke
from her dream and looked earnestly at these two men; so earnestly that
their faces were indelibly fixed upon her memory. One of them held out
to her a little book.

"What is the use of my taking the book?" she thought within herself, "I
cannot read a line, for I have never learned to read." Then, after a
moment's hesitation, she thought, "Why, I can take it and my children
can read it to me." So she took the book.

One of the men said these remarkable words to her:

"We are clothed upon with power to preach to the people."

She awoke in reality then, with those strange words thrilling her with
a new power she had never felt before. She roused her husband up and
related her dream, and he replied kindly to her.

They had now been married eighteen years and Mary had borne seven girls
and two boys; neither of the two boys, however, had lived but a short
time. The farm upon which they lived had been rented, or leased, from
a large land-owner named McArthur, for twenty-one years. This McArthur
owned some thousands of acres of farming and grazing land in this
region, which was leased in farms of various proportions.

The Chittendens' farm consisted of two hundred acres, and was mostly
farming land. The terms upon which they leased it were very similar to
others in that country. For the first five years they paid sixpence an
acre. After that it was ten shillings an acre.

William put up the house in which they lived, and an odd house it was,
too. First he took a number of poles, or uprights, which he placed in
the earth at regular distances. With these he made the framework of
his house. Between these uprights were placed smaller poles. Then he
took fine willows and wove them, or turned them round the center, or
smaller pole, resting the ends on the larger poles. In and out went
these willows, something the same way as you will see willow fences
here. Then he made a thick mud and well covered the whole, inside and
out. Next came a good plaster of lime and sand, and finally all was
whitewashed. The roof was made with rafters laid across the top. Now
came in this bark about which I told you. Going up to the forests which
were found on the near hillsides, the bark was cut in the lengths
wanted at the top and bottom of the tree; then with a sharp knife split
on two sides, upon which it peeled off in thick, straight slabs. It was
then nailed on in the place of shingles, each one overlapping the under
one. Then the floor was nailed down with wooden pegs, "adzed" off and
finally smoothed with a jack-plane.

In this manner one large sitting-room, two bedrooms, a dairy and a
kitchen, detached from the main building, were built; to which was
afterwards added a long porch to the front of the house, which faced
east, the rooms all being built in a row.

Mary cooked upon a brick oven, which was built upon a little standard
just between the kitchen and the house.

Large fire-places were built in the kitchen and sitting-room. The one
in the kitchen, being big enough to take three immense logs, which
would burn steadily for a whole week.

The dairy was well furnished with pans, pails, etc.



CHAPTER III.

In 1853, William decided to take a trip up to Sydney to sell a load of
grain, bringing back with him, if he succeeded as he wished, a load of
freight for some settlement or town near his home. There was a great
demand for wheat now as many hundreds of emigrants had rushed into the
great gold country. William left the farm to be managed by his prudent
little wife and started out on his hundred mile trip. How little did he
dream of the result of this journey! On his arrival in Sydney after the
disposal of his wheat, he walked out to see an old friend named William
Andrews who lived in the suburbs of the town. Here he passed the time
until evening when Mr. Andrews remarked, "I say, Chittenden, I've got
some brothers come from America, and I am going up to see them. Would
you like to go along?"

"Oh, yes," replied William, "I didn't know you had any brothers in
America!"

And so, arm in arm, they entered the little room where several men sat
at a table, or pulpit with a strange book in their hands and strange
words upon their lips. Here William heard the sound of the everlasting
gospel for the first time.

From the first William felt the truth contained in the words of the
Elders although he knew little or nothing concerning them.

On their way home Mr. Andrews explained to him that these men were his
brothers, being brothers in the covenant of Christ.

"And Chittenden," he added, "if any of them go down your way, you'll
give them dinner and a bed, won't you, for I know you can?"

"Oh, as to that," replied William, "I wouldn't turn a beggar from my
door, if he was hungry or wanted a roof to cover him."

William procured a load of freight for a man in Goulburn (one hundred
miles further south than Camden) and started on his return trip. His
mind was often upon the things he had heard, and he wondered what it
all meant. The Elders to whom he had listened were Brothers Farnham,
Eldredge, Graham and Fleming, Brother Farnham having charge. They were
the second company of Elders ever sent to Australia.

After the departure of William Chittenden, a council was held by the
Elders and it was decided that Brothers Fleming and John Eldredge
should go up to Camden and the surrounding district. At the last
moment however, Elder Fleming was desired to remain in Sydney by
Brother Farnham and Elder Graham was sent in his place. I mention this
circumstance as it was closely connected with one of Mary's dreams.
When William reached his home, he told Mary about these strange men.

"What did you think of them William?"

"Well Mary if they don't speak the truth then I never heard it spoken."
And then he went down to Goulburn with his freight.

One lovely day in summer two dusty, tired, hungry men each with a
satchel and a walking-cane in their hands, stopped at the wide open
door of the Chittenden farm-house. And what saw Mary, when she came to
the porch? With a queer throb, she saw in her door the very man who
came to her bedside in her dream. She even noticed the low-cut vest
showing the white shirt underneath. But as he stepped inside, and her
eye fell upon his companion, she saw _he_ was not the second one of her
dream, although he too carried a cane and satchel. She invited them
within, and the first one said,

"We are come, madam, to preach the gospel."

The words, almost identical with those of her dream. Giving her their
names, he whose name was Eldredge explained to her that they traveled
up from Sydney, and in all the hundred miles, they had found no one
willing to give them food and shelter.

Mary bustled around and prepared dinner for her guests. When evening
drew near, Brother Eldredge remarked,

"Mrs Chittenden, can you let us remain here over night?"

"Oh," said Mary, "I am afraid I have no place to put you!"

"Well you can let us sit up by your fireside, and that is better than
lying on the ground as we have done lately!"

And then Mary assured them that she would do the best she could for
them. So a bed was spread out on the floor of the sitting-room, and
here the foot-sore Elders were glad to rest their bodies.

The principles and doctrines of these men fell deep into Mary's heart,
and like her husband she felt they spoke the truths of heaven.

One evening in conversation with them, Mary told Brother Eldredge
that she had seen him before in a dream. But, she added, you were
accompanied by another man, not Mr. Graham.

"Ah well, that might have been. You may have seen Brother Fleming for
he was coming with me, but Brother Farnham altered the appointments at
the last moment!"

And it proved so. When Mary afterwards saw Brother Fleming she
recognized him as the second one of her dream.

The Elders were not idle because they had found a comfortable resting
place, but traveled about seeking to get opportunities of spreading
the gospel. One family named Davis, whose farm (rented from McArthur)
joined the Chittenden's, listened with pleased interest to these new
doctrines. In the course of two weeks after the arrival of the Elders,
William Chittenden came home, and expressed a gladness in his heart to
find the Elders at his home. He immediately fixed up a bedroom near the
sitting-room for the use of the Elders. Weeks went into months, and
still the Chittendens were not baptized.

The Elders made Camden their head-quarters, but went about through
the surrounding country, meeting, however, with very little success.
William and his wife, with their oldest daughter were ready to be
baptized, as were the Davis'. But almost a year after the arrival of
the brethren was allowed to slip by without the baptisms having been
performed.

I want to stop and tell you a little about the worldly condition of
this couple, as well as mention a detail or two more about the country
they were living in before I go on with my story.

They had brought their two hundred acres under good cultivation; they
had a large fruit garden back of the house, in which grew the most
delicious peaches, plums and cherries. The country is so adapted
to fruit that peach-stones thrown out near running water would be
fruit-bearing-trees in three years. There were no apples, but such
quantities of tropical fruits. Grapes, melons, figs, lemons and oranges
were so plentiful and so cheap that William would not spend time to
grow them. A sixpence (12 cents) would buy enough of these fruits to
load a man down.

They had four horses, one wagon, a dray and a light spring cart, six
cows and many calves, plenty of pigs and droves of chickens, turkeys
and geese.

The large granary to the south of the house groaned with its wealth of
wheat corn, barley and oats.

And while I am speaking of wheat I am minded to give a description of
the way adopted to preserve wheat in that country. Mr. McArthur, the
owner of all these thousands of acres, received from his tenants a
share of the wheat grown. This he stored up as there was little or no
sale for it until drought years, when it commanded a good price.

After the three years drought which occurred there prior to 1853,
William and his wife went to this Mr. McArthur to get wheat. He had dug
a very large vault or cellar, and this had been well cemented, top,
bottom and sides. Here the wheat had been stored for twelve years when
the Chittendens went to get theirs. The wheat was perfectly sound and
sweet. Over the vault a store-house had been built, and the door to it
was near the top of the cellar.

You can see that our kind friends were well-to-do, and had every
prospect ahead for success and prosperity.

In the Spring of '54, the Davis family and the Chittendens decided to
be baptized. Rumors, and false reports had been rapidly spread about
the Latter-day Saints, and their enemies sprang up like magic. Many
sarcastic and insulting remarks were made about the "dipping" (as the
baptism was called) of the two families. Mr. McArthur was a bitter
enemy to the new sect.

One day the Davises were over to Chittenden's and remarked they were
going to be baptized the following Monday in the river near their
house. William decided to come over with his family on the same day. So
on the 24 of April 1854 William and Mary were baptized by John Eldredge
in Camden, Australia. From the moment of their baptism until now no
faltering or doubt has ever been in the hearts of these true Saints. In
the evening of the same day, the girls were all baptized by the Elders
into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

The gospel once having been received the spirit of "gathering" soon
follows. And with Mary, who had always wished to go to America, how
much more intense that spirit was now!

As she sat and listened to the Elder's description of Zion being
built up in the bleak mountains, of the pretty streets lined with
shade-trees, and watered by swift-running streamlets she turned to her
husband and told him that this must be the place of her dream.

William was a very quiet, determined man, who could not be turned from
the way he had chosen.

The days, when through the long summer evenings, they all sat and
listened to the various principles and the new and lovely doctrines
unfolded one by one, by the Elders, like the petals of a glorious
flower, were the very happiest Mary and her family ever knew. Poor
Mary! They were the light which shone over her dreary oncoming future,
sometimes brightly, sometimes faintly, but always shining over the
wretched, darksome road of the next twenty years.

One little circumstance, which will illustrate Mary's simple but
powerful faith will perhaps be worth mentioning and may strengthen some
other one's faith. Just before the birth of her eighth girl, which
occurred in the Fall after their baptism, she felt low and miserable,
scarcely sick enough to be in bed, but too ill to work. One evening
Bro. Eldredge was talking to her and said that if she had any sickness
or bodily ill, it was her privilege as it was of any member of the
Church, to call upon the Elders to administer to her, and then if she
exercised faith, it would leave her. Mary had never read a word in her
life, and so this came to her as a new and very precious truth.

"Well, Bro. Eldredge, if I can be ministered to and get well, I want to
now," said Mary.

So the ordinance was performed, and she was indeed instantly healed.
From that day for many months she never felt one moment of illness. And
she says to me to-day in her simple quaint way,

"I have never been ministered to in my life since, that I did not get
better."

Ever since the arrival of the Elders, the Chittendens had opened their
house for them to hold meetings in on Sundays. No other place had ever
been obtained, so that the meetings of the Saints, or those who were
friendly to them, were still held in Mary's cosy sitting-room.

On the 1st of Nov. 1854, Mary had another daughter whom they named
Alice. In two weeks she was up and able to be about the house. The
Sunday on which the baby was two weeks old, the family had taken
dinner, the things had been washed and set away, and all sat in the
dining or sitting-room talking of gathering to Zion.

They had eight girls now, and it would take quite a sum of money to
emigrate them all to Utah. So thinking to increase their means a
trifle, Mary had taken a little motherless boy, about seven years old,
his father paying a certain amount a week for his board. This was money
and they would never miss his board as they raised everything which
they consumed. This little boy was very troublesome and mischievous. He
was very fond of playing out in the hired men's bedroom which was over
the granary.

On the Sunday of which I am speaking, he was out in the men's room, and
there found some matches. He thought he'd have some rare fun then, so
out he ran, matches in hand, and made what he called a "pretty fire,"
right down close to the pig pens. He watched it burn up, quietly at
first, and then--whew!--here is a jolly little breeze catches up the
flame, and carries it bravely up right on to the roof of the pig-pen.
Then how it did sputter, and crackle, and leap. The boy was old enough
to see by that time, that something more than a bit of mischief would
grow out of that tiny flame. It spread over the pens like a living
thing. Frightened now, he sped away, down to the nearest farm-house,
running in and shouting to the gentleman, Mr. Root who lived there, "I
didn't set the pig-styes on fire; I struck a match, and it blowed."

Mr. Root hitched up his horse to his water-budge, a cask on wheels
which he carried water from a lake near the Chittendens' house,
and started on the run for the scene of the boy's wickedness. The
Chittendens saw him pass their door running to the lagoon or lake.
"I'll declare," said Mary, "is Mr. Root going for water on Sunday? I
never knew him to do such a thing before!"

Just then Eliza ran in and said, "Father, the shed is full of smoke."

She had been down to gather eggs from the shed.

The barn, pig-styes, cow sheds, granary, poultry houses and stacks were
all at the back of the house and about six rods away.

At last, William got up to go down to the shed to see what was the
matter.

When he looked out of the back door, what a sight met his eyes--the
whole yard in flames! Others had seen the fire, for the farm-house
faced the public-road, and people were all passing there on their road
to Chapel. But no one except Mr. Root ever offered a hand of help.

"Oh," said they, "it's those d--d Mormons, let them burn up and go to
h--."

The whole family rushed down to the fire and tried to stop its progress
but all to no avail. The pigs could not be driven out, and were
literally roasted alive. The barn, sheds, pens and every combustible
thing went down before the relentless flames. Farm implements of every
description, even the grain to the amount of hundreds of bushels, were
burned. The flames swept towards the house. Then how they worked.
Everything movable was got out, and the roof was torn off; and the men
commenced pouring water on the walls to save them.

"Alas for the rarity of Christian charity." If a few brave men had
given help when the fire was first discovered, much might have been
saved. But when it was all over, and Bro. Eldredge and William had
thrown themselves on the ground completely exhausted, and the only
Christian who had helped them, Mr. Root, had gone home in the same
condition, Mary sat outdoors with a few of her household goods broken
and scattered around her, her two weeks' old babe wailing in her arms,
and all that was left of their comfortable home, the empty, blackened,
smoking walls of the house looming up in twilight fast falling around
her! Hundreds of cart loads of burnt grain were carted away for the
next few days and buried. How many bright hopes and happy plans were
buried at the same time, only the future would tell! The roof was
speedily put on again, and things inside made as comfortable as might
be.

Bro. Eldredge still advised going out to Utah with what means they
could scrape up, but William would only shake his head despondently and
say, "I don't see how I can do it."

Mary urged all she dared, for she knew the Elders were about to leave
for home. It was no use. The only answer she got was, "not now, Mary,
not now."

He found an opportunity about that time of going up into the country a
hundred miles with some freight. While he was away a gentleman came to
the farm-house and wished to buy the goodwill of the farm.

You will remember William had rented it for twenty-one years. About
fourteen years of the lease had expired. The improvements, etc.,
always went with the lease. So when this gentleman offered to pay
three hundred pounds ($1,400) for the remainder of the lease, or the
"good-will," as it is termed in that country, Mary thought it a very
fortunate thing.

The loss by fire had exceeded three hundred and fifty pounds, or about
sixteen or seventeen hundred dollars of our money; and Mary thought if
she could sell the lease of the farm, then they could sell what stock
and personal property was left them, that making perhaps another two
hundred pounds, which might get them all to America. So she sold it;
knowing, however, that the bargain would not be legal unless ratified
by her husband. She hoped, though, that he would see things as she did.
When William reached home Mary told him what she had done.

"Humph; I suppose you know it's of no use unless I give my word, too?"

"Oh, yes," said Mary, sorry to know her husband was so annoyed, "you
can, of course, upset it all."

Then she explained all her hopes and plans to him. How they could
raise five hundred and fifty pounds, and then they could surely get to
America with that tidy sum. "And you know, too, you promised years ago
to take me to America."

"And reach there," objected William, "with a big family of little
children, and not a shilling to buy 'em bread with. Nice plan, that!"

In vain she argued and plead. William was not to be moved. No one could
blame him for not being guided by his wife's advice. Albeit she was a
prudent, far-seeing, wise little woman, whose advice had always been
proved to be of the best; still the man leads the woman, not woman the
man.

But when Brothers Eldredge and Graham counseled him to return with
them, it was quite a different matter. They were over him in the
Priesthood and had a right to his obedience, even as he exacted
obedience from his wife and family. However he still refused, simply
saying, "I don't see how I can go just now, Brother Eldredge!"

And so the time passed on, and the Elders left Australia without the
Chittendens. The Davis family, who were baptized at the same time as
was William and his wife, accompanied the Elders, and part of the same
family are now residing in Minersville, Utah.

Here then was the grand mistake of William's life. He did not see it
then, nor for years after, but the time came when he wished in the
agony of his soul that he had gone to Utah when told to do so, even
if he had reached there without one penny to buy a crust of bread on
his arrival! Their girls were all with them and unmarried and they
could have brought their family unbroken to Utah. But instead of that
twenty-three years after they came with the merest remnant of their
once large family, leaving almost all their loved ones behind them, and
married to enemies of this work.

Is not this a grand lesson for our young Elders? How easy it is to
fancy that our own wisdom, especially about our private affairs, is
better than any one's else! But when the voice of God speaks through
His servants and says, "Do thou so!" woe to the man who turns from that
and works out his own will in direct opposition. Let this sink deep
into your hearts, my young readers, and remember always, God knoweth
best!



CHAPTER IV.

Although William was annoyed at the step his wife had taken, he
concluded to let matters go as they were. However, much to Mary's
chagrin, he took a farm close by, and tried to make another start.
Nothing seemed to go right.

On the 24th of July, 1850, Mary gave birth to another daughter, to whom
they gave the name of Rachel. The next year another company of Elders
came down from Utah under the leadership of Brother Stewart. These
also made their stopping place, while in that part of the country, at
the home of the Chittendens. But if the Elders met with little success
during their former mission, this time seemed a complete failure. No
one could be found to give them a moment's hearing. One Brother Doudle
came up near Camden, and used every endeavor to gain a foot-hold.
Instead of kindness he met with cruelty; and in place of bread they
threw him a stone. For two days he traveled and could find neither a
place to sit down, a crust to eat nor a thing to drink.

When he got back to the Chittendens, he walked wearily in, and Mary's
daughter, Jane, bustled around to get him something to eat. "No," said
he, "don't cook me a thing. I want nothing but a piece of bread and a
drink of water."

She hastily set what he required before him, and after he had eaten he
said, "Sister Jane, you shall receive the blessing for this. I have not
broken my fast since I left your house until now. I have had to sleep
out under the forest trees. I am now fully satisfied there is no place
to be had to hold meeting. I thought as I was leaving the city, shall I
shake the dust off my feet as a testimony against this people? No, no;
I will leave it all in the hands of God!"

The bitter prejudice of people around Camden grew worse and worse. At
last the word went out that all the missionaries were to return to Utah
immediately. This was in 1857, when Johnson's army was advancing upon
Utah.

Before leaving Camden, the Elders prophesied openly that trouble should
fall heavily upon the people who had refused them even a hearing. From
that time until the "Mormon" missionaries returned and opened the door
of mercy, there was not one stalk of grain raised in the whole district
of Camden, and people had been unable to obtain a living.

With what earnest prayers did Mary seek to persuade her husband to go
along too! And the Elders counseled him to return with them. But no,
he could not feel to go with his helpless family and have little or
nothing to support them when he arrived in America. So the last Elder
bade them good-by and turned away from their door. Alas! eighteen years
passed away before they ever heard another Elder's voice.

William was like his wife, unable to read one word, and all that he
knew of this gospel had been taught him orally by the missionaries. He
was also very young in the faith, and had not learned the great lesson
of obedience nor dreamed its mighty weight in this Church. For this
reason God was merciful to him, and did not deprive him of the light
of the gospel, but taught him the painful but necessary lesson through
much and long tribulation. And his children, although scattered and
living most of them in Australia, retain the love of the truth in their
hearts.

After the Elders had been recalled, Mary commenced to feel a great
brooding darkness settle down over her. In the day she could throw
it off, but when night closed her labors and laid her at rest, the
darkness would fold around her like a garment. She was anything but
a nervous, imaginative woman, and this terrible darkness grew into
something tangible to her husband as well as to herself. At last he
listened to her and decided to once more sell out and get away.

Two more girls were born to Mary before leaving Camden vicinity. One,
Caroline, was born May 10, 1858, the other, Louisa, was born June 25,
1860. Mary had then eleven girls, her two sons having died in infancy.
The older girls were very much disappointed that neither of the last
two were boys. Especially was this the case when Louisa was born;
their chagrin being expressed so loudly that it reached their mother's
ears. She was a trifle disappointed herself, but when she heard their
comments she was really sad and cast down. The feeling could not be
shaken off until the next day; when as she lay dozing, a voice plainly
said to her: "You shall have a son, and he shall grow up and be a great
comfort to you in your old age." As usual she related the circumstance
to her husband and he fully believed in it. He thought he would try
"sluicing" for gold in some of the mining camps. The process called
"sluicing gold," or washing it, is as follows: A box about a foot wide
and two feet long, is fitted with several little boards or slats, about
an inch high, across the bottom. This is to make the water ripple
over. Into this box the sand is shoveled, and the water washes away
the dirt leaving tiny nuggets of gold in the bottom of the box. This
is of course in the regions where gold is found plentifully. Rocks are
broken up and shoveled in, and often are richer than the sand. But this
"sluicing" process is a slow one, so much of the finer portions of gold
being washed away. If quicksilver was used to gather the tiny shining
metal, it would prove much more profitable, but quicksilver itself is
expensive.

So William sold out, and they started up to a place called Lemon Flat
in the early Spring of '61. All of a sudden severe rains set in; the
country was flooded, and the soft soil became actually impassable.
Insomuch so that the family were obliged to relinquish the idea of
going to Lemon Flat and turned aside to go to another mining camp
called Gunderoo.

While going to Gunderoo the day they reached the outskirts of the town,
was a very tiresome one for all. Mary had a light, one-seated carriage,
a great deal like the one horse delivery carts in Salt Lake City.
She often got out and walked for exercise. In the latter part of the
afternoon, the wagon, followed by the girls and their father, walking,
pushed ahead to reach the summit of the hills overlooking Gunderoo,
or the "gap" as it was called, there to pitch their tents and prepare
supper.

Mary, walking near the cart, began to feel a curious weakness creep
over her. No pain, only a weakness in every joint. Alarmed at the
long absence of their mother, two of the oldest girls hurried back,
and found her seated by the roadside unable to proceed another step.
They assisted her to rise, and half carried her up the hill to the
tents. She whispered to them to put her in bed in the cart where she
always slept. They did so. But she grew weaker and weaker. She would
faint entirely away, then slowly come back, and wonder feebly what was
the matter, and why they all stood around so. Then faint away again,
and so on all night. At last Jane remembered her mother had a little
consecrated oil packed away, and she searched among the boxes till she
found it. They administered to her then, and she revived some. But
begged to be taken away from that place.

Her husband felt she might die if he did not comply with her wish, so
they started immediately for Yass river. They were traveling along,
when Mary's horse gave out. She was obliged then to wait for her
husband to return, and get her. She felt much better, and thought she
could get out and walk about a little. So she directed the young man
who drove her cart to let down the shafts. She got out, but the moment
she went to rest her feet on the ground, she fell to the earth. The
young man assisted her into the cart again, and then for three months
she never stood upon her feet. There was no pain whatever, only an
extreme weakness.

While camping on the Yass river the next evening, Mary had a dream
which when related sounds like the history of her life for the
following twenty years; so true is it in every particular.

She dreamed that she saw herself and her family, traveling, struggling
and trying to get a start again. Everything seemed to go against her
husband. Sickness came, and she saw herself the only one able to be out
of bed. Deadly sickness too, but she was promised that there should
be no death. Things seemed to grow blacker and blacker. At last,
starvation approached and she saw them all without a morsel of food to
eat; everything sold for food, even their clothes. Then when the last
remnant of property had been taken from them, the tide turned. She
was told they should at last go to Goulburn, where they would break
land, and prosperity should once more visit them, and that they should
finally reach Zion. The dream was terrible in its reality. She awoke
trembling and sobbing, and awaking her husband she told him she had
been having a fearful dream.

"I would rather," she added, "have my head severed from my body this
minute, than go through what I have dreamed this night."

"Well, wife," answered William, "let us hope it is nothing but a dream."

She related it to him, but he felt too confident in his own strength to
believe such a dream as that. It gradually faded from Mary's mind as
such things will do, but now and then some circumstance would recall it
to her mind with all the vividness of reality.

While camping on the Yass, a stranger came to William and asked him
for his daughter Maria, who was then only fourteen years old. William
replied that Maria was nothing but a child, and he was an utter
stranger, so he could not for a moment think of consenting. Three
nights after this, the man stole the girl away, and when morning came
and the father discovered the loss, he was almost frantic with grief.
He was a most devoted and affectionate father, and he was fairly beside
himself with his daughter's disappearance. He spent money like water.
Advertised, went from place to place, searched and hired others to
search with him, for the missing girl. It was of no use. She was never
found.

While searching for her four of his horses wandered away, and only one
ever returned. Then, finally giving up in despair, he hired horses and
went to Yass city. Arriving there William obtained work for a man named
Gallager, at putting up a barn.

They had been settled but a short time when the baby was prostrated
with colonial fever. Mary did all she could, but the child grew worse.
Four months went by and still there was no improvement. At last Mary
persuaded her husband to get a doctor. The doctor came and told the
mother there was one chance in a hundred of the baby's life. No signs
of life seemed left in the little body, but he ordered her to put a
strong mustard poultice over the stomach. "If it raises a blister,"
said he, "she will live. If not, she is dead."

Into Mary's mind there suddenly flashed her dream. "Sickness, but no
death." Well, then, her baby should live.

A short time after the doctor's departure, Mrs. Gallager, a neighbor,
came into the tent, and said, "Mrs. Chittenden, let me hold the child."

"No, Mrs. Gallager, thank you, I would rather hold her."

The woman bustled about and got a tea-kettle of water upon the stove.

"What are you doing," asked Mary.

"Getting a bit of hot water. The child is dead, so we will want some
water hot."

"She will not die, Mrs. Gallager. She is going to live."

"Why, woman, she is dead now! Her finger nails are black!"

"No, she is not dead," persisted the mother. Who knows the great power
and faith of a mother?

Within a few hours the child's breathing became audible. Her recovery
was very slow. And while she still lay weak and ill, William was
stricken down by the same complaint. He grew rapidly worse. He too
lay ill for several months. He was in a very critical condition, but
whenever able to speak he would tell Mary not to bring a doctor, for
he should recover without one. The turn for the better came at last,
and as soon as he was able to get about a little, they determined to
go to Lemon Flat. Their first idea in going to Lemon Flat had been
to homestead, or "free select" land, as it is called in Australia.
However, they were far too poor now to do this, so William got odd jobs
to do. He scraped all he could together, and bought a horse for fifteen
pounds. But shortly afterwards, he heard of one of his lost animals
about eighteen miles up the country, so he made a trip up to find the
animal. Arriving at the place, he heard that a Chinaman had just gone
to another camp, on the horse. That night he tethered his horse out,
and next morning at daybreak went out as usual for him, and behold, he,
too, had disappeared, not leaving a track of a hoof to guide anyone
in a search for him. So William was at last obliged to trudge wearily
home, eighteen miles, carrying his saddle on his back.

And thus one year dragged heavily by. While here Jane was married to
John Carter, and Ellen to a Grecian man named Nicolas Carco. Also, just
as they were leaving Lemon Flat, Eliza married a Mr. Griffin.

Now they determined to go once more to Gunderoo to try what could be
done there. The reason why William wished to go to Gunderoo was, that
no matter what came or went, wages could be made by a man in "sluicing
gold." Now the family were almost destitute. After their arrival in
Lemon, and for months, most of the children lay sick with the colonial
fever.



CHAPTER V.

Between three or four years had passed since they left Camden (over
eight years since the last missionary left Australia), and the
Chittendens were much poorer than they were when they left.

For many years Mary had been in the habit of going about to her
neighbors, nursing them during confinement. This was a necessity of the
country, one woman going to another, as there were no regular nurses to
be had. She became acquainted in her labors with a Doctor Haley, the
best physician in Goulburn. He always, after the first time when she
nursed under him, sent for her. This practice put many an odd pound
into her pocket. Her husband was far from idle, however. With his
disposition he could never be so. He took charge of the estate of a
gentleman named Massy, who was absent in Ireland for eighteen months on
business.

As soon as he was released from this situation, where he had earned
some money and a good portion of grain, he rented a farm. With anxious
hope and honest labor he seeded down twenty acres with the grain he had
on hand.

He who sendeth the rains, withholdeth them at His pleasure! For two
years there was a complete drouth visited the country. William walked
over his field and could not, at the end of the season, pluck one
single armful of grain.

While living in this place the promised son was born to Mary, and once
again her prophetic dream was realized. He was born May 28, 1865,
and William named him Hyrum. When the baby was two years old, little
Alice came home from school, and said she felt very sick. As long as
there was a second penny in the house, no matter where they were, or
what their circumstances, these good parents had kept their children
at school. Without education themselves, no effort was spared to give
their children the great blessing they had so missed.

Alice came home, quite sick at her stomach, and her mother felt alarmed
at once, for her children were regularly and simply fed, and when
anything of the kind happened to them she knew it was of an uncommon
and serious nature.

Jane had returned to her mother's house, while her husband was up the
country on a mining expedition. She had a young baby eleven months old.

When the doctor came next day he pronounced Alice's case one of the
most violent scarlet fever. Next day Jane and Rachel came down, and
the next day Louisa and Caroline fell ill with the dreadful disease.
Jane had the fever so violently that Mary was obliged to wean the baby.
Everyone in the family was now ill but herself, and she with a baby
two weeks old. For eleven long weeks the anxious mother never had her
clothes off, but to change them. The disease was of such a violent
type that not one human being had courage or had humanity enough to
enter the door. Alone and utterly unaided she went from one bedside to
another administering food and medicine. The physician was the only one
who ever visited her, and at the times when he came (twice a day) to
attend to them, she would sit down long enough to take up her infant
and give it the breast.

Three months of sickness, toil and suffering, then the fever spent
itself, and Mary could begin to realize their condition financially.
Something must be done, for funds were very, very low.

There was a sudden excitement about this time at a place called Mack's
Reef, which was three miles from Gunderoo. Gold was found in quartz,
and was very rich indeed, at this new camp. William decided to go. So
investing their last cent to purchase a simple crushing-mill, and to
take themselves out, the Chittendens went to Mack's Reef.

Misfortune was too well acquainted with them now to be driven away, so
she curled herself up in the crushing-mill, and behold it failed to do
its work. It lost both the gold and the quicksilver.

Matters were now getting desperate. Food was wanted. Strain and
economize as she might, Mary could not make things hold out much
longer. The pennies followed the shillings, until when the last
half-penny had to be taken for flour, William looked at Mary and said,
"Mary, what are we coming to? Must our children starve?"

"No, William, please God! But do you remember my dream? You may not
believe it, but I know it was a true dream. Oh, William, why did we not
go to Zion when we were told? Surely our sufferings could not be more
than they are here. Here, take these clothes, they are things that I
can spare; you will have to sell them for bread."

And so it went. Garment followed garment, and yet there seemed no
chance of earning a penny. Finally, there were no more clothes;
everything was sold.

Then William took his gun, and went to the woods. But after a very
short time that, too, failed and they were starving.

That night, when the little children were put hungry to bed, William
walked the floor in the agony of his mind. "My God!" groaned the
wretched man, "must my children starve before my very eyes? In my pride
I fancied my family would be better in my hands than in the hands of
their Almighty Father! Oh, that I had listened to counsel! Now my
family are fast leaving my roof, and we that are left are starving.
Starving in a land of plenty!"

God listened to the prayers of His humbled son, and he was enabled to
get a little something to eat. But the lesson was not over yet.

Mary had obtained a situation as nurse and this helped them. William
thought he would go up to Goulburn, a large inland town, where he felt
sure he would find some employment. Accordingly he left the family with
Mary, but of course in very wretched circumstances. It was the best
that he could do, so Mary was satisfied to be left.

The trip to Goulburn was made in the old spring cart, which had been
left of the wreck of their comfortable traveling outfit. The horse,
which William had just found previous to starting, was one of the four
he had lost on the Yass river. The poor thing had been so abused that
it was almost worthless. In fact, it had no money value, for in that
country where good stock was comparatively cheap he had tried again
and again before leaving Mack's Reef to sell the horse and the cart,
or either alone, in order to get flour for his starving family, but no
purchaser could be found.

So he went up to Goulburn and took odd jobs as he could get them. When
he had been gone some few months, a company of prospecters brought in
a new machine to crush the quartz. This fanned the dead embers of hope
in every one's breast, and even Mary thought if she could get William
to come down and try his quartz in this new mill, they would succeed at
last.

But how to get word to him? He was at Goulburn, eighteen miles away.
There was no mail, and she had not a vestige of anything to pay for
sending word to him. She was very weak too from lack of food. But every
one around her was so confident of the grand success about to be made,
that she resolved to try to walk up to Goulburn. Accordingly, she set
out leaving the baby at home with the girls, and walked feebly towards
Goulburn. She was about half-way there when she came to a river. This
was forded by teams, but across it had been thrown a plank, and a
poor one it was, too. Mary looked at the foaming water, and then at
the rotten plank, and felt it would be an impossibility almost to go
across. Still, she must get over, so she started; but she had only got
a little way out before her head began to reel, she was weak and faint,
and about to fall, when she had sense remaining to lay flat down on the
plank, and wait for strength. As she prayed for strength and help she
heard a horse's hoofs behind her, and a gentleman on horseback dashed
into the stream. He rode up to her and said,

"Madam, permit me to help you. Let me take your hand and I will ride
close by the board, and thus get you across all right."

"Oh sir, you are very kind," answered Mary as she arose thanking God
that He had heard her prayer.

"Where are you going, madam? Pardon me, I do not ask from idle
curiosity."

"To Goulburn, sir to my husband."

"I was wondering as I came along, to see a woman on this lonely road.
You surely do not expect to reach Goulburn to-night?"

"I thought sir, I would go as far as I could, then lie down and rest
until I could go further."

"Well my poor woman, good-by! and success attend you on your journey."

"Many thanks, kind sir, may God reward your kind act." And so he rode
on.

Mary went on some distance, and began to feel that she could go no
farther. Suddenly she saw a woman approaching her. Wondering, the two
women at last met, and the stranger said to Mary,

"Are you the woman a gentleman on horseback assisted across the river?"

"Yes ma'am."

"Then you are to come with me. He has paid us for your supper and
lodging to-night. Also, he paid me to come out and meet you and show
you the way."

"Thank God! I am almost worn out. What was the gentleman's name,
please?"

"That I can't tell. But here's our house. Come, get your supper, it is
waiting."

And thus was her humble prayer answered, and a friend raised up to her
in her sore need.

The next day Mary reached Goulburn, and she and her husband returned
the following day in the cart, to Mack's Reef. But after reaching
the Reef, William found it would require quite a sum of money to do
anything with his quartz, so at last abandoning everything, he left the
Reef in disgust. The poor old horse died shortly after that, and thus
they only had the cart remaining. The harvest time was approaching,
and William had the rent to pay on the farm he had taken, and which
had failed so dismally. So he went to the owner and offered to harvest
out the amount. The offer was accepted, and he went harvesting the
remainder of the season.

Meantime, Mary had been sent for, to nurse a lady who lived a few miles
out from Gunderoo. So, not liking to lose so good an opportunity of
making a bit of money, she weaned her ten month's old baby, and left
him at home with the girls. She was engaged for a month, receiving a
pound a week, about twenty dollars a month, for her services.

When she returned, she found her husband at home. "You know, William,
I told you my dream would surely be fulfilled. Are you not willing to
admit that so far it has come true every word?"

"Well yes, Mary, but what then?"

"Then, in my dream we were to lose everything before the turn would
come, and we should commence to prosper. We've nothing left now but the
spring cart. Give that, as it is too poor to sell, to Isaac Norris.
Then let us go to Goulburn, and once more try farming. You know we must
break land there."

"Thou art like a woman. If we part with the cart, how, pray, shall we
get to Goulburn." "Why, William, have I not brought home four pounds?
That will move us to Goulburn. Come husband, let us get away from
here." At length William consented; the spring cart was given to their
son-in-law, Isaac Norris, and the whole family moved up to Goulburn.
Their daughter Alice was soon after married to a Mr. Larkum, and had
one child named Lavinia by him. The girl was treated very badly, and at
last gave the child to her mother to raise. Mary has never since been
separated from this child, but has reared her as her own. Four or five
years passed away, William farming and Mary nursing at times. William
did the farming for a widow lady named Day, who kept a lodging-house
about four miles out from Goulburn. She was a very fine, active,
kind-hearted woman, and for the next ten years, was a true friend to
the Chittendens. In fact, the best friend they ever had in Australia.
Mary used often to go up to her house, when not out nursing, for a
week at a time to assist the widow with her work. Goulburn is a very
large, handsome, inland town in Australia, situated in the midst of a
rich farming district. On one side of the town, away to the left, was
a large hill, covered with fine timber. The Chittendens had rented a
small house about four miles out from Goulburn.

About five years after their coming to Goulburn, Mary had another
dream. A personage came to her and began talking to her of her affairs.
This personage said to her among other things:

"You shall take a farm, on the opposite side of the road to where you
now live. And, after, you shall prosper exceedingly. Then you shall
take money, constantly, from this side of the road, and you shall be
blessed, insomuch that you shall soon go to Zion thereafter." When she
awoke, she told the dream to her husband. Shortly after this a rumor
reached them that a certain man named Grimson was about to give up
his farm, which he rented from a gentleman named Gibson. This surely
must be the place of her dream, for was it not across the road from
them? And so she talked to her husband about the matter. But he had no
sympathy nor hope to give her on the subject.

"Mary how can you think of such a thing? What could I do with a farm? I
haven't a tool nor an animal to use. It is impossible. So don't talk of
it."

But Mary was far from satisfied. However, she knew her husband too well
to urge the matter, when he spoke as he had done. And further, in a
very short time after the farm was vacated, it was re-let to another
person. Mary was thus forced to give it up. A month or so slipped by,
and one night Mary dreamed the same dream, in relation to the farm
across the road. She thought, however, she would not mention it to her
husband. In a week or so, they again heard the farm was to let, as the
family was dissatisfied. Then Mary made bold to tell her husband of the
repetition of the dream, and beg him to try and take it.

"Why do you keep urging me about that farm, Mary? I have not one thing
to do with. I tell you it is impossible."

And again disappointed, Mary thought she would say no more about
the matter. That day she was going up to spend a week at Mrs. Day's
assisting her in her housework and cleaning. After she arrived there,
she prepared breakfast, and she and Mrs. Day sat down to eat. As they
were talking, Mrs. Day said, "Why doesn't Mr. Chittenden take that farm
of Gibson's? I hear it is again vacant. He is a good farmer, and could
easily attend to that as well as look after mine."

"He would like to do so, no doubt, but he thinks he could not on
account of having nothing to do with, no teams nor machines, nor in
fact anything."

"Well, if that's where the trouble lies, I'll tell you what I'll do. He
shall have the use of my horses and plows and all the farm machines for
nothing, and I will furnish him seed grain for the first year, and he
can let me have it back after he gets a start."

"Oh Mrs. Day, you are too good to us."

"Not a bit of it. I would do more than that to keep you in the country.
You know that I could not possibly live without your help," replied the
lady, laughingly.

Mary could hardly contain herself for joy. And when night came, she
begged to be allowed to go home that night, as she could not wait a
whole week before telling her husband the good news.

Accordingly she hurried home that night and told her husband what Mrs.
Day had said.

"Mary," said William, "if Mrs. Day tells me the same as she tells you,
I'll take Gibson's farm."

So early the next morning they started on their errand. The farm house
opposite them was vacant, and as they passed Mary asked herself,
tremblingly, if they should be sufficiently blessed to live there. Mrs.
Day greeted them very kindly and told them they were just in time for
breakfast.

"Thank you, Mrs. Day; but Mary has been telling me you spoke to her
about our taking Gibson's farm."

"So I did, Chittenden; and I tell you if you'll take the farm, keeping
mine too, mind, you shall have the use of my team, wagon and farm
implements. Besides, I will lend you your seed grain for the first
year, and you can return it afterwards."

"Well, Mrs. Day, if you are so kind as that, all I can do is to thank
you and accept the offer. I will go right on to Mr. Gibson at once and
make the bargain."

Mr. Gibson was quite pleased to have William take the farm. That same
week the family moved across the road, and Mary felt like a new woman.

During all these fifteen years you may be sure Mary and William had
often talked of the religion that was so dear to both. Their daughters,
although they had, perforce, married those outside the Church, were
staunch "Mormons," and are to this day.

One day William met Mr. Gibson who said, "I have been thinking,
William, you can open a gate on the other side of the road, opposite
your own door, and make a bit of a road to the woods, and you can take
toll from the gate. You know you live on the public turnpike from
Goulburn, and this toll road would be a good thing to the Goulburn
people."

"How much could you allow me, sir?"

"Five shillings from every pound. Then your children could attend the
gate."

"Very well, I will do so, and am very grateful to you for the
privilege."

"Well, mother," said William soon after, as he entered the house, "your
money is coming from the other side of the road."

And when he had laughingly told her how, she said she felt more like
crying than laughing, she was so grateful to God.



CHAPTER VI.

The story of prosperity is so much easier to tell, and in truth is so
much shorter than the tale of adversity and suffering, that we may
well hasten over the remaining five years of their waiting in that
far-distant land.

Everything prospered. But about the second year William's health
commenced to break down. Gradually he became more and more incapable of
work, until at last, one day, he came in and throwing himself down, he
exclaimed, "Mary, I have done my last day's work." It was even so. But
God did not fail them.

In 1875, two men came up to the door, and asked for food and shelter.
When they announced themselves as Elders from Utah, Mary's hands were
outstretched and her heart filled with great joy, even as her eyes ran
over with happy tears.

The Elders were Jacob Miller of Farmington, and David Cluff of Provo,
since dead. A month or two afterwards, Elder Charles Burton and John M.
Young of Salt Lake City, also were warmly welcomed at the farm.

William's illness was Bright's disease of the kidneys, and he was
slowly dying.

They left Sydney on the 7th of April, 1877, for Utah, six souls in all,
William and Mary, their children Caroline, Louise and Hyrum, with the
one grandchild, Lavinia.

On their arrival they went at once to Provo. William had much more to
bear of poverty and suffering, than any one could have dreamed, even
after their arrival here. Mary went out washing to eke out their store,
(they had barely ten dollars left,) and the two girls got positions in
the factory.

Within a year, Caroline married Eleazer Jones, and Louisa married
Abraham Wild. The last named couple live near their mother now.

Caroline has moved with her husband to Arizona. Mary's eldest daughter,
Mary Ann Mayberry, also came with her husband and family to Utah in
1879.

I would not linger if I could on the severe suffering, and painful
death of William, just twelve months from the day they left home.

When the sad day came on which he left them all, in spite of his awful
agony, he called his only boy Hyrum, who was then thirteen years old,
and stretching out the thin, wasted hands he blessed him fervently, and
said, "You are going to be a good boy to your mother, I think?"

"Yes, father, I will," answered the lad, manfully.

"My boy, I can do nothing, no work in the Temple for her, nor for
myself; I have got to go."

"If you have got to go, father," tremblingly said the boy, "I will do
all that lies in my power."

"Remember mother, Hyrum, she has been good to us, and worked hard for
us all her days." Then again he blessed him, and soon the peaceful end
came, and the poor aching frame was at rest.

A year or two of hard, constant work at the wash tub passed away, and
one night the personage who had visited Mary before came to her in a
dream and said:

"Mary, the time has now come for you to go and do the work for
yourself and your husband. If you will go, you shall soon have a home
afterwards."

Here was a command and a promise. Hyrum had shot up and was a tall,
quiet-mannered young man, and had gone out on a surveying expedition,
carrying chains for the men, to earn some money. His great ambition was
to get a home for his mother.

On his return from the surveying expedition he put nearly $100.00 into
his mother's hands. A day or two after he said, "Mother I would like to
go down to St. George and do Father's work; you know I promised him to
do it as soon as I could, and this is the first money I have ever had.
I am sixteen years old, and if the Bishop thinks I am worthy, I would
like to go."

Mary quickly told her dream, which she had hesitated mentioning,
fearing he would not like it, but he believed it.

"Mother, I will go this very night," he said when she had concluded her
story, "and see what the Bishop says."

So down he went, and Bishop Booth very willingly told him to go, and he
felt pleased to give the necessary recommends.

They went and had a most glorious time, and on her return Mary went to
washing again. But mark! In less than one year from that time they had
bargained for a place, and got two little rooms built upon it.

If you come to Provo, go and see dear old Sister Chittenden; she is
sixty-six years old, and quite a hearty, happy little woman yet.

She meditatively pushes aside her neat, black lace cap from her ear,
with her finger, as I ask what to say to you in farewell, and with mild
but tearful eyes, says:

"Tell them for me, always to be obedient to the counsel of those who
are over them; and obey the whisperings of God, trusting to Him for the
result! And then, God bless them all! Amen."



A HEROINE OF HAUN'S MILL MASSACRE.

The name of Sister Amanda, or Mrs. Warren Smith, is well known to the
Latter-day Saints. She has had a most eventful life, and the terrible
tragedy of Haun's Mill, in Caldwell county, when her husband and son
were killed, and another son wounded, have made her name familiar to
all who have read the history of the mobbings and drivings in the State
of Missouri. Mrs. Smith was born in Becket, Birkshire Co., Mass., Feb.
22, 1809. Her parents were Ezekiel and Fanny Barnes; she was one of a
family of ten children. Her grandfather, on her mother's side, James
Johnson, came from Scotland in an early day, and in the revolutionary
war held the office of general; he was a great and brave man. Sister
Smith says that her father left Massachusetts when she was quite young
and went up to Ohio, and settled in Amherst, Lorain county, where the
family endured all the privations and hardships incident to a new
country. The following is her own narrative:

"At eighteen years of age I was married to Warren Smith; we had plenty
of this world's goods and lived comfortable and happily together,
nothing of particular interest transpiring until Sidney Rigdon and
Orson Hyde came to our neighborhood preaching Campbellism. I was
converted and baptized by Sidney Rigdon; my husband did not like it,
yet gave his permission. I was at that time the mother of two children.
Soon after my conversion to the Campbellite faith, Simeon D. Carter
came preaching the everlasting gospel, and on the 1st day of April,
1831, he baptized me into the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, of which I have ever since been a member. My husband was
baptized shortly after and we were united in our faith.

"We sold out our property in Amherst and went to Kirtland, and bought
a place west of the Temple, on the Chagrin river, where we enjoyed
ourselves in the society of the Saints, but after the failure of the
Kirtland bank and other troubles in that place, in consequence of our
enemies, we lost all our property except enough to fit up teams, etc.,
to take us to Missouri. We started in the Spring of 1838, and bade
farewell to the land of our fathers and our home to go and dwell with
the Saints in what then seemed a far-off place.

"There were several families of us and we traveled on without much
difficulty until we came to Caldwell county, Missouri. One day as we
were going on as usual, minding our own business, we were stopped by a
mob of armed men, who told us if we went another step they would kill
us all. They commenced plundering, taking our guns from our wagons,
which we had brought, as we were going into a new country, and after
thus robbing us took us back five miles, placed a guard around us, and
kept us there in that way three days, and then let us go. We journeyed
on ten miles further, though our hearts were heavy and we knew not what
might happen next. Then we arrived at a little town of about eight or
ten houses, a grist and saw mill belonging to the Saints. We stopped
there to camp for the night. A little before sunset a mob of three
hundred armed men came upon us. Our brethren halloed for the women and
children to run for the woods, while they (the men) ran into an old
blacksmith shop.

"They feared, if men, women and children were in one place, the mob
would rush upon them and kill them all together. The mob fired before
the women had time to start from the camp. The men took off their hats
and swung them and cried for quarter, until they were shot down; the
mob paid no attention to their entreaties, but fired alternately. I
took my little girls (my boys I could not find) and ran for the woods.
The mob encircled us on all sides, excepting the bank of the creek, so
I ran down the bank and crossed the mill pond on a plank, ran up the
hill on the other side into the bushes; and the bullets whistled by me
like hailstones, and cut down the bushes on all sides of me. One girl
was wounded by my side, and she fell over a log; her clothes happened
to hang over the log in sight of the mob, and they fired at them,
supposing that it was her body, and after all was still our people cut
out of that log twenty bullets.

"When the mob had done firing they began to howl, and one would have
thought a horde of demons had escaped from the lower regions. They
plundered our goods, what we had left, they took possession of our
horses and wagons, and drove away, howling like so many demons. After
they had gone I came down to behold the awful scene of slaughter, and,
oh! what a horrible sight! My husband and one of my sons, ten years
old, lay lifeless upon the ground, and another son, six years old,
wounded and bleeding, his hip all shot to pieces; and the ground all
around was covered with the dead and dying. Three little boys had crept
under the blacksmith's bellows; one of them received three wounds; he
lived three weeks, suffering all the time incessantly, and at last
died. He was not mine, the other two were mine. One of whom had his
brains all shot out, the other his hip shot to pieces." This last was
Alma Smith, who lives at Coalville, and who still carries the bullets
of the mob in his body, but was healed by the power of God through
the careful nursing and earnest faith of his mother. "My husband was
nearly stripped of his clothes before he was quite dead; he had on a
new pair of calf-skin boots, and they were taken off him by one whom
they designated as Bill Mann, who afterward made his brags that he
'pulled a d--d Mormon's boots off his feet while he was kicking.'
It was at sunset when the mob left and we crawled back to see and
comprehend the extent of our misery. The very dogs seemed filled with
rage, howling over their dead masters, and the cattle caught the scent
of innocent blood, and bellowed. A dozen helpless widows grieving for
the loss of their husbands, and thirty or forty orphaned or fatherless
children were screaming and crying for their fathers, who lay cold and
insensible around them. The groans of the wounded and dying rent the
air. All this combined was enough to melt the heart of anything but a
Missouri mobocrat. There were fifteen killed and ten wounded, two of
whom died the next day."

"As I returned from the woods, where I had fled for safety, to the
scene of slaughter, I found the sister who started with me lying in a
pool of blood. She had fainted, but was only shot through the hand.
Further on was Father McBride, an aged, white-haired revolutionary
soldier; his murderer had literally cut him to pieces with an old
corn-cutter. His hands had been split down when he raised them in
supplication for mercy. Then one of the mob cleft open his head with
the same weapon, and the veteran who had fought for the freedom of
his country in the glorious days of the past, was numbered with the
martyrs. My eldest son, Willard, took my wounded boy upon his back
and bore him to our tent. The entire hip bone, joint and all were
shot away. We laid little Alma upon our bed and examined the wound. I
was among the dead and dying: I knew not what to do. I was there all
that long dreadful night with my dead and my wounded, and none but
God as physician and help. I knew not but at any moment the mob might
return to complete their dreadful work. In the extremity of my agony
I cried unto the Lord, 'O, Thou who hearest the prayers of the widow
and fatherless, what shall I do? Thou knowest my inexperience, Thou
seest my poor, wounded boy, what shall I do? Heavenly Father, direct
me!' And I was directed as if by a voice speaking to me. Our fire was
smouldering; we had been burning the shaggy bark of hickory logs. The
voice told me to take those ashes and make a solution, then saturate a
cloth with it and put it right into the wound. It was painful, but my
little boy was too near dead to heed the pain much. Again and again I
saturated the cloth and put it into the hole from which the hip joint
had been plowed out, and each time mashed flesh and splinters of bone
came away with the cloth, and the wound became white and clean. I had
obeyed the voice that directed me, and having done this, prayed again
to the Lord to be instructed further; and was answered as distinctly
as though a physician had been standing by speaking to me. A slippery
elm tree was near by, and I was told to make a poultice of the roots of
the slippery elm and fill the wound with it. My boy Willard procured
the slippery elm from the roots of the tree; I made the poultice and
applied it. The wound was so large it took a quarter of a yard of linen
to cover it. After I had properly dressed the wound, I found vent to
my feelings in tears for the first time, and resigned myself to the
anguish of the hour. All through the night I heard the groans of the
sufferers, and once in the dark we groped our way over the heap of dead
in the blacksmith shop, to try to soothe the wants of those who had
been mortally wounded, and who lay so helpless among the slain.

"Next morning Brother Joseph Young came to the scene of bloodshed and
massacre. 'What shall be done with the dead?' he asked. There was no
time to bury them, the mob was coming on us; there were no men left to
dig the graves. 'Do anything, Brother Joseph,' I said, 'except to leave
their bodies to the fiends who have killed them.' Close by was a deep,
dry well. Into this the bodies were hurried, sixteen or seventeen in
number. No burial service, no customary rites could be performed. All
were thrown into the well except my murdered boy, Sardius. When Brother
Young was assisting to carry him on a board to the well, he laid down
the corpse and declared he could not throw that boy into the horrible,
dark, cold grave. He could not perform the last office for one so young
and interesting, who had been so foully murdered, and so my martyred
son was left unburied. 'Oh, they have left my Sardius unburied in the
sun,' I cried, and ran and covered his body with a sheet. He lay there
until the next day, and then I, his own mother, horrible to relate,
assisted by his elder brother, Willard, went back and threw him into
this rude vault with the others, and covered them as well as we could
with straw and earth.

"After disposing of the dead the best that we could, we commended
their bodies to God and felt that He would take care of them, and of
those whose lives were spared. I had plenty to do to take care of my
little orphaned children, and could not stop to think or dwell upon
the awful occurrence. My poor, wounded boy demanded constant care, and
for three months I never left him night or day. The next day the mob
came back and told us we must leave the State, or they would kill us
all. It was cold weather; they had taken away our horses and robbed us
of our clothing; the men who had survived the massacre were wounded;
our people in other parts of the State were passing through similar
persecutions, and we knew not what to do.

"I told them they might kill me and my children in welcome. They sent
to us messages from time to time, that if we did not leave the State
they would come and make a breakfast of us. We sisters used to have
little prayer meetings, and we had mighty faith; the power of God was
manifested in the healing of the sick and wounded. The mob told us we
must stop these meetings, if we did not they would kill every man,
woman and child. We were quiet and did not trouble anyone. We got our
own wood, we did our own milling, but in spite of all our efforts to be
at peace, they would not allow us to remain in the State of Missouri.
I arranged everything, fixed up my poor, wounded boy, and on the first
day of February started, without any money, on my journey towards the
State of Illinois; I drove my own team and slept out of doors. I had
four small children, and we suffered much from cold, hunger and fatigue.

"I once asked one of the mob what they intended when they came upon our
camp; he answered they intended to 'kill everything that breathed.' I
felt the loss of my husband greatly, but rejoiced that he died a martyr
to the cause of truth. He went full of faith and in hope of a glorious
resurrection. As for myself I had unshaken confidence in God through it
all.

"In the year 1839 I married again, to a man bearing the same name
as my deceased husband (Warren Smith), though they were not in the
least related. He was also a blacksmith and our circumstances were
prosperous. By this marriage I had three children. Amanda Malvina, who
died in Nauvoo; also Warren Barnes and Sarah Marinda, who are still
living, the former at American Fork and is counselor to the Bishop, the
latter at Hyde Park.

"I enjoyed the privilege of seeing the Temple finished, and of
receiving therein the blessing of holy ordinances. Willard, my
first-born son, also had his endowments in that Temple, and came out
among the first who left there; was one of the Mormon Battalion, who
were called to go to Mexico while we were _en route_ to find a resting
place for the Saints. Willard is now, and has been for several years
past, President of Morgan Stake."

During the time they lived in Nauvoo, President Joseph organized a
Relief Society. Sister Smith became a member of its first organization
and greatly rejoiced in the benevolent work; much good was accomplished
by it.

In July, 1847, they started from Nauvoo intending to go with the Saints
to the Rocky Mountains, but for the want of sufficient means for so
long a journey they were compelled to stop in Iowa. They remained until
the year 1850, when they took up their line of march for Salt Lake
City, arriving on the 18th of September, safe and well. Shortly after
arriving in this city, her husband, who had been for some time dilatory
in his duties, apostatized from the faith, and they separated. She took
the children with her and provided for herself.

On the 24th of January, 1854, a number of ladies met together to
consider the importance of organizing a society for the purpose of
making clothes for the Indians and other charitable work, which was
properly organized Feb. 9th. Sister Smith was one of the officers of
the society, which resulted in much temporal good being accomplished.

In consequence of the many hardships she endured through the
persecutions in Missouri which were heaped upon her and her family by
a relentless mob, her health was undermined, and as years increased,
infirmities settled upon her which rendered her unable to retain the
position she had held in the Relief Society. She was honorably released
and will ever be remembered by the Bishop and his counselors and the
members of the Ward for her benevolence and self-denial in ministering
to the unfortunate.

Sister Smith has much to rejoice over even in her present affliction,
for she has raised her family in the principles of the gospel of Christ
and the fear of God, and they remain true and steadfast to the faith
of the latter-day work. A good woman, who has reared to manhood and
womanhood a large family almost without a father's help, is certainly
worthy of commendation and must have great satisfaction in her life and
labor. She has been for more than fifty years a member of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

There are very few now living who have a record of more than half a
century in the Church. Sister Smith has endeared herself to a very
large number of the Latter-day Saints, who are ever ready to do her
honor for her faith, integrity and the many estimable qualities which
have beautified and adorned her life.

Her testimony of the massacre at Haun's mill, in Missouri, is that of
an eye witness and participator. Indeed she might with all propriety
be termed the heroine of that fearful tragedy, for her sublimity of
courage surpassed that of ordinary mortals. God was with her in His
power in her hour of severe trouble and she was indeed a host in
herself. In conclusion we would say may heaven's choicest blessings
rest upon her the remainder of her days here upon the earth, and her
heart be filled with joy and peace continually and may she continue
to bear a faithful testimony to the truth, and live until she has
accomplished all she has ever anticipated for the living and the dead.
E. B. W.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Heroines of Mormondom, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HEROINES OF MORMONDOM ***

***** This file should be named 51097.txt or 51097.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/0/9/51097/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project
(http://mormontextsproject.org), with thanks to Rachel
Helps and Villate Brown McKitrick for proofreading.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

