The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Thirty-Ninth Regiment Massachusetts
Volunteers, 1862-1865, by Alfred S. (Alfred Seelye) Roe


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Thirty-Ninth Regiment Massachusetts Volunteers, 1862-1865


Author: Alfred S. (Alfred Seelye) Roe



Release Date: February 19, 2016  [eBook #51250]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THIRTY-NINTH REGIMENT
MASSACHUSETTS VOLUNTEERS, 1862-1865***


E-text prepared by Christopher Wright and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 51250-h.htm or 51250-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/51250/51250-h/51250-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/51250/51250-h.zip)


      Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/cu31924030906915


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Text in the Index enclosed by equal signs is in bold
      face (=bold=).





[Illustration: COLONEL P. STEARNS DAVIS]


THE THIRTY-NINTH REGIMENT MASSACHUSETTS VOLUNTEERS
1862-1865

by

ALFRED S. ROE

A Veteran of the Civil War

Regimental Committee on History
John H. Dusseault, Chairman
J. Fred. Leslie, Secretary
Geo. F. Moses, Treasurer
John F. Locke
Wm. P. Brown[A]
Milton F. Roberts
Channing Whittaker[A]







[Illustration]

Published by the
Regimental Veteran Association
Worcester, Massachusetts
1914

Copyright, 1914, by
Thirty-Ninth Regiment
Veteran Association

The Commonwealth Press
Worcester, Mass.




CONTENTS

      PREFACE                                                          1
      BATTLES IN WHICH THE THIRTY-NINTH BORE A PART                    6
      IN THE BEGINNING                                                 7
      LYNNFIELD                                                       11
      COMPANY A                                                       12
      COMPANY B.                                                      13
      COMPANY C.                                                      14
      COMPANY D.                                                      15
      COMPANY E.                                                      16
      COMPANY G.                                                      17
      COMPANY H.                                                      19
      COMPANY I.                                                      20
      COMPANY K.                                                      22
      BOXFORD                                                         24
      BOXFORD TO WASHINGTON.                                          26
      POTOMAC CROSSED.                                                31
      ON THE MARCH.                                                   34
      PICKET DUTY.                                                    38
      STUART'S RAID.                                                  40
      MOVING AGAIN                                                    43
      OFFUTT'S CROSS ROADS                                            47
      POOLESVILLE                                                     52
      1863                                                            56
      A RAINY MARCH                                                   65
      WASHINGTON.                                                     68
      JOINING THE POTOMAC ARMY                                        80
      AT THE FRONT                                                    83
      IN VIRGINIA                                                     89
      FIRST ARMY CORPS.                                               94
      FIRST ANNIVERSARY.                                             102
      THE RAPIDAN.                                                   106
      A BACKWARD MOVE                                                110
      CAMPAIGN OF MANEUVERS.                                         113
      BRANDY STATION                                                 124
      MINE RUN                                                       126
      TOWARDS WINTER QUARTERS                                        133
      MITCHELL'S STATION                                             136
      1864                                                           137
      MASONIC LODGE                                                  145
      MITCHELL'S STATION AND THE SCHOOL IN CAMP                      146
      STILL IN CAMP.                                                 150
      THE WILDERNESS                                                 161
      THE BATTLE OF THE WILDERNESS By Channing Whittaker             172
      SPOTTSYLVANIA                                                  178
      NORTH ANNA RIVER                                               204
      COLD HARBOR                                                    209
      TOWARDS THE JAMES RIVER                                        215
      PETERSBURG                                                     219
      1865.                                                          269
      IN REBEL PRISONS.                                              296
      CORPORAL F. A. GLINES' DIARY.                                  299
      CORPORAL JOHN E. HORTON'S DIARY.                               303
      FROM DIARY OF CORPORAL EDWARD H. LEWIS, CO. B.                 306
      JOHN F. LOCKE'S RECOLLECTIONS.                                 308
      SERGT. MAJOR C. K. CONN                                        317
      J. F. LESLIE'S RUSE                                            318
      CORPORAL CHARLES H. BARNES' STORY.                             319
      REGIMENTAL VETERAN ASSOCIATION                                 322
      REGIMENTAL ROSTER                                              330
      FIELD AND STAFF COLONELS                                       333
      LIEUTENANT COLONELS                                            335
      MAJORS                                                         336
      ADJUTANTS                                                      337
      QUARTERMASTER                                                  337
      SURGEONS                                                       338
      ASSISTANT SURGEONS                                             338
      CHAPLAIN                                                       338
      NON-COMMISSIONED STAFF                                         339
      COMPANY A                                                      340
      COMPANY B                                                      353
      COMPANY C                                                      365
      COMPANY D.                                                     378
      COMPANY E                                                      389
      COMPANY F                                                      401
      COMPANY G                                                      414
      COMPANY H                                                      425
      COMPANY I                                                      436
      COMPANY K                                                      449
      TABLE OF AGGREGATES.                                           466
      INDEX                                                          467




PREFACE


More than fifty years after the organization of the Thirty-ninth
Regiment and its departure for the seat of war, its printed history
makes its appearance. The long delay has not arisen from any lack of
desire for its preparation, nor on account of want of material. For
many long years it was supposed that the recital was in preparation,
but the comrade to whom the task was intrusted went away into the other
world before its completion, and survivors of the Regiment began to
wonder if their story of long marches, fierce fighting and unspeakable
suffering in Rebel prisons ever would be told. At the annual reunion of
the Veteran Association in 1911 it was voted to proceed with the long
cherished proposition, and a committee was appointed to carry out the
proposal; after two years and a half the survivors of that committee
present this volume to the patient waiters among the living veterans
and to the families and descendants of those who have made the final
crossing.

Readers of the book should bear in mind that it is very far from being
a history of the war, nor does it discuss campaigns and battles in
their entirety; on the contrary every effort has been made to describe
the part borne by the Regiment in said campaigns and engagements.
Long shelves in the large libraries of the country are already laden
with great volumes descriptive of the War of the Rebellion as a whole
and of detached portions thereof; as many more have been written
of eminent individual experience, like the recollections of Grant,
Sherman, Sheridan on the Union side and of Beauregard, Johnston
and Longstreet among the Confederates, but the story of the great
struggle will not be fully told until that of every regiment finds its
way into print. Regimental histories occupy a golden mean between
the comprehensiveness of the general history and the minuteness of
individual records.

Massachusetts veterans can not be too grateful that the Commonwealth in
its wisdom, a number of years ago, offered to assist in the preparation
and publication of regimental histories by the purchase of five hundred
copies of the same, under certain conditions of size and contents. In
this manner and otherwise, more than one-half of the organizations
of the Bay State which participated in the effort to maintain the
Union have been written and it is hoped that the generosity of the
Commonwealth and the courage of the veterans will continue until every
regiment, battery and battalion will have been adequately described.
While those who made the history are rapidly passing over the divide
'twixt life and death, and personal recollections are more difficult to
obtain, yet their stories are not written so much, at this late date,
from word of mouth as from letters, diaries and jottings made at the
time and now are carefully preserved either by the writers or those to
whom they have passed as precious legacies.

A history like this of the Thirty-ninth represents many letters written
to veterans or to their surviving families in the effort to secure for
transcription whatever note the soldier may have made in camp, field
or prison-pen, bearing on the period in which the writer wore the
blue. In several cases, through fear of losing the precious documents,
friends of deceased soldiers have declined to lend them for use; of
course it is too late to secure them for utility in this instance but,
for the sake of other efforts in this direction, let us hope that
those people possessing any written observations on the trying times
of 1861-'65 will freely proffer their employment by those interested
in their permanent preservation. It is a lamentable fact that many
papers prepared under the fire of the enemy or, at least, in that
indefinite region known as the "Front," have disappeared through the
extra diligence of careful housekeepers and the general dislike of "old
things lying 'round."

While many months in the earlier portions of the service of the
Thirty-ninth were devoted to drill and thorough preparation, including
a prolonged stay in the city of Washington, yet the call to the field,
soon after Gettysburg, was so obeyed that before the seal of Appomattox
was set upon the fate of the Confederacy, Colonel Davis' men had proved
beyond any chance for cavil that they were of the same stuff that had
rallied so readily at Concord and Lexington; had bled in the streets
of Baltimore and, on the decks of the Constitution and the Monitor,
had shown the world what was meant by resistance to tyranny. Its first
officer was killed at the front; the third mortally wounded, and the
second so severely injured that his life was long despaired of and
seemingly was saved as by a miracle. At the Weldon R. R., on the 19th
of August, 1864, so completely was the Regiment swept off the field,
through no fault of its own, its organization was nearly lost, and the
deaths in the prisons of the South of these victims exceeded those of
all other Massachusetts Infantry Regiments with a single exception.

In seeking printed data for condensation in this narrative the
committee was rewarded in finding in the Fourth Volume of the Printed
Papers of the Massachusetts Military Historical Society a very
clear and interesting description of the "Operations of the Army of
the Potomac, May 7-11, 1864" by Brevet Brigadier-General Charles
Lawrence Peirson, the universally loved and respected Colonel of the
Thirty-ninth, and from his observations liberal abstracts have been
made for the edification of readers of this history. In the same volume
also are found papers by Captain Charles H. Porter, Companies D and A
of the Regiment, and always so active in the councils of the Veteran
Association, who discusses the "Opening of the Campaign of 1864" and
the "Battle of Cold Harbor," valuable in considering the parts taken
in those incidents by the Regiment in which he served. Access also has
been had to typewritten papers on the part borne by the Fifth Corps in
the last three days of March, '65, and "The Fifth Corps at Five Forks"
also prepared by Captain Porter and which have proved of great utility
in this compilation.

Naturally, the papers of General Peirson and Captain Porter are of a
general character, somewhat removed from the individual, but quite the
reverse is found in the well preserved accounts of company experience
as presented in contributions to the Woburn Journal by Albert P.
Barrett of Co. K, to the Medford Mercury by John S. Beck of "C" and in
the monograph of Lieut. John H. Dusseault of Company E. Unfortunately,
the spirited story, as told by the Woburn scribe, goes no further than
the Mine Run campaign, leaving the reader longing for a continuation
of his glowing recital; Diarist Beck returns his comrades, those who
survived, to their home-town, while the Somerville chronicler, whose
observations are clear and instructive up to the date of his wound and
consequent invalidism is compelled to end his direct comments on that
direful August day of '64 at the Weldon R. R. However, whether general
or specific, extended or condensed, the readers of the history owe much
to the careful annalist of those trying days of the early sixties.

Thanks are due the survivors who by their answers to circular letters
rendered possible the exceedingly full roster, wherein are found the
individual records whence must be drawn in coming years the facts for
those seeking admission to patriotic organizations on the strength of
ancestral service in preserving the Union. It is a source of regret
that data could not be obtained for extending the descriptive list
of every name in the Regiment. Especially are thanks due to General
Peirson for his unflagging interest in the work of preparation and
for his generosity in helping on the undertaking. The committee
representing the Veteran Association is entitled to the thanks of all
concerned for its careful attention to details, for the time given
to rehearsals of the story as it progressed and for its unfailing
willingness and promptness in assisting in every possible manner. At
the same time it is impossible to suppress the regrets that inevitably
rise over the seemingly untimely deaths of comrades Brown and
Whittaker. Possibly no one had been more prominent than the first named
in laying out the work and securing data for the story, but he was
called away in the very midst of the preparation; Comrade Whittaker
entered into the scheme with all the zeal and ardor so characteristic
of his intense nature, and died, as it were, pen in hand, inditing the
story of the terrible opening of The Battle Summer as he remembered it.

Thanks also should be rendered to the Brothers Mentzer and Mitchell
of "A" for anecdotes and incidents; to Geo. V. Shedd and Edward H.
Lewis of "B" for the use of their diaries; to the family of the late
John S. Beck of "C" for the loan of his well preserved diary, and to
M. F. Roberts for other Company C facts; to the widow of Captain C.
H. Porter, "D" and "A," for the use of his scrapbook, manuscripts
and other data; to Lieut. J. H. Dusseault, "E," for his accurate and
interesting account of the Somerville Company; to the family of John
E. Horton for his painstaking diary; and to Ex-mayor Edward Glines,
Somerville, for the use of the carefully kept diary of his brother
Frederick A.; to Lieut. Jas. E. Seaver, secretary of the Old Colony
Historical Society, Taunton, for valuable data concerning Company F,
its officers and men; to Lieut. Chas. H. Chapman and Sergt. J. H.
Prouty, "G," for facts concerning that company; to George Monk, "H,"
for his brother Robert's diary; to Lieut. H. F. Felch, W. H. Garfield
and the Hon. H. C. Mulligan, son of Lieut. Simon Mulligan, for facts
pertaining to Company I; and to the family of A. P. Barrett, "K,"
for the scrapbook having his letters to the Woburn Journal; George
E. Fowle, Abijah Thompson and Capt. E. F. Wyer (Fifth M. V. M.)
for Company K data and incidents; to all those whose journals and
recollections rendered possible the unexcelled accounts of prison
experiences. Finally, all concerned unite in thanks to the ever
efficient and courteous corps of officers and assistants in the office
of the adjutant-general at the State House for favors there extended.

  Worcester, December, 1913        ALFRED S. ROE.

FOOTNOTES:

[A] DECEASED




BATTLES IN WHICH THE THIRTY-NINTH BORE A PART


1863

  MINE RUN, November 28


1864

  WILDERNESS, May 5-7
  SPOTTSYLVANIA (Alsop's Farm and Laurel Hill), May 8-18
  NORTH ANNA RIVER, May 23
  COLD HARBOR, June 1-11
  PETERSBURG, June 17-August 17
  WELDON R. R., August 18-19


1865

  HATCHER'S RUN or DABNEY'S MILLS, February 6
  GRAVELLY RUN or WHITE OAK ROAD, March 31
  FIVE FORKS, April 1

      SURRENDER AT APPOMATTOX,
               April 9




IN THE BEGINNING


While patriotism never flagged for a moment, and the determination
to maintain the Union at all hazards was still as strong as ever, it
must be confessed that the midsummer military outlook in 1862 was not
altogether inspiring for the Nation. Whatever hopes had been raised
by the success of Burnside in North Carolina, by Grant's campaign in
Tennessee, and through the occupation of New Orleans by the combined
forces of Butler and Farragut, they had been more than offset by the
failure of McClellan's efforts on the peninsula and the unfruitful
outcome of Halleck's movement against Corinth. An army that had
displayed prodigies of valor from Fair Oaks to Malvern Hill, now
catching its breath on the banks of the James River, and an enemy
leisurely departing from the depot which Halleck had thought thoroughly
invested, were bitter morsels for Northern people who had been led to
expect the capture of Richmond and a like fate for the rebel forces
which had fallen back from Shiloh.

The slopes of Malvern were still red with the blood of fallen heroes
when President Lincoln, on the 4th of July, 1862, startled the nation
with a call for three hundred thousand additional troops. The land was
rapidly becoming one vast armed camp; Massachusetts already had sent
nearly or quite fifty thousand men into the army and navy, out of her
population of less than one and a half million people, but before the
year was done, the aggregate was swollen to more than eighty thousand.
Out of the great number called for, the assignment to Massachusetts
was fifteen thousand and, on the seventh of the month, Governor Andrew
formally presented the demand to the people of the Commonwealth.
Hitherto, there had been no regular apportionment, each division of
the state having been ready and anxious to aid in filling whatever
quota might be required. In this case there was a clear statement of
what each city and town, from Abington to Yarmouth would be expected to
do.

Concerning the number called for, the president in a private telegram
to Governor Morgan of New York said, "It was thought safest to mark
high enough. I should not want the half of 300,000 new troops if I
could have them now. If I had 50,000 additional troops here now, I
believe I could substantially close the war in two weeks. But time is
everything; and if I get 50,000 new men in a month I shall have lost
20,000 old ones during the same month, having gained only 30,000 with
the difference between old and new troops still against me. The quicker
you send, the less you will have to send. Time is everything, please
act in view of this." All this time, it must be remembered, Governor
Andrew, in a mild way, was criticising the National Administration for
its failure to liberate the slaves and for not imposing upon them many
of the hardships borne by the regularly enlisted men.

Nor were the needs of the Government satisfied with the demand of July
4th, however large it may have seemed, for, while the entire loyal
North was putting forth every possible effort to secure the required
enlistments there came from Washington, on the 4th of August, another
call for troops, this time also demanding three hundred thousand men,
just as though there were a never-ending source of supply. This call
was accompanied by the possibility of a draft, that most dreaded of
all methods for securing reinforcements, provided the volunteers did
not appear within a certain limited period; the apportionment, 19,080
men, it will be observed was more than a fourth larger than that in
the preceding call, an excess explained on the basis that the total
number, 34,080, bore the same proportion to the 600,000, the sum of the
two calls, that the free population of Massachusetts did to the free
population in the states that had shown themselves loyal to the Union,
and were supporting the Government in the struggle.

A very prominent question in the emergency was just how should the
newly enlisted men be placed; should they be added to regiments already
in the field or should new organizations be made for their reception?
Excellent arguments were offered on both sides; the question had been
discussed from the very moment that battles or disease had begun
making gaps in the ranks. When Mayor Isaac Davis, after the disastrous
engagement of Ball's Bluff, telegraphed to Colonel Charles Devens, of
the Fifteenth Massachusetts Infantry, asking what Worcester could do
for the regiment, the subsequently distinguished officer replied, "Send
us three hundred and ten men to fill our gaps; also a blanket and a
pair of mittens for each of us; that will do for the present." The good
mayor found it much easier to supply the woolen requirements than the
men, who, for certain reasons, were unwilling to enter an old regiment
where promotion would inevitably go to those who had been in the ranks
longest, and soldiering without the possibilities of promotion is dull
business.

Those who have considered carefully the subject of war, its progress
and development, have, in many cases, taken occasion to censure some
of the Northern States, and especially Massachusetts, forgetful of the
fact that local feelings and a confidence in leaders whom the men know
go a long way in imparting confidence to the citizen soldier. Governor
John A. Andrew would have filled the old regiments, rather than form
new ones, and to the newly formed organizations he would have given
experienced officers instead of those elected by the men, but the
latter would not have it so. In this connection that great man is said
to have exclaimed, "Julius Caesar himself couldn't raise a company for
an old regiment as long as there is a shoemaker left to make a captain
of." The town system, so prominent a feature in New England life,
had much to do with the fellow-feeling in companies and when these
different companies, representing as many townships, all belonged
to the same county, seemingly little was left to be desired in the
background of the organization.

The numbering of Massachusetts Infantry organizations had already
mounted to thirty before the call of the President in July, 1862.
Recruiting was very active, notwithstanding the horrors of war, so
graphically set forth in the daily press. Meetings to stimulate
enlistments were held throughout the Commonwealth, becoming a daily
occurrence in the City of Boston, where her historic buildings and
public places resounded with eloquence in behalf of the Union and
its preservation. Points of rendezvous were provided at Pittsfield,
Worcester, Lynnfield, Readville, and other places for regiments, while
Camp Cameron at North Cambridge was reserved for recruits to the
older organizations. Within two months from the issuing of Governor
Andrew's Order Number 26[B], dated July 7th, more than four thousand
men had been enlisted and sent forward to old regiments, nine new
ones had been raised and equipped, and eight of them had been sent
forward to strengthen the hands of the Government. So diligently had
the governor and his assistants labored, the dreaded draft was averted
and, long before the first snowfall, the last of the great demand upon
Massachusetts for the sons whom she had reared for other purposes, had
gone southward, gun in hand, following the flag.

Sometimes regiments were raised by officers commissioned for this
purpose; in other cases companies were raised in cities or large
towns which, when full, were sent forward to the nearest rendezvous
and, when a sufficient number had been thus assembled, the regimental
organization followed. Many towns could not furnish men enough for a
company, so the men went forward in squads or individually and these
recruits either pieced out some company, not quite filled, or were
thrown together to constitute a new company, this being the case with
Company G of the Thirty-ninth, which had no central source like those
of the others. Lynnfield had been designated as the point to which
should be sent all Eastern Massachusetts volunteers for new regiments,
while to North Cambridge, Camp Cameron, were forwarded the men who had
enlisted in old organizations. These two points were to receive the
three years' soldiers from the counties of Barnstable, Bristol, Dukes,
Essex, Middlesex, Nantucket, Norfolk, Plymouth and Suffolk. Already in
Camp Edwin M. Stanton, Lynnfield, usually called Camp Stanton, were the
Thirty-fifth and the Thirty-eighth Regiments in process of formation
and along with the Thirty-ninth in reporting there was the Fortieth;
later came the Forty-first, the last of the three years' regiments
under the July call.

FOOTNOTES:

[B] The order wherein were given the quotas of all the towns in the
Commonwealth and the several conditions of enlistment.




LYNNFIELD


Several of the companies constituting the Thirty-ninth, had left
their respective towns under the belief that they were to join the
Thirty-fifth, but that organization and also the Thirty-eighth were
so far completed, that the numerals "39" became the designation of
the regiment, whose story is progressing here. Lynnfield had been a
rendezvous, already, for the Seventeenth, Nineteenth, Twenty-second and
Twenty-third regiments and, however satisfactory it may have proved for
those bodies, it was clearly inadequate to the demands of the several
thousand men to congregate here during July and August. Placed on a
branch railroad, it was difficult of access and did not have space
for the formation of a regimental line; so rapidly did the volunteers
report, they found only scant comforts in their rendezvous. While only
thirteen miles from Boston and being nearer still to Lynn, the rush of
recruits to the rendezvous sadly tried the resources of the commissary,
and made many a boy wish he were elsewhere. Says one observer, "No
preparation had been made for our reception; finally however, tents
were found for a portion of the company and we passed the first night
in camp in anything but a peaceful frame of mind or body. Quite a
number of the men left camp for home, or found quarters elsewhere.
Rations, too, were conspicuously absent and for a time we depended on
outside sources for our supply." Time, and patience however, relieved
many of these distresses. The companies as they reached camp were known
only by the name of the town whence they came, or that of the officer
who was in command. Their designation by letters of the alphabet came
later. Herewith follows a brief account of the several companies, their
respective beginnings, their organization and time of reporting at Camp
Stanton.




COMPANY A

SOUTH DANVERS, since 1868 PEABODY.


The allotment of this town on account of the call for troops was
seventy-five. An enthusiastic meeting was held July 11, in the Town
Hall, over which B. C. Perkins presided and at which the Rev. Mr.
Barber and others spoke. A committee on resolutions was appointed
consisting of Messrs. F. Poole, Lewis Allen, John D. Poore, Alfred
McKenzie and Dr. George Osborne. A committee of nine members was also
appointed who were to assist or supervise enlistments. On the 21st,
the anniversary of the Battle of Bull Run, a special town meeting was
held at which it was voted to pay one hundred and fifty dollars' bounty
to each volunteer. Speeches were numerous and a committee of forty
citizens was appointed, five for each school district, to co-operate
with that of nine men already in existence. One-fourth of the quota
had been raised in two days. It was voted to borrow twelve thousand
dollars, and a committee was appointed to secure the money on time at
six per cent.; on the 25th, Friday, a great open air meeting was held
in the town square, a platform having been erected in front of the
Warren Bank Building. Isaac Hardy presided and spoke as did others. On
the next day, Saturday, the recruits, accompanied by about one hundred
citizens, under the direction of Roberts S. Daniels, Jr., and having a
brass band, marched from the recruiting station to Lynnfield, distant
several miles away, an exacting experience for raw recruits on a hot
July day. Among those witnessing the departure was one who, fifty years
before, had been a prisoner in Dartmoor. All of these newly enlisted
men supposed that they were going into the Thirty-fifth Regiment. July
31st, an adjourned town-meeting was held in which it was announced that
Eben Sutton, a public spirited citizen, had volunteered to take the
entire loan at five and one half per cent., an act that was greeted
with great applause by all present. Captain, George S. Nelson; first
Lieutenant, Henry W. Moulton; second lieutenant, George H. Wiley; all
of South Danvers.




COMPANY B.

ROXBURY.


Recruiting began early in Roxbury and on the 10th, there was a special
meeting of both branches of the City Government, at which it was voted
to give seventy-five dollars to each recruit in addition to whatever
the General Government might offer. It was also voted to appropriate
thirty thousand dollars for expenses, and the treasurer was directed
to borrow. Roxbury's quota was three hundred and eighty-nine; Saturday
night, to inspirit enlistments, a public meeting was held in Institute
Hall at which Mayor William Gaston (subsequently governor) presided and
numerous and eloquent speeches were made, and the previous action of
the City Government was publicly endorsed. July 17th, the bounty was
raised to one hundred dollars, and on the 19th a brass band concert
was given in front of Institute Hall, with an address by the Hon. John
C. Park. August 7, the Company, numbering sixty-nine men, under the
command of Captain Graham, escorted by the militia of the city, paraded
and all were entertained by Colonel Hodges of the Horse Guards in
Bacon's Hall, where Judge Russell spoke. Sunday, the 10th, the Company
attended service in the first Universalist Church; on the 11th, again
escorted by the Horse Guards, the Company paraded through the principal
streets to Bacon's Hall where speeches were made by several persons,
including Private George F. Moses, of the Company, the latter being
filled to its maximum. It was on the 15th of August that the Company
assembled and through lines of friends and relatives, at a little
before noon, started for Boston, whence it took train for Lynnfield,
arriving at about three o'clock, p. m. Captain, William W. Graham;
first lieutenant, William T. Spear; second lieutenant, Julius M. Swain.




COMPANY C.

MEDFORD.


Medford's popular company, the Lawrence Light Guard, had already
distinguished itself in the Fifth M. V. M., under the first call
for troops, and was enjoying something akin to dignified ease when
the president's call for three hundred thousand men placed new
responsibilities upon all the cities and towns, Medford having to raise
eighty-eight men as her quota. Though the selectmen, acting under the
governor's orders, did their best as recruiting officers, and though
there was an offer of seventy-five dollars' bounty, voted by the town,
and though on the 21st of July the offer was increased to one hundred
dollars, the eligible men did not seem disposed to enlist until, on
the 29th of the month, the selectmen addressed a letter to the Light
Guard, asking its members to step to the front and assist in filling
the requisition. The request was complied with at once and, on the 14th
of August, the company was complete with its complement of one hundred
and one men, including many who had served under the earlier demand.
Mustered in on the 14th, it left Medford for Lynnfield on the 25th of
August under most auspicious circumstances, these including religious
exercises, speeches and the presence of thousands of sympathetic
people. The commissioned officers, all of whom had been out with
Colonel Lawrence, were captain, John Hutchins; first lieutenant, Perry
Coleman; second lieutenant, Isaac F. R. Hosea.




COMPANY D.

QUINCY.


The quota of Quincy was one hundred and five men; and to secure this
number of new soldiers the first meeting was held in the Town Hall,
July 12th; a special one, called by the selectmen, and the crowd was so
great that the hall would not hold it. Chief Justice Bigelow, presided
and spoke, being followed by Josiah Quincy, Jr., John Quincy Adams and
others; it was voted to offer a bounty of seventy-five dollars, and
patriotic resolutions were adopted. At a meeting held July 21st, it was
voted to raise the bounty to one hundred and twenty-five dollars. The
third meeting was held July 29th, with William S. Morton presiding;
addresses were made by Lieut. Colonel Henry Walker of Quincy, Lieut.
Colonel Guiney of the Ninth Regiment, and by one of the recruits,
Charles H. Porter, son of Whitcomb Porter, whose remarks were of a very
enthusiastic character, Captain Spear receiving numerous compliments.
By the 2nd of August, ninety-six men had been secured, the recruiting
being done by a town committee. Monday, the 4th of August, "Good-bye"
was said to the Company; line was formed at the Town Hall under escort
of Niagara Hose Company, Captain Newcomb; an address was given by
Lieut. Colonel Walker, and a collation was served in Lyceum Hall.
Thence by horse cars, accompanied by the firemen and a band, the
soldiers went to and through Boston, and so on by steam to Lynnfield,
reaching that place at about two p. m. There had been one hundred and
twelve enlistments in the company, but some had been rejected. On the
22nd, the town generously voted to pay the recruits one dollar per day
for the time spent in drilling. This same day the company came home on
a furlough, and on the next night, that of Saturday, the men assembled
in the Town Hall and presented Captain Spear with a sword, costing
fifty dollars, and to First Sergeant John Nichols, a sash and belt.
It was a noisily enthusiastic meeting, so much so that very little of
the speaking could be heard. Sunday, the 24th, beheld a part of the
Company at service in the Universalist Church in the morning and, in
the afternoon, Lieutenant McLaughlin, U. S. A., came out from Boston
and mustered the Company into the United States service. Monday, the
25th, the men returned to camp, all save three, who were apprehended as
deserters and sent after their fellows, everyone proving himself a good
soldier afterwards; they were just a trifle dilatory in keeping up.
Captain, Edward A. Spear; first lieutenant, William G. Sheen; second
lieutenant, Charles H. Porter.




COMPANY E.

SOMERVILLE.


For the apportionment of fifteen thousand men to the Commonwealth,
Somerville had to raise ninety-two men and this she succeeded in doing
within the months of July and August. The aggregate bounty paid each
enlisted man was one hundred and twenty-five dollars, one hundred
dollars coming from the town, the remainder from private subscription.

The selectmen, acting as agents, had recommended three men as
commissioned officers of the projected company, and these, all of whom
had seen service in the Somerville Company of the Fifth Regiment, M.
V. M., in its three months' tour of duty, applied themselves diligently
to their task. Camp was pitched on Prospect Hill and the flagstaff,
erected there and then, remained until the digging down of the hill
some fifteen years later; this occupation if possible added to the fame
of the spot on which Israel Putnam had intrenched himself after falling
back from Bunker Hill. The stay on elevated and breezy Prospect was far
from tedious, the nearness of home supplies more than compensating for
any hardships incident to camp duties. Mustered into the U. S. service,
August 12, the Company remained here until September 2nd, when it
proceeded to Boxford, there to join the other companies which were to
constitute the Thirty-ninth Regiment, having had no taste of the stay
in Lynnfield, the rendezvous of the other companies. The Commissioned
officers were captain, Fred R. Kinsley; first lieutenant, Joseph J.
Giles; second lieutenant, Willard C. Kinsley. All of the officers had
been commissioned in the Thirty-eighth Regiment, Captain Kinsley and
Lieutenant Giles, August 14th, and Lieutenant Kinsley, August 8th, but
the assignment of the company to the Thirty-ninth Regiment compelled
the transferal of the officers.

[Illustration: CAPTAIN FREDERICK R. KINSLEY

B'v't Major and Colonel]




COMPANY F.

TAUNTON.


Work for the formation of what was to be Company F did not begin until
the 5th day of August, when a meeting of the sub-committee of the
military committee was held to consider the raising of a new company,
Captain Presbry, one of the selectmen, presiding, with T. Gordon,
secretary. Joseph J. Cooper was authorized to raise a company under
the conditions as stated in a letter of the Adjutant General, dated
July 29, '64, and the general order of the War Department, Number
Seventy-five. The _Taunton Gazette_ comments that the lieutenancies
will be offered to Isaac D. Paul and John D. Reed, both men of
integrity, and "it is believed that the company will be speedily filled
and that it will be one of the most creditable of those provided by
Taunton." The record for the 6th of August was that Captain Cooper had
opened a recruiting office in Templar Hall Building, and had secured
about a dozen names. By the 7th, the total had risen to twenty-four
men; the 8th saw thirty-six names enrolled and, on the 11th, the tide
had risen to forty-seven good and true patriots. The 13th beheld the
citizens assembled in town meeting, wherein it was voted to increase
the bounty to two hundred dollars, thus adding a stimulus which
resulted in filling the company to the maximum. The 18th was a day of
memories for the good old town, since on this date the new company
departed for the rendezvous at Lynnfield. The largest assemblage
of people that the town had seen since the leaving of the Seventh
Regiment, early in the war, was out at seven o'clock in the morning to
witness the going of the new soldiers. They formed on the green, whence
they were escorted by the Light Guard, with music by the Bridgewater
Brass Band, to the railroad station. Followed by the enthusiastic
cheering of the populace, the men were borne away to new scenes and
experiences. Five days later or on the 23rd, the men had a furlough
home for twenty-four hours, returning to camp on the 24th. Of course,
Company F moved with the other companies in the transfer to Boxford,
where on the 3rd of September, a noteworthy incident took place. The
men of Taunton's company were drawn up in front of their tents when
George Childs, Esq., in behalf of Taunton citizens, presented Captain
Cooper and Lieutenants Paul and Reed with elegantly mounted revolvers,
each officer responding in a very happy manner. Captain, Joseph J.
Cooper; first lieutenant, Isaac D. Paul; second lieutenant, John D.
Reed.




COMPANY G.

BOSTON, HINGHAM, SCITUATE AND THE SOUTH SHORE.


From information furnished chiefly by Lieut. J. H. Prouty it seems that
Hingham was about as liberal a contributor to Company G as any single
place, having thirty-seven men in the ranks of "G" and another in "D."
It was the only company in the regiment that started without some local
head or centre. When the call came, Hingham took action at once, and on
the 5th held a town meeting at four o'clock p. m., with Captain John
Stephenson presiding; it was voted to raise five thousand dollars to
aid the families of volunteers as state aid, and a thousand more to be
distributed under the direction of the selectmen. July 11th brought
the people together again, in the evening of Friday, to take action
towards filling the town's quota of fifty-one men; Luther Stephenson
presided and several patriotic addresses were given; it was voted to
pay seventy-five dollars bounty to every man enlisting, a committee
of twelve was appointed to co-operate with the selectmen in securing
enlistments. This committee met on the 15th, organized, heard a deal
of eloquent speaking and voted to recommend to the townspeople that
a bounty of one hundred dollars be paid to every volunteer. The Town
accepted, July 19th, the recommendation of the citizens' committee.
On the same evening, a number of volunteers put down their names. An
adjourned war meeting was held on the 22nd, and a large committee of
ladies was chosen to help forward the filling of the quota. The next
meeting, August 6th, was on the call of the ladies and was largely
attended; August 15th, the town voted to make the bounty for each
volunteer two hundred dollars. The thirty-seven Hingham men who went
into Company G were not all new to service, for two, at least, had
gone out with the Lincoln Light Infantry in the Fourth Regiment in
1861, on the first call for troops. The volunteers expected to go
with the Thirty third Massachusetts; next with the Thirty-fifth, but
finally fetched up with the Thirty-ninth. They had no officers. The
governor commissioned, as captain, Ezra J. Trull, better known as
"Jack" Trull, who had been a corporal in the Thirteenth Massachusetts,
and he was assigned to the command of "G." Though only nineteen years
old, he was one of the best drilled officers in the regiment and his
active, stirring nature kept his company in excellent shape. He was a
Boston man, as was the first lieutenant, C. W. Thompson; the second
lieutenant, C. Henry Chapman, was from Cambridge. First and last, more
than thirty cities and towns contributed to the roll of the company.




COMPANY H.

DORCHESTER.


Early action was taken in Dorchester towards raising the town's quota
of one hundred and thirty-seven men. On the 15th of July, the citizens
convened at the town hall with James H. Upham, moderator, and they
started proceedings by the singing of patriotic songs. It was voted to
pay all recruits one hundred dollars, and to borrow fourteen thousand
dollars for such purpose. The selectmen were empowered to carry out the
expressed will of the meeting and the same board was directed to see to
the securing of enlistments, by the appointment of a "suitable person"
to raise a military company as a part of the town's quota. The Hall had
been plentifully bedecked with flags, some one hundred in number, among
them there being one that had been borne in the Revolution. Besides,
there were curios and relics to excite the curiosity and patriotism of
all beholders, the display being the work of Frederick F. Hassam, who
received the enthusiastic thanks of the meeting for his thoughtfulness
and action. On the 19th there was a great meeting on Meeting House
Hill, with artillery company firing sixty-eight guns and the Hon.
Marshall P. Wilder presiding; of the event the _Boston Journal_ says:
"Shoulder Arms! Forward, March!" The Company left Dorchester Wednesday,
August 13, receiving a parting salute from Captain Harris' Battery; in
Boston there was a short parade with refreshments, 1.30 p. m., at John
Preston's chocolate establishment on State Street. A hearty escort was
given by the selectmen, many citizens, and Fire Engine Company Number
5, and all kept step to music afforded by a brass band. From Boston,
cars on the Boston and Maine Railroad bore the men, one hundred and
thirty-seven in number, to Lynnfield. Captain, Charles N. Hunt; first
lieutenant, Robert Rhodes; second lieutenant, Robert Williams.




COMPANY I.

NATICK.


Natick was expected to provide one hundred and three men, or just a
company, and this she set about doing through a meeting in the evening
of July 17th, in School House Hall, over which the Hon. J. W. Bacon
presided. To report a plan of action, the following committee was
appointed: Leonard Winch, John J. Perry and E. P. Fay. Another meeting
on the 25th voted to pay volunteers one hundred and fifty dollars each,
and a committee of fifteen was appointed to assist the recruiting
officers. Monday, July 28th, brought out a great meeting which was
addressed by United States Senator Henry Wilson, Capt. Ephraim H.
Brigham and others. By August 1st, matters had reached ignition pitch
with a great meeting in the Town Hall, Captain Brigham presiding; there
were eloquent speeches, but the one which excited the most admiration
was that of Benning Hall, Jr., the village expressman, who on this
occasion made his first public address, chiefly to his comrades, of
whom twenty-two had put down their names. The fourth public meeting
was held August 4th, in School House Hall, Lieut. Simon Mulligan in
the chair, and it was voted to act at once, and to talk afterwards.
Then followed "a scene such as few people ever witness" when
forty-seven men marched up and signed the roll amid waving hats and
handkerchiefs, the very best men in the grand old town. The Hon. Henry
Wilson was present and spoke, as did Edward Choate, G. L. Sawin, H. B.
Moore, C. B. Phillips and B. Hill, Jr. In one week Natick had raised
one hundred and twenty-seven men for her company, twenty-four more than
necessary. It was Saturday, August 9, that, escorted by the Victor and
Union Fire Company, and crowds of citizens, the Natick newly enlisted
men set forth for their rendezvous. After a brief parade in Boston,
Lynnfield was sought in the afternoon, where the reception was not just
what the would-be soldiers expected. So many recruits had reported
there was no room for the Natick people, who had to hire a building
outside for use until the departure of a regiment gave them access to
the regular quarters. Captain, Ephraim H. Brigham; first lieutenant,
Simon Mulligan; second lieutenant, William H. Brown.




COMPANY K.

WOBURN.

[Sidenote: AUG., '62]

Woburn's assignment was ninety-eight men and it came at a time when
recruiting was dull. Still the selectmen, in obedience to State House
orders, called a meeting of Union loving citizens in the Town Hall,
on the evening of Saturday, the 12th of July. The response was large
and enthusiastic; it was voted to give every volunteer a bounty of one
hundred dollars and a committee of fifteen was appointed to forward
enlistments. It was further voted to call a town meeting on the 24th
of the month for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this
popular gathering. Thirty-three men had enlisted or put down their
names before the excitement began or the offer of bounty was made,
and these men became "the immortal thirty-three" in company annals.
Recruiting began on the 15th, and was very slow, though the office
was open day and evening. At the town meeting, it was voted to give
a bounty of one hundred and twenty-five dollars, and enlistments
thereupon increased. Under the encouragement of a grand rally and a
banquet in upper Lyceum Hall in the evening of the 24th, followed by
a march through the streets accompanied by a brass band and speeches
by prominent citizens, the roll of enlistments reached fifty names.
Subsequent rallies and parades resulted in the securing of considerably
more than the required number by the 1st of August. On the 5th of
the month, after a collation in Lyceum Hall, escorted by the Fire
Department, the company departed for the rendezvous, Camp Stanton, in
Lynnfield, having the following commissioned officers: captain, John I.
Richardson; first lieutenant, Luke R. Tidd; second lieutenant, Luther
F. Wyman.

       *       *       *       *       *

Life at a rendezvous camp is much the same, wherever found. The change
from the untrammeled habits of home to the restrained conditions of
military life is seldom made without friction on the part of the newly
enlisted men, and if there were a lack of quarters, an insufficiency
of food, and if the latter were of indifferent quality, they were
only features to be expected wherever and whenever inexperienced
citizens undertake the transforming act of becoming soldiers. However
disagreeable some of the conditions at Camp Stanton may have been,
nothing was encountered there that would not have been laughed at,
when two years later the men were passing through the exactions of
the "Battle Summer" or later still, when they realized the horrors of
Salisbury and Andersonville. Nor were the days of Lynnfield altogether
disagreeable to the recruits, for were there not the visits of home
friends who always came laden with the best of goodies for the "boys,"
and passes for brief trips to the homes themselves? Besides every day
had its round of duties, such as guard, the policing of the camp and
the early induction to drill, even before the giving out of uniform and
arms.

Col. Edward F. Jones, who had won distinction in the earlier months
of the war as commander of the Sixth Regiment, and later had been
assigned to the colonelcy of the Twenty-sixth Infantry, was in command
of the camp and occasionally the newly made soldiers repined at the
rigor of his commands, quite uncalled for to their undisciplined minds.
Nothing, however, better exhibited the adaptability of the American
soldier than the speed with which the material from school, shop and
farm, caught the step, learned the manual and responded to the command
of superior officers. In the case of the companies that were to
constitute the Thirty-ninth Regiment, they arrived after the most of
the desirable quarters had been taken by the men of the Thirty-fifth
and the Thirty-eighth Regiments. The first named departed for the
front on the 22nd of August; on the 24th, the Thirty-eighth took train
for the South and as colonel went Timothy Ingraham who originally had
been commissioned as the leader of the Thirty-ninth; a Captain in the
Third Infantry during the three months' service, he had been lieutenant
colonel in the Eighteenth Infantry and there were feelings of regret
when the New Bedford officer was transferred to the earlier numbered
organization.




BOXFORD

[Sidenote: SEPT. 1, '62]

The limitations of Lynnfield finally became so apparent that the
authorities determined to seek a new location and officers were
directed to investigate, the result being that Boxford, still further
away from Boston (twenty-eight miles) was selected. Here were the
grounds that had been used as a musterfield by the Second Brigade,
Second Division of the State Militia and, on this extended plain by
the side of a beautiful pond of water, it was determined to pitch the
new camp. Orders were given for the cooking of three days' rations
and on the 28th, by special trains the troops were transferred from
Lynnfield to Boxford. It is possible that had the nearness of the day
of starting for the front been known the trouble of removal had been
avoided. Colonel Jones still commanded the camp which continued to be
called "Stanton" and the commandant's rules were quite as rigid as
ever. On the 29th, some of the soldiers were gladdened by the receipt
from the State of twenty-five dollars' bounty and they soon found ways
enough for disposing of it, though many of them had signed allotment
papers, agreeing to have a portion of their pay reserved for friends at
home.

Camp life during the week's stay in Boxford had its share of variation
such as came from short trips away, the visits of friends, the
receiving of uniforms, arms and equipments and the presentation of
gifts to officers and men. Sept. 1st brought Col. P. Stearns Davis,
the new commander of the Thirty-ninth Regiment. A brigadier general in
the militia, he had been one of the most efficient of those assisting
Governor Andrew in organizing and forwarding regiments, and the
governor parted from the officer with regret; he succeeded Colonel
Jones in the command of the Camp. Company officers were remembered
by their friends, both those in the ranks and outside; on the 29th
of August, his company gave to Captain Richardson of "K" a set of
equipments and on the 1st of September, when on leave of absence in
Woburn, Lieutenants Tidd and Wyman were presented by citizens with
swords and sashes. Sept. 2nd, Company E, from Somerville, appeared in
camp, the very last to report. On the 3rd, the commissioned officers
of Company F, Taunton, were given revolvers by their fellow townsmen,
of whom there was a goodly number present, their representative being
George Childs, Esq. On this day also Springfield rifles were placed
in the men's hands, accoutrements following on the 4th, so that they
began to feel like real soldiers. On the 3rd also appeared Lieutenant
Ladd, U. S. A., who began paying out one month's pay in advance. During
these days the ladies of Woburn made and presented to the Woburn
Company (K) a National flag, Miss Henrietta M. Young making the address
of presentation and Lieutenant Tidd receiving, though the acceptance
speech, in the absence of the captain, was made by Lieutenant Wyman.
The flag was returned to Woburn to be retained there until the return
of the company from its three years' term of service.




BOXFORD TO WASHINGTON.


On Friday, the 5th, came the regimental colors and orders to prepare
three days' rations against the expected departure of the Thirty-ninth
on the following day, and the same day saw the first dress-parade of
the regiment under the command of Colonel Davis, also the efforts of
embryo soldiers as they tried to pack into a knapsack two or three
times as much as it would hold. When the active campaigning began, they
were to learn some of the wisdom of Socrates when he exclaimed, "How
many things there are that I do not need." Breaking camp on the morning
of the 6th was a spirited affair and, after an early breakfast, line
was formed and the men marched to the station not far from 8 o'clock
a. m. Here came a lesson in delay that was to be repeated many times
as the years moved on. Boston was sighted between 1 and 2 p. m. and,
speedily disembarking, the regiment took its way through the city to
the Boston and Worcester station. The day was extremely hot, the men
had overloaded their knapsacks, hence many suffered badly, some having
to fall out, though all reached the station in time for the train.
Company E, Somerville, held the right of the line and "C" Medford, the
left, so that double-quick, with the Medford men, was the order
occasionally which, considering the heat, was a trying test. Of the
march through Washington Street, the _Boston Journal_ has this comment,
"The men appeared hardy, robust and of excellent fighting material and
were evidently superior in drill to many of the new regiments."

[Sidenote: SEPT. 6, '62]

Though the crowds were great and friends by the hundred, not to say
thousands, were there to say "Good-bye," the greetings and partings
were had in passing, as the quickstep was kept through the city. At
the station, the regiment was soon entrained for Worcester, as its
next step on its southern way. There was no lack of interest in the
departure by people all along the route to Worcester, and there the
good citizens were not slow in supplying food, somewhat more appetizing
than the rations borne in the haversacks; said rations in many cases
became useless through the taste imparted by the recently painted
receptacles, the traces of turpentine working through. One veteran
relates, at this late day, his anguish over the spoiling of a quantity
of fresh mother's made doughnuts. Thence, via the Norwich route, the
way was southward, the first train reaching Groton, Connecticut, the
summer terminus, about 10.30 in the evening. As the soldier-laden train
was in two sections, there was a somewhat prolonged wait here for
the arrival of the second part. However, sometime between 10.30 and
midnight the steamer "City of New York" proceeded on its way to the
great city, along the Sound, over which had passed so many New England
men and boys on their Union-preserving mission. Though there was ample
space on the soft side of the respective decks for the soldiers to lie
down, there was altogether too much novelty for them to encamp at once.
While the majority secured some sleep during the passage, there were
those who watched the night through and were ready to greet the dawn
and to experience the sensations of an early approach to the mightiest
city of the Western Continent. Those who saw that sunrise and the
course through East River and the final round-up at the Jersey City
landing never forgot it; besides, the morning sights included a view of
the "Great Eastern", the famous British steamship, then the greatest in
the world and the wonder of all beholders.

Sunday morning at 8 o'clock, the steamer was docked at Jersey City and
soon afterward the regiment was again embarked on a train for the trip
through New Jersey and, though it was Sunday and, presumably, many
people were at church, there seemed to be no lack of generous citizens,
ready to supply the most luscious of fruit and to prove that whatever
fun might be had at the expense of the state's being a "foreign
country" the hearts of the people were all right. The day itself was
in that delightful early fall, when Dame Nature does her best to outdo
her June wonders, and the hearts of the Massachusetts travellers
were all aglow as they saw the possibilities of the Garden State and
when, having been ferried across the Delaware River, Philadelphia was
reached, every man was in splendid appetite for the lavish lunch that
the ladies of the City of Brotherly Love had prepared for them in the
Cooper Refreshment Rooms. Few Eastern soldiers failed at some time in
their experience to test the hospitality of William Penn's great city
and that veteran is yet to be found who does not wax eloquent over the
spread there afforded, and that was his without money and without price.

[Sidenote: SEPT. 7, '62]

The march through Philadelphia was an enjoyable one, the people
being in such evident sympathy with the men, who at every step were
going further from their own homes and loved ones. When the station
was reached, whence they were to start for Baltimore, there was a
considerable halt during which the Massachusetts boys had a fine
chance to make the acquaintances of certain of the fair daughters of
the Keystone State and addresses were exchanged which, in subsequent
months, afforded pleasure to both man and maiden, as letters passed
between those in the field and the loyal dwellers on the banks of the
Schuylkill. The ride southward, according to some of the chroniclers,
was not as enjoyable as the previous portions had been; indeed one
careful writer says, "Here the comfort of our journey ceased for we
were put aboard cattle cars, with rough and hard seats"; in most
cases, no seats at all; yet the time would come when that writer would
be delighted to ride standing, on platform cars even, if thereby he
could the sooner gain his destination. Wilmington, Delaware, reached
at midnight or thereabouts, was the first stop and, notwithstanding
the lateness of the hour there was a modified repetition of the
Philadelphia reception, every one being anxious to contribute to the
well being of the "boys in blue." Among those in waiting were former
dwellers in the Bay State who were delighted to grasp the hands of men
just from the old home.

The crossing of the Susquehanna River from Perryville, Delaware, to
Havre-de-Grace was a source of great interest to these tyros of travel,
and whole trains of cars, run aboard great ferryboats at once, for a
trip over the river to the Maryland town opposite, excited not a little
wonder, if not admiration. On reaching the further side of the river,
the usual waiting was experienced and, though it was in the dead of
night, those young soldiers were too full of life to allow the time to
waste and in their search for mischief they discovered that the place
abounded in geese and, long after midnight, these representatives of
staid and sober New England awoke not alone the squawking fowls but the
people as well and, over and through the gullied ways of this first
bit of "Maryland, My Maryland" that they had encountered, these men,
on fierce battle bent, pursued these poor feathered bipeds, though
what they were to accomplish by a complete round-up, they had not the
least notion. However, from any such test they were happily saved by
the appearance on the scene of Colonel Davis who, apprised by the noise
of the need of his presence, admonished his valiant followers to cease
harrying the birds; nor were the mischievous fellows sorry, for they
had gone about as far as they could and not have their fun changed
into serious fault.

The regiment had reached the region where constant watch was kept
over stations, railroad bridges and all points where it might be easy
to obstruct transportation; hence the sight of dimly seen figures
performing sentinel duty as the train swept along was not a little
interesting to the men who were, as rapidly as possible, advancing from
the abode of peace and plenty to that of privation and danger. Dawn
of the 8th brought with it the entrance of Baltimore by the latest
Massachusetts organization and, as the men marched through the silent
streets in the early morning, many of them contrasted the reception
accorded them in the unquestionably loyal city of Philadelphia, and
that in the Monument City, which a year and five months before had
caused the first bloodshed in the Civil War. A substantial breakfast
was served at the Union refreshment rooms, though nothing like the
generous spread made the day before by the ladies of the city on the
Schuylkill. Several regiments, like the Thirty-ninth on their way
South, were found waiting orders and transportation and the situation
was somewhat emphasized by the sudden and serious illness of a number
of soldiers, the rumor gaining circulation that they had been poisoned.
Fortunately before the irate soldiers could begin retaliatory measures
against the people, it was decided that the ailment was simply _cholera
morbus_, occasioned by injudicious eating of green fruit obtained in
transit.

[Sidenote: SEPT. 9, '62]

Ellicott's Mills, not so very far from Baltimore, towards the west, was
at first announced as the destination of the regiment, but, as there
was no supply of tents or wagons, the order was countermanded and cars
were taken for Washington. The sight of the incomplete Capitol and
other public buildings was a glad one to these Massachusetts men who,
in spite of warlike intentions, were alive to all of the geographical
attractions that they might encounter. Reaching the Nation's centre of
activity somewhat late in the afternoon there was some time in which
to take cursory glances of many edifices, already familiar through
picture and print. Supper and lodgings were found in the barracks,
close by the Baltimore and Ohio depot, and those who did not like the
fare at the barracks, and could afford the price, had the privilege of
supping outside. Weariness can sleep upon a flinty bed while lazy sloth
may toss upon the softest of couches, hence the floor of the so-called
"Soldiers' Rest" afforded comfort for the cattle car travellers. In
the morning of the 9th, it was discovered that the Tenth Vermont had
arrived during the night and was encamped outside, a regiment with
which the Thirty-ninth was eventually to be brigaded for a time.




POTOMAC CROSSED.


The breakfast was not of a sort to elicit any great amount of praise
from the soldiers and once more those who could got their food outside,
and the forenoon was passed largely in seeing the sights of the
Capital. Very likely the folks at home were thinking that their boys
were so much needed that they were to be ordered into battle-line at
once; but all concerned were to learn that in the fiercest of wars
there are many waits, and this delay in Washington was incident to
finding out just where the Thirty-ninth was to report, for all knew
very well they were not to halt there long. The orders came from Gen.
Silas Casey in time for them to move out of the city about noon and so
to take their way across the Long Bridge, the thoroughfare connection
between Washington and Alexandria, then the most famous structure
of its kind in America; on account of the vibrations the regular
route-step was broken. The day was hot and sultry, the dust intense,
made so by the constant passing of horses and men, and the newly
enlisted soldiers, loaded down with their bloated knapsacks and other
burdens, began to think that soldiering was no joking matter.

While thus advancing into Virginia the Thirteenth Massachusetts
Infantry was encountered, the men having all of the activity and swing
that come from long experience, though thinned ranks spoke volumes for
the encounters they had passed through, but they were in no halting
mood and with only the greetings possible in passing the Bay State
men kept in motion. It was the time when the disastrous Second Bull
Run had necessitated realignment, and measures were afoot which in a
little more than a week were to lead up to Antietam. It was a march
of seven miles which brought the dust begrimed men to the vicinity of
Fort Albany, an extensive fortification situated on the estate of Gen.
Robert E. Lee, the famous Virginian so prominent in the Confederate
Army, a locality rapidly growing in reputation as Arlington. Though
camp equipage had not as yet made its appearance, the weather was so
dry and warm no trouble was found in camping without other outfit. In
every direction the eye could see very little save tents and campfires,
with the passing of long baggage trains, and the night air bore the
strains of many bands of music, all joining in a mighty effort to keep
the minds of the soldiers alert and free from the care which besets
solitude and repose.

[Sidenote: SEPT. 12, '62]

On the slopes of Arlington the morning of the 10th found the regiment,
its members all alert to observe and learn the lessons of each
successive day. The night had brought about great changes, for a large
portion of the camps so apparent during the watches of the night had
entirely disappeared; to be sure there had been some extra fires during
the preceding hours when, as it appeared later, camp debris had been
burned, but all of these indications were lost on the newcomers, to
whom the symptoms of breaking camp were unfamiliar, and how should they
know that already the fates were preparing for Antietam, the bloodiest
single day's fight of the entire war? That the enemy was not very
remote was currently reported and many of the young soldiers thought
they might be ordered into the fray at an early hour. Then too, for
the first time, they saw the coming into the Union line of escaped
negroes, the "contrabands" of General Butler's ruling; "strange looking
beings," one of the observers remarks. The 11th day differed in no
essential from its predecessor save that the arrival of tents permitted
the pitching of them and the instituting of regular and strict camp
orders. The proximity of great earthworks, known as forts, prompted
many to visit them and thus to appreciate the efforts that had been
made to render safe the nation's capital. Drills were begun, roll-calls
were frequent and the first dress parade in Dixie was recorded for the
Thirty-ninth on this day.

After a day of routine on the 12th, while companies were forming for
battalion drill, orders came to pack up and be ready to move out. It
was after dark and in the midst of a driving rain that the start was
made, but through the mud and darkness the regiment proceeded with as
much willingness as the circumstances would permit till, at last, after
what seemed a very long time and a great distance, really the latter
was only two miles, the welcome command, "halt," was heard, and as it
was not followed by one to move forward the men were content, the rain
having stopped, to throw themselves upon the ground and there to find
the rest that ever comes to the weary whatever the conditions. The
regiment was now near the outermost lines and pickets were thrown out.
The next morning, 13th, revealed the location as near Fort Tillinghast,
and work was immediately begun on clearing the ground for a camp, this
being the third effort for this purpose made by the men and some of
them hoped they might be allowed to remain long enough to see just
how a real camp at the front would look. It appeared that to the
Thirty-ninth had been assigned the duty of picketing the line between
Forts Tillinghast and Craig. Here Sibley tents were received, the
same having been left by the Sixteenth Maine on the departure of the
latter for the march into Maryland. This was the introduction of the
Thirty-ninth to an organization whose later history was considerably
involved with that of our Massachusetts men.

The forts, which occupied almost every elevation of land, were
conspicuous on every hand, and were a part of the system devised
for the thorough protection of Washington. They numbered in all,
including batteries, sixty-eight, and were for the most part named for
distinguished officers slain in the conflict. All of them were not
constructed at this time, but the record includes those that were built
later as well. The total perimeter of the fortifications was thirteen
miles, and the outer border thus guarded was nearly or quite equal to
that of the original District of Columbia. Besides the forts there were
twenty miles of rifle trenches, thirty-two miles of military roads and
ninety-three unarmed batteries for field guns, with four hundred and
one emplacements. In the total armament of these earthworks there were
nearly a thousand cannon and mortars. Notwithstanding this formidable
array, Early and his men came near getting through and into the city in
July, 1864.




ON THE MARCH.

[Sidenote: SEPT. 15, '62]

Whatever hopes of permanency may have been cherished as to the new camp
they were all destroyed before the day (14th) was done. There were
inspections, always a Sunday feature, the distribution of cartridges,
which had a businesslike aspect, and the dispatching of three companies
to the picket line only to be recalled later with orders to pack up and
be ready for a long march. In addition it was ordered that knapsacks
be left behind, a fact that brought up visions of forced marching
and a possible encounter. To the inexperienced soldiers separation
from their knapsacks was a serious matter and each man debated with
himself as to what he could best leave behind, the upshot of it all
being that generally his blanket, tied in a roll and slung over the
shoulder, was the one item deemed absolutely necessary. It was quite
seven o'clock before the march began, the way being through camps and
along the sides of forts until the Aqueduct Bridge, leading across the
Potomac to Georgetown, was reached; the name of the bridge arising from
the fact that the Chesapeake and Ohio Canal crossed here, terminating
in Alexandria. Over the bridge and through Georgetown the pace was a
brisk one until, after a march of possibly seven miles, a halt for the
remainder of the night was ordered on a prominence back of the village
of Tennallytown.

The 15th began with the soldiers at five o'clock and there was a
march of fully two miles before the halt for breakfast. Apparently in
the same line with our men were the Tenth Vermont and a Pennsylvania
Battery and the news gradually spread through the ranks that the
purpose of the speedy trip was to do picket duty along the Potomac
River. To the undisciplined mind it did seem as though a less headlong
pace might have been set for such an end, but it was not for the men
to complain nor to reason why, but rather to plod along as rapidly as
possible. Inasmuch as the heat was extreme, the roads dusty, many of
the men, quite unused to the strain and wilting under the sun's rays,
fell out. This day, too, the preparation of meals was entirely by the
soldiers themselves, company cooks having done the work before. When
a halt was ordered it was obeyed with the utmost alacrity, the men
throwing themselves upon the ground with expressions of relief. When at
last, after another advance, there came the orders to halt and prepare
coffee, they were heard with gladness, the location being near an old
mill on Waitt's Branch, this being an affluent of the Big Muddy Branch,
but the night was not to be spent here, the officers deciding that it
was not a defensible place, hence the march was continued in the most
quiet manner possible, to the brow of a hill where camp was pitched
for the night. In the light of subsequent knowledge that the enemy was
many miles away, the extreme caution must have been the result of false
information to those leading.

Another day, 16th, began early and the route was still up the Potomac,
though the pace was not so rapid as that of yesterday. At noon dinner
was eaten at Seneca Mills and then followed a stretch of about fifteen
miles, leading up to Poolesville, a village by no means important in
itself, yet it had been heard of frequently in Massachusetts since
here, or in this locality, a year ago were encamped the Fifteenth,
Nineteenth and Twentieth Regiments from the Bay State and through
here had marched the Thirteenth. To Lieut. Colonel Peirson and Major
Tremlett, the place must have seemed very familiar since both had been
officers in the Twentieth. Not a few of the latest visitors thought
that its size and appearance hardly comported with its notoriety. A
sudden and violent rainstorm accompanied the entrance of the place
where were found two cavalry companies on duty, who informed the
inquirers that the Battle of Poolesville, shouted so loudly a few days
before at Arlington, was really only a skirmish, in which the only
casualty was the killing of a horse, the whole affair being one of
many incidents, accompanying the movements of Stuart's Cavalry in the
general advance of General Lee into Maryland. Notwithstanding the rain,
weary men threw themselves upon the ground, glad to rest in any way
anywhere; but long before morning the fierceness of the storm and the
level character of the plain on which the men were lying, reducing the
latter to something like a duck-pond, made the soldiers get up, build
fires and try to dry themselves, but with indifferent success.

[Sidenote: SEPT. 17, '62]

The day of Antietam's great battle, the 17th of September, found the
regiment making coffee around fires that were larger than usual, owing
to the moisture that pervaded everything, but wet or dry, there was
to be no protracted halt here and the village, later to be quite
familiar to the Thirty-ninth, was left behind as the regiment plodded
along about three miles further. Turning off into some woods, camp
was established, rations drawn and preparations were progressing for
staying a while when orders came, directing five companies (B, C, D,
G, and K) to go on picket at once. Marching about two miles further,
the river was reached by the companies at Edward's Ferry. The latter
is thirty-five miles from Washington and the section had been more
or less mixed up with the war from the very start. Edward's Ferry
was familiar on account of the Battle of Ball's Bluff, just across
the Potomac, on the 21st day of October, one year before. Out in the
river is Harrison's Island, a bit of land that had been seen in fancy
by thousands of Northern people whose loved ones had died there. The
road, traversed by the men, was the Leesburg pike, the ferry being
one of the features of the way. While the country is attractive, with
the historic river flowing through it, the soldiers were not there
for historic studies. Posting one company at the Ferry as the extreme
left, the men were strung along the river to Conrad's Ferry, five miles
further up the stream. So on the banks of Old Potomac began the duties
of soldiering in a region that had already echoed to battle's din.
Parallel with the Potomac, sluggishly flows the Chesapeake and Ohio
Canal and along its banks many of the picket groups were posted. Five
miles to be under observation by about five hundred men or, as they
were posted in groups of five, there were twenty posts to the mile and,
if stationed at equal intervals, each set of sentinels was responsible
for sixteen rods, but other circumstances than mere distance determined
the placing of men on picket. Probably no more vigilant soldiers than
these of the Thirty-ninth ever watched the river and opposite shore,
for the novelty of the situation and the knowledge that the rebels were
within shooting distance made the responsibility great. Besides, the
rumbles from distant Antietam, throughout the 17th, were calculated
to waken apprehensions in the minds of men who had no means of knowing
what way the fight was going.


PICKET DUTY.

Thence onward till the 23rd of the month this tour of duty continued
and however irksome it may have been to many, as a rule, men preferred
such service to the routine of roll-call and almost constant drill in
camp. Happily for these tyros in military experience, nothing of note
disturbed the general quiet of the period, though every man was on the
alert for the first indication of hostile approach. The proximity of
Maryland farms and well-filled larders suggested foraging and, while
some of the men paid for the food which they obtained, others did not,
and a considerable raid is recorded which resulted in the bringing into
camp of a great variety of material, both animal and vegetable, as
well as cereals and fruit. While it was new business for the majority
of these well brought up young men, they speedily adapted themselves
to their new conditions, and rare was the soldier who could not secure
food to eat if anything of the kind were within reaching distance.
It is said that bills, aggregating fifty dollars, were presented to
the Colonel by suffering farmers from the afflicted locality and
they were paid by someone, though the amount was later assessed upon
the offending companies. Sickness made its appearance among the men,
largely the result of indiscretion in eating, the abundance of all
sorts of fruit inducing indulgence therein to the extent of serious
stomach and bowel difficulties. Also, the individual cooking done by
the men may have had a share in the disorders named, for while some of
the combinations of fried pork, apples and molasses may have been very
palatable, they certainly were a surprise to many of the stomachs, into
which they were introduced. At the same time the lesson of self help
had to be learned.

[Sidenote: SEPT., '62]

On the 23rd, the companies on picket were relieved by those in camp
and there came a chance to receive the knapsacks left at Arlington on
the 14th, and the extra clothing thus was appreciated by all to whom
the coldness of Southern nights was a revelation. Shelter tents were
distributed and every one speedily learned how much comfort could be
found beneath them. Here too began in good earnest the school of the
soldier, and four drills a day, along with roll-calls at frequent
intervals, induced a degree of attention and a weariness that made
many a lad seek his rest, when possible, without any prompting. The
first death in the regiment came on the 27th, when Nathan Mitchell, a
Bridgewater boy, Company F, twenty-one years old, passed out of this
life. The funeral was held the next (Sunday) morning, an impressive
lesson for the soldiers of the possibility of death in camp as well as
on the battlefield.

For a number of days there followed a regular exchange of duties
between camp and picket, the latter being considered preferable, as a
rule, having so much less of drill and the fretful features of military
life. Men learned to wash their own garments, to mend their apparel
and to do many things of which, had they remained at home, they would
always have been ignorant. The bi-weekly arrival of the mail was a
regular event that never lost its interest, and happiness and misery
were separated only by the receipt of letters or their failure. The
folks at home knew this full well, and there were few boys in blue for
whom some one in the distant Northland was not planning some pleasant
interlude during these months of separation. Confederate prisoners,
too, were not unusual, on their way under guard to Washington, and
while they at first excited curiosity, the latter feeling was mingled
with wonder at their lack of uniform and the general soldierly
appearance which the Union soldiers maintained. Under the impression
that the Maryland side was held by his people one rebel forded the
Potomac, clad in citizen's garb, wearing a Pennsylvanian's knapsack
which, he said, he had acquired at Manassas; he was a queer looking
soldier, though he claimed to belong to the Sixth Florida Infantry.
Someway, he had managed to get off the rebel route on the way back from
Antietam. It was no infrequent thing for an alarm to bring the men into
line at any time of night and to make them stand thus until daylight
did appear. Seemingly the foe was constantly fording the Potomac above
or below the portion guarded by the Thirty-ninth Regiment. In one case,
the "sure rebels," who had built fires across the river, proved to be
the division of General E. V. Sumner returning from a raid upon the
wagon-train of General Lee.

Since reaching "Old Potomac's Shore" no more memorable day had been
recorded than Sunday, October 12th, when the regular inspection was
interrupted by the arrival of a courier with orders to march at once
since the enemy was crossing the river at one of the upper fords, and
skirmishing was already in progress. Much to the wonder of some, in
spite of the urgency the inspection was finished and the rations drawn
before the Thirty-ninth, in heavy marching array, started off at a
double-quick, to make up for lost time. The heat of the day and the
heaviness of the attire made the march exceedingly trying, but Conrad's
Ferry was reached at last, knapsacks were unslung, line of battle was
formed, and the approach of the enemy was awaited; but in vain, for
the rapid riders of J. E. B. Stuart had already crossed at White's
Ford, two miles further up the stream. Some of the hypercritical
soldiers thought that if the inspection had been ended at once and
the march made in light order, the Thirty-ninth might have arrived in
time to interrupt the placid passage of the Potomac by the venturesome
Confederates.




STUART'S RAID.

[Sidenote: OCT. 9, '62]

It is in place to state that the affair was the termination of
one of the most picturesque incidents of the entire war. On the
9th of October, Confederate General Stuart with eighteen hundred
of the best mounted and most reliable men in the brigades of Wade
Hampton, Fitz Hugh Lee and B. H. Robertson started from Darksville,
a place some miles above Martinsburg in the valley of the Shenandoah
and, moving northward, crossed the Potomac at McCoy's Ford and reached
Chambersburg, Penn., in the evening of the 10th. In the Keystone
State the troopers had helped themselves to whatever they chose to
take, but they had carefully refrained from molesting property on
their way through Maryland. In Chambersburg and vicinity, horses and
whatever might contribute to the welfare and comfort of the invaders
were appropriated. The night in the Pennsylvania city was spent in
drizzling rain which added not a little to the peril of the situation,
for Federal authorities were astir, hoping to surround and capture
the entire rebel outfit. The morning of the 11th, the horsemen turned
their steps eastward, proceeding towards Gettysburg as far as Cashtown;
thence the route was directly southward, through Emmitsburg, New
Market, Hyattstown, etc., with only momentary halts, to the Potomac.
There was no bivouac for the night, since any hour might confront the
riders with a Union force to effectually block their way. Stuart had
the good fortune to be guided by Capt. B. S. White, a Poolesville man
and a member of his staff who knew the entire country thoroughly, so
that, while the Federal forces were looking for the enemy further down
the stream or at points higher up, White piloted them to the ford and
saw them in safety on the other side.

It was one of the great events of military history; General Stoneman
with infantry and cavalry was stationed at Poolesville, and Pleasanton
was in readiness at the mouth of the Monocacy, places which the astute
Confederates carefully avoided. The net results of the expedition
were the destruction of public and railroad property in Chambersburg
to the amount of two hundred and fifty thousand dollars; two hundred
and eighty wounded and sick prisoners, paroled; thirty United States
government officials and other citizens of prominence, captured and
forwarded to Richmond, to be held as hostages for Confederate citizens
held by the North, and more than twelve hundred horses brought away to
replenish the mounts for the daring rebels. Within twenty-seven hours,
the Confederates had ridden ninety miles, encumbered with artillery
and captured horses, and had forced the final passage of the Potomac
virtually under the very eyes of the Union forces, their only loss
being two men who wandered away, and the only casualty was the wounding
of one man. Not a few observers in the Union ranks wondered why things
were thus, and Hooker's pertinent question, "Who ever saw a dead
cavalryman?" is remembered.

An interesting postscript to the escape of Stuart and his men came
about soon after when Poole and Leslie of Company K, in spite of the
strict orders as to watchfulness and care, laid off their clothes, when
on picket, and swam over to Harrison's Island where they found no other
rebel than an old mule, feeding in solitary, but on their way back
they found in the river a pair of saddle-bags that had belonged to the
Chaplain of Hampton's Legion, one of Stuart's force, and evidently lost
in the crossing. The contents consisted in pious tracts, a vest with
Confederate buttons, needles and thread, and a hospital flag, a yellow
cotton affair, which years afterward would be one of the finder's
choicest relics. Leslie was always very sorry that those tracts were
not distributed among the Johnnies, for he thought they needed them
badly.

The same rain that had made the rebel raid all the more difficult
rendered the return of our men to camp very uncomfortable, but they had
learned something of what might be expected of them. Besides, during
the evening they acquired a bit of military knowledge from certain
troops under Gen. D. B. Birney of the Corps, lately commanded by Gen.
Phil Kearney. They too had come in a hurry from Hall's Hill and found
themselves too late for the game.

[Sidenote: OCT. 14, '62]

It had been a hard day and the men were tired and hungry; flocking over
to the camp of the Thirty-ninth, they were cordially received and the
Massachusetts men generously gave what they could to the comfort of
the weary soldiers, receiving in payment many thanks and some pretty
large stories of the fights in which the older soldiers had been. One
of the latter's first acts was to build great fires, using therefor
the fence rails, hitherto untouched by the Bay State lads, this being
in conformity with orders, but the experienced campaigners cared
not a copper for rules, but speedily laid hold on the combustible
matter and lighted roaring fires that astonished the lately arrived.
Such desecration was not to be tamely endured by those who strictly
interpreted the law, so the colonel of the Thirty-ninth undertook to
stay the hands of the wet and muddy soldiers and thus to save the
fences, but the veterans of the Peninsula, Groveton and Antietam were
not to be diverted by mere language, and the conflagration continued
till long lengths of zigzag fence had disappeared.




MOVING AGAIN


Tuesday, the 14th of October, saw the regiment again in line, and
marching something like eight miles towards Washington to Seneca
Landing, camping there for the night. The land was low and wet near
the canal, and in the morning all turned out as wet as if they had
been in the rain, so dense was the fog that overspread the locality.
By morning's light, a new camping-place was found on a high hill,
half a mile to the rear, where camp was once more pitched, the Sibley
tents having arrived; the location was the same that was occupied by
the Second Massachusetts Infantry in the winter of 1861 and 2; the
Landing, about twenty-five miles from Washington, was at the mouth of
Seneca Creek and was a depot of supplies for the army. A noteworthy
arrival of mail is chronicled for this place, since in the maneuvers
of the last few days, a large quantity of such matter had accumulated
at Poolesville and it is recorded that fully eight bushels of letters
and papers were distributed among the men, hungry for news from home.
Hitherto, the Thirty-ninth had acted in an independent capacity, but
on Friday, the 17th, orders were promulgated, organizing a brigade, to
be under the command of Brigadier Gen. Cuvier Grover and to consist of
the Thirty-ninth, the Tenth Vermont, the Fourteenth New Hampshire and
the Twenty-third Maine along with a battery and certain cavalry, the
same being an independent brigade, though under the ultimate command of
General Heintzelman, who was in charge of the defenses of Washington,
the duties being similar to those hitherto performed.

During these days, while there were drills, inspections and other camp
duties, the enlisted man had time, or he took it, to visit neighboring
farms, to quiz the natives, to sample the products of the land and
in many ways to prove his derivation from Yankeedom. The men found
the negroes glad to see them and ready to hurrah for the flag, while
suspicion was generally harbored that professions of loyalty on the
part of slave-owners were not particularly sincere. Target shoots were
indulged in, a practice of which there should have been more throughout
the army; Sunday, the 19th, was remarked as quite uneventful, since
there were only inspections and dress parade, and no alarm of any
sort. October 20th orders came to pack up, and a removal to the mouth
of Muddy Branch was made, possibly three miles nearer Washington,
where the old routine was continued. As the name of the stream would
indicate, the locality was still very unhealthy, being low and damp,
but the duties were less arduous when on picket, through there being
less posts and less hours of duty. Illicit traffic with the enemy had
to be strictly watched and prevented.

[Sidenote: OCT. 21, '62]

On the 21st, a long stretch of embankment on the canal breaking
away, a detachment of five men from each company was made to proceed
to the scene, some three miles down the stream, and to repair the
same, an employment hardly contemplated when they enlisted. However,
they succeeded in stopping the crevasse and permitting the renewal
of transportation. Though comparatively near the base of supplies,
provisions at times were scarce and hardtack and water seemed scant
rations for men accustomed to more generous fare. If, under such
circumstances, soldiers foraged occasionally, sometimes paying for what
they got, more often not, why, it was only a part of the game that
the North and the South were playing; and to prove themselves rapidly
progressing, October 24th, ostensibly in retaliation for excessive
charges, a raid was made on the regimental sutler,[C] mulcting his
assets to the amount, so said, of about eighty dollars.

The section guarded by the Thirty-ninth and the other regiments of
the brigade, being on the canal and river, was one pretty thoroughly
traversed by the Union soldiers and those who kept diaries made many
interesting entries. There was a constant passing of boats on the
canal and all roads led to Washington. Negroes on their way to the
Nation's Capital might be intercepted, but if the black man asserted
that he was running away from his master, he would have been a rare
soldier who would turn him back. One colored person, thus halted, very
aged, claimed to have been a slave of General Washington and, in reply
to a query, said that the Father of his Country looked very brave.
Though situated on the top of a hill, the constant wet weather made
the surroundings of the camp anything but agreeable, the soil being
soft and sticky; to crown all misfortunes, occasionally a tent would
collapse upon its occupants in the midst of rain and wind, resulting
in hurried action on the part of the unfortunate fellows who may have
just come in from the exactions of a prolonged tour of picket duty.

Lucky was the man on picket when the last day of October rolled round,
for on this date there were inspections and waitings in line, armed
cap-a-pie, sometimes at a "shoulder arms," drills, reviews and a muster
for pay. Everything seemingly that could be rung into a day's work was
had. Perhaps the fact that the muster for pay covered two months of
service was as agreeable an exercise as the day afforded. It was during
these days that at least one company, possibly more, undertook to
repeat the game so nicely played by Birney's veterans when they camped
near the Thirty-ninth at the time of Stuart's crossing the Potomac; in
other words, representatives of the companies, under supposed proper
orders and directed by sergeants, went out some distance from camp and
secured a good supply of well dried fence rails for the use of the
company cooks in the preparation of food. The matter was thought quite
proper, until the men were ordered into line and compelled to pick up
what rails had not already been chopped into firewood and to carry
them back to the place where they were obtained, though in depositing
them the soldiers surely raised a sign of offense before the doors of
the parties making complaint. Somehow the men could not be made to
appreciate the tender manner in which some in authority thought the
residents should be treated.

[Sidenote: NOV. 11, '62]

While each day brought its regular round of duty, there was little of
novelty in successive days, the soldiers gradually hardening into the
restraints and exactions of camp life. The 7th of November brought the
first snow fall of the season, and though only about two inches of the
fleecy reminder of northern regions fell, it was enough to impart a
robe of whiteness to Mother Earth and boys-in-blue had the pleasure of
snow-balling while it lasted, which was scarcely more than twenty-four
hours. The 9th was Sunday and it brought the regular inspections,
though the rain and cold prevented religious service and dress parade.
The cold was severe enough to freeze liquids left by the occupants
in their tents while out on duty. Monday, the 10th, marked a brigade
inspection by General Grover, which the men inspected voted much
easier than those made by their Colonel. This was the last appearance
of General Grover in the brigade since on the 11th he was ordered to
report to General N. P. Banks, who was organizing reinforcements for
the Department of the Gulf. A native of Maine and a graduate of West
Point, 1850, he had won honors at Williamsburg, Fair Oaks and at the
Second Bull Run. As commander of a division in the Nineteenth Army
Corps he will win still further laurels both in the extreme South and
in the Valley of the Shenandoah. His independent brigade had grown to
respect him highly.

FOOTNOTES:

[C] The privilege of piecing out the regular rations and of providing
luxuries, not thought of by the commissary in his wildest dream, was
accorded in the Thirty-ninth Regiment to Gilbert and Sumner Pullen,
both natives of the State of Maine and enjoying the kinship of Second
Cousins. After the war, Sumner Pullen, whose home was in Dedham, was a
travelling salesman throughout his business life. He died in Dedham,
Sept., 1890, aged 79 years; of Gilbert Pullen, no data subsequent to
the war have been found.




OFFUTT'S CROSS ROADS


The departure of General Grover was followed by the assignment of
Colonel Davis to the command of the brigade and the elevation of Lieut.
Colonel Peirson to that of the regiment. In close connection with the
foregoing, a change of location was ordered by General Heintzelman and,
on the 13th, another move towards Washington was effected. Turning
out long before daylight, an early breakfast was eaten and the line
of march was begun before sunrise, the terminal being Offutt's Cross
Roads, some twelve or more miles from Washington, the crossed roads
being that from Rockville to Great Falls, and the turnpike which
paralleled the river and canal, terminating at Tennallytown. There
was a deal of grubbing out of stumps and other obstacles necessary
in providing for a parade ground, though the site was considered
better than the one just left, even if there was no adequate supply of
water near. All the other regiments in the brigade were camped close
by, viz.: the Tenth Vermont, the Fourteenth New Hampshire, and the
Twenty-third Maine. In honor of the retiring brigade commander, the
new stopping place was named Camp Grover.

In diaries of the period two quite diverse entries are found for the
15th, one stating that Colonel Davis, acting brigade commander, was
thrown from his horse, though fortunately he was not seriously hurt;
the other that the band of the Fourteenth New Hampshire played "Home
Sweet Home" so beautifully that it made a wave of homesickness sweep
over and through the brigade. A company from each regiment in the
brigade was sent out by Colonel Davis to look after some of Captain
White's guerrillas. A distressing accident was that of the 17th when
James W. Finn of Company I, only eighteen years old, a farmer boy of
Natick, fell from the containing wall of the canal-lock into the water
and was drowned. During these days, the men were learning how to make
their tents warmer through a system of stockading, and there was need
enough of it, since cold weather had begun. Of all the regiments, there
is a large representation in the hospitals, though the Thirty-ninth
is better off in this respect than the others. However the best is
bad enough, for on the 21st Charles H. Morrison of the Natick company
passed on, followed on the 22d by Sumner P. Rollins of Somerville, a
young man of eighteen years. Again on the 23rd, two more men of "I"
crossed over, George L. Fogg and Francis E. Mann, and on the 25th, died
Francis E. Newhall, also of Natick. Hugh Connoly of the Woburn company
died November 25th. In the five weeks' stay at this point, the Tenth
Vermont lost twenty-five men, their funeral marches through the camp
being of almost daily occurrence.

[Sidenote: NOV. 27, '62]

Two and a half miles from the canal, at or near Great Falls, where
begins the aqueduct which carries Washington's water supply, a
considerable portion of these soldiers' duty was the guarding of the
Government buildings there, including a bakery; near by was a large
freestone quarry whose product was utilized in the building of the
reservoir and the aqueduct itself. Considering the rain, which was
very prevalent, and the mud which deepened on little provocation, the
distance seemed to grow as the days advanced. On the 24th two companies
were sent off in a hurry to intercept some of Stuart's cavalry said to
be in the vicinity of Edward's Ferry; nothing came of the effort more
important than the capture of two negroes. There was little going on
that did not involve the colored man more or less. Even Mr. Offutt,
for whom the cross roads are named, had been in the Old Capitol Prison
because of his inability to render up one of his slaves when called for
by General Jas. S. Wadsworth, when the latter was military governor of
the District of Columbia.

November 27th was Thanksgiving Day at home, possibly the most generally
observed day in New England. For several preceding days there had
been a steady stream of packages from the homeland, indicative of the
appreciation in which every soldier was held somewhere. Of course these
boxes and bundles contained articles of comfort both for internal
and external use. The approach of the day on which the Governor and
State Secretary unite in "God Save the Commonwealth" brought out many
expressions of wonder among the soldiers as to how the day would or
could pass without something unusual in the way of food. The care and
foresight of the home-army supplied the answer to the query, whether
expressed or not, and though there was no general table around which
the hundreds gathered, in some way it was possible for the greater
portion of the men to feel that the day had its special significance
even if they were far from home. Company K, which hailed from Woburn,
was especially well served, and the display of boxes and other
receptacles in the company street excited no little admiration, not to
say envy, in the minds of some not so well provided for. It is stated
that even fluids, particularly interdicted, were smuggled through
some of the packages, notwithstanding the thorough search of the
captain, and specimens of Northern distillations were submitted to that
officer's approval. From that date, "canned tomatoes" acquired a new
distinction. There was a release from the greater part of camp duties
and the time thus secured was devoted to baseball, football and the
other diversions so easily devised by the American youth.

[Sidenote: NOV.-DEC., '62]

A feature of the Thanksgiving spread, possibly not wholly understood
at the time, came out subsequently when the "boys" learned how much
work their pleasure had cost others. C. F. Whitney of Company I was
serving as wagoner, and the night before the 27th, soon after "Taps,"
he was aroused by the wagon-master with the statement that there was no
hardbread for the men, that the morrow brought Thanksgiving; he ordered
Whitney to proceed to the Canal Locks, about three miles away, and with
the commissary sergeant get a load of 'tack. Having worked hard all
day, Whitney naturally demurred, but he had to comply, so he harnessed
his six mules, took in Sergeant Hilton and started on his night ride.
It was after 10 o'clock, the sergeant went to sleep at once on a bed
of bags in the bottom of the wagon, but no such comfort attended the
driver who, in his saddle on the wheel-mule, had to look after things.
About halfway to his destination, he had to pass through a stretch of
always muddy road, now actually overflowing with water, so deep in
places that he had to take his feet from the stirrups to keep them dry.
Night work of late had fallen to Whitney's lot, hence he was sleepy to
the point of actually dozing off while in the saddle, this of course,
after getting through the morass, and from this semi-sleeping state
he was suddenly roused with the cry of "halt," uttered seemingly by a
dozen voices. With as many bayonets pointed at his breast, his first
thought was of "Johnnies," but he put on a bold front and shouted, "Let
the mules alone, I can handle them myself." He would not tell them
where he was going neither would he give the countersign, because he
had none, nor had there been any picket-line along the way before. All
this time the sergeant had slept on in his cosy bed, but he was roused
and proved equally ignorant of the password. It seemed that the Tenth
Vermont, camped near, had just established a picket-post at the place,
and the men were acting according to instructions; much to the disgust
of the two men of the Thirty-ninth they were compelled to turn about
and return to their camp; nor did their troubles end there for, having
cared for his animals and being on the point of turning in himself,
the quartermaster again informed the driver and the sergeant that they
would have to go back for that load of 'tack. So back they went, mules,
mud and all, and with the countersign, getting by the Green Mountain
boys, they reached the canal boat which they found having a great pile
of Thanksgiving boxes from the North; wisely choosing these instead of
the hardbread, they took the offerings to camp, reaching the same just
after reveille, and had no trouble in unloading; and this is how the
regiment got its spread for Thanksgiving.

The remainder of November and the beginning of December had no special
variants from the recent routine of drill, police and picket duty,
though the scribe of Company K makes mention of the formation of a
"construction corps" from a portion of that company, the object being
the erection and equipping of a structure which should be used as a
bath-house and a barber-shop. The labor essential to the cutting down
of the necessary timber, the transportation to camp and its preparation
there for use, absorbed the time and attention of a large number of
men, who welcomed a relief from the constant round of drill with its
endless repetition of facings, pacings and flank-movements, though
the work performed was by no means light. At the same time increased
labor fell on those who were obliged to perform the picket, sentinel,
guard and other duties which were incessant. In the night of the 14th,
a party of rebel raiders surprised in Poolesville a detachment of
Scott's Nine Hundred, a New York Cavalry regiment, resulting in the
capture of a number of the Union soldiers, with the death of one and
the wounding of others. The place being so near the earlier camps of
the Thirty-ninth, on or near the Potomac, the men were not surprised at
increased vigilance in the placing of pickets all along the interval
between the Cross Roads and the Leesburg pike. An observer in Company
B says for this day, "Buried one of our men by the name of Hiedenway
(David), the first one in our company."

During these days, news from the terrible battle of Fredericksburg
began to filter into the camp, at first very favorable for the Union
side and then the awful truth came in all of its horrors. Our men of
the Thirty-ninth had brothers and friends by the hundreds in the Bay
State regiments that suffered there, the news, by no means, making
easier the duties of the guardsmen along the Potomac. The weather was
cold and any proposition to move from the well established camp was
exceedingly unpopular, but just such intimation came in the evening
of the 20th, when orders were received to be ready to march. The boy
who wrote in his diary "We have just got nicely settled for winter"
learned, ere he was many months older, that wars are not conducted
on the basis of being comfortable. The four regiments of the brigade
were in line by nine o'clock in the morning of the 21st. Fortunately
the weather was fine and the start was made, with music by the band,
and six of the miles were marched, before the halt was made for the
preparation of dinner. As Poolesville, the destination, is about twenty
miles away from the Cross Roads (Offutt's) there yet remained a deal of
walking to be done. With all of their camp belongings, over the frozen
ground, the distance seemed greater than it really was.




POOLESVILLE

[Sidenote: DEC. 21, '62]

It was after dark, 6 o'clock on the evening, when the village was
reached. Once a fairly prosperous Southern town, Poolesville revealed
at this time a sorry spectacle of the ravages of war. Many of the
men had straggled, unable to keep the pace of the hard march and only
about one-fifth of the entire body arrived with the colors, but the
delinquents limped loyally in, though late. Accommodations for the
night had to be found wherever available, the village church holding
many, the schoolhouse others; many found shelter in barns and not a few
sought sleep on fence rails whose native hardness was softened a bit by
straw obtained from a nearby strawstack, though its complete demolition
was prevented by those soldiers who had managed to burrow into it. A
sergeant of Company E who kept a small quantity of "commissary" for
medicinal purposes had entrusted the precious flask to the keeping of
John Locke, the most likely member to be faithful to his trust. Alas,
when the sergeant called for the flask he got it empty, the contents
had gone to help dry the thoroughly saturated comrades of Locke, who
thought the boys would never have greater need. While in the morning
of the 22d, some of the regiment were detailed for picket at Edward's
Ferry, more remained in the village. Some of Scott's Nine Hundred, the
regiment that had suffered from White's guerrillas about a week before,
chose this day as one for wreaking vengeance on certain storekeepers,
one of them Jesse Higgins by name, these natives being suspected of
complicity with the enemy. The goods of the merchants were thrown
out regardless and the lucky soldiers who chanced to be near helped
themselves to whatever they liked best, though Companies B, H and K,
being at the Ferry, missed their share of the wreckage. In Poolesville
were thus halted the Thirty-ninth and the Fourteenth New Hampshire;
the Tenth Vermont went further up the river and the Twenty-third Maine
found its post lower down.

Duty along the Potomac was not unlike that performed some weeks before,
but in the interval these men had learned a deal; not only had they
been drilled but they had observed that all of the people resident in
the vicinity were not wholly loyal, that many of them were ready to
pass the desired word along to the enemy whenever opportunity offered,
and for such reasons they determined to piece out their own rations
with whatever was obtainable from the citizens. Nothing that was
edible and transportable was safe from the predatory hands of the men
and boys who, a very few months before, had been conspicuous in their
own localities for their sterling honesty and straightforwardness.
War and so-called necessity worked wonderful transformations in these
well reared New Englanders. If all the stories that have been told in
subsequent years may be believed, the marvel is that the natives had
anything left to subsist upon. December 23rd brought the camp-stores
and equipage by way of the canal, and a large force was set at work
cutting away trees to make ready for the new camp. The site chosen
for the camp was that on which the regiment had halted at the end of
its first considerable march, that from Arlington in the preceding
September. A large detail of men from the several companies, not on
picket, worked hard through Wednesday the 27th, to properly pitch the
tents and so collect the men into camp once more.

[Sidenote: DEC. 28, '62]

Of course the 25th of December came to Camp Davis, the name of the new
winter quarters, just as it did to the rest of the world, but signs of
Christmas were painfully lacking. One youth made this record, "To-day
is Christmas; four of us went out of the lines and got a Christmas
dinner and had it charged to Uncle Sam." Furnishing food to Union
soldiers in those parts must have been like a lottery with the chances
against getting anything back. Said another observer, "Christmas day!
And we would not know it by the work going on in camp; dined on salt
beef, more commonly known as 'salt-horse'." The later days of the month
were devoted to properly equipping the camp which, for location, was
the best yet occupied except for wood and water, the latter having to
be brought fully half a mile, and the former was two miles off. For
purposes of drill the parade ground was unexcelled and was extensive
enough to admit of the maneuvers of an entire division at one time.
Once more the Sibley tents are stockaded and the men believe that
winter quarters are really realized. In the light of later years, the
occupants of that camp claim that there was no better in the entire
army. Though located on a level plain, it was so well drained that no
amount of rain was able to render it disagreeable underfoot, a fact
which no doubt contributed to the prevailing health of the men.

On Sunday, the 28th, as the men were falling in for inspection, their
eyes were gladdened by the sight of the Tenth Massachusetts Battery,
subsequently known to fame as "Sleepers," approaching Camp Davis. This
event is thus cheerfully alluded to in John D. Billing's excellent
history of the Battery, "'How are you, Boxford?' was the greeting
from the Thirty-ninth Regiment, as soon as we were recognized, and it
seemed like meeting old friends to fall in with those who had been
encamped with us on the soil of Massachusetts." It was a strange stroke
of fortune that should bring these Boxford neighbors again so near to
each other, for the battery was assigned to the brigade and found a
camping place close by. This day, too, brought to the ears of many,
for the first time since leaving Massachusetts, the sound of a church
bell, but it was not for these soldiers, who were still perfecting
themselves in the school of the soldier; lessons so well learned that
the Thirty-ninth stood second to none in discipline and soldierly
appearance, and better still in general health, conditions largely due
to the unceasing diligence of the Colonel, with whom drill seemed to be
the chief end of man, especially those wearing uniforms. Long before
daylight in the morning of the 30th, an alarm brought the men into
line and four companies of the Thirty-ninth with a single section of
Sleeper's Battery started off towards Conrad's Ferry where, as usual, a
crossing of the rebels was reported. In light marching order, over the
most difficult of roads, the party hastened to the scene, as supposed,
of trouble. Though there were the reaching of an island in the river
by means of a boat and a certain amount of fortifying, nothing came
of the affair and at 1 p. m., tired and hungry the return trip was
begun, ending at 4 o'clock, with every one out of conceit with military
movements. On the last day in the month the Regiment was mustered for
two months' pay, always a welcome exercise.




1863

[Sidenote: JAN. 2, '63]

The new year was ushered in on Thursday, and the prevailing sentiment
among the men is indicated by this entry in his diary by one who
evidently had entertained other opinions, "The boys are rather blue
on the war subject; they begin to think they will not get home in the
spring." Very few soldiers had any idea of the many long and weary
months before them. The first men who went out, the Three Months' Men,
thought it hardly possible that it would take all of their projected
term to wipe out the Rebellion, nor were the rebels any less in error
in their estimate of the duration of the conflict. In the middle of the
month, the same writer once more reflects thus, "Our hopes of getting
home in the spring are somewhat blighted," yet he and his comrades
attended strictly to duty just the same. As the month progressed,
the men had full opportunity to size up and adequately estimate the
village near which they were encamped. Like everything that ever fell
under the blighting hand of slavery, it exhibited a lack of paint
and enterprise. Poor Richard long since remarked that he who by the
plow would thrive must either hold himself or drive. In the South the
slave-owner did neither; superintendence was entrusted to the overseer
and what work was done, the slave did. How well this was accomplished,
the surroundings showed. It has been said that there were only two
loyal men in the village, Mr. Metzger, the postmaster; and Dr. Brace.
Under such conditions there need be little wonder that the Yankee boys
thought it no sin to spoil the Egyptians.

It was in the night of the 2nd that some vagrant members of Scott's
Nine Hundred, that redoubtable New York cavalry body, which in December
had cleaned out Higgins' store, came back to do it again. On guard
was F. R. W. Hall of Company F whose brother, Eben A., was performing
similar duty in a neighboring building. "Whiskey" was the battle cry
of the New Yorkers and they sailed in to wreck things. At first, to
oppose them, was only "A little red-headed guard" and they soon found
that that _Hall_ could neither be hired nor scared, though he was
extremely happy to find soon at his side the brother, supposed to be in
another place. Both boys were "Sons of Temperance" and they proved to
the rummies that, once at least, prohibition prohibited, for the Halls
managed to keep the mob out till Lieutenant Paul appeared with the
reserve guard; even then the raiders did not subside, for they formed
under their leader preparatory to a fight. Not having their cavalry
outfit with them, they gave way to discretion, always the better part
of valor; and all the more readily when Lieutenant Paul gave the order
to charge, and they rapidly disappeared in the darkness. They had
succeeded in smashing all of the windows, however, and almost unroofing
Hall, whose gory scalp was proclaimed the first case of bloodshed for
the Regiment. Though Higgins might have been a rebel, he doubtless was,
the boys were set to protect and they always obeyed orders.

The 5th of January beheld the return of Colonel Davis to the Regiment,
the command of the brigade devolving on Col. A. B. Jewett, of the Tenth
Vermont, who after all these weeks had discovered that his commission
antedated that of our Colonel just one day and there were people so
uncharitable as to intimate that he had had the document redated just
for this special purpose. Though there may have been those who did
not altogether love Colonel Davis, because of his excessive devotion
to drill, and the rigors of a soldier's life, all were as one in
their admiration of his military bearing and his fitness for the head
of the brigade, while his successor was notably lacking in all such
characteristics. The Colonel made his first reappearance at dress
parade and was greeted with a round of hearty cheers. In the evening he
was honored by the Regiment's gathering round his quarters, accompanied
by the band of the Fourteenth New Hampshire. The serenade prompted the
officer to make a very happy speech, thanking everybody for progress in
the past and urging a continuance in the same commendable direction.
That the head of the Regiment was deeply interested in the welfare of
his command was evident to every man.

The month was not entirely devoid of interest and the sham-battle
between the battery and a portion of Scott's Nine Hundred (Eleventh
New York Cavalry), on the 6th, roused the admiration of all onlookers
to a high pitch; the rapid firing of the guns and the shouts of the
charging cavalry gave the boys a notion of what the real thing must be,
an impression rendered all the more vivid by the accidental wounding of
several of the combatants, through premature discharges and too close
proximity of certain ones. The endless round of all sorts of drill was
rendered less irksome by the remembrance of those at home who were
constantly sending choice bits of food for the delectation of their
dear ones in the field and, to crown all, on the 17th, came seventeen
barrels of apples for the Woburn company, right from the town that had
first produced the famous Baldwin apple, and the generosity of the "K"
boys was unstinted in distributing their pomological treasures among
their less fortunate friends. Sunday, the 18th, some three hundred
or more of the men repaired to the Presbyterian Church for religious
service, expecting to hear the Chaplain, but in his stead, Private
Batcheller, one of the older members of Company B, preached, a fact
well illustrating the diversity of talent among American soldiers.

[Sidenote: Jan. 20, '63]

The "knapsack-drill" of January 20th has lodgement in the minds of
many, the Colonel ordering that the 1 p. m. company drill be executed
in heavy marching order. Considerable growling and grumbling were heard
in the progress of the duty, and at its end Companies F and G gave
three rousing cheers for "knapsack-drill," an act that roused the ire
of the officer so that the companies were ordered on an hour's drill
without cessation. At the end of the battalion-drill, the Regiment
was formed in solid square and Colonel Davis very clearly explained
to the men his reasons for the heavy task imposed, dwelling on his
mortification at the episode of the morning. He said that whatever
had been done as yet, it was only a prelude to what must follow and
he desired the men to become inured to fatigue through such exercises
as those of the earlier hour, concluding his words by the remark that
if they would act like men, they would receive corresponding usage
from him. The next three days were marked by a very severe rain storm;
tents went down before it, and the sheds for the stalling of the
wagon-train mules, some one hundred and thirty in number, fell in upon
the animals. Covered with straw, and saturated with rain, the burden
became too great and the calamity followed, luckily not to the fatal
injury of any of the beasts. The 25th being Sunday, it is recorded
that some of the men went to prayer meeting and that in the afternoon
the Chaplain preached, though his auditors were chiefly from Company
A, the one in which he had enlisted. Of the 29th and 30th, it is told
that a snow storm that would have befitted Vermont or New Hampshire
raged, much to the discomfort of those on guard, while others had not
only to clear the company street but to free the parade ground for
brigade inspection, the same coming on the afternoon of the 31st and
being conducted by Col. Robert Wilson, of the Fourteenth New Hampshire,
Colonel Davis acting Brigadier-General, in the absence of Colonel
Jewett.

February proved to be a stormy month, severe snow storms reminding the
men of the climate at home, but guard rounds had to be maintained, no
matter what the weather might be. On Monday, the 2nd, a battalion of
the Sixth Michigan Cavalry, Major Kenyon, appeared, and became a part
of the local Union force. Armed with the very latest of breechloading
carbines, they had every sign of ability to put up a good fight with
whatever foe the future might develop. Very likely no event of the
month gave the soldiers any more enjoyment than the coming of the
paymaster on the 6th, with the money that the Regiment had been looking
for so long and anxiously. "He took us all by surprise," says one
writer, "coming on the grounds at 3 p. m., with his four-horse team."
While a considerable part of the sum received went into the tills of
local dealers and of the sutler, by far the larger part was sent home
for the comfort of loved ones there, Company K sending thus fully
$2300. The payment was only to the first of November, and it was the
first coming of the dispenser of Uncle Sam's compensation since leaving
Massachusetts. He was employed two days in passing out the money.

[Sidenote: FEB., '63]

One of the episodes of this snowy Poolesville winter was the effort
that a certain notable member of Company ---- made to get out of the
army. On account of a certain grievance, real or fancied, he simulated
insanity so perfectly that there was a pretty general agreement that he
had lost his head. Having committed to memory the entire contents of
the American First Class Reader, he would station himself in the middle
of the parade ground and in the stillness of the night hours declaim
from the reader; even Colonel Davis began to think his man had lost his
reason. Had the soldier stopped here or had his readiness to say a good
thing, regardless of consequences, been under better control, his ruse
probably would have succeeded. In the system of rigid camp neatness, a
barrel for night refuse was provided for every company, to be carried
off each morning; to the increased astonishment of his comrades our
declaimer now added fishing to his pranks and most soberly bobbed for
bites in the filthy liquid. Finally Colonel Davis, after watching
the performance from the tent of a company officer, approached the
fisherman and asked what he was doing. "Fishing, sir," was the sober
reply. "What do you expect to catch?" says the Colonel; "My discharge,
sir." It was there that the man fell down, but he never could resist
the temptation to make an apt reply. Plenty of hard work soon restored
the orator and emulator of Izaak Walton to all of his normal senses and
to becoming a model soldier.

During these days a strange rumor gained credence, viz., that the
Regiment, with the Fortieth and Forty-first was to be assigned to the
nine months' quota, the Government having found that the State had
exceeded its three years' allotment by three regiments. If the origin
of such insane propositions could be ascertained a great boon would be
conferred upon humanity, since many a man found himself most grievously
disappointed when the whole affair was recognized as an illusion. A
great snow storm began on the 17th, and for twenty-four hours raged
fiercely, changing finally into rain, which effectually removed what
otherwise would have occasioned many a backache; the men counted the
time well spent in checkers, cards and other camp diversions, in place
of regular drill. It was a sorry time though for those on guard. The
20th brought pleasure to the quarters of Colonel Davis, for, on this
day, his wife came to pay him a visit. Washington's birthday brought
another old fashioned storm of wind and snow, testing fully the texture
and endurance of the Sibley tents; fuel was scarce also, and, orders to
the contrary notwithstanding, neighboring fence rails found their way
into the fireplaces, thus giving a measure of comfort to the shivering
occupants. The only official notice of the day was the firing of a
salute by Sleeper's Battery, thirty-four guns, the report of which
could hardly be heard above the roar of the storm.

As soon as the storm abated there was the usual heavy detail of men
from the several companies for the purpose of clearing the streets and
parade ground, the wisdom of such procedure had, by this time, become
apparent to the men, since they could go about their several duties
dry shod, while neighboring regiments plodded with wet feet through
the slush and mud which followed the disappearance of the rapidly
melting snow. Experience and observation are the best of teachers. A
very pleasant instance of camp amenities was exhibited in this month,
when First Sergeant Oscar Persons, of Company K, having been promoted
to a second Lieutenancy and assigned to Company D, was presented by
his late comrades with the equipments essential to his new position.
The presentation was made by Lieutenant Wyman, and the recipient
very happily responded. The ever obliging band of the Fourteenth New
Hampshire accompanied the men on their errand of love, and discoursed
music fitting to the occasion. The month ended with the bi-monthly
muster for pay, the same making the Government just four months in
arrears.

[Sidenote: MARCH 17, '63]

March will not be much, if any, improvement on the preceding month.
The demand for fuel to supply heat for cooking and also for rendering
the tents comfortable makes it necessary for details to go further
and further from camp, and it is very fortunate that so much of the
country has been allowed to grow up to forests. All men have to take
their portion of the chopping exercise and in the performance of all
camp duties. Possibly there was some abatement in drill on account
of the weather and consequent condition of the grounds, and if the
wearied soldiers were allowed a little more time in quarters, they
accounted it no real loss. Pertaining to the variable character of
the March weather, and illustrative of certain most admirable racial
characteristics, Abijah Thompson, of "K," tells the story of a certain
Irishman among the Woburn boys, the very best natured lad in the
company, who was on guard duty in the midst of one of the hardest
downpours of that torrential period. The weather, however, made no
difference with Colonel Davis, for his regular rounds were made,
rain or shine; when he neared Patrick the latter faced the officer,
presented arms and said, "Good marnin, Kurnel! It's a foin mornin'
this, if wan't for the rain." 'Tis said the Colonel laughed so hard he
almost fell off his horse. Both February and March witnessed a steady
coming into the lines of rebel soldiers, really deserters, whom it was
necessary to escort down to the City of Washington. To serve on the
squad which thus guarded the men-in-gray to the Capital was considered
to be a privilege. Also in this month, the authorities pursuing their
investigations determined that several so-called Union citizens of the
vicinity were really sympathizers with the South, and for such reasons
a Mr. Pleasants and Colonel Leonards were arrested and sent to the old
Capital prison.

The 17th was "house cleaning" day and, the tents having been removed
from the stockades and everything carried out, the spaces were
carefully inspected by the surgeon, the lieut. colonel and Captain
J. Henry Sleeper of the Battery; the report of the officers was very
complimentary to the Regiment. Whatever the coincidence, the event
had no connection with the British evacuation of Boston nor with St.
Patrick's day. The two months were notable in the number of furloughs
that officers and men obtained for trips back to Massachusetts, not
long ones, but sufficient for a taste of home comforts and a sight of
the dear ones there. The month ended with the severest storm of the
season, the snow falling in great quantities, but at the period of the
equinox, snow cannot be expected to remain a very great while and it
departed more rapidly than it came. An observer on the spot wrote thus
in his journal for the 31st, "Woke up and found the ground covered with
snow; realization of the sunny South is very different from what I had
fancied it."

April found the Thirty-ninth still in its Poolesville camp, that is,
when its members were not out on picket and other duties, the same
extending a long way up as well as down the Potomac. The weather was as
variable as ever, a mixture of good, bad and indifferent, yet through
it all the regiment maintained a fair condition of health. "Many jokes
and sells, for it was All Fools' Day," was the entry in a certain
diary for the first day of the month, and what nonsense a thousand
men of military age could not devise on such an occasion, it would be
difficult to imagine. The 2d was the regular New England Fast Day, and
a holiday was proclaimed by the Colonel, for which he received the
mental if not verbal thanks of all the "boys" who proceeded to enjoy
the day to the limit. Probably as large a proportion of the regiment
attended the religious services at 11 a. m., conducted by Chaplain
French, as were present at similar exercises at home churches in
distant Massachusetts. However this may have been, there was no failure
in taking part in the races, sparring-matches and various games, or
at least witnessing them. The baseball game was between the men of
Sleeper's Battery and those selected from the Thirty-ninth with the
honors remaining with the Infantry, though the cannoniers were supposed
to be particularly skillful in the throwing of balls.

[Sidenote: APR. 11, '63]

The 5th of April found the ground again covered with a heavy fall
of snow, and though it departed quickly it left a deal of mud and
discomfort generally. The roads and by-paths were not so well drained
as the grounds of our Bay State regiment. Thanks to the careful
annalist, we know that the new bakery was in working order on the 8th
and that the first batch of bread was to be baked that night. Too bad
that it had not come earlier or that any necessity for its coming
at all existed when the entire camp was so near the army bakery of
Washington. Once more rumors became current that moving day was near,
and Saturday, the 11th, it was given out that seven days' rations
would be drawn on Monday, the 13th, preparatory to departure. A target
shoot marked this last Saturday in the Poolesville camp. Sunday was
a beautiful spring day, though not as quiet as the day might be
elsewhere, for the bustle of preparation was evident on all sides. The
ever welcome band of the New Hampshire Regiment made the time pass all
the more rapidly with its vibrant melody. There were just two days more
in Camp Davis and then came the change.




A RAINY MARCH


The first orders were to the effect that the whole brigade was to
move, but these were so far modified that only the Thirty-ninth was to
go, though the New Hampshire Regiment followed later. Washington was
known to be the destination, and provost duty was understood to be the
occupation. The start was made in the midst of a driving rain, a fact,
however, which did not prevent the Granite State friends and those of
the Battery thronging about to wish their comrades a "God-speed." It
was pretty generally understood that the Thirty-ninth was selected as
the first to go because of the rasping relations, as to priority of
commissions,[D] existing between the respective colonels of the two
regiments.

The storm did not prevent the New Hampshire band from turning out to
give us a hearty send-off and there was need of it, since the general
sentiment, long before the halt for the night came, was "the hardest
yet." "Now came an awful march through mud and water up to our knees;
many straggled behind, while others found it easier going ahead of the
Regiment." A stop for dinner was made in a wood by the roadside, and by
patience and care fires were made for the preparation of coffee, and
then we were off again till at a distance of fourteen miles from Camp
Davis, about three miles from Rockville, a very moist camping place was
found in some pine woods, and such rest as saturated garments would
permit was sought beneath the protecting cover of shelter-tents though
many, utterly miserable in their soaked condition, preferred to stand
before great fires which they had coaxed into burning. Others, more
thoughtful, but less careful as to orders, had taken the opportunity
to seek cover in barns and other places of refuge along the way, some
even getting good lodgings in dwelling houses, all confident that they
could easily overtake the Regiment after a night's rest and drying.
Appreciation of Maryland villages or hamlets was at the lowest ebb,
one observer charactering Dawsonville as a place of one house, a
blacksmith shop and a few other tumbledown buildings, while Darnstown
was considered appropriately named without further comment.

The morning of the 16th came none too soon, and many of the boys who
were getting great lessons in the "school of the soldier," started
off before the regimental orders to march were given at 9 o'clock,
the rain continuing to fall, though not with all the emphasis and
continuity of yesterday. Those who had the money and started early
enough obtained excellent breakfasts in Rockville, the county seat
of Montgomery County, and by far the prettiest village these blue
clad wanderers had seen since passing through New Jersey, an opinion
coincided with by more than one regiment in subsequent months. Here
began a new experience since, thence onward to the Capital, the road
was macadamized which, however much dryer it might be for the feet,
soon began to make them exceedingly sore, more trying even than the
muddy roads thus far encountered. While thus advancing on Washington,
the headquarter's wagon was met on its way to Poolesville and, on the
order of Colonel Davis, the mail belonging to the Regiment was taken
out and distributed to the men, a most cheerful episode in an otherwise
very dreary day.

[Sidenote: APR. 16, '63]

Whatever the speed of the men who marched ahead of the Regiment, they
were all held up by the vigilant guards at the first post of the
pickets who were stationed around the entire city. This was a few miles
before reaching Tenallytown and, at the post, the advance stragglers
awaited the coming of the main body. Showers had been intermittent
throughout the day and, after a march of sixteen miles, the drenched
sons of Massachusetts were pleased to reach the above named place,
practically a Maryland village, though within the confines of the
District of Columbia. In or near the village was a large edifice, used
as a retreat for the priests and pupils of Georgetown College during
the summer season, and here the bedraggled Regiment found refuge,
reaching it through the great fortifications which surrounded the city,
portions of which had been seen on the Virginia side of the Potomac,
the nearest forts being Reno and Gaines. That straggling was common
became apparent when an entire company found ample space in a single
room, whose comforts were all the more comfortable as the men heard the
rain which persisted through the most of the night.

"Somewhere the sun is shining" never had a more hearty greeting than
when, after so many hours of pitiless pelting, the morning of the
17th dawned clear and bright. Naturally there were orders to dry and
clean up, the house grates affording opportunity for one, and our own
industry accomplishing the other. It was ten o'clock when the start
was made, but alas for human expectations! In vain were all of our
burnishings, for the mud, Georgetown-way, was simply bottomless, and
long ere the latter city was reached, the Thirty-ninth looked even
worse than it did when Tenallytown was attained, though in their
anxiety to retain the morning's polish, in several cases dividing
fences were broken down that men might march between the street-fence
and the houses, thus getting out of some of the mud. The ineffective
rage of some of the protesting housewives is still remembered. But an
excess of mud and water could not efface the results of months of
the hardest kind of discipline and when "company front, by the right
into line" was heard, it was obeyed with a readiness and unanimity
that would have delighted the great Frederick and, baggage-burdened,
mud-bespattered and wearied with forty-eight hours of most trying
marching, the Regiment acquitted itself most admirably through the
streets and avenues of Washington. At last the men realized the value
of their arduous labors on the drilling-grounds of Poolesville; they
believed in their Colonel and his associate officers, and when they saw
their lines as an arrow straight, every one, in spite of all obstacles,
keeping perfect step, best of all they believed in themselves.

FOOTNOTES:

[D] Reference to the records of the officers, as given in the archives
of Vermont and Massachusetts, shows that Colonel Davis was commissioned
August 29, 1862, and Colonel Jewett on the 26th, though the document
was not issued until the 30th. Since possession is universally
considered nine points of law, it would seem that the burden of
evidence was on the side of the Massachusetts Colonel.




WASHINGTON.


The halting place was Martindale Barracks, named thus for General
John H. Martindale who, a West Pointer from New York (1835), had won
distinguished honors in the Peninsular campaign and, from the preceding
November, had been Military Governor of Washington. The barracks,
themselves, large and roomy, were located near the "circle," so called,
where Washington and New Hampshire Avenues intercept Twenty-third
Street, all being to the Northwest of the White House. The men had no
difficulty in recognizing the equestrian statue of Washington, by Clark
Mills, which, since February, 1860, had stood as the principal figure
in the Circle. The buildings to be occupied by the Thirty-ninth were
new, well ventilated and lighted, having all reasonable conveniences,
two stories in height, the first for officer's quarters, cooking and
dining rooms, while in the second story were the best of accommodations
for the men. The quarters had been occupied hitherto by one regiment
only, the One Hundred and sixty-ninth New York, which having reported
in Washington, in October, '62, had been doing provost duty until a few
days before when it was ordered to proceed southward to assist General
John J. Peck in the defense of Suffolk, Virginia. The hospital, large
and well equipped, won the admiration of the men though, fortunately,
there were few occupants during the regiment's stay in the city.

[Sidenote: APR., '63]

Such were the new appointments to which the Thirty-ninth was commended,
something of a change from its former rural surroundings, and a new
course of duties was about to be undertaken, though hardly had the
brightening up of uniforms and equipments begun ere orders came to
stay proceedings, for the regiment was to proceed at once to Fortress
Monroe, possibly to have a part in the Suffolk campaign. Had this order
not been countermanded and the organization had followed after the One
Hundred and Sixty-ninth New York, and had participated in the latter's
services, while the Thirty-ninth would have had enough to do, it would
have entirely escaped the Wilderness, Spottsylvania, Weldon Railroad
and other experiences which make up its thrilling war history. Once
more settled in their new quarters, confident that provost work in
the Capital is before them for an unknown period, the men proceed to
burnish up their weapons, to wash, brush and brighten their uniforms
and by the time for dress parade, at the close of this first day in
Washington, the closest observer could not have detected any traces of
the tribulations through which the soldiers had so recently passed.

It is a life of rigid routine to which the regiment is now committed;
military conventionalities in the highest degree are to be the rule for
nearly three months; no more "Go as you please" when on picket, nor
the free and easy conditions of the Poolesville camp for, seemingly,
the eyes of the public are on every man and he must be in the stiffest
form of polished brasses, dustless apparel and shiny shoes. The
discipline that was thought so severe before, now becomes doubly so.
Reveille sounds at 5.30 a. m. and thence onward till 8 o'clock, save
for breakfast, the detailed men are preparing for inspection, which
takes place at the office of the provost marshal, Captain Todd. When
on duty, the utmost punctiliousness is demanded and, if the men of
the Thirty-ninth do not approach perfection, it will not be the fault
of the regulations nor of the officers who direct. To such an extent
are the polishing and shining of the rifles carried that some of the
men are actually afraid that they will wear the barrels out by such
constant attrition. When fully settled into the system of provost and
other forms of duty, much of the old time drill is suspended, but there
is something to do every day, as much as if the men were laboring in a
shop, at the desk or on a farm.

The chief exhibition occasions are those of dress parade when
distinguished people are not unlikely to appear. At such times,
President Lincoln is seen, and Senator Henry Watson, that Massachusetts
man of the people, is not an unusual figure. Is Colonel Davis proud
of his men? Rather, how his face lights up at the immediate and
perfect response to his commands, and every movement of the long line
of soldiers is an effectual refutation of the stilted idea that well
informed men cannot make good soldiers. Indeed the entire war was
proof convincing that thinking bayonets are the most reliable. Of the
satisfying spectacle of dress parade, an observer of the time comments,
"So perfect and strict were the drill and personal appearance that in
our line, of from eight hundred to nine hundred men, not the slightest
difference could be detected in any movement from one flank to the
other, as if performed by one man, and, in that test of perfect drill,
'Order arms,' though on a brick sidewalk, not one musket was behind
the other, all striking with one crash, which startled the spectators,
resembling a perfect volley of musketry."

[Sidenote: APR., '63]

It was a great change from picketing the banks of the Potomac and
doing guard duty about the Poolesville region, to patrolling the
thoroughfares of Washington and guarding such points as the War
Department, the White House, the offices of the paymaster and
quartermaster general, General Heintzelman's Headquarters, the medical
purveyor, the post office, the headquarters for forage, corrals for
horses and mules, contraband camps, courts-martial and other places of
kindred character. The men who had all of these duties to look after
grew to consider Washington a paradise for officers not on duty, but
quite the reverse for the enlisted man. The former could come and go
at his own sweet will while the latter, if he got a pass at all, was
subjected to so many conditions that more than half of the pleasure was
lost.

At the same time, in one way or another, the Regiment grew to know
Washington pretty well; the most of the notable points were inspected
and the young men from far away homes took pleasure in seeing the
evidences of real home life on every hand; said one of them, "It seems
good to be in civilization once more." The 21st of April brought
the New Hampshire friends of Poolesville memory and those beholding
bade the Fourteenth a hearty welcome; the regiment was assigned to
quarters on New York Avenue, its principal duty being the care of the
Central guard house; a fact that resulted most happily when Lieut.
Carroll D. Wright, subsequently colonel, was in charge, for certain
inconsiderate members of Scott's Nine Hundred, having run in some of
the Thirty-ninth's men, without sufficient reason, that very efficient
officer released the prisoners at once, the incident being the only one
in which our Massachusetts men were even temporarily under arrest in
Washington. The two regiments partook of the neighborliness, so long
characteristic of the states whence they had come.

Many a soldier boy made mention of the fact that on the 22nd Uncle
Sam's paymaster happened around and left four months' compensation,
squaring accounts to the first of March, and with "plenty of money in
our pockets" even provost guards could be gay and happy. An indication
of the steadiness of at least some of the men is found when a diarist
writes of the city division of the Sons of Temperance and the cordial
reception accorded him and the lieutenant who accompanied him; later
the same writer states that a large number of soldiers were present;
not all soldiers were or are dissolute. In these days the objects of
interest were pretty thoroughly inspected and many a lad thought his
blue coat quite in place in the President's blue room; and few items
near escaped them. They even noted the cow that furnished the milk for
the President's family, and some admired the equestrian Jackson, nearly
opposite the White House; they threaded the mazes of the Smithsonian
Institute, lingering longest over Catlin's wonderful collection of
Indian faces, and one recites his pleasure at meeting Frank Brownell,
the slayer of Jackson, the Mansion House murderer of Colonel Ellsworth
of the New York Fire Zouaves. On the 28th the shoulder-scales that
became a part of the display-uniform thereafter were dealt out, a fact
that secured for the Thirty-ninth the reputation from certain ignorant
fellows of being a regiment of major generals. The month ended with a
general observance of the National Fast Day appointed by the President
in compliance with a request of the National Senate that he set apart a
day for national prayer and humiliation.

[Sidenote: MAY, '63]

May found everybody intent on the struggle which Union and Confederate
soldiers were waging on the banks of the Rappahannock. Hooker, who
had been preparing since the last of January, had begun the campaign
which Union-loving people were wishing would atone for the disaster of
December at Fredericksburg. Again the latter name became familiar to
the national ear, and these Massachusetts men in Washington believed
that their fellow native of the Bay State would atone for some of
the earlier misfortunes. Incidentally much extra work came to the
regiment in the care of rebel prisoners, whom the Federals captured
in the later days of April and the earlier ones of May. Also, it was
the task of the Thirty-ninth to escort many of the captives to more or
less remote points for permanent retention. Another duty was that of
returning to the army at the front large relays of deserters, many of
whom had returned under the general amnesty proclaimed for them, and
in visiting Fredericksburg for this purpose, the escort had a chance
to see what real war meant. While following the forces in the field
up to and through Chancellorsville, there was no lessening of local
occupation and all articles of wearing apparel had to be kept just as
bright as ever.

On the 10th much attention was attracted by the funeral procession of
General A. W. Whipple, one of the victims of Chancellorsville, having
been shot on the 4th, though he survived till the 7th. A native of
Greenwich, Massachusetts, he was graduated at West Point, 1841, and his
fellow Massachusetts soldiers felt almost a personal interest in the
tokens of respect as the procession passed, including, among many other
distinguished public officers, President Lincoln; the pall-bearers were
eight first sergeants from the Thirty-ninth Regiment. For many years,
thereafter, one of the great forts on the Virginia side of the Potomac
was to bear his name. Those of the Regiment, not on other duty on the
11th and 12th, had the benefit of one of the periodical scares liable
to any locality near the seat of war. Just before dress parade on the
earlier date, at a quarter of six, orders came to have the Regiment
ready to march to the Chain Bridge, the most northerly of the three
great connections between the District and Virginia. After supper, with
rubber blankets and overcoats properly slung, the men were in line,
prepared for the order to advance to repel any possible rebel raid. The
bridge is about five miles from the barracks and the troops reached
that point soon after 10 p. m. No sign of any enemy appearing, they
stacked arms by the roadside and proceeded to get what rest they could
from the materials in their possession, every one taking the trip as a
mild kind of lark. At an early hour of the 12th the return march was
made by the men, tired and dusty, though they were quite prepared for
the eight o'clock breakfast which the cooks had in readiness.

It was not all work in Washington; there were pranks by the score,
and now and then one was written down in the book of someone's
recollection,--witness the following: "a corporal of Company A with a
guard was detailed to look after certain condemned goods some two miles
out; with stripes and chevrons he was as slick and dapper a youth as
ever wore a uniform. Without a cent in his pocket, and his entire party
of twelve men equally lacking, he took them all to the theatre to see
Maggie Mitchell play 'Little Barefoot'; he had said to the men, 'Be
ready at seven o'clock, sharp, with shoes blacked and with brass scales
on shoulders, the U. S. on the belts, well polished.' They obeyed and
were marched off the grounds and along Pennsylvania Ave., the Corporal
saluting any patrol they chanced to meet, right up to the theatre,
itself; past the ticket-office, and when tickets for the company were
demanded, the natty corporal threatened to arrest any one venturing
to halt or impede his men, so in they went to the very best seats in
the building, two dollar ones, and there he seated his squad. Never
was play better enjoyed and when, at 9 o'clock or later, a lieutenant
of cavalry looked the house over in search of parties without proper
credentials, the corporal rose and, like a veritable Crichton, saluted;
how could any officer disturb such serenity and immaculateness? He
asked no questions; not a boy in the party understood the circumstances
under which they were having the time of their lives, and the return
was quite as successful as the going; the whole affair, a triumph of
unqualified bluff and cheek."

[Sidenote: MAY 24, '63]

Very likely many good veterans never knew that the Northern soldiers
in Washington maintained an active Division of the Sons of Temperance,
having their meetings in Odd Fellows Hall, corner of Nineteenth Street
and Pennsylvania Avenue, and that, on public occasions, no branch
of the order turned out more men. Several officers and men of the
Thirty-ninth were deeply interested in the society, and one of them
records with some evident satisfaction the fact that he had closed a
rum hole and arrested the keeper, making one less source of temptation.
On the 24th the boys from New England, with eyes alert for anything
savoring of home, discover the passing of the Eleventh Massachusetts
Battery, the Commonwealth's only Nine Months' Artillery organization,
on its way homeward. Naturally the exchange of greetings was most
hearty. On meeting Major S. E. Chamberlain of the First Massachusetts
Cavalry, only recently severely wounded, yet out and ready to return,
an admirer writes, "If the service were made up of officers like him,
more would be done towards putting down the Rebellion."

Pay-day came on the 28th, and the promptness of the Government won no
end of praise from the always impecunious soldiers, a feeling that they
were disposed at a later time to considerably moderate.

The crowning event of the end of the month was the joint drill of the
Regiment along with the Fourteenth New Hampshire some three miles away,
in the rear of Mt. Pleasant Hospital on Fourteenth Street. It was hot
and dusty, there having been no rain for three weeks, but the men were
put through their evolutions by Brig. General Martindale, in a manner
that evidently met his approval, whatever those exercised may have
thought of it. White gloves and shiny scales suffered from the heat and
dust laden air, but the men bore ample testimony to the quality of the
drill on the old Poolesville grounds. However, the principal honors
came when the return was made, for though the route step was allowed
until the heart of the city was reached, then came the display moment
and, in column of companies, the Regiment wheeled into Pennsylvania
Avenue with the precision of a machine, winning the applause of the
crowd of officers who were occupying the piazzas of Willard's Hotel;
and without music, but with the regular tramp, tramp, that drill alone
can impart, the men marched to their quarters with an added notch in
their appreciation of what the Thirty-ninth could do.

In the way of dust and heat, June was to be a trying month for the men
who had to keep themselves in the very primmest form possible, since
to be neat and speckless was deemed the highest attainment of a soldier
in town. In those days there was voting by the citizens on local
matters and the drift of the ballots cast on the first day of the month
gave indications of a large secession spirit in the city. On the second
day, the Thirty-fourth Massachusetts appeared in Washington for the
performance of duties, similar to those already falling to the lot of
the Thirty-ninth. Though from Worcester County and Berkshire there was
the common bond of statehood, and the Thirty-fourth also prided itself
no little on its discipline and well drilled ranks. One of the members
of the Thirty-ninth comments on the hardness of appearance of some of
the prisoners whom he had to watch over and remarks that, at the window
by his beat is a girl, about eighteen years old, who is a rebel spy,
and that for five months she was a corporal in the Union ranks. Of this
same person, Colonel Lincoln in his story of the Thirty-fourth relates
that, to curb her and keep her within bounds, one of his officers was
obliged to handcuff her.

[Sidenote: JUNE 15, '63]

So far as the amenities of Washington life for the regiment were
concerned, nothing contributed more than the evenings spent in
connection with the Sons of Temperance organization, of which something
might be said in addition to former items. Formed in the Poolesville
camp during the preceding winter, it had been chartered by the Grand
Lodge of Massachusetts and was known as Army Lodge, Number 39, and
after reaching the Capital, its membership increased to about two
hundred. No better indication of the moral quality of the regiment
could be found. Similar organizations among the residents of the
city were especially hospitable, and invitations to all sorts of
entertainment were of frequent occurrence. A festival on the 12th,
where not only the delicacies of the season were served, but where
literary and elocutionary ability were displayed, was long memorable
in regimental circles. Also long remembered was Monday, the 15th,
when large details assisted in bearing to the several hospitals the
grievously wounded from Chancellorsville, many of whom had been
lying on the field for almost two weeks with scant attention, some
having suffered the amputation of limbs at the hands of Confederate
surgeons. Carried upon stretchers as gently as possible, some of them
fully two miles, through the intense heat, some died on the way,
many more soon after arriving. While people along the route did all
that they could do to alleviate their suffering, the condition of
these unfortunate men was a startling lesson to all of the awful
possibilities of war.

It would be very strange if the guarding of the White House grounds
did not occasion some meetings with the President. Of William S.
Sumner, Company H, a second cousin of Senator Charles Sumner, the
following is related: He had been stationed at a path, leading across
a recently seeded lawn, the path having formed a short cut to one of
the departments. Several officers had been turned back, when Sumner saw
the president approaching to take the cut-off himself. He was promptly
halted when the President exclaimed, "What's up, Sentry?" To this,
the sentinel replied, "The grass is up, Mr. Lincoln." Looking down at
his feet, the president said, "Some of it would be down, if I crossed
over the lawn. I gave the order to place a sentinel here and I am just
ready to be an offender." He commended the soldier for obeying his
orders so strictly, even to halting the President, and Sumner was also
commended by his own officers. Later when a comrade of his company had
obtained a sick furlough and could not secure transportation, Sumner
went with him to the White House, to present the case to Mr. Lincoln,
who, remembering the incident of the hold-up at the lawn, readily wrote
a line to the quartermaster which speedily brought the desired means of
going home.

The campaign which was to reach its culmination at Gettysburg was well
under way. Lee was headed northward and Union Governors were speeding
troops towards the South to assist in driving him back. Naturally,
expectation was at fever heat and every rumor simply added to the
excitement. Some of the men who visited Baltimore to escort thither
certain prisoners found the city with barricades in the streets and
negroes working on fortifications, all under the apprehension of the
coming of the rebel army. Friday, the 26th, under the tidings that the
enemy was near Fort Massachusetts, north of Georgetown, the regiment
was ordered to be in readiness to move at a moment's notice. Ammunition
was given out and, in light marching order, the men were excitedly
expectant when the order came to turn in and "snooze." As the sequel
showed, had the Thirty-ninth and other regiments marched out beyond
Tenallytown, a great wagon-train might have been saved, but those in
command had not the power of reading the future.

[Sidenote: JUNE 28, '63]

How near the men came to meeting Stuart's Cavalry appeared a little
later. Rumors were afloat as to some sort of disaster on the Maryland
side of the Potomac and not so very far away from the District. The
result was that late at night, orders were received to start at once
for the scene of depredation and after a rapid march of several miles
beyond the Chain Bridge, line of battle was formed at about two o'clock
in the morning of the 29th. If all concerned could have known that the
terrible Stuart and his men were many miles away at the time, with
no thought whatever of molesting Washington or its defenders, very
likely the impromptu bivouac or "In place, rest" might have been more
comfortable than it really was. The event, in which any act on the part
of the regiment was altogether lacking, was one more of those audacious
deeds for which the Confederate Kleber was famous. Crossing the
Potomac at Rowser's Ford somewhat south of Poolesville, under the most
difficult circumstances, early in the morning of the 28th, he rode east
to Rockville, whence a detachment, a very small one, dashing towards
the District, encountered a wagon-train of one hundred and twenty-five
vehicles, heavily loaded, on their way to supply the Union Army, then
marching towards the north. Though Stuart was able to retain the train
and to take it with him into Pennsylvania, the delays occasioned by it
rendered him and his men much less efficient in the great encounter at
Gettysburg than they might have been otherwise.

The resignation of General Hooker from the command of the Army of the
Potomac had produced many an expression of regret among the rank and
file throughout the army, but especially were regrets expressed among
the men reared in Massachusetts, the boyhood's home of "Fighting Joe."
With the steady progress of the rival armies northward, it was apparent
that a great battle was impending, and that all available troops would
be called into the fray, though the demand did not come quite as early
as expected. While on the banks of the Mississippi, Vicksburg, and
around the quiet Pennsylvanian city, Gettysburg, were acquiring new
significance in the world's history, the capital city, Washington,
was preparing for the celebration of the 4th of July, just as if that
were the only matter of importance. To begin with, all guards and
patrols were reduced one half in numbers, thus leaving a larger force
to participate in the parade. The military escort consisted of the
Second District of Columbia Volunteers, the Fourteenth New Hampshire,
the Thirty-fourth and Thirty-ninth Massachusetts Regiments. The civic
organizations of the city looked and marched their best; the Marine
Band discoursed the kind of music for which it was famous. Added
interest might have been given to the day, had news from the two
great battles, just fought and won, arrived in time. They would have
given the celebration the greatest cause for enthusiasm ever had by
an Independence Day, not accepting the first one of all. One prosaic
participant comments only this, "We marched from seven-thirty to one
o'clock; the sun terribly hot." So far as the military features were
concerned, the day ended at the Provost marshal's office, where all
were reviewed by Generals Heintzelman and Martindale. On reaching
their quarters, the soldiers were regaled with as good a dinner as
their cooks were able to provide. Another loyal Bay Stater entered on
his book these characteristic words, "It was very well, but nothing
when compared with Boston celebrations."

Sunday, the 5th, brought to the city general Daniel E. Sickles, minus
the leg which he lost on the second day of Gettysburg, out by the
peach orchard. A detachment of the Thirty-ninth met the distinguished
officer and escorted him to his home. Official news of the surrender of
Vicksburg to General Grant was received on the 7th and loyal Washington
went wild with marching columns serenading prominent officials and
with the general illumination, the Martindale Barracks not accepted.
President Lincoln, members of his Cabinet and Major General Halleck
were called on and each one responded with an appropriate speech. On
the 9th came the orders which, long expected, were not unwelcome, for,
though the Washington tour of duty was free from long marches, the
risk of battle and the privations of camp, there was ever the thought
that the service was not strictly ideal for real soldiers, hence the
willingness with which dress coats and other form of superfluous
clothing were packed against their possible need in the following
winter. Contents for the knapsacks were chosen with considerable more
judgment than would have been used nine months before.




JOINING THE POTOMAC ARMY


[Sidenote: JULY 10, '63]

It was about eight o'clock in the evening when the Regiment formed line
for the last time on the parade ground and the men marched off for
the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad station. The drums were beating and
laughter and shouting were quite in contrast with the solemn demeanor
of former passages through Washington, then intent on making and
retaining a reputation for discipline and self control. At the station
there was a considerable wait for the Thirty-fourth Massachusetts
and two batteries which were to accompany us. Hence it was late of
the ninth or, rather early in the morning of the 10th, before the
start from the city was made. Seven hundred and fifty strong, a
large shrinkage for the nine months of peaceful service, loaded upon
freight cars, the Regiment was headed for Harper's Ferry. All sorts of
items made the journey long and tedious; says one of the boys, "The
locomotive came near running over a 'nigger'; the train broke in two;
one of the cars ran off the track," and another observer comments on
the heat and closeness of the night and cars. The ride during the day
was varied with characteristic incidents of the halts where efforts
were made to secure food from nearby houses; at Frederick Junction
where a branch road runs up to the city, made famous by Barbara
Frietchie and Whittier, other troops joined the train and the same sped
on to its destination, not exactly the Ferry itself, but Sandy Hook,
the Maryland village opposite.

Darkness had settled down when the train reached the point of
unloading, and the debarkation was effected with every one wishing he
could see the wonderful panorama that the place afforded, but before
the scenery could be enjoyed there was the biggest climb before the
men that they had ever undertaken. The road was only an apology for
one, though its mud was deep and adhesive; following closely one's
file leader was necessary, if a man would keep in the procession.
Finally there came a real climb up a mountain's side with every man for
himself, until there was a blessed emergence on a plateau where, mud
encrusted, the men threw themselves upon the ground and slept the sleep
of exhaustion. The sun of the 11th, was well up the sky, ere the
wearied climbers awoke to admire the scene developed around them. It
did not matter much at what time the waking came, since there were no
rations and the company cooks had no facilities for cooking even were
rations ready. It was not till a large detail had gone down to the
railroad and brought hence the hardtack, coffee and pork, that eating
could be resumed, each one becoming his own cook, though some of the
soldiers declared that a twenty-four hours' fast, along with unusual
exertion had made the repast the most appetising they had eaten in
months.

Those thus inclined had a chance to view a landscape which had engaged
the attention of Washington and Jefferson, and which in more recent
times had been the observatory of John Brown, previous to the raid
which, without doubt, had helped precipitate the great conflict. Down
along the opposite banks of the Potomac were the blackened ruins of
the great armory, where had been made so many guns, now in the hands
of the enemy, and nearer the middle of the village was the fire-engine
house which was to go down into history as the "John Brown Fort." At
Harper's Ferry, the Shenandoah joins the Potomac, and, as a point of
vantage, it had been held by both rebel and Federal. A year before,
the place had been given up by Col. D. S. Miles to Stonewall Jackson,
and is now in Confederate possession, though the hurried construction
of a bridge across the Shenandoah indicates a disposition on the part
of the men in gray to depart. The retreat of Lee from Gettysburg had
involved the entire region in uncertainty, hence the ordering out of
regiments from Washington, and the presence in the immediate locality
of the Eighth, Forty-sixth and Fifty-first Massachusetts, nine months'
regiments, which on their way home from North Carolina were shunted off
into this section, along with the Thirty-ninth, forming a brigade under
the command of General Henry S. Briggs, first colonel of the Tenth
Infantry, also a Bay State organization.

[Sidenote: JULY 12, '63]

While individuals might improve the opportunity to admire the locality
and to secure whatever the vicinity afforded in the way of food, it was
not a tour of observation that took these men to this elevated section,
and about noon of Sunday, the 12th, came orders to move, but according
to traditional custom, the order was not carried out until six o'clock.
The march of the preceding night had convinced many that they were too
heavily laden, and there being near the camp an elderly gentleman of a
most obliging nature, he consented to take charge of bundles which the
men made up, and, carefully marked, left in his care, to be called for
later. Of course many who relieved themselves of burdens never called
for their possessions and the most of them thought the man himself
would become tired of his charge; but when years afterwards, a Woburn
veteran tried the experiment of writing for his package, it came back
to him forthwith, a remarkable tribute to the honesty and system of the
man. During the ensuing night very many, who had not thus anticipated
the exactions of the march, lessened their burdens by throwing away
what had become intolerable.

The roads, trod by new regiments, were always marked by just such
evidence of the lessons of experience. The regiments thus starting were
the Eighth, Forty-sixth, Fifty-first and Thirty-ninth Massachusetts,
forming the Fourth Provisional Brigade of the Second Division, First
Army Corps; the respective commanders being Generals John Newton of the
corps, John C. Robinson of the division, and Henry S. Briggs of the
brigade. The Thirty-fourth, which had accompanied the Thirty-ninth from
Baltimore, remained and gave the parting good word as the Thirty-ninth
departed, the two organizations not to meet again until the homeward
march through Richmond in 1865.




AT THE FRONT


When a brigade advances, all portions thereof do not, cannot move at
once, hence it was fully nine o'clock in the evening of the 12th,
before all were fully under way. It is a forced march on which the
soldiers are entering, and those who are keeping the run of events
will merge the 12th and 13th together, there being no good stopping
place between them. As one writer expresses it, "up hill and down, so
dark that we can scarcely see, all night, right up to 5 o'clock in
the morning, when we halt for rest and breakfast in a belt of woods,
about two miles from Boonsboro."[E] The trials of that night were long
matters of reference, blankets were thrown away, so heavy did they
become under the severe strain to which all were subjected. When the
halt came, many threw themselves upon the ground for sleep, rather than
prepare their coffee, the prime source of strength to the campaigner,
and some of those who did set about breakfast getting immediately fell
asleep over the task, so completely worn out were the marchers by the
exactions of the night.

[Sidenote: JULY 13, '63]

Nor was the end yet, since all too soon for the tired soldiers the
sound of "assembly" calls them into the ranks and "forward" is again
the word. To crown their discomforts, rain begins to fall and the mud
to deepen, as the ranks once more press forward through Boonsboro, and
thence over ways trodden by the participants in the Antietam battle of
the year before, the men obey orders and, being at the right of the
brigade, they pretty effectually distance their friends in the other
regiments and, finding themselves practically alone, they are obliged
to halt and await the coming up of the remainder of the brigade; so
thorough had been the disciplinary drills on the Poolesville parade,
the men of the Thirty-ninth were equal to almost any exaction. The
termination of the long march was Funkstown, an insignificant Maryland
village, important only as the point near which was stationed a part
of the Army of the Potomac, all awaiting the word to advance against
Lee, whose forces had been unable to recross the Potomac, on account of
the heavy rains, which had greatly swollen the waters of that important
stream.

Also the name had been heard a year before, when the Battle of Antietam
had for the first time given Funkstown distinction, otherwise it
might have slumbered a thousand years with no signs of awakening. To
the wearied men of the Thirty-ninth who, in twenty hours or less,
had traversed through rain and mud from twenty-five to thirty miles
of wretched roads any sort of place was agreeable for a terminal,
and they were glad to hear the command "Halt," and the subsequent
direction to pitch tents was equally grateful. Those that could turned
in early, but those unlucky ones who had to stand guard faced their
duty grimly, realizing that war was not altogether fun. A skirmish
line actively engaged, out towards the lines of the enemy, gave to
these inexperienced soldiers just the least foretaste of what hostile
bullets meant. There was a general feeling that the morrow would bring
the clash of arms, and that the days of preparation were over. Ten days
after Gettysburg, the Confederates, at bay between the river and the
Federals, must either fight, drown or surrender.

Lieut. Colonel Peirson who, when a member of the Twentieth
Massachusetts had served on the staff of General Sedgwick, now
commanding the Sixth Army Corps, naturally improved the opportunity to
call upon his former leader. Our officer was received most kindly and
the situation was freely discussed, the General saying that he had just
returned from a conference of all the general officers, at which it was
decided that it was then inexpedient to attack Lee, his force being
about as large as our own and his position for defense being stronger
than ours for attack. So depleted were the regiments by the great
battle, so recently fought, the Thirty-ninth was as large as almost any
brigade. Years later, on meeting General Meade in Boston, the decision
of the conference was confirmed, the Potomac Army Commander telling
Colonel Peirson that the risk involved was considered too great. Of
course of this the rank and file, wondering when the orders to attack
would be heard, knew nothing.

The dawn of Tuesday, the 14th, revealed an entirely different
situation; the Confederates, afar from their case of supplies,
impoverished as to ammunition by the demands of Gettysburg, hence in
no condition to attack even if so disposed, had worked industriously
all of Monday, the 13th, in constructing a pontoon bridge across the
Potomac, at Falling Waters, over which they had withdrawn during the
night. To the rank and file, the situation did not appeal as it did
to those in command who saw in the escape of the enemy the possible
results of the fierce engagement at Gettysburg vanish away. Men with
guns, as they advanced, were not encountering the expected opposition
and finally, when in the afternoon Williamsport was reached and still
no sight of the foe, the dullest man in line realized that the fight
for that day was off. One of the observers inscribes in his diary these
reflections, "If we had attacked the rebels yesterday, we might have
made great havoc among them, crossing the river, but, as it is, we
probably will have to follow them into Virginia; pitched our tents,
cooked some coffee and went to sleep." Another commentator remarks,
"The Somerville (E) Company is detailed as guard at General Newton's
headquarters."

[Sidenote: JULY 14, '63]

History is now repeat to itself, since Lee with his army is moving up
the Shenandoah Valley as he did after Antietam, while Meade and the
Union army will follow the route of McClellan along the eastern side of
the Blue Ridge, appearing at each one of the successive gaps through
which the Confederates might essay a passage on their return to their
former stamping grounds. With what might have had been, had Meade done
this or that, we have no more to do than with the events which followed
Antietam, and a like dilatoriness on the part of McClellan in moving
immediately on the enemy's works. Our present concern is with and for
the Thirty-ninth Regiment which hears the reveille at five o'clock in
the morning of the 15th, with the injunction to be ready to march in
twenty minutes, a command which resulted in a start at six o'clock. The
day is hot and sultry, the pace rapid and again men rid themselves of
everything possible to lighten their burdens as they hasten over the
dusty Maryland roads. Funkstown is again sighted, though on the right,
and the battle-line of the day before is hurriedly passed. The gory
field of Antietam, where so many of the blue and the gray mingled their
life-blood, is also recognized and a halt is called near Antietam Creek.

One of the early incidents of the day's march was the meeting of the
Sixth Corps and the First, rendering it necessary for the two bodies
to pass each other at nearly right angles. The writer also notes the
peculiar coincidence that this passage of the Thirty-ninth was effected
through the ranks of the Thirty-seventh, a Western Massachusetts
regiment; just a chance to say "Good-morning and Good-bye," all in
the same breath. It was on this day's march also that the news came
of the fall of Port Hudson and the bloody combats before Charleston,
South Carolina. Burnside's bridge, over the Antietam, is crossed in the
opposite direction from that taken by that leader a year ago and the
hurried way is pursued through Keedysville to Rohersville where the
camp is pitched for the night. It has been a hard day, with a record
of fully twenty-five sun-broiling miles passed over, and to crown the
miseries of the march, rations are scarce, in most cases entirely
lacking. The story is told that a goose was appropriated on the way,
with the hope that soon opportunity might be found for cooking it,
but the wearied men, successively, grew tired of carrying it and its
body was left for some luckier party, nearer the rear of the line, to
enjoy on reaching camp. The strain must be excessive which will cause a
soldier to throw away an edible luxury.

As usual, the bugle summons the men from repose at an early hour on
the 17th and not a little rejoicing follows the announcement that
rations are to be drawn, so that the day's exactions will begin on full
stomachs. At not quite so brisk a rate as that of yesterday, the route
continues through Crampton's Gap, on to a hillside near Petersville,
not far from Catoctin Creek, a name often heard in stories of the
locality. Berlin, a village somewhat below Harper's Ferry on the
Potomac, is the name of the nearest river point, and all are pleased at
the chance to pitch their shelter tents, to rest, to clean up clothing
and weapons, and to realize that the soldier is not always on the
march. It was at this point that the chaplain and the men who had been
left in Washington rejoined the regiment. The 17th of July introduces
the variation of a heavy rain, yet this does not prevent our active men
from visiting neighboring regiments whose depleted condition contrasts
vividly with the full ranks of the newly arrived. Says one visitor,
"Some of the old regiments do not number more than our one company."
On this day, obedient to orders, the Fifty-first Regiment takes its
departure for the North and its muster-out, its entire tour of duty
from the first of the month having been over and above the time called
for by its term of enlistment.

[Sidenote: JULY 17, '63]

The assembling of a great army is ever a magnificent sight, and that
presented by the several corps of the Potomac Army, awaiting the laying
of pontoon bridges across the Potomac for the use of this great array
of humanity, forms no exception, a glorious sight even though seen
through showers of rain. It is the period also of wheat-harvest and,
notwithstanding the moisture, something of an idea is obtained of how
the staff-of-life looks in its earlier stages. There is a deal of talk
among the soldiers as to how they ought to have fought and finished
Lee, many of them believing that the end of the Rebellion might have
been effected at or near Williamsport. By the 18th, the bridges being
in readiness, early orders are given that all must be ready to advance
at four o'clock, and for a wonder the start is only half an hour behind
the appointment. The Fifth Corps and the cavalry crossed last night.
The Forty-sixth Massachusetts, one of the nine months' regiments,
accompanying us all the way round from Maryland Heights, is but a few
rods from the river, when orders are received to fall out and proceed
immediately to Baltimore and so Northward; for some reason, the Eighth
Massachusetts, in the same category, still continues in line. It was
in these days that certain of the regiment, thinking themselves so far
from the region of military precision they might essay a little abandon
of style, attempted to wear the "bell-hats," worn by some regiments,
in place of the visored, regulation caps required where style was
effected, but the Colonel would have none of it and to trade back was
the next thing necessary.

FOOTNOTES:

[E] It was during this strenuous night that General Briggs imparted to
the Thirty-ninth men near him, acting as bodyguard, the interesting
item that an old farmhouse near them was the very one in which "Old
John Brown," in October, 1859, had assembled his followers and whence,
during the night of the 17th, they went to the attack on Harper's
Ferry. As the Kennedy farm, the place of rendezvous, was within sight
of Boonsboro, it is not improbable that the morning's halt was near the
historic building.




IN VIRGINIA


Quite nine months have passed since that hurried departure from
Arlington for the Maryland side of old Potomac's shore and now, on the
18th of July, the sacred soil is again trodden by Massachusetts feet
as the regiment takes its way through a section that fairly captivates
the eyes of these men so far from home and, after a march of possibly
thirteen miles, the lovely village of Waterford is reached at about
two o'clock in the afternoon. Considering the unusual beauty of the
village, its marked similarity to just such assemblages of dwellings in
the North, the surprise of the visitors is not so great when they learn
that the place has furnished two full companies of soldiers for the
Union army. After a good night's rest, at 6 a. m. of Sunday, the 19th,
the regiment passed through the village, keeping step to patriotic
airs, while the people displayed Union flags and cheered the passing
men in blue; the scene would hardly have been different, were they in
one of their own Northern towns. Through a continuation of yesterday's
scenic beauties, the march is made to the village of Hamilton fifteen
miles away, also a beautiful place, and here the halt is made under
trees so umbrageous that tents are unnecessary, all declaring it the
very best camping place yet. The neighboring fields abound in seemingly
endless quantities of blackberries of which the hungry soldiers proceed
to eat their fill, not only satisfying hunger but proving an excellent
specific for certain ailments incident to the season. Had the officers
purposely directed the army this way, they could have done nothing more
opportune for the health of the men. What Northern home is ignorant
of the healing qualities of blackberry cordial? Better far than many
responses to the surgeon's call.

[Sidenote: JULY 20, '63]

The men thought the Sunday well spent and, after a twilight devoted
to reminiscenes, wherein of course home abounded, couches on mother
earth were sought, hoping that sleep might be undisturbed until morn.
It was well that rest was taken early for it is only two o'clock of
the 20th when morning sleep is broken by the bugle call; evidently a
long march is in prospect, but from characteristic delays, it is fully
five o'clock before faces are again set southward, the route being
through a section badly scarred by the ravages of war. About twenty
miles are passed over in reaching Middleburg, a place on the Alexandria
and Winchester turnpike, of some local importance, whose inhabitants
are largely if not entirely secesh, and we are told that many of them,
being in Pickett's Division, had suffered greatly at Gettysburg. Indeed
one lady, the mistress of a large and elegantly furnished mansion,
apparently one of the F. F. V.'s, who very kindly responded to the
requests of the Union soldiers, when thanked most respectfully for
her consideration, replied that she only wished people on the other
side might have done as much for her son who was killed at Gettysburg.
On the way hither, the regiment has the new experience of fording a
stream, Goose Creek, from two to four feet deep and from 80 to 100 feet
wide.

A heavy picket line is thrown out because of the proximity of
guerrillas, who prowl around like jackals intent on mischief; and they
already had captured several division staff officers who had ridden too
far ahead, for the purpose of selecting proper camping grounds. The
tour of picket duty was not without its compensation since an abundance
of blackberries was revealed by the morning of the 21st which, with
food foraged from the enemy's country, helped out the somewhat reduced
rations of the haversack. In the preceding night Samuel W. Joyce,
Company C, a Medford boy, had died, worn out by the exactions of the
expedition, and a prayer by the chaplain is the sole service as his
body is committed to the earth, since in active warfare scant time is
found for burial ceremonies. The entire day is passed in this camp,
thus affording a needed rest while time is found for observation, not
alone of the neighboring fields, abounding in berries, but of the
people among whom no men of military age are found and of the fact that
Confederate money finds greater favor here than the currency of Uncle
Sam, a peculiarity however that gradually disappears as the months
advance.

It is two o'clock, p. m. when the command to pack up is heard, but it
is nearly or quite sundown before the start is made, since the brigade
is taking its turn on the left of the line; also the guarding of the
wagon train is committed to the brigade and in this somewhat arduous
duty the Thirty-ninth bears its part. Over roads, never conspicuous for
smoothness, now worse than ever, the troops and the train pick their
weary way till 3 a. m. of the 23rd, when White Plains is reached, a
distance of not more than eight miles from Middleburg, but a wearying
march nevertheless. It is pretty generally understood that both the
rebel and the Union armies are racing for the Rappahannock, and the
Federals have the inside track. The wagons are parked here, for mules
must, if men do not, rest, and those guarding have the privilege of a
bivouac for a short period, while the other troops have been resting a
large part of the night. Repose is enjoyed for about four hours when,
at seven o'clock in the morning, we are routed out and, two hours later
proceed on our route to Warrenton, some thirteen miles away, getting
there not far from five in the afternoon. Much to the astonishment of
the wearied marchers, a dress parade is ordered, and the men go through
the form, though they would much prefer to rest their tired bodies
prone upon the ground.

[Sidenote: JULY 25, '63]

Warrenton is one of the names which every one has heard, over and
over, ever since the beginning of the war, and all conclude that it
must have been a very interesting as well as beautiful place before
hostilities had marred its loveliness; the county seat of Fauquier
County it possesses all of the public buildings belonging to such a
place and betrays evidence of thrift, enterprise and culture. Secesh to
the core, the people prefer Southern currency, though they will also
take that of the North. In camp on a hill to the rear of Warrenton,
the 24th is spent, rations are drawn, letters written to the homeland,
and a big notch made in the stick of soldierly experience. With true
military routine a dress parade is had at seven o'clock, just for the
sake of maintaining the regimental altogethery feeling. Early in the
morning of the 25th march is resumed and continues through a dry, level
country, destitute alike of shade and water, the sun all of the time
giving indications of his heat rays; occasional halts do not negative
the fact that it is a long and tiresome march, on account of which many
a man would have been overcome by the heat had not all been thoroughly
acclimated in the vigorous drills of the preceding months. Thirteen
miles of desolation bring us to noon and Warrenton Junction and, best
of all, to the sight of water. The stream, though small and already
muddied by all sorts of animals in their efforts for drink, is none
the less sought with ardor by the thirsty men, who pronounce this the
dryest day in all their army experience.

Here is found a depot of supplies, the communication by rail and
steam with Washington being direct and regular so that commissary and
quartermaster stores are replenished; near by is the whole Army of the
Potomac, though there is every indication of going further on every
hand and, while seemingly in direst confusion, no one appeared to get
in another's way, convincing proof that some guiding power had all
these different lines well in hand. What a chance to visit this and
that friend in other regiments, an opportunity of which hundreds of
men availed themselves, and many a meeting here was the last in this
life. Making camp in a nearby grove, rest is sought, save as it is
interrupted by rations-drawing, until there comes the order to fall-in
once more, but by this time the men have learned that a certain amount
of leeway is to be allowed in these marching orders, and they do not
respond with all of their former alacrity. It is from this point that
Major Tremlett, accompanied by men from several companies, goes North
for the purpose of looking after recruits expected from conscripts and
substitutes. The second installment of this day's march really began
about 7 p. m. and continued possibly seven miles to Bealton Station,
on the Orange and Alexandria Railroad. Lack of water had made the
morning's route hard to bear; nothing of the sort troubled that of the
evening, since a pelting rain beat upon the faces of the marchers,
filled the roads with mud and made the rivulets swelling torrents. With
a single exception this was the severest storm ever encountered by the
Thirty-ninth, that exception being the one when crossing the Occoquan
on the return of Washington after the surrender. It is one o'clock in
the morning of the 26th, that the regiment, though completely saturated
with rain, files into an open field, and finds such repose as it can
until the light of day.




FIRST ARMY CORPS.


It was here and on this day that the Eighth M. V. M., having
accompanied the Thirty-ninth in all of its wanderings from Maryland
Heights, took its leave of the Potomac army and, obedient to orders,
embarked at Warrenton Junction for Washington, its nine months' tour
of duty being long overpast, and a happy lot of soldiers they were,
with the prospect of a speedy return to their homes. Of course there
were the regular details for pickets, but the most of the regiment had
a chance to clean up and to rest after the exactions of the preceding
night. The departure of the Eighth caused the end of the Provisional
Brigade, under the command of General Briggs, the latter returning to
Washington, while the Thirty-ninth became a part of the First Brigade,
Second Division, First Army Corps, the division and corps being the
same as before; the other members of the brigade were the Thirteenth
Massachusetts, Sixteenth Maine, Ninety-fourth and One Hundred and
Fourth New York, and the One Hundred and Seventh Pennsylvania, the
Commander being Colonel Peter Lyle of the Ninetieth Pennsylvania
regiment. The dress parade at the close of this day was signalized by
a sequel to the bell crowned hats, already referred to, since a number
of the men in Woburn Company (K), wearing the obnoxious headgear and
otherwise grotesquely arrayed, appeared on the parade ground, exciting
the risibles of all beholders and securing for themselves a command
to report at the colonel's headquarters, where even his equanimity
was upset and, after a hearty laugh, he let the culprits off with a
reprimand and some extra policing about his tent.

[Sidenote: JULY 26, '63]

The sweet sleep to which the regiment commended itself at "Taps" was
interrupted at 11 p. m. by the command to "pack-up" and "fall-in" and
soon afterward the Thirty-ninth was marching southward, making the
best of the way alongside the railroad, not always careful to keep the
middle of the road, this being one of the lapses of Colonel Davis,
viz., that he was willing that the men should keep their feet dry if
possible. He had even excited the ire of General Briggs by insisting
that, when only keeping in line was the point at issue, his men should
march dry-shod, thus possibly accounting for the extra marching ability
of his men. Rappahannock Station, where the Orange and Alexandria
Railroad crosses the river, was the point aimed at, and very early in
the morning of the 27th it was reached, and the broken slumbers of
the preceding night were resumed for a brief period. The remainder of
the First Brigade was here along with several thousand cavalrymen.
The remaining days of July were spent in the camp established near
the banks of the Rappahannock, on an elevation overlooking the river.
There was nothing to disturb the general quiet of the place, though
Union soldiers picketed one side of the stream, a narrow one here, and
rebels the other. The railroad bridge had been destroyed and the coming
of a train load of pontoons, in the evening of Wednesday, the 29th,
called for a large detail of men from each company to unload them, a
rather heavy task, while showers, many of them very severe, made even
tent life anything but comfortable. Somewhere, in these meanderings, a
character of Company G won fame for himself in the aptness of his reply
to Captain Trull. As he fell in for dress parade, the Captain noticed
that the private's shoes were plastered with Virginia mud, and sent him
to his quarters to make them more presentable. Presently he returned
with the fronts of said shoes much improved, but the after portions
were as before. When asked by the irate Captain why he had not blacked
the heels as well as the front of his shoes, the witty fellow replied
that a good soldier never looked behind.

[Sidenote: AUG. 6, '63.]

Lest the men through idleness might grow rusty, the last day of July
was marked by a drill, and later the orders were given that at two
o'clock in the next morning, August 1st, the camp should be broken and
all be ready to march soon after. While the day did not bring on an
engagement there was much of interest in seeing the cavalry cross the
river and in beholding the disappearance of the Confederate pickets and
in hearing the sounds of more or less firing beyond the hills across
the stream, in the direction of Culpeper Court House. Our crossing
was effected about two o'clock in the afternoon, line of battle was
formed and under a blazing sun we advanced until a piece of woods was
reached where every man improved the least chance possible for escape
from the intense heat. After a considerable halt and consequent rest,
the line fell back fully a mile, halting on the brow of a hill where
trees and underbrush were cut away to favor firing of both artillery
and musketry, while the fallen timber would serve as an abatis. Until
the 8th of August the Regiment remained here, digging intrenchments,
doing picket duty, witnessing the almost constant activities of the
Cavalry, which kept the enemy stirred up, and on the 3rd it seemed
as though the Confederates were really coming our way, but it proved
to be only a reconnoisance in force, and the Union forces were found
on the watch. Colonel Lyle having leave of absence, Colonel Davis
succeeded to the command of the brigade and Lieut. Colonel Peirson
to that of the regiment. For diversion, the men had berry picking
and foraging generally in front of, and bathing in the Rappahannock
behind their lines, and on Wednesday, the 5th, all were surprised and
delighted by the appearance of Major Bell, paymaster, who left many
tokens of Uncle Sam's honesty in the hands of the men, a large portion
of which was speedily sent northward for the benefit of kindred there.
Thursday, the 6th, was a day of national thanksgiving for the victories
that had attended the Union arms and at brigade headquarters there
were religious services by the chaplains of the Sixteenth Maine, the
Ninety-fourth and One Hundred and Fourth New York, and by General
Briggs, temporarily in command of the division. The proclamation of the
President, calling for this observance, was issued July 15th, the kind
heartedness and devotion of Mr. Lincoln appearing in every sentence.
While the entire document might be read with profit to-day, let the
following extract suffice:--

 But these victories have been accorded not without sacrifices of life,
 limb, health and liberty, incurred by brave, loyal and patriotic
 citizens. Domestic affliction in every part of the country follows
 in the train of these fearful bereavements. It is meet and right to
 recognize and confess the presence of the Almighty Father and the
 power of His hand equally in these triumphs and in these sorrows.

That the men might participate in the spirit of the day there was a
suspension of drills, though a morning inspection reminded everyone
that routine constitutes a large part of a soldier's life.

Dress parade on the 7th was omitted on account of one of the severe
storms with which the season was rife, accompanied by thunder and
lightning and wind to the extent of blowing down the brush protection
which many of the men had set up around their tents; many of the tents
went down also--as one of the unfortunates records it, "most of the
boys got drowned out." Saturday, the 8th, brought a change, in that
orders were received about 11 a. m. to prepare dinner early in order to
be ready to march, though we did really remain till after five o'clock
before starting, carrying with us tent-poles and everything movable
that might contribute to the comfort of the new stopping place, which
proved to be across the river and very near where we were before the
advance beyond the Rappahannock. Apparently, the entire brigade came
back with us. Though no one was conscious of the fact at the time,
here the Thirty-ninth was fated to remain with the other parts of the
Potomac Army for more than a month. Though we had marched with the
army all the way down from Funkstown, we had not fought at Gettysburg,
nor had we participated in that trying race with Lee's forces all the
way from Falmouth to the foregoing sanguinary field. Regiments had
become little better than skeleton organizations; mounts for cavalry
and artillery were sadly wanting and a period for recuperation and
replenishing was absolutely necessary.

"Reveille at 4.30 a. m.; splendid morning and the distant bugles and
drums over hill and vale proclaim that the army is awake," such was
the entry in his diary of one of the Thirty-ninth whose day was given
to guard duty, in an open field exposed to the fierce rays of an
almost tropical sun, while many of his comrades devote much of their
daylight to procuring and placing boughs around and over their tents
to render less oppressive the August heat. One wonders whether it was
piety or dislike of work which prompted the following item in another
diary, "Other regiments have religious services; ours never does; had
to keep at work all day"; that dress parade closed the day might be
concluded without the saying. Owing to the nearness of other regiments,
it is easy to compare their scanty numbers with the full ranks of the
Thirty-ninth, while the Twelfth and Thirteenth turn out with scarcely
a corporal's guard in numbers for several of the companies, the
Thirty-ninth has five hundred men, this very day, on parade, though a
shrinkage of one half is quite an item, especially when there has been
no loss on the battlefield. The utility of constant drill, especially
in these superheated days is not appreciated by the older regiments in
the brigade, and means are usually found to sidetrack the orders of
Colonel Davis, acting commander of the brigade, but the Thirty-ninth
obeys them to the letter.

[Sidenote: AUG. 12, '63]

The round of guard and picket duty keeps everyone in active condition,
particularly as there are drill and fatigue for any not otherwise
employed. The picket line is across the Rappahannock, about two miles
and a half towards Culpeper, not far from the early August camping
ground. That there is every indication of a prolonged stay here is
emphasized by the appearance of the sutler, on the 12th, who proceeds
to establish his plant and to open out some luxuries, always appetizing
to the average soldier, though forty-six cents a pound for cheese and
one dollar a bottle for syrup and preserves make a man think twice
before buying. The Medford men, Company C, are somewhat exultant over
the fact that Captain Hutchins, on the 13th, is in command of the
Regiment, since Lieut. Colonel Peirson is in command of the picket
line and Major Tremlett is in Boston. During these days many drafted
men arrive and are added to certain of the older regiments, though the
permanent good derived from their coming is hardly commensurate with
the trouble and expense incident to their presence. America never had
much use for involuntary soldiering.

The 15th, Saturday, brought orders to be ready to march at a moment's
notice but, as often happened, nothing came of it. The following day
there was a movement of certain troops by train to Alexandria, for
what purpose no one knew, though doubtless a part of the scheme to
strengthen the Carolinas and the West which, eventually, will take a
considerable number of men from Meade's Army. Everyone is learning
the extremes of midday heat and midnight cold and many sigh for the
material thrown away on the marches southward from Antietam. Those
in authority are becoming alive to the fact that sleeping on the
ground is conducive to summer ailments, and the consequent order goes
forth that bunks shall be constructed and the tents correspondingly
elevated. No one is permitted to get homesick on account of having
nothing to do. Owing to the absence of Surgeon Page, the surgeon of
the One Hundred and Seventh Pennsylvania has temporary charge of the
sick in this regiment, and his diligence makes an exceedingly favorable
impression. During this quiet period along the Rappahannock, the
railroad bridge across the river is repaired or rebuilt, the pontoons
are taken up and sent away and the men are realizing what regular mails
and rations mean. The latter are so full and free that an excess of
coffee especially forms an excellent medium of exchange with the rebel
pickets.

On the 19th, more troops returned from the south side of the river,
leaving scarcely more there than the Second Brigade of the Second
Division; evidently some change of lines is in prospect. One man
records his opinion that the construction of an oven for the baking
of beans is a sure indication of a general move of the army, activity
generally following any attempt at permanency. It is in these August
days that the several companies are recalling the first anniversary of
their muster-in and comparing notes between now and then. Though the
Regiment has not been called to face the enemy on the field of battle,
the time has by no means been wasted, since the drill and discipline
that Colonel Davis and other officers have insisted on have made the
organization ready for almost any test that may come in its way. The
28th of the month was marked by the return of Colonel Davis to the
Regiment; Colonel Lyle having resumed his position at the head of the
Brigade. As a consequence, all forms of drill received an immediate
impetus. It was about this time (28th) that the Pennsylvania Reserves
presented General Meade with a magnificent sword, the presentation
taking place some three-fourths of a mile away, and Governor Curtin
of the Keystone State, General Heintzelman and other distinguished
men being present. Rumor says that the blade was originally intended
for General John F. Reynolds, Commander of the First Corps, killed at
Gettysburg.

[Sidenote: AUG. 29, '63]

It was in the last week of August that the knapsacks, left by orders
at Funkstown, were received by their owners, but their contents,
valuable or otherwise, had already been appropriated by others; much
disappointment resulted, since many a soldier had reckoned on the
material, supposed to be there, for relief in the cold nights along
the Rappahannock. As Government allowance for clothing was only $42
a year and the securing of sufficient apparel seemed necessary, not
a few boys in the Thirty-ninth found themselves in debt to Uncle Sam
instead of being prospective recipients of two months' pay, one of
the hardships that the men were obliged to undergo through no fault
of their own. Over in the Fifth Army Corps, on the 29th, was enacted
a play in real life, if such a scene could be called a play--the
execution of deserters. The coming and going of recruits had become
so common that examples must be made of some of the flagrant cases.
Drafted men, unwilling to enter the service, had the privilege of
purchasing exemption by the payment of a large sum of money, the men
accepting the same and taking the place of the drafted men received
the general name of substitutes. In quite too many cases these men,
finding the occupation lucrative, deserted again and again, each time
re-enlisting, gaining many dollars thereby, while the army received
no increase. These five men, shot to death while sitting upon their
coffins, afforded a salutary lesson for others, similarly inclined,
to see and heed. General F. A. Walker, in his history of the Second
Army Corps, says, "The shooting of a score of bad men in 1861 would
literally have saved the lives of thousands of good men in 1862 and
1863." The best soldiers were those who, realizing the peril of their
country, took their lives in their own hands and, as it were, offered
them a willing sacrifice for the Nation's salvation; if they escaped
death, that was their good fortune, their supreme devotion was nothing
lessened thereby. The month ended with an inspection by Lieut. Colonel
Peirson and muster for two months' pay.

In the concluding days of August, pains had been taken in rearranging
the camp, resulting in well defined company streets, and thereafter
much time was spent in securing boughs and placing them so as to lessen
the burning heat of midday; it is an excellent trait of healthy, well
meaning men that, following a brief rest, they always are disposed
to enhance the possibilities of comfort. With the 3rd of September
(Thursday) came a rigid inspection of equipments and clothing,
conducted by General Robinson,[F] Division Commander, the event having
a suspicion of greater military activity. The entire brigade with its
six regiments numbers about two thousand men, of whom the Thirty-ninth
constitutes more than one-fourth, our Regiment being the only one not
yet exposed to the losses of battle. Another indication of aggression
or apprehension is the building of defenses and the advance of the
Union picket line; a like approach of the enemy brings the Blue and the
Gray pretty near each other. Friday night, the 4th, was noteworthy in
that boxes, which should have reached the Regiment in Washington, were
announced. Of course the food, prepared by loving hands in the distant
North, was long past the condition of use, but articles of apparel came
in a most convenient season; had they come before leaving Washington or
on the trip southward, they doubtless would have been thrown away or,
at any rate, left behind in some of the caches established on the march.




FIRST ANNIVERSARY.


[Sidenote: SEPT. 12, '63]

Sunday, the 6th of September, set many a mind to thinking, for it
was the first anniversary of the departure from Boxford, and a year
before hardly an enlisted man thought the war would last so long, yet
he beheld himself a mere atom in the immensity of the strife, at the
moment taking breath before the next effort. One of the scribes writes
in his book of innermost thoughts, "I see very few signs of the end
as yet." Another laments the barbarity of men and boys who, gently
born and reared, will destroy needlessly the property that comes in
their way, instancing a beautiful house, across the river, out towards
Culpeper, whose F.F.V. owner had followed the Confederates in their
falling back, and not only had the furniture, elaborate and choice,
been utterly broken to pieces, but the covering of the mansion had been
torn off also, so that the bare framework of the structure remained,
only one of hundreds of examples that might be narrated. On this day
a cavalry force, under the lead of Generals Buford, Kilpatrick and
Gregg advanced across the Rappahannock and, engaging the mounted force
of General J. E. B. Stuart, drove it steadily back to and through
Culpeper, capturing one hundred prisoners and some of the English light
guns of the enemy. Dashing along to the Rapidan, Buford and his men,
encamped on the banks of that already noted stream and then made their
way back, not without difficulty, to the Union side of the Rappahannock.

With the beginning of the second year's service since the start from
Boxford, enters a new division of time in the camp:--Reveille at
sunrise, police-duty, fifteen minutes later; sick-call at 6 a. m.;
breakfast, 7; drill, 7.30; recall, 9.30; dinner, 12.30; drill, 3 to 5;
dress parade, sunset; tattoo, 8.30; taps, 9 p. m. A long-needed rain
came in violent form on the 12th, doing much good, yet was not exactly
comfortable for those who had their tents blown down; however, well
filled springs were quite consoling in that the regular water supply
had grown conspicuously low. The 12th, too, is the day which marked
the departure of Longstreet from Lee's army to the relief of Bragg in
Georgia and Tennessee, not to return till the battle of the Wilderness
is in progress. It takes very little time for the news to reach the
hither side of the Rappahannock and an immediate movement towards the
south follows, the Second Corps and the Cavalry being the first to
advance on the 13th, with the purpose of so engaging the attention
of Lee that he will send no more troops to assist in the possible
discomfiture of Rosecrans.

The 14th marked the coming of Paymaster Major Burt, and the squaring
of accounts for the preceding two months, though the clothing items
reduced the compensation in certain cases almost to the vanishing
point. Constant activity across the river, the passing of many heavily
loaded trains and their return with loads of prisoners and wounded
Union soldiers indicated the rapid pushing of things in that direction,
and the inevitable advance of the remaining portions of the Federal
force. Early in the morning of the 16th came the expected order to be
ready to march at 5 a. m. Everything was in readiness, but the start
was not made until 7 o'clock and then the regiment and the entire First
Corps again crossed the Rappahannock by means of pontoon bridges and
advanced towards Culpeper. A considerable part of the way was over
an excellent road, though the rations, extra supplies of cartridges
and the recently filled knapsacks made the way a hard one. Recent
experience of cold nights had taught the men the necessity of retaining
their extra apparel but, if some of the unnecessary ammunition were
thrown away, it was because the men soon learned that large quantities
of cartridges were entirely too burdensome. Though the distance marched
was only twelve miles it seemed very much longer, leading by Brandy
Station, a name in a few months to become almost a household word
both North and South, and in general along the line of the Orange and
Alexandria Railroad. While the Second and Sixth Corps had advanced to
the Rapidan, the First Corps was held in reserve, some three miles east
of Culpeper.

[Sidenote: SEPT. 14, '63]

For a little more than a week this was to be the camping place of the
Thirty-ninth and with accustomed diligence there speedily followed
the regular round of inspections, drills and parades, though there
were many and large details for picket duty. An inspection on the
17th seemed largely for the purpose of ascertaining how generally
or otherwise the men had retained the extra ammunition dealt out to
them; how successfully delinquents were helped out by those who had
retained their heavy loads was long a theme for lengthy dissertations
in company circles. The location of the camp upon a rising knoll made
it the sport of the winds and the distance of both wood and water was
a special hardship. Even then, when water was obtained, it was found
to be so hard or so impregnated with lime as to be very distasteful to
New England men who had been brought up where soft water was quite the
vogue. An indication of a more or less prolonged stay appeared on this,
the 17th, when the regimental sutlers put in an appearance and setting
up their tents were ready for business. They were not likely to follow
too closely an army in motion. Also drills and inspections marked the
resumption of regular soldier regimen. The weather was singularly cold
for the season of the year; in strolling about the vicinity, it was
easy to discover where the enemy had lately encamped.

The advent of eight days' rations on the 22d with an injunction to pack
five days' portion in our knapsacks made us think that some unusual
stunt was impending. A Division-drill signalized the 23rd, General
Robinson conducting the same. The 24th brought the expected change,
the regiment marching a few miles down the Rapidan near Raccoon Ford,
occupying some portions of the camp held until this morning by the 12th
Army Corps, the latter along with the Eleventh having been ordered to
arrange for a transfer to the Army of the Cumberland in the Tennessee
country; this move being made lest Longstreet's presence with his force
should give too hard a problem for Rosecrans to solve. While the orders
to Howard and Slocum, of the Eleventh and Twelfth respectively, were
issued on the 24th, it was not till the 3rd of October that the great
organizations reached their destination. Of far greater consequence
to some of the men in the Thirty-ninth was the fact that home-boxes
just arrived from Washington had to be left behind. The 25th sees the
renewal of regular camp activities along with the necessary cleaning up
after the departure of the Twelfth Corps. The 26th saw a large force of
twenty-five men from each company, under the command of Lieut. Colonel
Peirson, proceeding to the banks of the Rapidan for picket duty. It was
while nearing this point that the residence of Dr. John H. Stringfellow
of Kansas notoriety, then or later a Confederate Surgeon, was reached
and the man himself was interviewed, who declared his undeviating
secession proclivities. Though certain of these Massachusetts men
would have liked to repay some of the debts due him, they concluded
that he was getting his punishment as he went along, for evidently his
situation in the midst of contending armies was rapidly reducing him to
a condition of absolute destitution.

FOOTNOTES:

[F] John C. Robinson, one of the famous officers of the Union Army,
was born in Binghamton, N. Y., April 10, 1817, left West Point 1838, a
year before graduation, to study law, but returned to the army in 1839;
he won distinction in the Mexican War; as Commandant of Fort McHenry,
Baltimore, at the breaking out of the War, he preserved it for the
Union side; from the Colonelcy of the First Michigan Infantry, he rose
steadily in rank to the command of a division; he was prominent through
the Seven Days' Fight, was ever in evidence from Fredericksburg to
Gettysburg; he lost a leg at Spottsylvania thus retiring from service
in the field; with Governor General John A. Dix, he was Lieut. Governor
of the Empire State in 1873-4 and was commander-in-chief of the Grand
Army of the Republic in 1877-8; in 1887 he attended annual reunion of
the Thirty-ninth; he died February 18, 1897.




THE RAPIDAN.


[Sidenote: SEPT. 27, '63]

Picketing along the Rapidan at this time was not a hardship, since by
mutual consent there was no firing, and the native Yankee disposition
to explore had full vent, when not actually on post, the reserve
furnishing many opportunities for learning habits and conditions of the
people not otherwise attainable. Relieving the Ninetieth Pennsylvania,
one-half of the detail attended to extreme outpost duty, while the
other part enjoyed absence of drill and inspections around the reserve
camp, "Revelling in that delicious abandon, one bright spot in a
soldier's life, when he can do just what he pleases." Thus it was an
even turn-about during the days on the river, in these parts only a
narrow stream of possibly three rods' width. Most cordial relations
existed between Reb. and Fed. and the trades between the Blue and the
Gray proved that no monopoly in the swapping habit was enjoyed by
the Yankee. Whatever extra coffee the boys possessed proved to be as
good as cash, if not better, when dealing with these lads from the
Southland. They even swam across the river to partake of Northern
hospitality and to facilitate exchanges. The nights being cold,
campfires were kindled on both sides and the alleged enemies kept as
comfortable as possible, in plain sight of each other.

In the stillness of the Sunday evening (27th) the Confederates in
their camp indulged in a prayer-meeting and their hymns, the same that
Northern Christians were singing at that very moment in the far away
churches, were plainly heard by the hostile soldiery on our side of
the stream. Need there be any wonder that some listeners moralized on
the absurdity of men who read the same Bible and sang the same songs,
spending several years of their lives, none too long at the longest in
shooting at each other? Here took place the famous exchange of song, so
often told in campfires and wherever it is desirable to prove that one
touch of Nature makes the whole world kin. One night the Rebs. started
off on the "Bonnie Blue Flag," and when their strains had ceased,
the Yanks got back at them with the "Star Spangled Banner"; next the
Boys in Gray tuned up with "Maryland, My Maryland" and those in Blue
naturally retorted with "The Red White and Blue"; breaking the lull
that ensued, our men started John Howard Payne's immortal and universal
"Home Sweet Home"; scarcely had the first note been struck before the
sympathetic enemy chimed in, and Virginian woods and hillsides echoed
with the tender strains clearly showing how Saxon blood remembers. On
another occasion a musical exchange, beginning with "Pennyroyal," ran
through the list of then popular melodies, though all sang in unison,
and very naturally, too, for ending "Old Hundred." Will not coming
generations wonder that men who could together sing the old songs
should ever fight each other?

Monday, the 28th, ended the stay by the river's side and the detail
returned to camp, coming up with it some two miles nearer than when it
was left, a fact that in no way disturbed those coming back. While
a large part of the Regiment was on its tour of duty, those left
behind were by no means idle and they too had their observations of
Confederates who apparently had heard from Chickamauga, a favorite
shout of theirs across the river being, "How are you, Rosey?" In the
afternoon of the 27th, the Regiment and the whole Corps again changed
locations; the pickets along the river could plainly see and hear the
rebels at their respective tasks; the work upon their fortifications,
their drills and other occupations. Here it was that Lieut. Colonel
Peirson's detachment found the Regiment on its return. A short move on
the 29th, brought the Regiment out of shelling range, but in a place
so heavily wooded that trees had to be felled to make camping places,
and on ground so low that very little rain made it extremely moist. By
building bunks, we were enabled to keep out of the mud, but we were
far from comfortable and, to crown all our discomforture, though there
was water everywhere, as in the case of the Ancient Mariner, we found
not a drop to drink; that had to be brought from a distance. The fires
for cooking and bodily comfort were maintained with difficulty, and
inflamed eyes, through prevailing smoke, became the rule.

[Sidenote: OCT. 3, '63]

Friday, October 2d, marked a sad day in the annals of the Divisions;
the forenoon had been so rainy that it seemed as though nothing could
add to the discomforts of the situation, yet the prospect of a march
to witness the execution of a bounty-jumper was not so inviting as it
might have been under less watery conditions. It was about noon that
the Regiment fell into line, and, after standing an hour under the
pelting rain, thoroughly drenched it moved out and in mud and water
seemingly knee-deep marched some two miles or more to the assigned
rendezvous where, after many changes of position to accommodate other
portions of the Division, the rain having cleared away, the band of
the Sixteenth Maine playing a dirge announced the approach of the
procession; the same consisting of the provost guard, followed by
an ambulance in which rode the prisoner, sitting upon his coffin,
accompanied by his chaplain. Blindfolded and kneeling upon his coffin,
the firing squad, obedient to orders, discharged their weapons and the
deserter of the Ninetieth Pennsylvania passed on to his reward; however
gruesome the scene may have been, undoubtedly the lesson was a valuable
one upon such as thought the laws of the land could be broken with
impunity.

The return from the execution to a camp, practically under water, was
anything but inspiriting and whatever was eaten had to be taken out
of the haversack, for campfires were out of the question and sleep to
men soaking wet was hardly possible. The weather clearing during the
night gave some chance for drying garments during Saturday, the 3rd,
and Sunday began to seem endurable and adapted to letter writing, when
there came orders to pack up, once at least heard with no sigh of
regret. While waiting for orders to march, all ears were startled by
the sound of cannonading, which proved to be an effort of the enemy
to shell a Union wagon train which had driven somewhat near the rebel
works. When the start was made and the new camping spot found, it
proved to be an excellent one, high and dry, with plenty of wood and
water, and by general consent, the site was first-class; in honor of
the Surgeon-in-Chief of the First Corps, the place was known as "Camp
Nordquist."

At dress parade, Oct. 7th, an order was read to the effect that
men, desirous of changing from infantry regiments to light
artillery batteries, could do so by sending their names through
the proper channels. Much to the surprise of the officers, there
was a very general response to the proposition; indeed two hundred
and twenty-three men, almost one half of the effective regimental
organization, had filled out papers. Colonel Davis forwarded the long
list to division headquarters with his approval, but the applicants
had so far overdone the matter, nothing came of it, save that General
Robinson in a special order said that the service must inevitably
suffer, if so many men were to go from one organization, and there
the project ended. However fitting the men found Camp Nordquist, it
was not theirs to remain there long, since after lights had been
extinguished in the night of the 9th and the men were in the midst of
their before-midnight slumbers, there came peremptory orders to pack
up and be ready to march. Quickly responding, and building great fires
for light and comfort, the Regiment was soon in place and prepared for
the next command. It did not come until the morning of the 10th, when
in obedience to it the Brigade, Division and all, started out over a by
no means easy route and kept in motion until morning. Finding ourselves
in the vicinity of Morton's Ford, we were ordered to cook breakfast and
make ourselves as comfortable as possible.




A BACKWARD MOVE


An explanation of the event of this and subsequent days is in place
here; by a singular coincidence, just as Meade was beginning to do
what Lee had been expecting of him, for several weeks, the latter
began a move similar to that of the year before when he had hurried
Pope across the Rappahannock; in other words, he flanked Meade's
right, thus making it necessary for the latter to end any southern
plans that he may have formed, and to devote himself exclusively to
heading off the Confederate leader. While the entire Union army is in
motion our interest centres in the Regiment whose story is in progress.
As originally proposed, the First Corps was to cross the Rapidan at
Morton's or Raccoon Ford, co-operating with the Cavalry which was to
cross the river at Germanna Ford, and to assail the Confederate right;
meanwhile the Sixth Corps was to cross at a point further up the river
and to attack Lee's left. An early attack was the motive for the very
unseasonable start, though its purpose was largely negatived by the
great fires with which the men had lighted their way through the night.

[Sidenote: OCT. 11, '63]

All day long the troops awaited the approach of Buford and his
troopers before crossing, but no cavalry appeared; night approached
and preparations for repose were afoot when the command came to pack
up and be off. Evidently the purposes of Lee had been disclosed and
an "About Face" was only preliminary to "Forward, March." The night
was memorable to those concerned in its exactions, not so much for its
length as on account of the difficulties encountered. Along a narrow
road, infantry and artillery jostled each other, frequently the former
having to take to the fields, many of them low and marshy, or to lie
along the roadside while the cannon had the thoroughfare. At last the
top of the hills near Mountain Creek, where the first camp south of the
Rappahannock had been pitched, was gained and an unparalleled scene
broke upon the vision of these sleepy and wearied soldiers. As far as
the eye could reach the entire landscape was starred with campfires,
and it began to look as though we were to sleep on our old campground.
Every conceivable noise saluted the ear; the stroke of axes as they cut
up rails for fuel, the clamor of teamsters, endeavoring to get their
teams through difficult places and the incessant hum of human voices,
raised for a thousand reasons. It was midnight, however, before the
Thirty-ninth was ready to commit itself to sleep, and even then, not
for long, since at 2 a. m. of the 11th, the call to arms was heard by
the tired and sleepy men.

All may have heard the call, but all did not obey at once. Some of
them had been known to ignore parental rising calls at home and, on
this occasion, they were the happy, lucky ones, since six o'clock
arrived and still no orders to move forward, though the right of the
corps had been long on the march. The many and rapid changes of the
last thirty-six hours have brought about some hitherto unexperienced
trouble. Many of the Regiment had been left on picket and one of those,
performing this at present hazardous duty, records the following in
his diary, "About nine (p. m.) receive orders to pack up and leave;
march to our old camp and get some rations; then start again for
Pony Mountain. About 3 a. m. (11th), arrive at our old campground,
where we first stopped (Aug. 1) after crossing the Rappahannock, and I
was just ready to lie down when we were ordered back about a mile to
our Regiment." Not all, however, were so fortunate. Though under the
command of that sterling veteran, Captain John Hutchins (C), owing to
the darkness of the night, some of the men lost their way and thirteen
were captured by closely following rebel cavalry; seven of the captives
being from "E," the Somerville company, were as follows: Sergt. J. R.
Hyde; Privates F. J. Oliver, Henry Howe, Joseph Whitmore, Washington
Lovett, all of whom died in Andersonville; and Corp. G. W. Bean and
Private J. W. Oliver; the corporal survived seventeen months of
imprisonment, getting out March '65, while the private, more fortunate,
was paroled after three or four months of durance; John K. Meade of "K"
was also taken the same night, the event happening near Stevensburg,
about six miles from the Regiment.

[Sidenote: OCT. 2, '63]

The soldier's time honored privilege of grumbling had free course this
afternoon, since it was between 10 and 11 a. m. that the lines finally
moved. The hardened campaigner understands that no one in the regiment
is responsible for unseemly hours of turning out; it means just the
same for shoulder straps that it does for men in the ranks; the enemy
is near; exactly when or where he may appear no one knows, but all can
be ready to respond immediately to the first command. The chances are
that not even Colonel Davis was aware that to him and his regiment
was to be entrusted a considerable part of the safety of the rear of
the retreating army. Yet such was the case, and when the fact became
apparent not over pleasant memories of their former experience in a
similar duty were recalled; happily in this case the wagon trains had
been hurried forward and the coast was comparatively clear all the way
to Kelly's Ford, passing on the way all that was left of the hamlet
of Stevensburg. Further down the river was a pontoon-bridge over which
other troops were passing but, as the enemy was near, there could be
no delay and at 5 p. m., or thereabouts, the men marched through, the
water being about waist deep and, in chilly October, anything but
agreeable. With all possible precautions taken for defense against the
closely following foe, and with great fires to dry their saturated
garments, the soldiers were soon comparatively comfortable.




CAMPAIGN OF MANEUVERS.


By way of explanation of the marchings and counter-marchings in which
the regiment is indulging, it should be stated that a considerable
portion of October was devoted to what Wm. Swinton calls "A campaign of
maneuvers." So far from reading each other's mind, it would appear that
neither Lee nor Meade was accurately informed of the actual procedure
of his rival for, while the Confederates were still making their way
northward, but not being encountered by Meade where he expected, the
latter ordered the Second, Fifth and Sixth Corps to turn about and
to be ready to face Lee at or near Culpeper; the Third Corps, under
French, meanwhile was at Freeman's Ford on the Rappahannock, and the
First we have seen at Kelly's Ford. When the Union Commander learned
that Lee had simply gone a little further west for his crossing of
the Rappahannock, White Sulphur Springs, on the 12th, and was rapidly
nearing Warrenton, he recalled the troops south of the river and then
began the forced march to prevent Lee's distancing him completely.
Thomas Nelson Page says, "Meade was a master at moving his troops
and now, making a forced march that night was in Lee's rear the next
morning"(13th). It was a hotly contested race as to which army should
first reach Bristoe Station, thus ending any purpose that Lee might
have had against Washington.

In all these movements on the great chessboard of war with its army
corps, divisions and brigades, what was a single regiment among so many
hundred? How much less was the individual, and it is the province of
a history, such as this, to keep as near the individual as possible.
Even a brigade, in such a vast array of men, was scarcely more than
a pawn in the mighty game the Blue and the Gray were playing for
American supremacy. Still every regiment had its part to perform in
the progress of the contest, and thousands of people in the homeland
were watching each and every day's doing with supreme interest, their
thoughts chiefly centered on some particular organization, and to them
and the members themselves there was no other body quite so important
as "ours." To follow day by day, the march, bivouac and duty of the
Thirty-ninth Massachusetts in this and all other campaigns in which it
had a part is the office of this story.

[Sidenote: OCT. 12, '63]

The white frost that greeted the eyes of waking soldiers in the
morning of the 12th was quite as cold as any that New England could
present, and campfires never were more appreciated. A hurried breakfast
was prepared and eaten when the brigade was ordered into hurriedly
made rifle-pits, where the day was spent with the understanding that
trouble might arise at any moment. This was the day in which Meade
was looking for Lee. While there were sounds of activity elsewhere,
nothing disturbed the Thirty-ninth, some even writing letters as the
hours passed on. At no time in the history of the Regiment, did legs
play a more important part than they did on the 13th of October; called
from slumber at midnight, the advance was begun at one o'clock of
the morning, and through the darkness the blue clad men were pushing
forward as rapidly as possible towards Warrenton Junction, reaching it
at 11 a. m., with fifteen miles to the credit of the forenoon's effort.
At Bealton station on the way, at six o'clock three had been a halt,
and the men naturally supposed that coffee and breakfast were in order,
but, much to the disappointment of all, came the order to advance and
that, too, without delay. When men demurred and undertook to continue
their preparation of food, staff officers rushed among them and,
kicking over their utensils, put out the fires, thus impressing on the
hungry fellows the fact that the march was a forced one. It surely was
a hurried getting-away and many a vehicle came to grief, particularly
among the sutlers who had been somewhat venturesome in their coming
to the front; it was even claimed that misfortunes to the outfits of
the sutlers were not always unprovoked, since the removal of linchpins
by mischievous boys and the consequent running off of wheels gave
opportunity to fill otherwise empty haversacks.

At Warrenton Junction all preparations were made for the possible
attack of the enemy, batteries being unlimbered, the Regiment formed
in battle-line, though the noon hour, after the long retreat,
suggested dinner to the almost famished men, but the experience of
the preceding July had taught all that the locality was sadly lacking
in water supply. Except those who were looking out for the rear, the
troops were in active motion, all passing by at the height of speed.
Great quantities of commissary stores were piled up, and these were
either carried off by the soldiers themselves or loaded upon the
trains and thus saved, so disappointing the enemy who had reckoned
on getting to these food supplies first. After a considerable halt
the march proceeded along the line of railroad past Catlett's Station
to Bristoe's, reaching the latter point late in the evening and
camping at about nine o'clock. On the way we had passed the great
wagon trains of the Army of the Potomac, packed in one, great, solid
square, with wheels chained together, the mules being secured in the
centre, indicating that the danger of immediate attack from the enemy
was thought to be over for the present at least, and it also seemed
that the First Corps came near being in the lead. A march of nearly
twenty-five miles with almost empty haversacks gave the men reason for
being considerably tired.

"Not every boo is a bear" was clearly shown on this march towards
Centreville when Fred, brother of Sergeant L. of "K," having permission
from the colonel, undertook to secure a chicken for the sergeant whose
stomach was not in accord with his regular rations. With instructions
to be extremely careful, the soldier went from house to house but
without success, the guards at these places telling him that he was
running great risks, since the men, seen in the distance, were clearly
bushwhackers. It was nightfall before he found the chicken he was
after, and by the time he was making his way back, darkness settled
down. He had to pass through a strip of woods where every object was
distorted and even a deaf man would have heard sounds. Halfway through
the woods, a real noise in the roadside bushes made his hair begin to
rise, but he did not stop to investigate too closely, when the climax
was reached by six or seven razorback hogs dashing across the road in
front of him. The sudden change from probable guerrillas to actual
swine was a relief unutterable, but the former were about and that very
night carried off two men from the headquarter's wagon train. While the
sergeant enjoyed his chicken broth and improved thereon, he declared
the risk too great and Fred went on no more such errands.

[Sidenote: OCT. 14, '63]

It was a four o'clock call of the bugle, in the morning of the 14th,
that summoned frost covered and sleepy soldiers from dreams to
realities, but their distress was somewhat offset by the appearance of
rations, of which they drew supplies for four days and thereby were
better equipped for the day's progress which began at seven o'clock, as
one veracious chronicler states, with the First Corps on the left and
the Sixth at the right of the railroad. While these two Army Corps were
thus continuing their way in relative quiet, heavy firing in the rear
indicated that the Second and Fifth Corps were having something to do,
the Second fighting the battle of Bristoe Station; General Warren having
his hands full in warding off the attack of the enemy while the
cavalry, on both sides, were piling up the portentous list of battles,
many of them bloodless, which adorn the histories of so many mounted
regiments. Centreville, so famous in the July days of 1861, was now the
evident destination of the forces and crossing Bull Run, at Blackburn's
Ford, the scene of the first day's fight in the memorable First Bull
Run engagement, the brigade arrived at Centreville not far from noon.
To build fires and to prepare a dinner, undisturbed, was the next act
in this day's drama and, if tired soldiers caught a few hours sleep
before the next scene, it need not be wondered at. Some of the men
in the Thirty-ninth were participants in the disastrous battle of
Bull Run; to them it was a case of old scenes revisited, and if they
took some pride in rehearsing their experiences they did not fail of
interested listeners.

But the day was by no means done; though Centreville had been reached,
the enemy was still near, only a little way to the west, and picket
lines must be established. Accordingly the Regiment proceeded on its
somewhat confusing task, while the greater part of the division went
on a reconnoisance. Apparently there was little definite knowledge
of localities, since one writer observed that they reached their
destination at seven o'clock and marched around till eleven, and
another of Company E relates the interesting experience of trying to
obey the orders to follow Bull Run until the pickets of the Sixth
Corps were reached. After crossing Cub Run, three miles away, Major
A. D. Leavitt of the Sixteenth Maine, division-officer of the picket,
went on ahead to ascertain his whereabouts, leaving the Regiment in
a field. Returning in less than an hour, he reported a rebel camp in
the immediate front; in trying to retire, the line was halted by our
own pickets when it appeared that we had been more than a mile beyond
our own lines. On calling the roll, Sergeant Dusseault found that
twelve men were missing. Major Leavitt would allow no one to go back
after them but himself and he found the missing men fast asleep where
we had been waiting. Bringing them all safe and sound to their own,
established the reputation of the Major with the Thirty-ninth from that
time on, as long as he lived. To one member of Company E, "Johnny"
Locke, the memory of the Major was specially grateful, because of the
latter's kindness. The young man had been suffering for days from a
carbuncle on his neck; in any other place than the army, he would have
been laid up completely, but here he kept going; he was one of those
found by the officer and, recognizing the condition of the soldier,
he kindly got down from his horse and mounted the boy in the saddle.
Sidney himself could have done no more.

[Sidenote: OCT. 16, '63]

The dawn of the morning of the 15th did not reveal the situation with
certainty to these inexperienced soldiers; they knew that they were
very near the thrilling scenes of more than one and two years before,
that the sound of musketry and cannon-firing in their front indicated
the possibility of a third battle of Bull Run. It was theirs, however,
to watch and wait in constant expectation of orders to lend a hand.
One writer enlarges on the delights of persimmon-eating, the October
frosts having ripened the yellow delicacy to perfection, and the
various other diversions that unoccupied hours ever suggest. Though
the brigade was finally rejoined and there was a movement towards
Centreville with orders to pitch tents, before the same could be obeyed
a long threatened rain began to fall, putting out whatever fires had
been built and essentially adding to the discomforts and uncertainties
of the day. Rations were drawn late at night and record is made of the
giving out of a portion of whiskey as a stimulant to the wet and weary
soldiers. The experiences of the 16th and 17th did not vary essentially
from those of the 15th; there were picket duty, acting as reserve, the
drawing of rations and all sorts of prognostications as to what the
outcome of the expedition would be. While the cavalry of both sides
kept up an exchange of compliments, very few casualties were reported
from any source. That those who directed believed there was immediate
danger was evident in the degree of caution constantly maintained;
roll-call every two hours and constant injunctions to be ready to move
at any moment.

The 18th marked the end of the Confederate effort to repeat the
campaign of the preceding June and July, and that of 1862. General Lee
writing to his wife on the 19th of October says:

 I have returned to the Rappahannock. I did not pursue with the main
 army beyond Bristoe or Broad Run. Our advance went as far as Bull
 Run, where the enemy was entrenched, extending his right as far as
 Chantilly, in the yard of which he was building a redoubt. I could
 have thrown him farther back, but I saw no chance of bringing him
 to battle, and it would have only served to fatigue our troops by
 advancing farther. If they had been properly supplied with clothes,
 I would certainly have endeavored to have thrown them north of the
 Potomac; but thousands were barefooted, thousands with fragments of
 shoes, and all without overcoats, blankets or warm clothing. I could
 not bear to expose them to certain suffering on an uncertain issue.

From the foregoing it would seem that only the Confederate cavalry
had been responsible for the Federal activity in and about the old
Bull Run battlefields, and now even the horsemen were to follow the
foot forces and the Union troops would again move west and southward.
Ordered out and to pack up in the morning of the 19th the prospects
were not improved by a severe rain storm which completely drenched both
tents and apparel so that, to regular burdens, was added the weight of
water absorbed by the fabrics. Starting at about eight o'clock, the
route was along the Warrenton turnpike, the very road, so prominent in
all accounts of the two Bull Run fields, with the sad sights of only
partially covered bodies of those who had perished in the engagements;
the severe rain was constantly adding to the heaviness of the way
and Thoroughfare Gap, the reputed destination of the march, seemed
a very long distance off. The vicinity of Haymarket on the Manassas
Gap Railroad was reached about 4 p. m. and the noise ahead indicated
a fear that the enemy was there in force, our artillery keeping up a
vigorous shelling of what was thought to be the rebel position. Camps
were made and tents pitched only to have the vexatious order "Pack up"
given just as we were disposed to get a bit of rest. Rations, too, were
scarce and everything combined to make the day and night particularly
trying; at 3.30 p. m. or thereabouts of the 20th an advance was made
through Thoroughfare Gap, though there were those who thought "No
Thoroughfare," on account of the difficulties of the way, would be a
better designation.

The 21st was spent in camp which was pitched on such a hilly surface
that at least two bunkies had to stake a board at their feet, lest they
slide from under their blankets. Every one remarked on the beauty of
the locality and comments were made on the five storied flouring-mill
standing in the Gap, the same being thought the finest edifice yet seen
in Virginia. Notwithstanding the recent destruction of railroads on the
Confederate retreat, so quickly were repairs made and so immediate the
communications between the different departments that a wagon supply
train came through in the afternoon and hungry men were fed once more.
One man said his breakfast had consisted of half a hardtack; the same
writer, his stomach being at rest, could enlarge on the beauties of
the moonlight in the evening. Poetic thoughts are not prevalent in the
presence of hunger. The 22d brought inspection, an indication that
the officers, at least, thought us anchored for a while; the 23rd
was marked by a battalion drill, another sign of permanency and, to
complete the soldiers' happiness, quartermaster's stores appeared so
that many defects and wants in uniform were supplied.

[Sidenote: OCT. 23, '63]

While every prospect was pleasing, it was not for sightseeing that
these men in blue were so far from home and all realized that a long
stay here was out of the question, so the orders to be ready for a
start at seven o'clock of the 24th surprised no one. A very heavy,
cold rain had been falling during a large part of the preceding night,
hence wet tents increased the burdens of travel while empty haversacks
reminded the owner of an equally vacant stomach. Every day, during
an active campaign, reminded all concerned of the truth of the old
adage that an army, like a snake, moves upon its belly, and Oliver
Twist, ever insistent on more, was reproduced in every healthy soldier
in the Potomac Army. Only the few who had provided for a possible
lacking of rations had anything to eat this morning, hence no time was
lost in preparing breakfast. It was through a pitiless rain that the
day's march, beginning early in the forenoon, was made back through
Thoroughfare Gap; following the railroad as nearly as possible, luckily
the grade being down rather than up; fording streams, especially
Broad Run, though they could make the men no more wet than they
already were from the rain; through Haymarket, Gainesville to Bristoe
Station, the scene of the Second Corps' fight on the 14th. On every
hand were evidences of the fierce encounter, as dead horses and the
many graves of the slain. Though the most of the brigade halted here,
the Thirty-ninth and the Ninety-fourth New York had not reached their
limit, and they continued until Kettle Run was reached.

The special duty assigned to these two regiments was the guarding of
the railroad, which had been repaired to this point and the bridge
which was in process of building; all were exceedingly tired from the
long day's exactions; there was no food to cook for supper but they
could build big fires and dry to some extent their drenched apparel,
and then seek rest and the sleep which hovers near the wet and weary.
Sunday, the 25th, dawned bright and beautiful, its warmth imparting sun
soon dried what the fires of the night before had failed to do and, had
there only been rations for the hungry men, they might have been in
a better mood for enjoyment. Ten of the clock brought inspection, as
inevitable as death itself; before noon the anxiously expected rations
appeared and, with them disposed of, the Regiment was ready for any
duty that might be assigned. With the food also came some articles of
apparel, so that long needed blankets made nights more comfortable.
For eleven days or until the 5th of November, this locality, the camp
having been changed a bit and more carefully laid out, became the
habitat of the Thirty-ninth. It was during the night of the 25th that
Lieutenant I. D. Paul of Company F came near losing his life; orders
had been given to those on guard to challenge no one but to shoot at
sight; only the recognition of his shoulder strap saved the popular
officer's falling a victim to the very orders that he had himself given
out.

[Sidenote: NOV. 4, '63]

Though the camp was to continue quite a while for an active campaign,
the men did not know it, nor anyone else for that matter, so orders to
be ready for a move were not unheard during this period of comparative
rest; still the regular routine of roll-calls, drill, etc., was
resumed, for absolute ease was unknown to members of the Thirty-ninth.
The season being the last of October, the weather was sharp, the rains
cold and need of warm clothing apparent. The 29th brought quite a
rarity in the shape of a ration of "soft bread" as the soldiers always
called the baker's product, in the shape of loaves, in distinction from
the hard bread or the regulation hardtack, the real standby. The last
day of the month was written down as the date of muster for two months'
pay and the fact that food was abundant, since, being right on the
railroad, by means of steam, rations came direct from Washington. On
Tuesday, November 3rd, there was a brigade drill, conducted by Colonel
Leonard of the Thirteenth Massachusetts, commanding the brigade, and
the giving out of eight days' rations had a decided look towards a
change of camps. The 4th was signalized by the arrival of boxes from
home and many a boy's heart, as well as stomach, was made glad by
evidence of home regard and recollection.

While the men regretted leaving their comparatively comfortable camp,
all realized that the mutations of war demanded almost constant action,
so the orders while battalion drill was in progress to get ready for a
move were not entirely a surprise; besides, the many rations of the day
before were a warning. Arms having been stacked, tents were pulled down
and everything made ready for the start, which was about 4 p. m., and
a large part of the march to Catlett's station, some seven miles away,
was made after dark, hence tedious, made all the more so by the burden
of extra rations and a winter outfit of clothing and tent material.
Some one has characterised the march as a helter-skelter one, every man
"going on his own hook," without regard to regimental formation, let
alone so compact a matter as a company; each man camped down where he
could do so most comfortably; "there was no roll-call that night." The
next day the soldiers found their own, and the Regiment moved half a
mile or so from the night's bivouac and pitched tents on a side-hill,
resuming the routine of regular camp life, and entry is made of the
burning of the tall grass which grew near, necessitating some energetic
work on the part of the campers to extinguish, and the all too apparent
exertions of the preceding twenty-four hours merited the whiskey ration
which was dealt out.

That no degree of permanency had yet been attained was evident when
early orders were received to be ready to march at 6.30 a. m. of
the 7th, and the start was made at 7, much nearer than usual to
the allotted hour, and the trend was southward, through Warrenton
Junction and Elktown to the vicinity of Morristown, a few miles from
the Rappahannock. Not only was the entire First Corps in motion but
the same was true of the Second and Third as well, all indications
pointed to a resumption of the status prior to the October Northward
move. Whatever the plans or purposes, they were not carried out
without provocation to firing as appeared in the sounds from the river
region; later knowledge acquaints us that the noise arose from portions
of the Sixth and Fifth Corps at Rappahannock Station and the Third
Corps at Kelly's Ford, disputing possession with the ever present and
always vigilant enemy. The distance marched varied according to the
one estimating, the same ranging from fifteen to seventeen miles. In
October, 4.30 a. m. is a long while before daylight, yet this was the
time of waking on the 8th and, after the very essential coffee-making,
the line was off soon after six o'clock. The first considerable halt
was at Grove Church where were seen a large number of Confederate
wounded from yesterday's engagements.




BRANDY STATION


[Sidenote: OCT. 10, '63]

The Rappahannock was crossed at Kelly's Ford by means of a pontoon
bridge and, at 5 p. m., the Regiment was near Brandy Station, having
marched ten or twelve miles; the route, where possible, was along the
railroad which will be in operation to-morrow probably. Tents were
pitched and large fires built and many were pleased to find not so very
far away the Tenth (Sleeper's) Massachusetts Battery which we had left
at Poolesville and now is connected with the First Division, Third Army
Corps and which, yesterday, had borne its part in the incidents of the
day. Many a handshake and "Glad to see you" signalized the meeting. The
earlier part of the 9th was passed in the halting place of yesterday,
some of the men improving the chance to call on friends in the Tenth
Battery, but at two in the afternoon, the familiar "Pack-up" order was
heard with the accompanying direction to be ready to march at four
o'clock. A little before sunset, the start was made by a countermarch,
recrossing the Rappahannock on the pontoon bridge and a long,
wearisome, night trip followed, one of the features being the first
snowstorm of the season, all tending to make a very tired lot of men,
who were pushed along without halting to Licking Run, between Bealton
and Warrenton Junction, possibly fifteen miles from the starting place,
arriving a little past midnight. Very many fell out on the way quite
unable to stand the pace, and those who did stick to the colors wasted
no time in preparations for camp, but dropped at once and straightway
fell asleep.

The morning of the 10th revealed a tired array of men and a
snow-covered earth, but human nature and human bodies rally readily.
After a short move further into a considerable piece of woods, camp
was pitched and preparations were made for as comfortable a stay as
possible, some of the men expressing the wish that they might remain a
while because of the abundance of wood and water, and here they were
to remain almost two weeks, though from them the fact was concealed;
probably no one knew what the future would unfold. There was work for
many of the men repairing the railroad, some having to go into the
woods to cut sleepers, others to assist with pick and shovel. This
day, the 10th, the promotion of 1st Sergeant Dusseault, Company E, was
announced and he was assigned to Company H as Second Lieutenant. Within
this period, drills were resumed and all else that pertained to routine
and efficiency; clothing was drawn, the Regiment was paid for September
and October on the 16th and 17th and by a singular coincidence the
sutler made his appearance at the same time. Evidently some of the men
were in arrears, as for that matter, most soldiers were wont to be.
Considerable care was taken with the tents of both officers and men,
the idea gaining credence that a prolonged stay might be made here, but
neither army was ready, as yet, for winter quarters.

Orders to move were circulated on the 22d and at four o'clock in the
forenoon of the 23rd, drowsy men were summoned from their sleep to
pack-up and be ready for another change, starting from their late
camp at about sunrise. On reaching Bealton, a union was effected with
the remainder of the division and a few miles further, towards the
Rappahannock, camp was made for the night, all realizing that cold
weather was upon them and that the burdens, on the march by day, had
to be heavy in order to insure any comfort for the night. Rain fell
very easily during those days, and it was somewhat discouraging to have
to turn out at 4 a. m. and, breakfasting at an early hour, to stand
in line momentarily expecting the order, "Forward," and all the time
pelted by the falling rain. After a while we were ordered to put up
our tents again, a change of mind having been experienced higher up.
Wednesday, the 25th, differed in no essential from its predecessor,
though many of the men were wondering whether the mail, express or
freight, would bring them anything from home by way of a reminder of
Thanksgiving, due on the 26th. Disappointment was the lot of all, for
authorities in Washington must have known of impending activity and so
withheld what thoughtful friends had attempted to forward to the army;
sutlers however put in an appearance, an ill-starred act, on their
part, as the morrow was to show.




MINE RUN


[Sidenote: NOV. 26, '63]

Thanksgiving day in the North, November 26th, should be remembered as
the beginning of the famous Mine Run affair, one of the greatest of
the battles that were never fought. Judging from results in former
years, when campaigning was undertaken at this season of the year, it
would seem that winter quarters would be a better proposition for the
army than another forward movement, but General Meade, feeling that
the Northern public demanded some aggressive movement on his part,
determined to avail himself of the withdrawal of Longstreets' Corps
and the remoteness of Lee's remaining Corps, Ewell's and Hill's, from
each other, and to take the offensive. Ewell's men, under the command
of General Jubal A. Early, Ewell being ill, held the Confederate right,
the same resting on the Rapidan at Morton's Ford, while Hill's forces
in their dispersion extended fully twenty miles to the southwest.
Meade could lead 70,000 men into the assault, while Lee's troops were
rated at 50,000; the lower fords of the Rapidan were quite uncovered,
Lee depending for defence on a line of fortifications extending along
the left bank of Mine Run, an insignificant stream, tributary to the
Rapidan and entering the same near Morton's Ford. The words of Robert
Burns concerning the plans of mice and men never had better application
than in the events of the following days. Had army corps crossed and
attacked as projected, considering the detached, not to say scattered,
condition of the enemy, it seems as though he would have been beaten in
detail.

Had General French and his Third Corps started at the early hour named
in the orders; had not the engineer miscalculated the width of the
stream and so provided too few pontoons for the bridge which had to be
pieced out with a trestle; had not the banks of the river proved too
precipitous for the artillery which had to go down to Germanna Ford
and even then, if the Corps had not taken a wrong road and so fallen
foul of Confederate General Edward Johnson and his forces, the entire
story of the war might have been very different from what is written.
In brief, the expedition was scheduled to begin early in the morning
of the 23rd, but was delayed by the severe rain of that and subsequent
days. The orders under which the start of the 27th was made were
that the Third Corps, General French, followed by the Sixth, General
Sedgwick, should cross the Rapidan at Jacob's Mills; the Fifth, General
Sykes, followed by the First, General Newton, was to cross at Culpeper
Mine, while the Second, General Warren, was to cross by the Germanna
Ford, between the other fords named. With ten days' rations carried by
the men, General Meade was justifiable "in cutting loose from his base
of supplies, and undertaking the feat in three columns of seizing the
plank road and turnpike and, by advancing rapidly towards Orange Court
House, of turning the enemy's works and compelling him to give battle
on ground not previously selected or prepared."

[Sidenote: NOV. 26, '63]

That the expedition failed is history, its outlines have often been
told in many places; our interest rests principally in what the First
Corps and Thirty-ninth Regiment were doing during these days of stroke
and counter stroke. General John Newton, commanding the First Corps,
in his report to the Headquarters of the Army of the Potomac, tersely
narrates the doings of each day from Thursday, Nov. 26th, to Thursday,
Dec. 3rd, both dates inclusive. Leaving the Third Division of the Corps
guarding the Orange and Alexandria Railroad from Rappahannock Station
to Manassas, he advanced the other two divisions to the Culpeper Mine
Ford, getting only one of them across by seven o'clock; starting at
3.30 a. m. of the 27th, he reached the rear of Robertson's Tavern a
little after 7 p. m.; the Corps was roused at 3 a. m. of the 28th and
put in position at the left of the Second Corps and Robertson's Tavern;
about seven o'clock the corps was ordered to advance, still keeping to
the left of the Second Corps; advancing in two lines through the woods
to near Mine Run, the enemy was discovered in line of battle to receive
us. Establishing a picket line, with a little firing of the enemy,
the corps remained in position for the remainder of the day. November
29th, an attack on the enemy being contemplated on the right and left,
General Newton, in the centre, commanded his own troops and some of
the Fifth and Sixth Corps; at 8 a.m., agreeably to orders, cannonading
began along his front, continuing a short time only; skirmishers were
sent across Mine Run who performed their duties gallantly, losing
in killed and wounded about forty men; under cover of the picket
lodgement, four bridges were built, for later use if necessary; under
advice from headquarters the pickets were withdrawn to the Federal or
east bank of the Run at 3 a. m. of the 30th and an hour later fell back
to Germanna Ford to cover the crossing of the Fifth and Sixth Corps.
Dec. 1st all of the army recrosses; Dec. 2d, under orders, leaving a
single brigade at Germanna, proceeded to Stevensburg with the remainder
of the Corps; Dec. 3rd reached Paoli's Mills about noon and sent a
brigade to Kelly's Ford.

Returning to the 26th of November and confining ourselves to the work
of the Thirty-ninth we find the same awakened at an early hour and
starting out before four o'clock. The Rappahannock was again crossed at
the station of the same name as the river. During a brief halt on the
south side of the stream, Colonel Leonard, commanding the brigade, read
a telegram from headquarters, announcing the great victory of General
Grant at Chattanooga and at least one soldier remarked, "That's good
news to march on." With hourly halts, the extended march was not so
tiresome as certain shorter though more rapid ones had proved. About
6 p. m. the Rapidan was crossed at Culpeper Mine, and ascending an
elevation south of the river, a mile further along, camp was pitched
for the night. Not a few commented on the change from Thanksgiving Day
the year before, and still more remarked on the difference between the
day at home and that passed in active campaigning; no cases of insomnia
were heard of during the night, for all were tired and sleepy and
"taps," if sounded, found very few waiting to obey. Eighteen miles were
put down as the distance marched.

Certain men were detailed as pickets, and it was their duty to see to
it that no harm befell their sleeping comrades; going on duty at ten
o'clock last night, they came off at two this morning (27th) and an
hour later the camp was alert with preparations to depart. Starting a
little before daylight, we marched southward, passing through a part of
the country very near the Chancellorsville battlefield of the preceding
May and of the Wilderness, yet to be. After striking the Orange and
Fredericksburg pike at eight o'clock in the morning, a halt was called
and the men rested while the wagon and ambulance trains passed. The
march continued till after dark, ending at Robertson's Tavern with a
total distance covered of about thirty miles, from the starting point
of yesterday.

The 28th of November, Saturday, brought a part of the Regiment under
fire. Before daylight an advance of a mile or so was made, followed
by breakfast and the use of pick and shovel in entrenching and then
a still further, though brief, advance. The sound of the skirmishing
comes from front and battle line is formed; Companies C and E being
detailed as skirmishers, they went forward some 300 yards, the regiment
remaining behind the crest of the hill. As a Company C participant
wrote, "It commenced to rain very soon and we lay on our bellies and
watched the Rebs.; their sharpshooters watched us closely and some were
wounded. Benj. Dow of our company was shot through the leg,[G] but the
boys were cool and stood their first fire like veterans; after lying
thus all day, cold and wet through to the skin, we were relieved about
eight o'clock and rejoined the Regiment, tired and hungry; the Rebs.
are in good position and I doubt whether Meade will attack first."

[Sidenote: NOV. 29, '64]

The night that followed, though quiet, brought very little comfort
to the men, thoroughly chilled by the rain of yesterday and, at 3 a.
m. of the 29th, some of them were stirring to prepare the soldiers'
solace, a cup of hot coffee. Everybody expected to storm the enemy's
works at some time on this day; knapsacks were piled up that full use
of all the muscles might be had. Old campaigners were writing their
names and regiments on bits of paper and pinning them on their garments
for identification since it seemed sure that the works could not be
assailed without a terrible loss of life. A brigade of the Fifth Corps
formed the first line of battle and our brigade came next; skirmishing
between the rival lines prevailed all day. Shells even came over from
the Confederates, but they drew no reply from our lines. The rebels
having withdrawn across the Run, the same wider than usual through
having been dammed, formed the line of separation between the blue
and the gray. At nightfall, to shield themselves from the cold wind,
trees were cut down for a shelter, and to the mercies of the night the
soldiers again commended themselves.

Sunday was the last day of the month, and it seemed impossible that the
day should pass without the long impending assault; three days' rations
were distributed and the men were told that they must make them last
five, a pretty severe exaction from an army which we have been told
moves on its stomach. The attack did not take place, but there was a
deal of activity in arranging the forces for the projected advance.
It was understood by the leading officers that in the early morn of
the 1st of December there should be a simultaneous cannonading along
the entire line to be followed by an assault by Warren and his massed
forces, to be succeeded on the right by like action on the part of
Sedgwick and his loyal Sixth Corps followers. The morning of the first
day of winter came, but Warren did not order the assault as expected.
To his practiced eye, the works erected and defended by the enemy were
too strong for the attack and to his judgment Meade, himself, deferred
when he had ridden to the extreme left and there saw their magnitude
and strength. His messenger, who happened to be his own son, rode with
breathless speed to countermand the orders of the day before and the
Battle of Mine Run was not fought. At nightfall the backward movement
began and at or near midnight, the Thirty-ninth with many other
regiments was at the Rapidan once more.

During the last of these Mine Run days, our Lieut. Colonel Peirson was
in command of the division line of pickets, being officer of the day,
and his experience was interesting for, entering upon his duties, he
rode a white horse, furnished him at Division Headquarters, riding
just in rear of the picket line until the plentitude of the enemy's
bullets compelled him to alight and to walk or crawl the rest of the
way. Desiring to cross a little elevation, he took the precaution,
before exposing himself, of raising his cap upon his sword and, as it
was the immediate target of several rebel bullets, he concluded that
a more circuitous route would be preferable. So cold was it that men,
in their falsely named "shelters" were frozen to death, as they held
on to their posts to which the relief did not come. On reaching the
desired point and, after driving the enemy across a small stream which
he later learned was not Mine Run but a tributary, with the assistance
of a few pioneers he successfully bridged it for the passage of troops.
In this labor he had the misfortune to fall into the water and, in
a few minutes, was completely clad in icicles. Colonel Peirson was
still advancing his line before reporting upon the situation, having
discovered another branch of the stream which he was about to bridge,
when the orders to fall back were received.

[Sidenote: DEC., '63]

The retreat is made across the river at Germanna Ford and to the
Thirty-ninth is committed the task of seeing all safely over. We see
the Fifth and Sixth Corps safely across, then our own troops, including
our brigade; finally the Regiment goes across, all save Companies C and
F and then C is left alone; stragglers have passed over; apparently the
last cavalryman is riding on the further side when the pontoons are
taken up and, in the last boat, the Medford Company crosses over to
join its fellows on the northern bank. The expected dash by Confederate
horsemen did not take place and, chilled to the bone, the Union army
after a rest of an hour proceeded to Stevensburg or near that point.
Later, finding a suitable camping place, rationless and wearied, the
men sought what comfort sleep might afford. Some of the soldiers find
time to moralize on the outcome and they secure some satisfaction from
the fact that if they did not assail the enemy, neither did the Rebels
attack the Federals. Years afterward, General Early, in command in the
immediate front of the line held by the First and Fifth Corps, wrote
of the situation, "A direct attack from either side would have been
attended with great difficulties, on account of the necessity of having
to descend the slopes of Mine Run and then, after crossing that stream,
to ascend the opposite slopes under the fire of artillery as well as
infantry." Very few soldiers have ever been heard to criticise the
wisdom of Warren's judgment or of Meade's acquiescence.

FOOTNOTES:

[G] The wounding of Private Dow was the first bloodshed in the
Regiment, and in token thereof he was promoted to be a corporal.
As this was the only casualty in the Regiment, during the Mine Run
campaign, the death which Col. T. W. Higginson gives in his story of
Massachusetts in the Army and Navy 1861-65 must be an error.




TOWARDS WINTER QUARTERS


In the forenoon of the 3rd, the Regiment marches a few miles to the
vicinity of Kelly's Ford on the Rappahannock where certain log huts
built by the enemy and used by them until driven out on the 7th of
November by the Third Corps are occupied; a diversity of opinion as to
their condition is put down by certain scribes of the period, though
Company C comes up too late to get in at all. Some of the boys are very
certain that winter quarters are to be right here on account of the
nearness of wood and water but, meanwhile, the old duty of picketing is
resumed and some of the Medford men find their line along the waters
of Mountain Run. For three weeks there is little variation in daily
routine: drills, inspections, parades and the regular off and on for
picket and guard duty. Meantime everyone finds time to try to retain
whatever heat his fire may induce, but in spite of his efforts, as
one boy writes, "We suffer with the cold every night." On the 5th,
came orders to move, but happily they were soon countermanded. The 6th
brought the sutler again and opportunity to invest money for creature
comforts at exceedingly high rates. In these days, men are able to
exhibit their mechanical ability, or the want of it, in their efforts
to make comfortable and presentable the cabins in which they expect to
pass the winter. Drills are suspended on the 11th that more time may be
given to work on the huts.

For the 12th and the 13th there are records of the arrival of boxes
from the North; in one case, "The provisions are all spoiled"; in
another, "All right, except the shirts and drawers which are missing."
Had the latter case arisen while the men were in rebel prisons, the
enemy would have had to bear the blame; it would appear that there
were pilferers also among our own people. The regularity of the
arrival and departure of mails affords these letter-writing soldiers
no little pleasure. The weather is not so cold as that of New England
at this time of the year, but it varies from bright sunshine to points
away below freezing with an occasional flurry of snow, but however
disagreeable it may be, all realize that it is harder still for the
Confederates, since they are not so well clad as we are. It is also a
time for furloughs and, on the 19th, seven men from the Thirty-ninth
start on a ten days' visit to the northern homes, the time spent there
to be the very happiest in their entire lives. The 21st had special
mention in the diaries, in that the chaplain attended two funerals of
as many men belonging to the Regiment and that Colonel Davis began
a ten days' leave of absence for a trip to the Bay State. The 23rd
carries the record of wintery weather, made all the more so by having
the ground covered with snow, the first time in the season, also the
surprise for all, in that they are ordered to have everything in
readiness to move tomorrow at five o'clock in the morning. Sad looks on
soldierly faces follow this announcement, "for it is such a good place
to spend the winter in."

[Sidenote: DEC. 24, '63]

Though awakened at 3 a.m. and formed in line at 4, it was 8 a.
m. before the orders to march were heard. Not a little grumbling
accompanied this departure on a cold wintry day from semi-comfortable
quarters for new camping places. One man's observations come down to
us thus: "Why couldn't they let us sleep a while longer and then let
us prepare and eat our breakfast, rather than make us stand in line on
such a cold, cheerless morning?" Had all kept diaries the entries would
have differed in no essential from the foregoing. The day proved to be
a good one for marching and after reaching Brandy Station, the course
was along the Orange and Alexandria Railroad, through Culpeper Court
House to a point possibly four miles beyond, when it was found that
the Regiment had lost its bearings, thus necessitating a bivouac in a
convenient stretch of woods. The burden of extra winter necessities and
the frozen earth made the eighteen miles' march a trying one. Though it
was "The night before Christmas" and many thoughts wandered northward
to far away homes where the loved ones dwelt, there was little of the
divine flavor to the night which settled down and enfolded these armed
men, on the very outposts of the Union Army.

Christmas dawned as expected, but it did not seem just as it would
under other circumstances; the "Merry Christmas" that passed from
mouth to mouth seemed to lack some of the home fervor, yet all put
the best foot forward and, determining to make the best of it, there
was more than one expression of wonder as to whether "We'll be here a
year hence?" Luckily, boxes from home came to cheer some of the men, a
real demonstration of Santa Claus, and all the more welcome for this
reason; the entire First Corps was included in this movement and the
many campfires, that lit up the night, gave a gloss to what otherwise
might have been cheerless; song and story made the evening pass rapidly
away, and the ever melodious "taps" set these patriotic North men to
slumber and the sweetest of dreams. There was an inspection in the
forenoon of the 26th and orders to be ready to march in the afternoon.
Starting at 3 p. m., the trip was only about two miles still nearer
the Confederacy, along the railroad, halting at or near Mitchell's
Station, the very last before reaching the Rapidan; here in a large
field the brigade encamped in column by regiments. Rain falls on the
27th and this, coupled with the marshy character of the fields in which
the Regiment is camped, makes moist beds for the men, though they try
to obviate the situation by tearing boards from an unoccupied house
and by the use of boughs and branches in getting the bunks off the
saturated ground.




MITCHELL'S STATION


In the matter of residents, it could not be said that Mitchell's
Station was exactly densely inhabited, but where was there ever a girl
whom someone did not admire and, if possible, make her acquaintance?
One family, with the staunchest of German names, in which the sons
had gone into the rebel army, had a father, mother and three grown-up
daughters. When sober, the "old man" claimed to be a good Union man;
when drunk, as was sometimes the case, he was an out and out Secesh;
as to the girls, it made no difference what their affiliations were;
they were girls and that was enough. One evening, three officers called
at headquarters and asked the privilege of calling on the Y---- girls;
"Umph," exclaimed Colonel Davis, "I verily believe half the officers in
the Regiment are there already, but you may go if you think it will do
you any good."

[Sidenote: DEC. 28, '63]

With the 28th comes Sutler Pullen again and until afternoon the rain
continues; the 29th does not bring the change of camping place that so
many wish. During the day, Colonel T. F. McCoy (One Hundred and Seventh
Penn.), commanding in the absence of Colonel Leonard, compliments the
entire brigade on the cheerfulness and fortitude of the men and their
endurance in marching in the cold and stormy weather; he also calls
attention to the exposed position of the brigade, being the nearest the
enemy and warning every one to be on the lookout constantly. On this
day also was promulgated the plan to secure reenlistments of the men,
with the promise of a thirty days' furlough and a large bounty. The
proposition did not appear to find much favor with the Thirty-ninth,
although all of the men would appreciate that month at home. The 30th
brought orders to be ready to march on the morrow. December goes
out with mud and moisture much in evidence; the camp is moved in the
forenoon less than a mile, thereby finding better conveniences in
a piece of woods. Major Leavitt of the Sixteenth Maine musters the
Regiment for pay, and Lieut. Colonel Peirson performs a like act for
the Maine soldiers. Colonel Davis gets back from his furlough, having
walked from Culpeper last night in the dark and through the mud. Here,
then, ends the year with its record of Gettysburg and Chattanooga, but
for our Regiment, with all its preparation, marching and undeviating
performance of duty, its fiery ordeal is yet to come.




1864


January 1st the day dawned bright and cold, the weather having cleared
in the night; the mud and the streams have taken on the repose of
winter, but, if any protection against the inclement season is to be
had, the men must get to work at once and this they do, cutting down
trees to fashion therefrom the primative habitations that the early
settlers of all new countries have had to make. Though the men do not
know it, and though there will be many rumors of departures, they may
even pack up at times yet, until the last of April, Mitchell's Station
will be the P. O. address of the Thirty-ninth Regiment, but winter
in camp is no trifling matter with a regular routine of camp duties,
besides the necessity of maintaining the utmost vigilance towards the
foe. Hence the building of quarters cannot be effected in a day or
week, in the meantime the ordinary shelter tent affords only slender
protection against the wind and cold. It is to be a second winter's
experience with our Regiment, hence the building of log huts is not
an innovation; all that is needed are time, tools and material. For
several months the Rapidan is to be the most generally named stream in
the eastern part of the Union, for along its northern banks are to camp
the several corps which make up the Army of the Potomac and, every day
thousands of letters to far away homes will tell the people there what
is doing down in "Old Virginny." For four months a thin line of blue
will patrol its shores for more than twenty miles and equally vigilant
men in gray, will keep their watch upon the south side. With the Second
Corps on the extreme Union left, with headquarters near Stevensburg,
the Union army stretches to the westward till it terminates with the
First Corps, which will furnish infantry pickets on a line of cavalry
outposts.

South of the river, the Confederates are guarding an equal distance,
yet there will be very little indication of hostility, something like
an armed neutrality, each line of sentinels quite content to be let
alone; there is however this difference between the two armies, one has
all that boundless means can supply to make its soldiers comfortable,
the other wanting nearly everything that would contribute to personal
enjoyment. The lack of clothing and camp outfit had become such that
winter with its rigors became far more an object of fear to the enemy
than any army the Yankees might send against them. Thomas Nelson Page,
in his Life of General Lee, has this to say concerning the Confederates
in camp along the Virginia Central Railroad:

[Sidenote: JAN. 1, '64]

 Lee's army was in a state of such destitution that it is a wonder that
 the men could be kept together. Only their spirit enabled them to
 stand the hardships of the winter. Barefooted and hungry, they stood
 it throughout the long months of a Virginia winter, and when it is
 considered that until they joined the army many of these men had never
 seen snow, and that none of them had ever experienced want of adequate
 clothing, their resolution is a tribute to their patriotism that can
 never be excelled. That Lee himself endured hardships and suffered
 with them in their self denial was sufficient for them.... From his
 camp, General Lee writes to his wife on January 24, 1864, "I have had
 to disperse the cavalry as much as possible to obtain forage for their
 horses, and it is that which causes trouble. Provisions for the men,
 too, are very scarce, and with very light diet and light clothing, I
 fear they will suffer, but still they are cheerful and uncomplaining.
 I received a report from one division the other day in which it
 was stated that over four hundred men were barefooted and over one
 thousand were without blankets."

During the early January days, all the time that could be secured from
regular duties was devoted to house building, and every man worked with
a will, since the weather was extremely cold, the amount of clothing
possessed being insufficient, in the open air, to maintain warmth; some
of the men resorted to the old fashioned practice of putting a heated
stone at their feet to help make them comfortable, every one thus
getting a notion of what it meant to build homes in the wilderness as
so many pioneers had done. Because of so many of the men in Company C
having been ship carpenters when at home, a large part of the company
was detailed to work on the houses, though the Woburn delegation (K)
was not far behind with its thirteen men selected to use axe, saw,
hammer and plane. The arrival of packages from home, from time to time,
did much to lessen grumbling and the coming in of seven deserters on
the 6th, barefooted and telling pitiful stories of the conditions
across the Rapidan, made the Yankees more nearly comfortable just by
way of contrast. With big fires burning, we were sure of one side being
warm, even if the other was almost freezing. However, song and story
wiled away many a long evening before trying to woo the goddess, sleep,
in comfortless shelter tents. In the demands of picket, camp, regiment
and brigade guard there was something in the guard-way for nearly every
man, every day, so the houses did not grow any too rapidly.

Such entries in the diaries of the period as, "mudded our hut to-day,"
would mean little to the novice unless told that this meant the
stopping of the spaces between the log cob-pile which constituted the
walls of the habitation, with real old Virginia soil, properly mixed
with a certain amount of water and, when plentifully applied, was
warranted to stand indefinitely, keeping out the much dreaded wind. The
same material judiciously mingled with sticks, staves, boards or boxes
made the chimney-exit for the smoke produced in the fireplace, which
was a necessary feature of every cabin.[H] Making the quarters for
the squad that was to hold and occupy did not end the enlisted man's
duties, for he had also to take a hand in the fabrication of similar
structures for his company officers and then to do his part in behalf
of the care and comfort of the Field and Staff. Nor did the chain end
here, since there must be places for the retention and protection of
commissary and quartermaster stores and, never to be forgotten, were
all the important, superlatively useful yet ever railed at, "The good
old army mules," and who should build their shelters, if not the men
for whom they had drawn through so many miles the supplies which fed
and clothed the soldiers?

[Sidenote: JAN. 10, '64]

The long delayed Thanksgiving dinner came to "C," the Medford company,
on the 10th and a relay of clothing such as, "Nice flannel shirts
and drawers, socks, mittens and a few caps for nights." The company
received them very gratefully and the friends at home would be more
than paid, could they see how thankful the men were. "We eat our
dinners to-morrow," says the scribe. The details of the dinner, eaten
on the 11th, are not uninteresting; remembering that twenty-two men
had been discharged from the company, that some men were on detached
service and that many were in the hospital, the fact, that less than
forty were present for duty and the dinner will not seem so strange.
Owing to the limited number, the liberality of material for that feast
is conspicuous; they might have called in some of their less fortunate
neighbors and then have had a very large meal for themselves; the
record is, "One turkey and one pudding for every four men; one half a
mince pie per man with sauces for turkey and pudding, also the real old
orthodox cranberry, redolent of the Cape, besides, pickles, cheese and
condensed milk." The folks at home did nothing by halves and how many
hours of careful and diligent labor in those northern homes did this
magnificent layout represent!

Everyday life in these winter-quarter days of the Army of the Potomac
are a practical illustration of the old maxim, "Eternal vigilance is
the price of liberty"; for, despite the efforts given to hut building,
all the men are really under arms or the next thing to it. "Men are
obliged to wear their equipments twenty-four hours" and an immediate
response is expected to every order. A few recruits are joining the
Regiment, not exactly a pleasant season of the year in which to be
broken into the routine of military life, yet the proper officers take
them in charge and begin the breaking-in process. On the 12th, remains
of the great Company C dinner are sent over to the sick at Culpeper,
and those who are not users of the weed distribute their tobacco, also
from Medford, among those who are not so abstemious. Notwithstanding
all of the alert watchfulness, the enemy seems to be perfectly
quiescent and, probably, perfectly willing that we should be. After a
deal of policing and general slicking up, the 16th brings the monthly
inspection, conducted by Lieutenant Bradley of the brigade staff. The
habits of the far off homes are fixed and in the evening of Sunday, the
17th, might be heard the sound of many voices as they joined in singing
the songs and hymns of childhood; "a splendid, moonlight evening."

Deserters and contrabands are frequently discovered fording the
Rapidan, whose chilly waters have less terrors for the escaping
parties than the tribulations left behind. In the night of the 19th the
firing of the Confederate guards hastened the steps of some deserting
rebels and prevented the departure of others. The cabins having been
constructed and occupied, the men are now making corduroy sidewalks, by
laying moderate lengths of poles side-by-side, crossways of the walk
itself, and, thus, are able to get about without being lost in Virginia
mud. Many a remark is heard on the admirable appearance of the camp,
all agreeing that it is the best in the brigade, and some even lay
that claim as against the entire Army of the Potomac. Company H and a
part of "K" go out on a reconnoisance, Thursday, the 28th. Towards the
end of the month, unusual stir is observed among the enemy, apparently
fresh troops are replacing those long on guard, possibly through fear
that all of the latter will desert; our own camp also has a spell of
falling-in according to orders and, on the 29th, we packed up at 5
a. m., stacked arms and awaited further orders, sorry enough at the
prospect of quitting the comfortable quarters, so recently completed.
Fortunately for us, it all blew over and the Second Brigade moved
instead. On this same day our eyes were gladdened by the unusual sight
of a lady in camp, the same being the wife of General Maj. John Newton,
commanding the First Corps, who accompanied the General and Division
Commander, General Robinson, and their respective staffs, all on a tour
of observation. A dull, though not stormy day closed the month with
regular inspection and we see a Confederate major and three men brought
in as captives by the cavalry.

[Sidenote: FEB. 1, '64]

February starts off full of rumors as to the future of the Regiment;
one says it is to join an expedition to Texas; another sends us home to
be recruited to full ranks, while still another sends us back to become
a part of the Sixth Corps. Who can explain the starting of so many
baseless reports? The weather, early in the month, is cold yet there
are few breaks in regular routine, if parades, drills and inspections
can be injected between the many calls for picket duty. A hospital is
in process of erection near the surgeon's quarters and it is a fine
building, considering the circumstances under which it is going up.
There is talk, also, of a chapel or schoolroom for the use of officers
and men. The 5th of the month, late at night, came the summary orders
to be ready to move early in the morning, reveille to be at 3 a. m.
The drawing of rations, etc., kept us busy until one o'clock in the
next morning, hence not much sleep, but no end of grumbling. Reveille
sounded according to programme on the 6th; the men turned out, cooked
their breakfasts, packed their tents and were ready to start before
daylight. At seven o'clock the orders came to replace the tents and to
resume regular camp life. This break in the usual calm was explained as
an incident in the movement of the Second Corps to Morton's Ford, on
the Rapidan, as a supplementary act to the proposed attempt of General
B. F. Butler from the south against Richmond. As Butler's plan proved
abortive, activity on the part of the Second Corps subsided at once and
things were soon as they had been.

Sunrise, gilding the snowy tops of the Blue Ridge Mountains, awakens
the sensibilities of some of the men as the 10th day of the month
begins and, later in the day, the paymaster makes all happy with
compensation for services rendered up to December 1st. General Robinson
and staff, accompanied by ladies, also by some of the corps staff
officers, rode into camp on the 12th, evidently thinking it one of
the show places of the cantonment. Over the fact that the men left in
camp, the Regiment being on picket, are all merged in two companies
and these go on dress parade prompts one commentator to remark that he
supposes if only one man were left in camp, he would have to appear
at the regular time on parade. Injudicious use of the ardent was the
probable reason for the advent of a Thirteenth Massachusetts' party
evidently bent on mischief. Whatever they came for, the colonel cut
short the career of a sergeant and a private by placing them under
arrest and so returning them to their Regiment. How strange it is, that
men will tolerate an evil that makes such fools of them! The evening
of this day was brilliantly illuminated by great forest fires on both
sides of the Rapidan. The coming of Major William Thorndike, the new
surgeon, is chronicled on the 15th; Surgeon Calvin G. Page, on account
of disability, had been discharged Nov. 16, 1863. The 16th is so cold
that large quantities of wood are brought in from the forest for the
building of fires just for the warmth thereof. The new hospital is
opened and much is expected from it.

The 20th of February marked the dedication of the new chapel, whose
building had taken the time and strength of the soldiers, some of them,
for a number of days. Nicely decorated and appointed, the men were not
a little proud of their place of worship. Chaplain French had charge
of the exercises; the band of the Sixteenth Maine was present and most
obligingly discoursed appropriate music. Among the people who crowded
the interior were Colonel Leonard of the Thirteenth Massachusetts
with his wife, Surgeon Alexander of the Sixteenth Maine and wife,
with others. Compliments were dealt out to the men who had labored so
zealously for the success of the project and Colonel Davis' remarks
in this direction were especially happy. The next day was Sunday,
and regular service was held in the new chapel. Apparently the 22nd,
Washington's birthday, received no special attention. The new chapel
afforded most excellent quarters for the regular meetings of the
Masonic Lodge which had been one of the features of the Regiment for
considerably more than a year. As far back as Offutt's Cross Roads,
November 20, '62, the lodge had been instituted, under a special
dispensation from the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, Grand Master,
William D. Cooledge, the document bearing date, November 13, 1862.

[Sidenote: FEB. 22, '64]

FOOTNOTES:

[H] Long years intervening, General Peirson recalls the existence of a
certain church edifice, out Slaughter Mountain way, which in a former
campaign had afforded cover for a rebel battery and that the same,
issuing from its concealment, had done no little harm to the Second
Massachusetts Infantry, even wounding several of his good friends. Lest
it might be used thus again, and with a certain feeling of resentment
as though the building had been _particeps criminis_, he suggested to
the builders of the winter quarters that the siding of the house and
its foundations might help out their own building schemes. "A word to
the wise" was sufficient, and ere long the structure disappeared, to
reappear as flooring and chimneys for Yankee comfort. The story does
not end here, since many years later the officer was introduced, at the
home of a Boston friend, to a Virginian lady whose mission North was
the soliciting of funds for the rebuilding of the very edifice whose
destruction he had suggested. The General's memory seemed defective
when asked whether he responded liberally or not.




MASONIC LODGE


This original meeting was held at the regimental headquarters, Colonel
Davis presiding, he having been named as Worthy Master of the Putnam
Army Lodge, No. 8, thus called in compliment to the East Cambridge
Lodge of which he was a member. It appears that army posts were no
innovations at this date as the number of this new one would indicate.
Already lodges had been formed in the Third, Sixteenth, Seventeenth,
Twenty-fifth, Second and Forty-eighth Massachusetts Regiments and later
dispensations were granted to the Forty-second and the Thirty-second.
Aside from the Master of Putnam Lodge, Colonel P. S. Davis, the
officers were Henry B. Leighton, S. W.; Capt. Geo. S. Nelson, J. W.;
Capt. F. R. Kinsley, Treasurer; Lieut. Julius M. Swain, Secretary;
Daniel Henry, S. D.; Perry Coleman, J. D.; Lieut. Henry F. Felch, S.
S.; Lieut. Wm. T. Spear, J. S.; Lieut. Willard C. Kinsley, Marshal;
and John M. Curtis, Tyler. In the distribution of officers it would
seem that army rank had no place, fraternal relations being the only
line of consideration. By-laws for the proper management of the lodge
along with blank forms for application for membership were adopted
and, though the Third Thursday of each month was named as the regular
meeting date there were far more special than regular assemblings.

The second meeting of the lodge was in the Methodist chapel and when
the Regiment moved back to Poolesville, the schoolhouse there was
utilized, proper secrecy being gained by putting on guard, near the
place of meeting, members of the order. Applications for membership
came in rapidly and the record for the remainder of the calender year
was twenty-three candidates admitted and seventeen meetings, $580
being received for dues and degrees. From April 6 to July 15, in front
of Petersburg, after the death of Colonel Davis, there was a lapse;
then the Lodge voted to bear the expense attending the return of the
Colonels' remains to Massachusetts but, at the request of the family,
the part of the lodge was confined to embalming and transportation to
Boston, along with the expenses of Chaplain French, who accompanied
the body on the sad journey to Boston. Help was given to the families
of comrades who had been killed or were in hospitals or rebel prison.
October 16, '64, at Fort Dushane it was voted to pay the expenses of
sending the body of Lieut. Wm. T. Spear, Company B, to Roxbury, the
officer having died in hospital from wounds; the same consideration was
shown to the remains of Lieut. Willard C. Kinsley when he was killed.
The final meeting of the lodge was in the State House Boston, January
29, 1866, with fourteen members present when it was voted that of the
remaining funds, $198, $50 should go towards a portrait of Colonel
Davis and the rest for relief. The officers were given the regalia that
they had worn; the Bible was given to the widow of the Colonel, the
square and compasses to the East Cambridge Lodge, the remaining set to
go to Brother Henry B. Leighton, the S. W. During the activities of the
field, the Master, S. D., J. S. and Marshal were killed, the Treasurer
and Secretary were captured. There are recorded considerably more
than fifty names of those voted in, while the brother, turning in the
records, says that thirty-nine took the three degrees.




MITCHELL'S STATION AND THE SCHOOL IN CAMP

Channing Whittaker, Company B


[Sidenote: FEB., '64]

Our most ideal winter's camp before the Wilderness Campaign was that
at Mitchell's Station. A more perfect parade and drill ground could
not have been desired. It had abundant length and breadth. It was
the smooth level top of an extensive plateau. The log cabins of the
officers were in a straight row where the slope to the rear began. The
log cabins of the men stretched down the slope toward a veritable
Eldorado of firewood and drinking water. These log cabins were very
comfortable. Each accommodated eight men. The entrance from the company
street was at the middle of its length. The fireplace and chimney were
directly opposite the entrance. The living room was between the two.
There were four bunks, two at each end with one above the other. Each
bunk was long enough for a tall man to stretch out at full length
with his head upon his knapsack and wide enough for two men to sleep
comfortably, side by side. The cabins of the field officers had, of
course, the right of the line. The chapel was more to the front and a
little to the left of the cabins of the field officers. The pioneers
who constructed Col. Davis' cabin and the chapel were master workmen.
No keel of ship in New England shipyard had timbers hewn and dowelled
into a substantial whole with more absolute perfection. I never shall
forget the perfect delight of an afternoon when, convalescing from a
severe attack of measles, I was detailed to report at the Colonel's
quarters. Here I was received by Lieut Colonel Peirson with a smile
upon his face. He showed me that the cabin was not yet dry enough for
occupancy, showed me the wood which I was to burn to dry it out, showed
me the charming fireplace in which I was to burn it. If I remember well
its top was arched. Perhaps the arch had blocks, with a central one of
keystone shape. He gave me a comfortable seat and an entertaining book
to read, by an army chaplain, "The Whip, Hoe, and Sword," by George
H. Hepworth. The friendly behavior of the Lieut. Colonel, the restful
charm of the roomy clean interior finished in natural wood showing its
grain, the blazing fire in the big fireplace with its perfect chimney,
and the extreme comfort of it all, after the discomforts of the
measles, filled me with agreeable sensations and with gratitude to the
Lieutenant Colonel.

[Sidenote: FEB., '64]

And the chapel! It may have been thirty by fifty feet inside. Its hewn
oaken logs were perhaps twelve inches square, its roof was a fly
that the Christian Commission had furnished. Its fireplace was huge,
magnificent. The prayer meetings were held in it, the Freemasons used
it as a lodgeroom, the Sons of Temperance had meetings there, and the
regimental school for those who could neither read nor write nor cipher
was held in it. I well remember the morning when Comrade John F. Locke,
of Company E, and myself were detailed to report at the chapel and
appointed to be the teachers of the school by Lieut. Colonel Peirson.
I remember hearing the roll-call of the students of my own and of a
neighboring company and the ugly mutterings, the dissatisfaction, the
almost mutinous emphatic expressions of discontent of some of those
whose names had been called, because they had been detailed to attend
a school. I fully expected trouble. A considerable number of men were
in anything but a teachable spirit. We met in the chapel, the Lieut.
Colonel, the teachers, and thirty students, some of them bristling with
unwillingness. But the Lieut. Colonel, who was always a gentleman,
drew us all into a comfortable semi-circle about the hearth where
the cheerful fire blazed. He told us of the personal benefits and
advantages which it was hoped that the work in the school would bring
to each student, and his manner and speech almost immediately disarmed
the embryo antagonism of the others in the group. When he finally asked
if there were any present who desired to be relieved from attendance
at the school, not a man wished to withdraw, all were glad of the
opportunity. The antagonism had melted away like a mud-puddle in the
light of a July sun. And the antagonism never returned. I have taught
many hundreds of students since but none who were more interested, more
attentive, more constant. Each of the men learned to write his name.
Seven wrote letters home before we broke camp, to the great delight of
themselves and their families. Twenty-three made especially commendable
progress in reading and arithmetic. Our text and copy books had been
the generous gifts of Colonel Davis and his brother Robert. The Lieut.
Colonel had offered a gold pen and case as a prize to the man who
should gain the greatest proficiency in writing. All of the written
exercises were carefully preserved from the beginning and, when the
time came to award the prize, it was almost impossible to say whether
it had been won by Johnny Gibbs of Company A, a brick layer, who was
well along in years or by Daniel Lines, a carriage painter. For year
after year the good right hand of Johnny Gibbs had clasped the small
handle of a trowel. Its active exercise in that cramped position with
the acrid lime sometimes in contact with it had caused its bones and
cords and muscles to grow out of shape. He could no longer open it much
more than enough to enter and remove a trowel handle. He could not hold
a pen in usual position. There were sharp crooks made at the joints
of his right thumb and forefinger when he brought them together, and
there were similar crooks in his capital O's when he wrote his best.
But his handwriting, though characteristic, was absolutely clear. It
was perfectly easy to read. He had mastered his hand for the purposes
of a writer. Despite the crooks he wrote a handsome hand. The hand
of Daniel Lines had gained a wonderful cunning in the business of a
carriage painter. He could do what he would with a camels-hair brush,
when making scrolls and stripes and decorations. He brought to his
copy book the artistic power of a hand over which he had a complete
control. From the beginning his double-reversed curves were lines
of beauty. At the end his writing had almost the perfection of the
copyplate. There was no possible doubt that Daniel Lines' writing was
more beautiful than that of any other pupil in the school, but which
had gained the greatest proficiency in writing in the school, he or
Johnny Gibbs? The teachers were puzzled. They called in the Lieut.
Colonel as referee. He too was in doubt and suggested that Gibbs and
Lines should draw lots. The lot fell to Gibbs. On Sunday, the 21st of
August, 1864, Johnny Gibbs and his teacher, John F. Locke, were taken
prisoners in a battle on the Weldon Railroad. They were both very sick,
together, in that fearful prison in Salisbury, North Carolina. There
were no tender-hearted, white-capped, trained nurses there, to keep in
extreme cleanliness the clothing of the very sick. But the gratitude,
the compassion, the sympathy of the old man for his youthful teacher
became too strong. Like many another soldier who has volunteered to
dare almost certain death in a forlorn hope, weak Johnny Gibbs washed
the soiled clothing of John Locke. Within a day, Johnny Gibbs was dead.




STILL IN CAMP.


[Sidenote: FEB. 29, '64]

Incessant picket duty has marked the month of February with a great
variety of weather and the men are not sorry to see the 29th day, Leap
Year's allotment, for they know that they are just so much nearer the
end of the war and their consequent return to their homes. A spring
feeling begins to be felt on both sides of the river and indications
of activity are discovered among the Confederates, and at least twice
recently orders have been given for the preparation of rations for
the haversacks, as though some sort of a move were contemplated. On
this final day of the month, the Regiment is mustered for two months'
pay, while drill, inspection and parade have their accustomed places.
Doubtless very few are aware of the hardening effect upon the bodies
of the men this regular and constant round of discipline is having;
the same will appear in the exactions of the coming months. While
February is expiring thus quietly with our Regiment, in the First Corps
Kilpatrick is making his famous raid towards Richmond, having started
on the night of the 28th, crossing the Rapidan at Ely's Ford and, with
Colonel Dahlgren's forlorn hope, is entering upon a project which will
make history rapidly. To cover this attempt, a diversion of Confederate
attention is made by the Sixth Corps and a cavalry force under Custer.
Passing through the camps of the Third Corps, Sedgwick and his men move
out towards Madison Court House, while Custer and his mounted force
push on to Charlottesville, where, on this final February day, hostile
forces are contending within sight and sound of Monticello, the home
and the tomb of Jefferson.

March started off rainy and cold with usual rumors as to immediate
orders for some sort of a move, but duty on the picket line continued
just the same, and not a few remarked on the discomforts of those who
had gone out to Madison Court House and were compelled to bivouac
in the snow, into which the rain had changed. For the 2d day of the
month, the return of the Sixth Corps and its cavalry accompaniment
was chronicled, along with the fact that nothing had been heard from
Kilpatrick. Even in wartimes, it did not always rain and the 3rd, being
"a splendid day," some of the men climbed up the sides of Cedar or
Slaughter Mountain for the view, and to look up traces of the fierce
encounter, August 9, 1862, when the Second and Third Corps, Generals
Banks and McDowell respectively, all under General John Pope, were
beaten by "Stonewall" Jackson and his men. Having encamped so long
under the shadow of the eminence, the trip was particularly enjoyable
and there was no difficulty in locating many of the prominent features
of the bloody day which served as a prelude to the still bloodier
battle of Second Bull Run. A two hours' brigade drill on the 4th,
under Colonel Leonard, took all available men to the extensive plains
across Cedar Run. As an illustration of the degree to which neatness
was carried, it should be stated that from their respective company
funds pay was given to men, detailed for the purpose, who should do
the company washing, hence no excuse for uncleanliness would avail
thereafter.

Sunday, the 7th, marked the relief of the Second Brigade on picket,
and its return by train to Culpeper, while the First Brigade took
its place. An order, promulgated March 10th to the effect that
all women in the camp must depart at once, was taken as a sign
of increased activity and the next day saw the departure of the
visiting betterhalves for their northern homes. Further indication
of active campaigning appeared on the 12th when the Colonel issued
an order directing the several captains to send back to Washington
all dresscoats. John S. Beck, Company C, entered in his diary, the
14th, "In the evening, took the Second Degree in Army Lodge, No. 8,
and Free and Accepted Masons," an unusual incident in army life; two
nights later, he took his Third Degree. St. Patrick's Day, or the
17th, secured no recognition in camp, though large fires on the rebel
side of the river betokened something doing there, yet the afternoon's
sun, lighting up the hillside on which the Confederates were encamped,
revealed their tents still in place. The 18th, in the afternoon,
witnessed no end of hurry and bustle as all effects were packed, even
to removing tents from the cabin roofs, and all were to be in readiness
to move at once. It was the general agreement that Stuart and his
lively followers were surely in the saddle. With stacked arms and
expectant hearts, the next order was awaited and, at 5.30 p. m., it
came, not to fall in and "Forward," but the bubble-burst words heard
so often, "As you were," with a resumption of regular camp routine and
duties.

[Sidenote: MAR. 20, '64]

The signing of pay-rolls on the 19th was a sure sign of the approach of
the paymaster and the perfection of the weather gave light hearts to
all, though a clergyman of the Methodist Church South, seized outside
our lines for conducting certain of Stuart's men to the capture of one
of our pickets may have had a leaden heart as he was dispatched on his
way to Washington, there to account for his conduct; bearing the name
of Garnett, he must have belonged to one of the best families of the
Old Dominion. The 20th was Sunday, not usually a pay day, but were
there signs of activity it was thus employed and, as the paymaster
came on this date, the event was considered a pretty sure sign of a
movement; so late did he begin, it was 8 p. m. before the last company
was reached. Much to the disgust of all who had thought winter over
and past, snow began to fall on the 22nd. By nightfall the ground was
white with it, the wind blowing as in an old-fashioned "nor'-easter,"
so that the on 23rd there was a foot of snow lying around and all hands
had to turn out and shovel the same out of the streets and from the
parade ground, which was quite ready for the dress parade of the late
afternoon.

To the Regiment, however, the most important event of the day was
the rearrangement of the several corps constituting the Army of the
Potomac, though this act had no immediate effect upon the regular
life of the Thirty-ninth. The First Army Corps of the Potomac Army,
commanded successively by Generals McDowell, Hooker, Reynolds and
Newton, had left an excellent record through the nearly two years of
its existence; the disk which, in red, white and blue, represented its
several divisions, had ever been a badge of honor and now the advent
of General Grant to the command of the army was to bring about various
changes, among them the merging of the First Corps with the Fifth; its
three divisions, reduced to two, became the Second and Fourth under
Robinson and Crawford respectively while Warren, of late temporarily
in command of the Second, was assigned to lead the Fifth Corps, and
Newton[I] who had succeeded Reynolds at Gettysburg, was relieved.
Under the same general orders, the Third Corps also was disbanded,
its first and second divisions going to the Second Corps, its third
division to the Sixth, and General Sykes, the Commander, to the command
of the District of South Kansas. There were thus left the Second, Fifth
and Sixth Corps in the Potomac Army, to which in the campaign of 1864
the Ninth Corps, under General Burnside, was to be added.

This rearrangement of army relations was not accomplished without some
heart-burning and many adverse remarks. John D. Billings in his story
of the Tenth Massachusetts Battery says:

 "Next to the attachment men feel for their own company or regiment,
 comes that which they feel for their corps. All the active services
 that we had seen was in the Third Corps, and its earlier history and
 traditions from the Peninsula to Gettysburg had become a part of our
 pride, and we did not care to identify ourselves with any other. If
 such was our feeling in the matter, how much more intense must have
 been that of the troops longer in its membership, whose very blood
 and sinew were incorporated with the imperishable name it won under
 General Sickles."

The farewell of General Newton to the men of the First Corps bears date
of March 25, 1864, and is as follows:--

 "Upon relinquishing command I take occasion to express the pride and
 pleasure I have experienced in my connection with you, and my profound
 regret at our separation. Identified by its services with the history
 of the war, the First Corps gave at Gettysburg a crowning proof
 of valor and endurance, in saving from the grasp of the enemy the
 strong position upon which the battle was fought. The terrible losses
 suffered by the Corps in that conflict attest its supreme devotion to
 the country. Though the Corps has lost its distinctive name by the
 present changes, history will not be silent upon the magnitude of its
 services."

[Sidenote: MAR. 26, '64]

Though the Thirty-ninth had borne no part in the battle-trials of
the corps, save in the premonitions at Mine Run, yet its marchings
and campings, during eight months of service, had done much towards
impressing upon the Regiment the character of the corps and an
appreciation of the corps and an appreciation of its excellent record.

Foundation facts for the coming summer are coming fast in these
days for, on the 26th of March, General U. S. Grant established his
headquarters at Culpeper, a little south of those of the Army of the
Potomac. For just a month, the General's name has been heard in the
public ear more than usual since, on the 26th of February, the bill
restoring the grade of lieutenant-general became a law; on the 1st of
March, General Grant's name was sent to Congress and it was confirmed
March 2nd; on the 3rd, he was ordered to Washington to receive his
commission and he started the day following. March 9th, in the White
House, in the presence of the President's Cabinet, his staff or such as
were with him and his son, Fred, General Grant received his commission
from the hands of Lincoln, with the briefest possible exchange of
compliments. The Thirty-ninth Regiment knew it not, but on the 10th,
the Lieutenant-general was at Brandy Station viewing some of the scenes
that were to be better known by him in approaching days; the next day
he was in Washington again and in the evening started back to the west.
Many plans were evolved by Grant and his lieutenants before his return
to Washington on the 23rd, whence he went to Culpeper as before stated.
Henceforth his military record will be a part of that of the Potomac
Army.

While this is strictly a story of the Thirty-ninth Massachusetts, of
any happening in the camp of our near neighbors and good friends,
the men of the Sixteenth Maine, passing mention is due here. Colonel
Charles W. Tilden had been captured at Gettysburg and had been held
prisoner in Richmond until the 10th of February, when with others he
got away from Libby through General A. D. Streight's famous tunnel
and on the 28th of March, at four o'clock in the afternoon, he was
received by his old boys with a heartiness which only old soldiers
can give to the tried and true; in the evening followed a feast in
the regimental chapel, attended by the officers of the Sixteenth and
the field officers of the brigade, all uniting in the most fervent
expressions of respect and admiration; the history of the Sixteenth
has this concerning the words of our esteemed Commander, "Colonel
Davis, whose encampment is a paragon of neatness and comfort, replied
in his calm and witty way to a toast complimentary to the Thirty-ninth
Massachusetts." The next day several hundred men from other regiments
in the brigade assembled at 9 a. m. to witness the presentation to
Colonel Tilden by his regiment of a magnificent black stallion duly
caparisoned; evidently the officer was greatly admired. The remainder
of the day was one of diversion for the men of the Sixteenth and their
friends.

[Sidenote: APR. 8, '64]

The One Hundred and Seventh Pennsylvania, a member of our brigade,
whose Colonel, Thos. F. McCoy, at times commanded the brigade, pretty
generally enlisted in the month of February, but its re-enlistment
home-going did not begin until this day; surely no April Fool's
occasion for the happy men who crowded aboard the train which was to
carry them hence, all intent on the happiness in store for them; the
"battle summer" will be well under way before the regiment rejoins us;
a considerable part of the One Hundred and Fourth New York also started
away on a similar errand. On the 3rd, the Ninetieth Pennsylvania came
over from the Second Brigade and occupied the camp of the One Hundred
and Seventh. The general harshness of the season marked early April,
rain and snow, and not till the seventh day did the weather clear
up effectually and, even then, as matters shaped themselves, there
were those who claimed that there was an improvement, not so much on
our account as that there might be a bright day for General Grant's
inspection. It was Fast Day, too, at home, but we were eating all we
could get. We were out early and active on the 8th, doing very thorough
policing. We were in line at 11 a. m. and before noon, the hero of
Vicksburg, accompanied by his staff and General Robinson, appeared,
receiving three cheers from the men as he rode by us; he took a look at
our camp and highly complimented its appearance. Evidently the General
had heard of our camp for he went down through the company streets
which were spick and span as usual. Then he went out to the picket-line
and thence to the signal station on the hill, Colonel Davis going with
him. Everyone was sizing him up and making some sort of a mental entry
concerning him, and one man wrote this, "He has a good, resolute look."
There seemed to be a general opinion that he was no great talker, but
that, as a doer, he would probably be all right.

Stormy weather was resumed on the 9th and continued almost every day
until the excess of water washed away bridges between us and Washington
to the extent of stopping trains on the 11th, with consequent lack
of mails and other inconveniences; so efficient, however, were the
artificers of the army, the very next day trains resumed running and
letters from home made glad the hearts of men. During these days we
were packing all superfluous articles, preparatory to sending to
Alexandria, at the same time all were enjoined from writing about
this to the friends at home. The new management did not believe in
the utmost publicity. Saddened reflections followed the departure of
the sutler, on the 16th, since thereafter, it would be necessary to
forego luxuries altogether. The 19th saw seven discouraged rebels come
into our lines, saying that there were many more waiting a chance to
get through. Notwithstanding this, we could see that the enemy was
working hard on making breastworks, evidently expecting us to march
directly upon them; nobody knows just what way we shall advance, but it
probably will not be by the line surmised by the Confederates. Everyone
felt better on account of the serenade that the band of the Sixteenth
Maine favored us with in the evening of the 20th. The 21st marked the
departure of thirteen men from the Thirty-ninth, transferred to the
Navy, many of whom, being familiar with nautical duties, fancied that
service afloat would be preferable to that ashore.

The Cavalry had been even more active, if possible, than the Infantry
during the winter and General Sheridan commented on the lean and
hungry look of the horses when he reached the army, but in spite of
leanness, this branch was the first to move--some said it had not
stopped moving,-and on the 23rd, one man wrote, "The Cavalry moved
out to-day" and, could he have foreseen the service that the restless
"Little Phil" was to exact from the horsemen, doubtless he had written
more at length. He also entered in that same journal, "The covering of
our chapel was taken off to-day, so I suppose our meetings are over."
Dismantling was the order of Sunday, the 24th, and unroofed cabins
lost their homelike look. The move of the 26th looked much like an
abandonment of our long time camp and the beginning of active warfare,
for the whole brigade, leaving the old camp behind, crossed Cedar Run
and, at a point a mile away from the former stopping place, pitched its
shelter tents in column by companies, the thirty-ninth Regiment being
on the right. Some went back to their old quarters to bring thence
boards to help out their sleeping facilities. By this change of camp,
it was expected to free the men from all surplus stuff and, at the same
time, to re-inure them to the hardships of active campaigning. The
remaining days of April were uneventful, given to parades, inspections
and drills, wherein knapsacks figured largely, thus testing the
endurance of the soldiers and on the 30th, Saturday, the Regiment was
mustered for two months' pay, March and April.

[Sidenote: APR. 30, '64]

No month in the year among dwellers in northern regions prompts to
brighter, happier thoughts than May; in distant Massachusetts, children
who had sought the fragrant arbutus through the daylight hours, were
repining that Sunday made it impracticable for them to hang May-baskets
when the evening shades appeared, a pleasure deferred however only
till the following night. To the men and boys, afar from familiar
scenes and cherished friends, the pleasures of peace were denied, and
being on the eve of departure, much of regular camp life was omitted.
Their neighbors, the Sixteenth Maine, formed in hollow square and had
religious services, but letter writing was the most serious employment
for the men of the Thirty-ninth. Could they have known the horrors
through which they were to pass before another Lord's Day returned,
with what eloquence had those messages teemed which carried simply the
usual words of love and fealty. Hands that wrote tender words on this
May day, ere another week had passed, were folded on soldierly breasts,
asleep in battle-made graves. For nearly an entire year, with no long
rest in winterquarters, no respite from the noise of combat, the men of
the North and their brothers from the South are about to engage in a
death grapple, and a baptism of blood awaits the tyros of the Lynnfield
camp, the cadets of Edward's Ferry and Poolesville, the Capital
guardians of Washington, and the admirably equipped soldiers of Colonel
Davis' pride.

Though it is the 2d day of May and we are in the supposedly "Sunny
South," snow is plainly visible on the tips of the Blue Ridge and where
the mountains are high enough, anywhere snow may be found the whole
year round. Company E, Somerville, is taking the least bit of pride to
itself in that its Captain Kinsley, the senior officer of that rank,
commands in the battalion-drill. Keen observers of signs are these
soldier boys and, when they learn that the cars have come up for the
last time, and when they hear, at dress parade, a letter of praise
and patriotic prompting from General George G. Meade, all this on the
3rd, they know full well that the days of winterquarters are all but
ended; certainty is added to surety when, at 10 p. m., three days'
rations are issued with the not over cheerful information that they
must last us six; at midnight, we are awakened and told to be ready to
move in fifteen minutes. How many glances are cast towards the Rapidan,
during the nearly three hours' wait before the start is made, not of
apprehension but of wonder as to what the outcome will be when "brave
Northmen shall the Southern meet in bold, defiant manner?" We know full
well that our faces are soon to be set towards the south, that once
more the stream, so often crossed and recrossed, will soon greet us
again as we pass over or through it; remembering the mettle of the man
who is now leading, one who never made provisions for retreat, because
he never retreated, we realize that in our progress southward there
will be no backward turning, that, while "few shall part where many
meet," some of our numbers will survive to carry forward the Flag, and
everyone had a perfect conviction of the righteousness of his cause and
absolute confidence in its eventual triumph.

[Sidenote: MAY 4, '64]

The main incidents of these days in early May are writing themselves
deep in the hearts of America; as long as he lives will every
participant, whether in blue or gray, recall the impressions that were
his as he realized the immensity of the struggle that is impending.
Of it, Grant has said in his Memoirs, "The capture of the Confederate
capital and the army defending it was not to be accomplished without
as desperate fighting as the world has ever witnessed." Lee left no
memoirs but his biographer wrote, "He divined Grant's plans, and
cutting the latter from the object of his desires, threw himself upon
him in a contest whose fury may be gauged by the fact that the musketry
fire continued in one unbroken roar for seventeen hours, and trees
were shorn down by the musket balls." The outlines of the movement
which began with the start of the Second Corps, at 11 p. m. of the
3rd, crossing at Ely's Ford at six o'clock in the morning of the 4th,
followed at Germanna's in turn by that of the Fifth and Sixth Corps
in order, have been told in hundreds of places by both tongue and pen;
they form the a, b, c of 1864 military history, so we must content
ourselves with the fact that when, at three o'clock of the 4th of May,
the Thirty-ninth hears that ever significant command, "Forward, March!"
the Second Corps, under the lead of Hancock the Superb, is nearing
Ely's Ford in its all night's march; and the ever-vigilant Sixth Corps,
under glorious "Uncle John" Sedgwick, is only awaiting the advance of
our Fifth Corps, led by Warren, around whose head must ever wreathe
the halo of Little Round Top, before following to take position at our
right in the forthcoming battle-line.

[Illustration:

  JOHN C. ROBINSON
  B'v't Major-General
  Second Div. Fifth Corps

  GOVERNEUR K. WARREN
  Major-General
  Fifth Corps

  PETER LYLE
  B'v't Brig.-General
  First Brig., Second Div. Fifth Corps]

FOOTNOTES:

[I] John Newton, like Winfield Scott and George H. Thomas, was a
native of Virginia, and was appointed thence to West Point, where he
was graduated in 1842, No. 2, in a class that included Rosecrans,
Pope, Seth Williams, Doubleday, Sykes and other noted Federal leaders
and Longstreet, D. H. Hill, Gustavus W. Smith, McLaws and Van Dorn
of the Confederates. In continuous service in the Engineer Corps, he
had attained the rank of captain when the war began. He was assistant
engineer in the construction of the defenses of Washington; served
through the Peninsular campaign; was at Antietam, Fredericksburg,
Chancellorsville and at Gettysburg and followed Reynolds as commander
of the First Corps. After leaving the Army of the Potomac, he commanded
a division in the Fourth Corps, under O. O. Howard, in the army of
the Cumberland having a part in the campaign which culminated in
the capture of Atlanta, September 1864. Later he commanded various
districts in Florida until his muster-out from the volunteer service,
January 1866. His subsequent life was devoted to engineering, among his
most notable deeds being the removal of obstructions in Hell Gate, the
narrow passage of East River, between Long Island Sound and New York
Harbor. Subsequent to his resignation from the army in 1884, he became
Commissioner of Public Works in New York City; at the time of his death
in his seventy-second year, May 1, 1895, he was president of the Panama
Railroad and of the Panama and Columbian Steamship Companies.




THE WILDERNESS


At first our own course is northward, toward Culpeper, then we bear off
to the right, passing the headquarters of the Sixth Corps, and those of
the Army of the Potomac skirting the base of Pony Mountain and on to
Germanna, remembered well in our Mine Run campaign. Though nominally,
for several days a part of the Fifth Corps, we do not actually meet
any part of the Corps itself till just before reaching the ford. We
cross the river at about 11 a. m., nowhere encountering any opposition
from the enemy, who evidently is endeavoring to ascertain what Grant's
objective may be, catching up with the other portions of the Corps late
in the afternoon. After an arduous march of considerably more than
twenty miles, burdened by heavy knapsacks, filled in winter quarters,
our division bivouaced near the Wilderness Tavern.[J] From this point
the almost countless campfires of our army could be seen, always an
impressive sight, and never were the soldiers of the Potomac Army in a
more impressible mood than after their long period in winter quarters.
Of the troop thus in bivouac, Lieut. Porter of Company A wrote, "The
men were in the best of spirits. They believed that the supreme effort
to bring the rebellion to a close was being made. There were enthusiasm
and determination in the minds of everyone." A year ago the word
"Wilderness" was frequently heard as the events of Chancellorsville
were discussed and now it is to gain even wider mention; it seems a
name quite out of place in the midst of the Old Dominion, not so far
from the very first settlements in British North America.

General Morris Schaff in his story of the great battle says this of
the section, "What is known as the Wilderness begins near Orange Court
House on the west and extends almost to Fredericksburg, twenty-five or
thirty miles to the east. Its northern bounds are the Rapidan and the
Rappahannock and, owing to the winding channels, its width is somewhat
irregular. At Spottsylvania, its extreme southern limit, it is some
ten miles wide." Considerably more than a hundred years before, there
were extensive iron mines worked in this region under the directions of
Alexander Spottswood, then governor of Virginia. To feed the furnaces
the section was quite denuded of trees and the irregular growth of
subsequent years, upon the thin soil, of low-limbed and scraggy pines,
stiff and bristling chinkapins, scrub-oaks and hazel bushes gave rise
to the appellation so often applied. Hooker and Chancellorsville are
already involved in memories of the region and coming days will give
equal associations with Grant and Meade, while the Confederates,
remembering that within its mazes their own shots killed their peerless
leader, Jackson, ere many hours have passed will lament a similar
misfortune to Longstreet.

[Sidenote: MAY 4, '64]

Within this tangled thicket, artillery will be of no avail and the vast
array of thunderers will stand silent as artillerymen hear the roar
of musketry; cavalry will be equally out of the question, but within
firing distance more than two hundred thousand men will consume vast
quantities of gunpowder in their efforts to destroy each other. It is
generally understood that General Grant did not expect an encounter
with Lee within the Wilderness itself, as is evident in Meade's orders
to Hancock and the Second Corps; indeed on the 5th the latter was
recalled from Chancellorsville to the Brock Road at the left of the
Fifth Corps, the Confederates having displayed a disposition to attack
much earlier than the Union Commanders had thought probable; how
Sedgwick and the Sixth Corps held the Union right, Warren and his Fifth
the centre and Hancock with the Second were at the left are figures
from the past well remembered by participant and student. While every
movement of the Union Army has a southern tendency, a disposition to
get nearer to Richmond, yet in the Wilderness all of the fighting was
along a north and south line, the enemy exhibiting an unwillingness
to be outflanked as easily as the new leader of the Potomac Army had
evidently expected.

In the morning of the 5th of May, General Richard S. Ewell commands
the Confederate left with "Stonewall" Jackson's old army or what may
be left of it; next to him, at his right, is A. P. Hill with the
divisions of Wilcox, Heth, Scales and Lane; Longstreet has not arrived
as yet, the morning finding him as far away as Gordonville, but he is
making all the speed possible towards the scene of conflict, and when
he arrives his station will be on the rebel right, his lieutenants
being Anderson, Mahone, Wofford and Davis. The intricacies of this
jungle-infested region are much better known to the Southern soldiers
than to those from the North, and this knowledge is a full compensation
for any disparity in numbers known to exist. Burnside and the Ninth
Corps of the Federal forces are just crossing the Rapidan after a
forced march from Rappahannock Station and when they reach the battle
line, it will be to occupy some of the thinly covered interval between
Warren and Hancock. All of the amenities of the long winter months are
now forgotten, and war to the death is confronting every combatant,
whether in blue or gray.

In coming days, these men will recount the events of May, 1864, and
while the roar of musketry will play a veritable diapason of war
for them, they will not forget how readily they dropped the musket
and, grasping axe or shovel, felled the trees and, weaving them into
earth-covered breastworks, interposed thus much protection from the
cruel missiles of the enemy. If the survivors of the Potomac Army in
the battle summer had chosen to wear subsequently as under-guards or
supports of their respective Corps-badges, whether, trefoil, Greek or
Maltese Cross or shield, the semblance of musket and shovel crossed, no
one would have questioned its oppositeness. However averse men may have
been to the regular use of pick and shovel, experience soon told them
that an old fence rail, a small sapling or a shovelful of earth might
ward off a hostile bullet and, lacking the intrenching tools, they were
known to throw up, in an incredibly brief time, serviceable defenses,
using no more effective utensils than their bayonets, case-knives and
tin plates. Future archaeologists, in the Wilderness region, will
have difficulty in distinguishing between the works of the Eighteenth
century miners and their soldier successors more than a hundred years
later. Deeply scarred was the battle-riven surface of the Old Dominion
and, centuries hence, poets and historians will wax as eloquent over
some of these fiercely contested places as did Charles Dickens over
the bloody field of Shrewsbury where "the stream ran red, the trodden
earth became a quagmire and fertile spots marked the places where heaps
of men and horses lay buried indiscriminately, enriching the ground."
Macaulay, too, never wrote with more brilliant pen than when he
described the poppy-strewn plain of Neerwinden, "fertilized with twenty
thousand corpses."

[Sidenote: MAY 5, '64]

If Grant had known as definitely the mind of Lee as the latter
appeared to divine the intentions of the Union General, the story
of the Wilderness might have been very different. The orders for
the morning of the 5th were for Warren to move to Parker's store,
towards the southwest; Sedgwick was to follow Warren, ranging up at
his right; Hancock with the Second Corps was to advance, also towards
the southwest, his left to reach to Shady Grove Church. The enemy was
discovered before Warren reached Parker's store and he was ordered to
attack; Getty and the Second Division of the Sixth Corps were sent
to defend Warren's left flank and Wright with the First Division of
the Sixth Corps was ordered up to Warren's right, and at nine o'clock
Hancock was ordered to come to the support of Getty, all this happening
where Grant had expected, at least had hoped for, an unopposed passage.
Instead of a retreating enemy, Warren opened the great battle of the
Wilderness by an attack upon a foe ready for the fray; but let the
Fifth Corps Commander tell his own story:--

 "Set out according to orders, 6. a. m., towards Parker's
 store--Crawford, Wadsworth, Robinson; enemy reported close at hand in
 force, and when Crawford had nearly reached Parker's, Generals Meade
 and Grant arrived and determined to attack the force on the road near
 Griffin (Warren's right division). Wadsworth was gotten into line
 immediately on the left of Griffin with one brigade of Crawford,
 Robinson in support. We attacked with this force impetuously, carried
 the enemy's line, but being flanked by a whole division of the enemy
 were compelled to fall back to our first position, leaving two guns on
 the road between the lines that had been advanced to take advantage of
 the first success. The horses were shot and the guns removed between
 our lines. The attack failed because Wright's (Third) division of the
 Sixth Corps was unable on account of the woods to get up on our right
 flank and meet the division (Johnson's Ewell's Corps) that had flanked
 us. Wright became engaged some time afterward. We lost heavily in this
 attack, and the thick woods caused much confusion in our lines. The
 enemy did not pursue us in the least. We had encountered the whole of
 Ewell's Corps. The enemy that moved on past Parker's along the Plank
 Road was Hill's corps. General Getty's division of the Sixth Corps
 was sent to the intersection of the Brock Road to check the column,
 which it did, and General Hancock was ordered up from Todd's tavern,
 and also engaged Hill's corps. At this time I sent Wadsworth with his
 division and Baxter's (Second) Brigade (Second Division) to attack
 Hill's left flank as he engaged Hancock. It was late when this was
 done, but the attack produced considerable impression. Wadsworth's
 men slept on their arms where night overtook them. During the night,
 I sent instructions to Wadsworth to form in line northeast and
 southwest, and go straight through, and orders were given to attack
 next morning at 4.30 with the whole army, Burnside being expected up
 by that time to take part. With the rest of my force I prepared to
 attack Ewell in conjunction with a part of the Sixth Corps."

During the day, General Alexander Hays, commanding a brigade in the
Second Corps was killed, a contemporary of Grant at West Point, he
was one of the bravest of the brave; Generals Getty and Carroll were
wounded, but remained on the field. The report of General Robinson,
commanding the division, does not add any essentials to the report
of General Warren. Unfortunately no report of our Brigade nor of the
regiments composing it are found. Comrade Beck of Company C has this to
say of his observations during the day:--

 "Turned out at three o'clock and started at about light; after some
 delay found the rebels in force; the advance forces of our Corps drove
 the enemy from his first line of works; we were in reserve till about
 12 m., when we were ordered into line-of-battle on the right of the
 Plank Road; dead and wounded are in evidence and there is hot work
 ahead. The Rebs have a strong position across a ravine; our artillery
 could not be placed in position; volley after volley was fired all
 day from all along, both left and right; we had to lay low, the balls
 whistled thick around us; at six o'clock were ordered to charge but
 were ordered back; it would have been madness, since the enemy had
 a cross fire on us. We lay in line-of-battle all night; many of our
 wounded could not be reached, and it was awful to hear their cries;
 when the stretcher-bearers tried to get them, the Rebs opened a
 battery on them."

[Sidenote: MAY 5, '64]

Readers with memories will recall that, some time after Gettysburg,
Longstreet was detached from the Army of Lee and sent to Georgia
to help the Confederates whom Rosecrans was pressing hard; sometime
before this, early in 1863, two divisions of the Ninth Corps had
been withdrawn from the Potomac and dispatched to the Department of
the Ohio to aid in the campaign Burnside was then projecting. Both
Confederates and Federals had returned to the East; Longstreet, most
remote of the rebel array, had been striving to reach the field where
his chief was struggling with the Union Army and, by one of the most
wonderful coincidences in all history, Burnside and his following, save
two divisions, were swinging into position between Warren and Hancock,
only a few minutes later than Longstreet when the latter came up to the
help of Hill. Grant in his Memoirs says that Meade wished the hour of
attack on the 6th to be set at 6 a. m., an hour and a half later than
the orders of the night of the 5th. "Deferring to his wishes as far as
I was willing, the order was modified and 5 was fixed as the hour to
move." So then we come to the 6th of May and a resumption of Warren's
report:--

 "At precisely five o'clock the fighting began. General Wadsworth I
 re-enforced with Colonel Kitching, 2400 strong (an independent brigade
 of the Fourth Division). He fought his way entirely across the Second
 Corps' front to the south side of the Plank Road, and wheeling round
 commenced driving them up the Plank Road toward Orange Court House.
 The accumulating force of the enemy staggered his advance, and the
 line became confused in the dense woods. In the very van of the fight,
 General Wadsworth was killed by a bullet through his head, and General
 Baxter was wounded. On our right, the enemy was found to be intrenched
 and but little impressions could be made. I then sent another brigade
 to sustain General Hancock, who had now two of my divisions and one
 of the Sixth Corps, and was defending himself from both Hill and
 Longstreet. They charged and took possession of a part of his line but
 were driven out again. Late in the evening, the enemy turned General
 Sedgwick's right very unexpectedly, and threw most of his line into
 confusion. I sent General Crawford at double-quick, and the line was
 restored to him.... In most respects, the result of the day's fighting
 was a drawn battle."

The report of General Robinson of the Second Division repeats some
of Warren's statements, at the same time mentioning the fact that he
accompanied General Baxter with the Second Brigade, which went with
Wadsworth of the First Division on the 5th, when all hastened to the
relief of Hancock; he names Colonel Lyle, of the Ninetieth Pennsylvania
as commanding the First Brigade. He also mentions the death of his
Assistant Inspector General, Lieut. Colonel David Allen, Jr., of the
Twelfth Massachusetts on the 5th, and mentions the charge of the
First Brigade (ours) late on the 5th, when the Ninetieth Pennsylvania
suffered so severely. In the afternoon of the 6th, he was ordered to
send another brigade to the support of Hancock, and later still one
more which he accompanied, ranging them on the right of the Second
Corps. There he ordered the building of rifle-pits, while he rode to
Hancock's headquarters; the latter telling him that he is ordered to
attack, and requesting Robinson to join in the assault, our Division
Commander returned to his command and made ready to advance, awaiting
orders. Two hours later, heavy firing was heard on his left and he was
visited by General D. B. Birney who stated that the enemy had broken
through our lines and that Hancock was cut off. Robinson at once faced
his second line about and made ready to receive attacks on his left
and rear. Before any further change was effected, General Birney was
summoned by Hancock, and Robinson learned that, instead of breaking
through, the enemy had been repulsed. It seems a little strange that
the General does not mention the death of General Wadsworth, his fellow
division commander, nor the wounding of Baxter of his own command. The
taking off of Wadsworth was a great calamity, representing, as he did,
the vast array of citizen soldiery. Far past the age of military duty,
one of the wealthiest men in the Empire State, he nevertheless threw in
his services and, eventually, his life for the cause he loved.[K]

[Sidenote: MAY 6, '64]

Returning to the meager records of our own Regiment, we glean
certain facts, as that the Brigade was advanced in the morning to
nearly its former position and that it was shortly withdrawn and
sent to the extreme left on the plank-road, where breastworks were
thrown up under active skirmishing. Also on this day, in the various
changes of position, the Fifty-sixth, Fifty-seventh, Fifty-eighth
and Fifty-ninth Massachusetts Regiments were met, all of them in
the Ninth Army Corps, and all of them having officers largely drawn
from the older organizations of the Bay State. Private Horton of "E"
says, "We lay all night in the same place, the rebels keeping up the
firing. We are relieved at 4 a. m. and go back and get breakfast.
Travel around almost all day; go to the left where is heavy firing;
throw up some rifle-pits." Beck of "C" in effect coincides with the
foregoing, though he closes the day's account with the words, "Some
of the hardest fighting on record; we build intrenchments on the side
of the road and sleep in them through the night; troops were passing
and repassing all of the evening; we are having nice warm weather for
our operations." Lieutenant Dusseault of "H" relates the incident of
a false alarm, while the men were lying along the road, between that
and the breastworks:--"About midnight, while the boys were trying to
get a little sleep, a great racket was heard not far away, and some in
their alarm thought the whole rebel army was upon us. It proved to be
a stampede of our own cattle, and they came bellowing down the space
between the flanks and the works, and over the prostrate forms of our
men. The choice language of the startled sleepers, when they came to
understand the situation, added not a little to the tumult." During the
day, in one of the several charges made upon us, "A rebel prisoner,
apparently wounded and just able to crawl about, on hearing the shouts
of his compatriots so near, and dreading to fall into their hands,
much to our amusement, jumped up a well man and ran like a deer towards
our rear."

Of the charge made in the afternoon of the 5th, this story is told in
the history of the Ninetieth Pennsylvania whose Colonel, Peter Lyle,
was in command of the Brigade, having succeeded Colonel Leonard of the
Thirteenth Massachusetts:--

 "The command was formed in line-of-battle and advanced until it
 reached the open ground, beyond which the enemy was intrenched. The
 line was established behind a slight rise of ground with small trees
 and bushes in front, the right of the Ninetieth being separated from
 the rest of the Brigade which it was impossible to occupy, being raked
 by the enemy's artillery. We lay in this position for some time when
 General Griffin,[L] in command of the First Division, rode up and
 commanded a charge. Colonel Lyle promptly led his regiment forward
 and, as soon as it had cleared the shrubbery in front, and emerged
 upon the open field rebel batteries opened upon it with grape and
 canister. The order was given to double-quick and with a shout it
 advanced within close range of the rebel lines. When Colonel Lyle
 discovered that he was unsupported, he gave the orders to about-face
 and what was left rallied around the colors and, under a fierce fire
 of infantry and artillery, returned to its original position.... Out
 of two hundred and fifty-one men, one hundred and twenty-four were
 killed, wounded or captured. From some misunderstanding or not having
 received the same peremptory orders from General Griffin that he gave
 the Ninetieth the rest of the brigade did not advance any distance,
 leaving the Regiment entirely alone in the charge.

[Sidenote: MAY 6, '64]

 "In fairness to our Regiment, it should be stated that the left wing
 heard the orders which sent the Ninetieth forward and, responding,
 suffered with it. The wonder is that, in the confusion of numbers,
 noise and misunderstood commands, more errors rather than less, are
 not recorded. It is not to the discredit of Colonel Lyle that he is
 said to have shed tears over the calamity which befell his brave
 followers through no fault of his."

Colonel Peirson in a paper read before the Loyal Legion also has a
fling at these same guns to the following effect:--

 "We also left behind two guns which were on the turnpike in front of
 Warren's position, which were lost by Griffin on the 5th, and were
 between the two armies until we retired. A brigade of Robinson's
 division vainly attempted a charge to retake them, but the plain was
 swept by canister at 350 yards, and the brigade returned with heavy
 loss. It was understood that the sixth Corps was to join in this
 attempt but General Upton, whose brigade lay on the right of Robinson,
 refused to move, saying, 'It is madness.' So sensitive were the enemy
 about the matter, they fired on our stretcher-bearers, who advanced
 to bring in the wounded; and the wounded were not brought in, but lay
 all night calling for water and help, to the great distress of their
 comrades."

Two such days, as were the 5th and 6th of May in the Wilderness,
evidently were as much as even Grant and Lee could endure. The former
is said to have remarked to Meade on the 7th, "Joe Johnston would
have retreated after two such days' punishment." The losses on both
sides were frightful; there was little of the spectacular which will
always characterize Gettysburg, but men, in all their mortal combats,
never grappled in fiercer, more determined struggles than in those of
the dense and tangled Wilderness. In his Memoirs, Grant says, "More
desperate fighting has not been witnessed on this continent than that
of the 5th and 6th of May," and he was at Shiloh and Chattanooga;
evidently the great Westerner was changing his mind as to the
fighting qualities of Eastern armies. The Union force had lost 2,265
killed, 10,220 wounded, and 2,902 missing; an aggregate of 15,387.
While Confederate data as to numbers are frequently questioned, the
Medical and Surgical History of the War makes the Southern losses,
2,000 killed, 6,000 wounded and 3,400 missing; a total of 11,400. The
Confederates also had lost Brigadier Generals Micah Jenkins and John
M. Jones, both gallant officers, but their greatest personal loss
was that of General Longstreet, grievously wounded on the 6th and
immediately carried from the field. Thomas Nelson Page refers to the
event as the fourth similar incident where, seemingly, the loss of one
man ended the hope of rebel victory, as the deaths of A. S. Johnston at
Shiloh, "Stonewall" Jackson at Chancellorsville, the wounding of "Joe"
Johnston at Seven Pines and of Longstreet, "at the critical moment when
victory hovered over his arms."

FOOTNOTES:

[J] General Morris Schaff, who was a member of General Warren's Staff,
says, "Robinson, who brought up the rear of the corps, camped on the
Germanna Road, the middle of his division about where Caton's Run comes
down through the woods from the west." P. 97

[K] Greeley in "The American Conflict" says, "Thousands of the unnamed
and unknown have evinced as fervid and as pure a patriotism, but no one
surrendered more for his country's sake, or gave his life more joyfully
for her deliverance, than did James S. Wadsworth."

[L] In General Schaff's "Wilderness" we may read, "The victorious
Confederates could not pursue beyond the guns, or even stand there, for
Sweitzer's of Griffin's, and the First Brigade of Robinson's division,
under my friend, Charles L. Peirson, a gentleman, together with our
rallied men, now poured such a fire into them from the east side of
the field, that they fled back to their lines on the edge of the
woods.... In an effort to recapture the guns--whose loss, Griffin, the
commander of our West Point battery in my day, felt deeply--the Ninth
Massachusetts and the Ninetieth Pennsylvania suffered frightfully,
adding to the thickly lying dead in the old field." (Page 163.)




THE BATTLE OF THE WILDERNESS

BY CHANNING WHITTAKER


 Most of the Infantry fighting of the Wilderness, as is well known,
 occurred on May 5th and 6th, 1864, in almost impenetrable thickets of
 tangled woodland growth, a growth facilitated by warmth of climate, by
 a multitude of streamlets and by areas of morass. The Infantry line
 of battle may have been from five to seven or eight miles in length.
 General Grant said in his "Personal Memoirs," written just before
 his death, "More desperate fighting has not been witnessed on this
 continent than that of the 5th and 6th of May, 1864." The bloodiest
 battlefields of those two days were those of Caton's Run of May 5th
 and of the thicket bordered by the Brock and the Orange Plank Roads on
 May 5th and 6th. During the battle I was pretty completely occupied
 with what was occurring close about me and I had little knowledge of
 what was occurring beyond my individual eyesight. Since the war I
 have been too completely occupied by daily duties to seriously search
 the records to ascertain the contribution which the Thirty-ninth
 Massachusetts made to the battle as a whole. Since I received your
 letter I have tried to ascertain where the Regiment was and what it
 did with relation to the battle as a whole on those two days. It
 participated in the Battle of Caton's Run on May 5th and in that of
 the Brock and Plank Roads on May 6th, but because I am not at leisure
 and my sources of information are limited, I shall attempt no account
 of either battle as a whole.

[Sidenote: MAY 5, '64]

 It is only recently that I have learned of the trap which the
 Confederates had deliberately set for us on the morning of the 5th
 of May in the gully of the unwooded valley of Caton's Run, where,
 ambushed in the woods on the western edge, they awaited "with fingers
 on triggers" the initial charge of our brave men, under the orders of
 Grant and Meade and Warren, down the long unwooded slope, across the
 roughly shaped gully of a primeval forest stream and up the long and
 open slope beyond it; of the brutal and terrible carnage on the slopes
 and at and about the battery caught in the gully; and that here,
 where at about eight a. m. was killed Charles H. Wilson of Wrentham,
 Co. I, Eighteenth Massachusetts, the first Federal infantryman to
 fall in the campaign, were controlled and stayed the proud banners of
 17,000 Confederates under Lee and Ewell, including those of Walker,
 commanding the famous Stonewall Brigade. The first assault in this
 murderous trap was made by Griffin's First Division of Warren's Fifth
 Corps, while our Brigade, the First of Robinson's Second Division of
 the Fifth Corps, was held in reserve in their rear.

 What I remember of the Battle of the Wilderness after the lapse of
 almost fifty years is a story quickly told. Some of the things which I
 saw and experienced made an indelible impression upon my mind. Other
 events have been crowded out by intervening occurrences, and of them I
 have no memory.

 I will now state all that I remember of what occurred within my own
 experience on the morning of May 5th, 1864. I suppose these things
 occurred during Griffin's assault through the gully, and while the
 Thirty-ninth was being held in reserve in Griffin's rear.

 We were standing in line of battle in a grove of oaks, the largest
 of which were perhaps eight inches in diameter. I was in the front
 rank near the right of Company B. First Lieutenant Spear was in his
 usual place in the rear of the Company and a little to my left.
 Lieutenant Spear turned on his heel and momentarily vacated his place.
 Almost instantly a piece of a shell buried itself where he had stood.
 Occasional bullets passed over our heads and among the oaks. Captain
 W. W. Graham of Company B was at rest in front of the Company, leaning
 against an oak but not behind it. A raw recruit in the rear rank who
 had joined the Company at Mitchell's Station and who had not yet
 learned to await the word of command aimed his rifle at a venture and
 planted a bullet in Captain Graham's oak, close to his head. Orderly
 Sergeant Allison shook the recruit by the collar and threatened
 terrible things if he should fire again without orders.

 I can not recall that I knew anything of Griffin's assault while
 it was in progress, or of the rout which followed it. I have since
 learned from General Robinson's report that at the close of Griffin's
 sanguinary assault, Griffin's Division was relieved by Robinson's
 First and Second Brigades, ours, the First, taking the line of battle.

[Sidenote: MAY 6, '64]

 I remember that the Regiment moved to a new position and that later
 in the day we were lying, faces down, on the grass covered slope of a
 ridge. Small pines branching from near the ground broke its surface.
 Erect, and close behind us, Lieutenant Colonel Peirson walked back
 and forth like a sentinel upon his beat, but with his eyes never off
 of his ready but prostrate men. Absolutely alert, in quiet and calm
 tones, he said to each restless one who sought a dangerous relief from
 his unbearable immobility, "That man in ---- Company, lie down," or
 whatever would cause the man to safeguard himself. The minie balls
 continually showered the green pine needles and pitchy twigs upon
 us. No one was in such danger as the Lieutenant Colonel, but he ever
 walked back and forth, back and forth, speaking his words of friendly
 caution. Still later it was desired that we should lie nearer the top
 of the ridge. He said to Colonel Davis, "If you will stand here" (at
 the right of the line to be formed) "I will align the men on you."
 When we again stretched ourselves upon the slope our heads were close
 to its top. Later in the afternoon we were standing in line of battle
 on the top of the ridge. The line of battle of a Regiment on our
 left made an angle of less than 180 with our own. For a moment I had
 a clear, distinct view of its front brilliantly lighted by the rays
 of the declining sun. I saw Colonel "Dick" Coulter on his prancing
 horse in front of them. The vision though momentary was changeful,
 unsteady, as if the men were staggering, falling. Our Brigade charged
 down the western slope. A Battery was in the gully at the foot of the
 slope, and neither the Federals nor the Confederates could touch it.
 The Brigade did not reach the Battery but returned to the ridge. The
 cries of the wounded on the slope were heart breaking. They called for
 help, for water. I was told, "General Grant says, 'Let no well man
 risk himself for his companion. He will need the help of all well men
 to-morrow.'" There was a call for volunteers to act as skirmishers
 on the slope toward the battery. I volunteered without any personal
 request that I should do so. I was located some distance down the
 slope and walked back and forth upon a "beat," like a camp guard.
 Then I had a genuine surprise. While I walked and watched with fear
 in my heart, the sun not having yet gone down, Lieutenant Colonel
 Peirson came sauntering along the skirmish line as if he was enjoying
 a pleasurable stroll. He made some casual remark and, handing me his
 field glass, asked if I would enjoy seeking the battery through it. He
 left me after I had had abundant time to look, but all of the fear had
 gone and did not return. When I next saw the glass it had been ruined,
 smashed by a shell which had nearly taken the life of the Lieutenant
 Colonel at Spottsylvania. All night I walked back and forth on the
 slope.

 When we took our position upon the Brock Road, volunteer skirmishers
 were again called for and I responded as before. I was placed perhaps
 three hundred feet in front of the Regiment in a typical Wilderness
 forest tangle. Here were hardwood trees several inches in diameter,
 and in an almost impenetrable mass between them were quickly grown
 hardwood saplings of the diameter of one's finger and perhaps twenty
 feet in height. These were in the beautiful, tender green, full
 foliage of May and often woven all through between their interlacing
 branches were strong, green, horse-briar vines in so high and dense
 a hedge that had a line of battle been in your front not twenty
 feet away you probably could not have seen it. My part was to watch
 the thicket in front of my post and to give warning of the first
 appearance of the enemy. My fear of the day before did not return. I
 had excellent opportunity to hear the rapidly detonating musketry on
 my left and front, varied by the deep bass of occasional artillery. As
 the firing quickened I could no longer distinguish intervals between
 the sounds. I heard only one clear, loud, inspiring, uplifting,
 musical sound punctuated by artillery.

 Suddenly, upon my left and behind me all was commotion. The Sixteenth
 Maine on our left fired volley after volley toward the front. My
 regiment, the Thirty-ninth Massachusetts, followed their lead. I threw
 myself upon my face until the fusilade had ceased. Then I lost no time
 in reaching the Regiment. I saw no wounded in our immediate front, but
 a number in butternut clothing crawled toward the Sixteenth Maine or
 lay prostrate in their front. One in particular, I remember, he was
 crawling upon his hands and knees toward the Sixteenth, while a large,
 red stream flowed from his throat as I had seen blood flow from the
 throat of a slaughtered pig.

 I now saw that a wonderful change had occurred in front of the
 Thirty-ninth. A wide belt of the forest had disappeared. Three
 parallel lines of breastworks, with an abatis in their front, were
 undergoing construction along the Brock Road. Men without axes had
 felled large trees with hatchets, and saplings with knives. Bayonets
 instead of pickaxes had loosened the sun-baked Virginia clay and tin
 plates instead of shovels had transferred the soil. The trees, the
 saplings and the clay, under the direction of skilled mechanics and by
 the herculean efforts of determined and rapid workmen, had taken and
 were taking effective defensive shape. The moment the firing ceased
 the constructive, defensive work again began. I saw upon the Brock
 Road a mounted officer, riding and swinging his sword. I heard him
 say, "General Grant says, 'If you hold this place until night, the
 enemy must evacuate Petersburg and Richmond, is ours.'" I began to use
 my bayonet and tin plate with the rest in constructing breastworks,
 but the call for skirmishers soon came again and I went back to watch
 through the night and the following day for the first signs of another
 frontal attack, which happily did not come. Before we left this place
 I listened to the account of my messmate, George V. Shedd, who, as one
 of a squad, had passed on duty through a part of the woods where men
 wounded, dying and dead had been blistered, blackened and burned by
 ruthless forest fires.

 I have learned since that on the morning of May 6th a Confederate
 engineer officer reported to General Longstreet that the extreme
 left of the Infantry of the Army and of the Second Corps was in the
 woods in front of the Brock Road and exposed. A flank attack by
 four Brigades was immediately made, following first the unfinished
 railroad bed where their march was practically unimpeded and then
 advancing north through the woods. Our men, who were cooking coffee,
 were completely surprised and routed, and this explains the confusion
 which prevailed along the Brock Road when we arrived a little later.
 The Brock Road was now almost in the grasp of Longstreet, who hoped
 to seize it and to "put the enemy back across the Rapidan before
 night." "Longstreet, followed by fresh Brigades at double-quick,"
 began to follow up the victory when he and his staff were mistaken
 for Federal troops and fired upon by the Sixty-first Virginia of
 Mahone's Confederate Brigade. Longstreet was severely wounded. General
 Longstreet says, "I immediately made arrangements to follow up the
 successes gained and ordered an advance of all my troops for that
 purpose."

 (Here the hand of our comrade ceased, for fatal illness came upon him
 ere his task was ended.--A. S. R.)

[Sidenote: MAY 7, '64]

One of the saddest features of the Wilderness struggle was the fire
kindled by exploding shells and which raged unchecked over much of the
fighting area, enveloping in its destroying embrace with equal fury the
blue and the gray, whether living or dead, and we can never know how
many among the missing were thus ushered into eternity. In Northern
burial grounds, no unusual sight is that of a cenotaph or memorial to
the memory of a departed soldier whose body was cremated or burned
beyond recognition in the Wilderness. Save for the industry displayed
in the building of rifle-pits, and the fruitless rebel assault on the
Sixth Corps at our right, the night connecting the 6th and 7th of May
was a quiet one; both sides were weary to the pitch of exhaustion, and
both had learned that breastworks had wonderfully preserving qualities
and, while Sheridan makes something of a stir at our left, as far away
as Todd's Tavern, the day is relatively a peaceful one. Very likely
the respective heads of the two great armies are taking inventories
of their losses and gain, if any of the latter were observable. Both
leaders had suffered sufficiently in the Wilderness, yet each one
is perfectly willing that the other should attack, and when Grant's
tentative skirmish line fails to draw the men in gray from their
intrenchments, the Union commander knows that the time for him to
continue his march towards Richmond has come. There appears to be a
general agreement among those keeping diaries that the Thirty-ninth,
with the other regiments of the brigade remained in or near the
intrenchments till well along in the afternoon, when it was withdrawn,
and in the rear had the privilege of preparing something to eat. Davis,
in his story of the Thirteenth Massachusetts, says fresh meat rations
were drawn and cooked and coffee was boiled, a most grateful relief, if
only a brief one.

Of this day General Warren says that the army took up defensive
positions and spent the time getting together the several commands
which had been detached to defend parts of the field in the varying
emergencies of the previous days' battles. Of himself he remarks that
he had received, on the 6th, eighteen orders to send reinforcements
to other parts of the line. It is nine o'clock in the evening of the
7th that the Fifth Corps takes up its line of march towards the left.
Men of other corps are seen asleep as we pass by, and it is no craven
thought for us to wish that we might slumber also, but "Forward" is the
word. Lieutenant Schaff, more than forty years later to produce one of
the most remarkable battle descriptions ever given, his story of the
Wilderness, an officer on Warren's staff, says this of the scene:--

 "Here comes the head of Warren's Corps with banners afloat. What calm
 serenity, what unquenchable spirit are in the battle-flags! On they
 go. Good-by, old fields, deep woods, and lonesome roads. And murmuring
 runs, Wilderness, and Caton, you too farewell. The head of Warren's
 column has reached the Brook Road and is turning South. At once the
 men catch what it means. Oh, the Old Army of the Potomac is not
 retreating, and, in the dusky light, as Grant and Meade pass by, they
 give them high, ringing cheers.

 "Now we are passing Hancock's lines and never, never shall I forget
 the scene. Dimly visible, but almost within reach of our horses,
 the gallant men of the Second Corps are resting against the charred
 parapets, from which they hurled Field. Here and there is a weird
 little fire, groups of mounted officers stand undistinguishable in
 the darkness, and up in the towering tree tops of the thick woods
 beyond the intrenchments, tongues of yellow flame are pulsing from
 dead limbs, lapping the face of night. All, all is deathly still. We
 pass on, cross the unfinished railway, then Poplar Run and then up a
 shouldered hill. Our horses are walking slowly. We are in dismal pine
 woods, the habitation of thousands of whippoorwills uttering their
 desolate notes unceasingly. Now and then a sabre clanks and close
 behind us the men are toiling on.

 "It is midnight. Tood's Tavern is two or three miles away. Deep, deep
 is the silence. Jehovah reigns; Spottsylvania and Cold Harbor are
 waiting for us and here The Wilderness ends."




SPOTTSYLVANIA


[Sidenote: MAY 7, '64]

Of this same day and evening, our own Colonel Peirson has also given a
vivid picture; after quoting Grant's words to Colonel Theodore Wyman,
sitting under a pine tree, on the 7th, "To-night Lee will be retreating
south" he says, in his Loyal Legion paper:--

 "Lee did retreat south, but only for the purpose of intercepting the
 onward movement of Grant, and he retreated so rapidly that we found
 him at Spottsylvania when we emerged from The Wilderness. Nightfall
 of the 7th saw our whole army on the march for Spottsylvania--Warren
 leading with Robinson's division by the most direct route, which was
 by the Brock Road, via Todd's Tavern,--leaving on the field all our
 dead and wounded Grant remarked that if Lee thought he was going
 to stop to bury his dead he was mistaken, but a few days later he
 sent a cavalry force back with ambulances, who succeeded in saving
 some of the wounded men.... The 7th was hot and dusty, and as it was
 necessary in order to clear the roads of trains by daylight, the
 movement was discovered by the enemy. The Fifth Corps in the advance,
 preceded by cavalry and followed by the Second Corps, took the Brock
 Road. The Sixth Corps moved by the Plank and Turnpike roads via
 Chancellorsville, preceded by the train, and followed by the Ninth
 Corps, who were the rear guard.... The Fifth Corps, led by Robinson's
 division, marched all night and about six on the morning of the 8th
 emerged from the wilderness near Todd's Tavern, and after marching a
 mile or two came up with our cavalry, who, as evidenced by several
 dead cavalrymen by the roadside, had recently been engaged with the
 enemy."

General F. A. Walker, in his history of the Second Corps, accounts for
the presence of the Confederates at Spottsylvania on the arrival of the
Union army in a very interesting manner. He says that Lee, convinced
of the intention on Grant's part of moving towards Fredericksburg,
ordered Anderson, who had succeeded to Longstreet's position, to move
in the morning of the 8th to Spottsylvania. We remember that the whole
battle section had been overrun with fire and that it was still burning
when the orders came. Anxious to escape its unpleasant nearness,
he determined to set out in the evening of the 7th and so make a
night-march of the fifteen miles intervening. By what Southern pietists
might call this Providential procedure on the part of the Confederate
leader, he got there ahead of Warren.

Resuming Colonel Peirson's excellent paper bearing on this campaign, we
find him recording as follows:--

 "As soon as the cavalry got out of the way Robinson's division at once
 deployed, with Lyle's brigade on the left and leading, the Maryland
 brigade (Third) coming upon his right, and Baxter's brigade (Second)
 supporting still further on the right. In this way they advanced,
 driving the skirmishers before them by and beyond Alsop's house, and,
 reaching a wooded knoll, reformed the line, which had become somewhat
 disordered, casting off their knapsacks in order to move more quickly,
 and because the heat made them almost unsupportable. Pushing forward
 again, they came in sight of a part of a light battery of the enemy,
 which was firing down the Brock Road, and breaking into a run nearly
 captured the two guns, driving them well to the rear. The leading
 brigade had now advanced some two miles since its deployment, and
 had reached a heavily wooded rise of ground, where they halted for a
 moment to get breath and some alignment; and having run much of the
 distance, had left the rest of the division far behind. The men were
 very much blown, and many had fallen from the way from sunstroke and
 fatigue. General Warren here rode up and, saying to General Robinson
 that his orders were to go to Spottsylvania Court House, ordered him
 forward. Robinson asked for time to get up his other brigades, but
 after a few moments of waiting Warren became impatient, and General
 Robinson ordered an immediate charge upon the enemy's line, then in
 plain sight behind some rude breastworks, saying, 'We must drive them
 from there, or they will get some artillery in position.'

 "The enemy's line was formed on a ridge across the Brock Road, near
 its junction with a road leading to the Block House, and was protected
 by an incomplete breastwork, with small pine-trees felled for abatis
 and a rail fence parallel with the line to the front. The enemy was
 hard at work finishing their breastworks. They were two brigades of
 Kershaw's division of Longstreet's corps.

[Sidenote: MAY 8, '64]

 "Lyle's brigade, in which my regiment was, charged over 500 yards
 of open, badly gullied ground under a rapid fire from the enemy's
 muskets and from the artillery we had so nearly captured. The troops
 went over the rail fence, into the abatis, and up to within 30 feet
 of the works, getting shelter then from the hill and the felled pine
 trees. Here they lay to recover their wind, easily keeping down the
 fire of the enemy in their front, who fired hurriedly and aimlessly,
 and while waiting saw the Third Brigade (Marylanders) advancing
 gallantly across the field to their support. The latter, however,
 after getting halfway to the rebel works, broke under the enemy's fire
 from the right and retreated in confusion, General Robinson being
 shot in the knee while trying to rally them. The remaining brigade
 was too far to the right and rear to assist in this assault. Lyle's
 brigade, having rested these few minutes, started to go over the
 works, and would have gone over, but at this moment, discovering a
 fresh brigade of the enemy advancing in line of battle upon our left,
 I (a lieutenant-colonel, upon whom the command had devolved, so few
 were the men to reach this spot) reluctantly gave the order to retire,
 and the command fell back in some confusion, but reformed when clear
 of the flanking fire, and taking advantage of the accidents of ground
 checked the advance of the enemy. The sun was so hot, and the men so
 exhausted from the long run as well as from the five days and nights
 of fighting and marching, that this retreat, though disorderly, was
 exceedingly slow, and we lost heavily in consequence from the enemy's
 fire. My own experience was that, while wishing very much to run,
 I could only limp along, using my sword as a cane. My color-bearer
 (Cottrell) was shot by my side, and unheeding his appeal to save
 him, I could only pass the colors to the nearest man, and leave the
 brave fellow to die in a rebel prison. The flanking brigade of the
 enemy, which so nearly succeeded in surrounding us, was part of
 Longstreet's corps (now under command of General R. H. Anderson) and
 it was his line we had so nearly broken.... That Longstreet's corps
 had but just arrived at the line of our assault is evident from the
 incomplete nature of the breast works, and from the fact that they had
 no artillery in position. Had there been any support for the brigade
 which got up to the rebel works, the enemy's line would have been
 broken, and our army would have been between Lee's army and Richmond;
 but as we have seen the only supporting brigade was far behind, and
 the rest of the Fifth Corps not yet up....

 "The delay in Robinson's movement caused by the cavalry was
 unfortunate, and gave rise to a good deal of feeling at the time.
 General Meade, who was always for giving the infantry a free foot,
 had sent orders to General Sheridan, on the night of the 7th, to have
 his cavalry out of the Brock Road, but Sheridan, not receiving them,
 obstructed the road with a brigade, and as the cavalry and infantry
 became unavoidably mixed up, this delayed the advance.... It is known
 that in an interview at this time, General Meade was very indignant
 with General Sheridan, until he learned from him personally that he
 had never received the orders to clear the road, when Meade frankly
 apologized for what must have been harsh censure. In this interview
 which was described to me by Colonel Theodore Lyman, who was present,
 General Sheridan, being much chagrined by the censure of his superior
 officer, stated there was no force worth speaking of in front of the
 advance of the Fifth Corps; but he seems to have withdrawn this view,
 when in his cooler moments he came to write his report. Perhaps the
 feeling which caused Warren's unjustifiable removal from the command
 of the Fifth Corps at Five Forks began here.... The advanced troops
 fell back to the line which had been taken up by the Fifth Corps,
 intrenched, and waited for the Sixth Corps to come up, which they did
 in the afternoon, going into position on Warren's left. Crawford's
 division of the Fifth Corps made an attack in the afternoon, but with
 little result beyond capturing some seventy prisoners and losing
 considerably in killed and wounded."

In the preceding pages General Peirson refers to the fact of the
command of the Regiment devolving on himself; it might have been stated
that Colonel Davis, a very large and stout man, though doing his best
to lead his men whose pace was more than double-quick, was completely
overcome by the heat and mounted upon one of the Rebel Battery horses,
cut out by Milton F. Roberts of "C," was carried to the rear. Modesty
no doubt influenced General Peirson not to state that he was, himself,
hit by a portion of a buckshot-cartridge, three of the missiles lodging
in his right arm or shoulder, his sword-cane giving place to the
stalwart shoulders of Isaac H. Mitchell of "A." Two of the bits of lead
were picked out by the surgeon, the other is there yet. The wound did
not keep the resolute officer long from his post.

Here is the story as told by I. H. Mitchell, Company A, and transcribed
by Channing Whittaker, Company B.:--

[Sidenote: MAY 8, '64]

 "It must have been very near to where the Johnnies were that
 Lieutenant Colonel Peirson received three buck-shot in his right arm
 above the elbow, on May 8th, 1864. It was after we had been ordered to
 fall back that I first saw him after he was wounded. He was conscious,
 but perfectly helpless. He was trying to get back. I took him right
 upon my shoulder and carried him quite a distance into and part way
 through the woods, where we had formed line just before the last
 charge in which he was wounded. I had carried him 100 yards sure, and
 was still carrying him to the rear, when we met a man with a horse who
 was looking for some officer. I told him that I had got to have the
 horse to carry the Lieutenant Colonel. He did not object, because he
 could not find his man, and the bullets were whistling about pretty
 thick at that time. He then led the horse and I held the Lieutenant
 Colonel on his back, while I walked by his side. We followed the
 general direction of those who were going to the rear. I was not sure
 whether we were going in the right direction, and fearing that we
 might get into the hands of the Johnnies, I stopped, took him from
 the horse and carried him a little distance from the road into the
 woods. If I remember rightly, I made some coffee for him there waiting
 perhaps two hours, before we could get a stretcher for him. While we
 were there General Robinson was carried by. He had been wounded and
 he was saying things. In the meantime they had established a division
 hospital in the rear, and I then hailed some stretchers bearers, who
 took the Lieutenant Colonel there and I returned to my place in the
 Regiment. He came back to the Regiment very soon and was in our next
 fight."

As the day advanced the other corps came into their respective
positions, the Second being massed at Todd's Tavern, protecting the
rear of the army and the Ninth was at the extreme Union left, and there
was more or less fighting along the whole line at some time in the day.
A melancholy train was that made up of ambulances and baggage wagons
which on the 8th set out for Fredericksburg, bearing 12,000 wounded
men, thence via Belle Plain Landing and the Potomac to be distributed
to the great hospitals of Washington and points further North.
Sheridan and his troopers also received orders to set out upon their
famous raid which would flank Lee's army, reach the outer defenses of
Richmond, slay J. E. B. Stuart, the most remarkable cavalryman of the
Confederacy, and leave a gruesome token of its venturesome trip by a
trail of decaying horseflesh and freshly made graves for considerably
more than a hundred and fifty miles. The magnitude of this adventure,
which began Monday morning, May 9th, may be seen when we know that it
comprised 10,000 horsemen, riding in fours and well closed up, yet
constituting a column thirteen miles long requiring, according to a
rebel authority, four hours at a brisk pace to pass a given point;
what an eye opener such a force must have been to the Confederates at
home, who had little notion of the resources of the North. Rejoining
the Federal army at Chesterfield Station, on the 25th, its results
were summed up in having deprived Lee's forces of their "Eyes and
Ears" (cavalry) since all of the mounted rebels started in pursuit, as
soon as the move was understood; it had damaged Lee's communications,
liberated nearly four hundred Union prisoners, destroyed an immense
quantity of supplies, killed the leader of his cavalry, saved the Union
Government the subsistence of ten thousand horses and men for more than
two weeks, perfected the morale of the cavalry corps and produced a
moral effect of incalculable good to the Union cause.

Returning to the incident of the artillery referred to by Colonel
Peirson in his paper, it is interesting to find the same affair
recounted by one of the leading Confederates, General Fitzhugh Lee, in
one of his war sketches. After alluding to the ubiquity of the cavalry
and the work it had done in preparing the way for the arrival of R. H.
Anderson's (Longstreet's) Corps, he says:--

[Sidenote: MAY 8, '64]

  "Major James Breathed, commanding my horse artillery, remained
 behind and by my order placed a single gun in position on a little
 knoll. We knew the enemy's infantry was marching in column through
 a piece of woods, and the object was to fire upon the head of the
 column, as it debouched, to give the idea that a further advance
 would again be contested, and to compel them to develop a line of
 battle with skirmishers thrown out, etc. The delay which it was
 hoped to occasion by such demonstration was desirable. Under Major
 Breathed's personal superintendence shells were thrown, and burst
 exactly in the head of the column as it debouched. The desired
 effect was obtained; the leading troops were scattered, and it was
 only with some difficulty a line of battle with skirmishers in its
 front was formed to continue the advance. I was sitting on my horse
 near Breathed, and directed him to withdraw his gun, but he was so
 much elated with his success that he begged to be allowed to give
 the enemy some more rounds. He fired until their line got so close
 that you could hear them calling out: 'Surrender that gun, you rebel
 scoundrel.' Breathed's own horse had just been shot. The cannoneers
 jumped on their horses, expecting of course the gun to be captured,
 and retreated rapidly down the hill. Breathed was left alone. He
 limbered up the gun and jumped on the lead horse. It was shot from
 under him. Quick as lightning he drew his knife, cut the leaders out
 of the harness and sprang upon a swing or middle horse. It was also
 shot under him just as he was turning to get into the road. He then
 severed the harness of the swing horses, jumped upon one of the wheel
 horses, and again made a desperate attempt to save his gun. The ground
 was open between the piece and woods; the enemy had a full view of
 the exploit; and Breathed at last dashed off unharmed, miraculously
 escaping through a shower of bullets."

In confirmation of the foregoing, is the statement of Sergt. Wm. A.
Mentzer, Company A, as follows: "After advancing about two and one-half
miles we came to a piece of artillery on a knoll. While the Rebs fired
at us, to our pleasure as well as surprise, they fired over our heads.
We drove them from their position about half-a-mile, when they opened
on us again. We in the front rank gave them a Yankee yell and charged
for the gun. We shot one horse and drove away all the men but one, who
dismounted, cut the traces of the dead horse, remounted in a hurry and
got away with the gun just as we thought it was ours."

Battle scenes and incidents, we think, are indelibly impressed upon the
memory. Sometimes they are; more often many of the prominent features
disappear entirely, so that when the locality is revisited, difficulty
is found in reconciling the past impressions with those of the present.
Thus many of the Thirty-ninth who made that exhausting charge under
fire, in the morning of the 8th of May, would find themselves at fault
at many points, and would wonder at the changes in the face of nature,
had they the opportunity to go over the route followed under such
adverse circumstances. Channing Whittaker of "B," however, is sure he
could recognize the spot where the Regiment reformed and momentarily
rested; the place where Colonel Peirson and General Robinson were
wounded; the road cut through the hill which Grant's army did not
pass over on May 8th or 9th, the hillside on which he was wounded and
where he spent the night after the fight; the point whence he saw
three mounted Confederate Generals and where he saw Sergt. Major Conn,
hacking away with his short Sergeant Major sword at a multitude of
Confederates who had set upon him and finally carried him away captive
and, above all, just where Breathed's rebel battery was dislodged.

[Sidenote: MAY 8, '64]

Of the exactions of this day, M. H. Mentzer, "A," says, "Many were
exhausted but an officer begged us to cross over one field more. We had
been advancing and under fire from early morning, but we started again,
a very thin blue line, through a valley, up a rise, when a terrible
hail of bullets met us; we lay down and hugged the dirt; a lull, and
then distinctly from the enemy came the order, "Now rally ---- North
Carolina and give them H--ll!" Over they came, taking many prisoners
from our little line. I started to run as others did but tripped and
fell headlong down the hill lying still until they had pushed our
boys well back, when I crawled a short distance to cover, several
shells bursting in my path as I got away. Out of the way, covered with
sweat, dirt and ashes, for the cinders of the Wilderness were yet on
us, I fell asleep, and remained here till about four o'clock in the
afternoon. I fell in with a Natick boy, Company I, who had a bullet
hole in his wrist; I washed out the wound, tore a piece from my shirt
and bandaged it as well as I could, washed his face and hands, made
some coffee to cheer him up and then took him to a hospital on the
field. Then I set out to find my Brigade and Regiment and found them
at twilight; my brother, Sergt. Mentzer, had reported me as dead with
a bullet-hole through my forehead; those who saw me trip and plunge
forward must have mixed me up with someone that looked like me. It was
in the work of this forenoon that General Robinson was wounded and
Jeff. Cottrell, of "A," Color Sergeant, was wounded and was carried
part way off the field by Charles Goodwin, only to die at last in a
rebel prison. My brother, Sergt. W. A. Mentzer, then took the colors
and carried them until Major Tremlett reorganized the color-guard."

J. H. Burnham also of "A," recalls, "The march down the Brock Road with
the Fifth Corps from the Wilderness, the night of the 7th of May, and
our running into Longstreet's corps, then under General Anderson. The
rebels were behind, hastily erected breast works and were ready for us.
We advanced across an open field and suffered much from the rifle fire.
When near the works, I was hit in the abdomen. Throwing down my gun,
I made my way back across the field, over the dead and dying, and lay
down under a tree in front of a house. As this was early in the morning
of the 8th, I don't think there were many other wounded men there then,
but later others came. Sometime in the forenoon, a lady came out of the
house and asked me if I was badly hurt. She also said that she was from
New Jersey. It seems as though she said the place was the Laurel Hill
farm, though I understand it is known in history as the Alsop farm.
The next day came the ambulances, tents and other outfit of the Fifth
Corps. I should like to go there some day and have a look at the place
where I expected to give up my life. I carried the ball in my body for
months and have it now. I never rejoined the Regiment."

We owe much to Colonel Peirson's recollections of the service of the
Regiment, but in this affair at Alsop's he fails to recount a story
remembered by McDonald of "B," who says that in the company was a tall
Scotchman, Hunter by name, much inclined to stoop and, for this reason
was frequently enjoined by the critical Lieut. Colonel to take "the
position of a soldier." In the advance of this trying Sunday, Robert
was stooping as usual when a bullet went through his cap. When the ball
was over and the opportunity came, Hunter sought the officer and,
holding up his headgear, remarked, "Now, look at that; if I had ta'en
the position of a so'ger, be G-d, that ball wud a gone thru' my heed."
R. W. Hall of "F" recites an interesting experience of this 8th of May,
"I had penetrated the abatis in front of the Rebs and was unable to
extricate myself in time, when our boys fell back, and with about one
hundred and fifty others was taken prisoner, but I never saw the inside
of a rebel prison, as Sheridan in his great raid overtook us toward
evening of the following day at Beaver Dam Station on the Virginia
Central Railroad, where we were waiting. How plainly I can see General
Custer and another cavalryman in the lead, when they dashed down the
road as we were about to take the train for Richmond. Of course we had
to keep up with the cavalry during the raid and to dodge the Rebs who,
in small squads, contested the way. Their General Stuart was killed or
mortally wounded, May 11th, at the Yellow Tavern, in a very hot fight.
After several days' rapid marching, we came out at Malvern Hill, on the
James. The gunboats took us for Rebs and gave us several shots. City
Point, on the other side of the river, was not so very far away and
thence we ex-prisoners took a transport for Alexandria, where we were
re-equipped and sent to the front as guard for a supply-train of the
Ninth Corps. When Nelson and I reported for duty the surprise we gave
our comrades may be imagined."

[Sidenote: MAY 8, '64]

The 8th was a bloody day for the Thirty-ninth, the summary of losses
revealing ninety-three killed, wounded and missing. Lieutenant
Dusseault was wounded in the breast but an army button diverted the
bullet. As he wrote in his diary, "I was within thirty feet of the
enemy's works, and when I was hit, I was sure I was killed, as the
force of the blow caused me to spin round and round like a top, and
I fell to the ground. Finding I was not seriously hurt, I jumped up
and joined in the retreat. When we got back, we found Captain W. C.
Kinsley of Company K in tears; 'Look at my company!' he cried, 'Only
seven men left out of eighty-seven!' But he was assured that the woods
were full of our men and that his would be in shortly. It proved to be
so. We were not called on for the rest of the day, and that night we
obtained some sleep."

During the closing hours of the 8th, there was digging for the Fifth
Corps and the early hours of the 9th found the hard worked soldiers
still using the shovel; the night and the following day showing no less
than three distinct efforts in this direction for the Thirty-ninth,
a record in which the stories of the Sixteenth Maine and Thirteenth
Massachusetts accord. Of the day itself and the new positions of the
several corps, Colonel Peirson remarks, "The 9th was another hot and
dusty day, and the Fifth and Sixth Corps occupied it in pressing the
enemy and developing his position, seeking points of assault. The enemy
were still passing down during the morning the Parker's Store Road, in
dangerous proximity to our right and rear, and Hancock's Second Corps
was at 10 a. m. moved into position on Warren's right, making lines of
battle along the crest commanding the valley of the Po, the artillery
shelling the rebel trains which were in sight, causing them to take a
more sheltered road." The new position of the opposing forces might
be stated, briefly: from the northwest to the southeast, a distance
of two miles, were Hancock and his Second Corps at the right, next to
Warren and the Fifth; then Sedgwick with the Sixth; and at the extreme
Union left, Burnside and the Ninth Corps. At the rebel right was Hill's
Corps, now under Early; the extreme left was held by Longstreet's men,
under Anderson; and the intermediate distance, including the famous
Salient, was occupied by Ewell's Corps.

The event of the 9th which emphasized it in the annals of the campaign
was the death of Sedgwick, Commander of the Sixth Corps. Since the
fall of Reynolds at Gettysburg, no similar misfortune had befallen
the army of equal importance; universally respected, all but idolized
by his own men, his very presence at any time was worth whole brigades
to the cause he loved. "While standing behind an outer line of works,
personally superintending and directing, as was his custom, the posting
of a battery of artillery at an angle which he regarded of great
importance, he was shot through the head by a rebel sharpshooter, and
died instantly. Never had such a gloom rested upon the whole army
on account of the death of one man as came over it when the heavy
tidings passed along the lines that General Sedgwick was killed." He
was Connecticut born, West Point, 1837, having as classmates, Hooker,
E. D. Townsend, and Wm. H. French, late Commander of the Third Corps,
all of the Union Army; while his rebel fellows included Braxton Bragg,
Pemberton of Vicksburg fame, and one might wonder whether Jubal Early,
over at the rebel right, had a twinge of sadness over the summary
taking off of the man who, in earlier times, had stood by his side
on the West Point parade ground. Born in 1813, Sedgwick was not yet
fifty-one years old when sought by the enemy's bullet.

[Sidenote: MAY 9, '64]

Some of the besetments of army life and duty at this time are well
set forth in the story that Lieutenant Dusseault, of Company H, tells
of his efforts to replenish the supply of ammunition for the brigade:
"That same night--and it was a dark one too--I was detailed to go back
to the ordnance train for ammunition. I had sixty men from the five
different regiments of our Brigade to help me. I was ordered to bring
25,000 rounds (twenty-five boxes). We had secured the requisite amount
and were returning to the brigade in the thick darkness. As it took two
men to carry a box, which was supported on a blanket between them, it
was impossible to keep the men together, and as I did not know them,
many of them dropped their burdens and ran away. When we got back to
our camping place, we found that the brigade had moved on a mile and
a half further. When I came to my superior officer, I had but seven
boxes to deliver to him. Rousing from his sleep, he ordered me to go
back immediately and secure the rest, and then turned over and went to
sleep again. It had to be done and at about two or three o'clock in the
morning I reported the second time, not with the lost boxes, but with
enough others that had been obtained in a way which I will not stop to
explain."

May 10th adds another day to the long battle list of 1864; while a part
of the Spottsylvania encounter, it bears to those who had a part, the
sub-title of "Laurel Hill," the location being in the same vicinity
as that of Sunday's fight at Alsop's Farm, possibly somewhat further
towards the south. While there was fighting along the entire line, of
that portion of the same in which we are directly interested, Swinton,
in his history of the Army of the Potomac, says:--

 "The point against which the attack was designed to be made was a
 hill held by the enemy in front of Warren's line. This was perhaps
 the most formidable point along the enemy's whole front. Its densely
 wooded crest was crowned by earthworks, while the approach, which was
 swept by artillery and musketry fire, was rendered more difficult
 and hazardous by a heavy growth of low cedars, mostly dead, the
 long bayonet-like branches of which, interlaced and pointing in all
 directions, presented an almost impassable barrier to the advance of a
 line of battle. The attack of this position had already been essayed
 during the day by troops of the Second and Fifth Corps, and with most
 unpromising results. When Hancock's divisions joined the Fifth, an
 assault was made by the troops of both corps at five o'clock; but it
 met a bloody repulse. The men struggled bravely against an impossible
 task, and even entered the enemy's breastworks at one or two points;
 but they soon wavered and fell back in confusion and great slaughter.
 Notwithstanding the disastrous upshot of this assault, the experience
 of which had taught the troops that the work assigned them was really
 hopeless, a second assault was ordered, an hour after the failure of
 the first. The repulse of this was even more complete than that of
 the former effort. The loss in the two attacks was between five and
 six thousand, while it is doubtful whether the enemy lost as many
 hundreds. Among the killed was Brigadier General Rice[M] of the Fifth
 Corps, distinguished for his intrepid bearing on many fields."

This was the day, when at the left of the Fifth Corps a portion of the
Sixth was more successful, yet even its fruits were not held. General
Emory Upton of the First Division, Second Brigade, in a vigorous charge
carried the enemy's first line of intrenchments, capturing nine hundred
prisoners and several guns. This attack, however, was unsupported and
the advantage could not be maintained, so that at nightfall Upton
withdrew and the captured guns were left behind. General Meade ascribed
the failure of the movement to the lack of expected support from Mott's
Division of the Second Corps on his left. The reports of Generals
Meade and Warren add nothing to the foregoing while Lieutenant Colonel
Peirson particularizes as follows:--

[Sidenote: MAY 10, '64]

 "The ground in front of the Laurel Hill position was swept by the
 enemy's artillery, and our men suffered severely from it. In our own
 Regiment, we lost several men, killed by the falling limbs of the huge
 pine trees cut off by the enemy's artillery fire. One of our men was
 pinned to the ground by one of these limbs, so near to the enemy's
 line, that, when we retreated, as we did upon receiving a terrific
 musketry fire at point blank range, he was the only one who saw that
 after the volley the enemy ran as fast as we did, but in the opposite
 direction. They soon returned, however, and captured the observer.
 At some points our troops even entered the breastworks, but the men
 though brave were easily discouraged, and the long continued strain
 and fatigue told upon their spirit; and while they would defend their
 position to the last, or retire in the face of heavy odds with the
 utmost coolness, the fact remains that the men of the Second and Fifth
 Corps were not as ambitious on the 10th, as they had been on the 6th
 and 8th of May."

While the Ninth Corps, General Burnside, did no severe fighting on the
10th, the day nevertheless was significant in Bay State records through
the death of General Thomas G. Stevenson, commanding the First Division
of that Corps. Born in Boston, February 3, 1836, he early displayed
a bent for military matters and at the outbreak of the Rebellion
commanded a battalion of militia in Boston harbor. At the head of the
Twenty-fourth Massachusetts Infantry, he accompanied the Burnside
Expedition to North Carolina, winning laurels everywhere. On the return
of Burnside from the Southwest, Stevenson who already had won his star,
was made commander as above and like Rice and Sedgwick is supposed to
have been the victim of a sharpshooter.

While Colonel Peirson has given us a deal of information concerning
the beginning of the Battle Summer, he says nothing of the fact that
he had, himself, a narrow escape from death. Colonel Theodore Lyman,
in his diary, writes of a visit made by himself and General Peirson to
these scenes, and has this to offer on his observations:--

 "A few hundred yards to the right of where this attack was made, we
 visited the patch of pine woods, where, on the 10th, Peirson's brigade
 again advanced to the attack. The brigade advanced to within about one
 hundred yards of the works, and then began firing in the thick woods,
 being exposed to a tremendous artillery enfilade, whose marks still
 remained in the fallen timber. Peirson said he ordered his men to
 cease firing, finding few balls coming the other way, but got an order
 from the brigade commander to open again. Then Peirson was knocked
 senseless by a shell."

Concerning the injury to Colonel Peirson, Lieut. Dusseault of "H" has
this version:--

 "On the 10th of May at Laurel Hill, our men were lying flat upon the
 ground, under the enfilading fire of artillery from the left and the
 direct fire of musketry from the front. As an officer of Company H,
 I had been trying to get up into the line a private of that company
 who was lying forty or fifty yards behind it. I had tired of exposing
 myself in the endeavor and had left him and taken my place in the
 line. At about that time, Lieutenant Colonel Peirson, who was walking
 back and forth, erect, as was his custom, saw him and went back to get
 him up into his place. I went back to help him. We had succeeded in
 getting him up to within eight or ten feet of the line. The Lieutenant
 Colonel who was within two feet of me, had his sword in his hand,
 both arms extended, and was leaning forward a little, when a piece
 of a shell came between his arms and his body, ripped out the breast
 of his coat, smashed his field glasses in their case, and jammed the
 hilt of his sword. He doubled up, fell forward on his head, and then
 over sideways. Colonel Davis, who was standing eight or ten feet in
 our rear, asked, 'Lieutenant, is he dead?' and I answered, 'Yes.' I
 called two men of my company and told them to take him to the rear.
 They turned him over upon his back, one taking hold of him near the
 head, and the other by the feet. When they commenced to raise him, his
 eyes began to blink and he answered the question which had been asked
 three or four minutes earlier by Colonel Davis, saying, 'No. I guess
 it isn't much.' He was sent back to the hospital and was very sick
 there, but he rejoined the Regiment on the 9th of June. Lieutenant
 Colonel Peirson was strictly a temperance man, but he carried a flask
 of brandy for emergencies, and he had requested some of the officers
 to give some to him if he should be hurt. It happened that the shell
 cut off the lower half of the flask and it fell in front of Private
 Richardson of Company A. A few drops remained in the flask which
 Richardson immediately drained, saying, 'They are throwing good brandy
 at us.'"

[Sidenote: MAY 10, '64]

Of this same event, one of the men of "A" writes, "One piece of shell
wounded Colonel Peirson, ripping off a row of buttons from his coat.
I picked them up and divided them with the boys. I have one left now.
Salem Richardson got the bottom of the Colonel's brandy flask, which
was shot away by the same bit of shell, and I wish you could have seen
him empty it." The same incident is called up by S. H. Mitchell, also
of Company A, whose members evidently were keeping their commander
under observation. The flask was carried against an emergency, when
it might be of great utility. It offered no resistance whatever to the
Confederate missile but Comrade Richardson always averred that the
coming of the drink was most opportune. From the story of the Sixteenth
Maine, it is learned that this day the brigade was temporarily assigned
to the First Division, General Cutler commanding. The Second brigade
was placed in the Third Division, under Crawford, and the Third was
made independent to report directly to General Warren, these changes
being induced, supposedly, on account of the heavy losses and the
wounding of the commanding officer, General Robinson.

Possibly the doings of the 11th can be described no better than by
copying the record as made at the time by John S. Beck, "Rested all day
to-day, if you can call it rest, for we were in a mudhole, out of the
range of Rebel shells. Our brigade looks small; drew rations; raining
hard, everything wet through, no blankets or shelter tents. I should
have been sick were it not for the excitement of battle. Our position
here looks dubious, as we have to fight the enemy behind concealed
breastworks and in dense woods. To-night we lay down on the wet ground
with an old, wet, woolen blanket which I picked up." Considering that
this rain was the first since crossing the Rapidan, it really was a
comfort even if it did make some, for the time, unpleasantly wet. The
11th is noteworthy from another fact, viz., that it is on this day
that Grant telegraphs to Washington the prominent features of the
campaign thus far, that reinforcements would be encouraging, and that
he purposes "to fight it out on this line, if it takes all summer."

Thursday, the 12th of May, is the day of the dread "Salient" or the
"Bloody Angle" of Spottsylvania. Had our Regiment been with Barlow's
men of the Second Corps, or with the Vermont Brigade of the Sixth, the
mortality record of the Thirty-ninth might have been far different,
though all participants in any portion of this bloody field have ever
thought their losses severe enough. The vision of that First Division
of the Second Corps, in the morning mists emerging from the woods at
the Union left centre, and with determined rush, "a narrow front, but
extending back as far as the eye could see," seeking the Confederate
works, is one that memory needs no assistance in recalling. Through
wonderful good fortune for us, the artillery of the enemy had been
withdrawn and the guns which might have cut wide swaths through that
disordered mass of blue, were hastening back, arriving just in time to
be captured, the assault resulting in the capture of General Edward
Johnson's Division of Ewell's Corps, including the commander, with
twenty pieces of artillery and thirty stands of colors. But this did
not end the day. So furious was the foe over the loss of men, munitions
and position, that the struggle for reinstatement became possibly the
fiercest and most deadly of the entire war. Once at least, the bayonet
became a weapon of real contact. Here it was that the large oak tree
was actually cut down by bullets from both sides. The ground, at the
margin of the works, was covered with piles of the dead, and for twenty
hours the battle raged, until the wearied rebels withdrew, unable to
retake the lines lost in the morning.

In this rapid survey, no mention is made of the Sixth and Ninth Corps,
but each one accomplished the task assigned, nor was the Fifth by any
means idle. Inferring from the forces pressing upon Hancock in his
endeavor to hold advantage of the early morning, that the enemy must
be withdrawing his right and left to assist his centre, both Burnside
and Warren were ordered forward. Warren obeying, advanced at something
after nine o'clock, but was repulsed, "for Longstreet's corps was
holding its intrenchments in force." Of this in his report, Warren says:

[Sidenote: MAY 12, '64]

 "The enemy's direct and flank fire was too destructive. Lost very
 heavily. The enemy continuing to fire on the Second and Sixth Corps, I
 was compelled to withdraw Griffin's and Cutler's divisions (First and
 Fourth) and send them to the support where they again became engaged.
 My whole front was held by Crawford's Division (Third) and Kitching's
 and the Maryland Brigades, presenting a line of battle not as strong
 as a single line. The enemy made no serious attempt to force it.
 My divisions on the left were relieved during the night from their
 position, and returned to the right in the morning, having been kept
 awake nearly all the night, which was rainy."

A graphic picture of the work of the Brigade is painted by Adjutant
Small of the Sixteenth Maine in his history of the Regiment, and a
portion of it is reproduced here:

 "The men, thoroughly exhausted, would lie at length on the cool,
 fresh earth, some of the timid ones hugging the bottom of the trench,
 painfully expressing the dread of something to come. And yet these
 timid ones, at the first rebel yell, would over and 'at them,' or
 draw bead on some venturesome Johnnie, and shout with derision if he
 was made to dodge. If they dropped him, a grim look of satisfaction,
 shaded with pity, passed over their dirty faces. The quiet was almost
 unbearable, the heat in the trenches intolerable, and rain, which
 commenced falling, was most welcome. Time dragged. We had not the
 slightest hint of what was developing. The rebels seemed very far
 off and trouble ominously near. From the right came an aide, and,
 quietly passing down the line of works, he dropped a word to this
 and that colonel; only a ripple, and all was again suspiciously
 still. 'What was it, Colonel?' asked the adjutant. The Colonel made
 no reply but simply pointed up the hill. Soon he took out his watch
 and looked anxiously to the right. Suddenly a commotion ran down the
 line, followed by the command, 'Attention! Forward, double quick!'
 On went the Brigade with a yell which was echoed by thousands of
 throats in front and was thrown back by the double columns in our
 rear. Down from the rebel right thundered shot and shell, making
 great gaps in our ranks, while on swept the Brigade, until suddenly
 loomed up in our front, three lines of works--literally a tier, one
 above another,--bristling with rifles ready aimed for our reception.
 There was lead enough to still every heart that was present, and yet,
 when sheets of flame shot out in our faces, scarcely a dozen of the
 Regiment were hit. Then men tore wildly at the abatis, and rushed on
 only to fall back or die. Again and again did the Brigade charge,
 and as often came those terrible sheets of flame in our faces, while
 solid shot and shell enfiladed our ranks. The crash which followed
 the fearful blaze swept away men, as the coming wind would sweep away
 the leaves from the laurel overhead.... Just as the last charge of
 ammunition was rammed home, relief came, when the Brigade retired
 to the works in the rear, to learn that it was not expected of the
 Brigade to carry the works, only to hold a strong force of the
 enemy, while Hancock carried the lines in his front, which were more
 favorably situated for a successful attack."

It was in the trying scenes of this exacting effort that Major Leavitt,
of the Sixteenth, so endeared by his manly character, received the
wound from which he died on the 30th instant in Washington. His was
a nature too broad and brave to be confined to the limits of his own
Regiment. "None knew him but to love him."

How the day seemed to a Company C man appears in his diary entry for
the day: "Still damp, wet and rainy; the day opened with an advance of
the Second Corps under Hancock, who carried the enemy's front line of
breastworks and captured a division of the rebels and their General,
Johnson. We were soon on the move to support our First Division in
a general charge and were soon into it, hot and heavy. The enemy
soon had another enfilading fire of grape and canister on us, and we
could do nothing. Edward Ireland was killed by a solid shot and Henry
Ireland was wounded in the arm. Soon after being withdrawn to the
rear, we were sent to the left to support the Sixth Corps, and lay in
a line of rifle-pits about two hours, when again we advanced through
the woods and joined the Sixth Corps on the right, where we lay all
the afternoon. We heard our folks pouring shells into the enemy from
mortars. We turned in for the night, resting on our arms, wet through
to the skin."

[Sidenote: MAY 13, '64]

The night was uncomfortable enough and during its hours there was an
alarm that the enemy was advancing, while the truth was that Johnny Reb
was quite as tired as the Yankees. Even soldiers must rest sometime,
and early in the morning of the 13th the division was withdrawn to the
rear, and for a short time laid aside responsibility, but it was not
a long rest, since those rifle-pits must be filled with someone, and
all too soon "we were moved up to the right, into works along with the
One Hundred and Forty-sixth New York. Nothing here but water and mud.
Showery all day, though the men are in good spirits, notwithstanding.
About 8 p. m. when we were beginning to arrange to stretch out for the
night, orders came to move, and we fell in, following the rest of the
corps to the left. The mud was dreadful, the night dark, we forded
streams up to our knees, and the mud all the time was over shoes."
Grant had not yet found the spot through which he could force his way,
so the Fifth Corps once more essays the part of pioneers, and leads
the move towards the inevitable left, seeking in vain for some point
not bristling with rebel bayonets, or threatening with black throated
cannon. Truly our Lieutenant General is finding out, not only how
strenuous is the Eastern Union soldier, but his eyes are opening wide
as to the resourcefulness of the Eastern Confederate and his eternal
vigilance.

It is another flank movement, and the men of Warren's Corps are moving
to Burnside's left with orders to assault with that Corps at four
o'clock in the morning of the 14th. Very likely the difficulties of
this night, with its more than Egyptian darkness, had not been reckoned
upon by the Commander and the appointed hour found the would-be
assailants a long way from the point of expected advance. The route
was past the Landrum House to the Ny River, which had to be waded, and
beyond the route did not follow any road, traversing the fields, and
a track was cut through the woods. Then came a fog, so dense that not
even the fires built to light the way could be seen. Men exhausted by
the difficulties of the move and previous exactions fell asleep all
along the way. The new locality was quite unknown and by daylight when
the expected attack was to take place, only Griffin with his First
Division, having only twelve hundred "fagged-out men" had arrived. It
was seven o'clock before General Cutler got thirteen hundred of his men
together. Naturally the four o'clock charge was not made.

Wright and the Sixth Corps moved still further to the left, but had
to do some fighting to get just the position wanted. All observers,
whether of Regiment or Brigade, agree that the day was wet and
comparatively quiet, though the enemy's shells passed harmlessly over
the heads of the tired men, many of whom slept the sleep of utter
exhaustion, the waking ones thankful that the fuses in said shells were
long enough to keep up their hissing until a considerable distance
beyond us before bursting. In the mutations of fighting and moving
about, all the regular contents of knapsacks had disappeared, the most
of the men retaining, in addition to canteen and haversack, rubber
blankets only; besides, rations were scarce, yet men were content to
rest without food, so trying had been the ordeal of the preceding
ten days. After all, the average Yankee is ever anxious to know just
where he is, and several entries of the 14th are to the effect that
the Regiment is near the Fredericksburg turnpike, about eight miles
from the city itself and, from a mile and a half to two miles from
Spottsylvania Court House. With only the canopy of the sky as a
covering, a large part of the Thirty-ninth slept through the night of
the 14th-15th.

[Sidenote: MAY 15, '64]

The 15th is Sunday, and just a week away from the sad experience of
Alsop's farm. These men of the First Brigade are fast becoming hardened
veterans, and they have the privilege of greeting as such the comrades
who had been home on re-enlistment furloughs and who, this day, got
back again. There are many comparisons between the spic-and-span attire
of the just-returned, and the "of-the-earth, earthy" apparel of men
who, for ten long days and nights have fought and marched, at intervals
hugging muddy mother-earth, till all semblance of cleanliness has
disappeared, and dress parades have faded out of the recollections of
all concerned. Then too the ravages of the hotly contested field have
torn great gaps in the erstwhile well-filled ranks so that only squads
of men constitute what have been long company lines. Some boys remark
on the quiet of Sunday and think it properly kept; three days' rations
are drawn, including fresh beef, and, with returning vitality and
spirits, learning that the Eleventh Massachusetts Battery, in the Ninth
Corps, is hard by, men of the Thirty-ninth make friendly visits to
their acquaintances therein. Colonel Davis comes back to the Regiment
to-day, looking much better than when he dropped out. Towards night,
six o'clock, the troops are formed in line with expectation of an
attack; four lines deep, our right rests on the top of a hill whence,
as far as the eye can reach, armed men are seen awaiting the attack
which is not made. It is a sight to remember!

Monday, the 16th, is also a quiet day for this campaign. Beginning
foggy and damp, with the rising sun the mists clear away and it is very
warm. On some sort of an alarm we are deployed, in line with the One
Hundred and Seventh Pennsylvania, Colonel McCoy, that has just got back
from its home trip on account of re-enlistment. On being recalled to
our former station, we are set to work entrenching, introducing heavy
timbers into our lines of works, three deep. About 9 p. m., we have to
stop work, because the tools are needed elsewhere. Though there are
showers in the evening, the moon finally shines through and, under her
benign light, the Regiment sleeps. Nor does the record of the 17th
differ essentially from that of yesterday. Foggy in the morning, then
clearing and warm; picket or skirmish line duty for some and, about
4 p. m., our lines are moved to the right, nearer those of the Ninth
Corps where there is more digging to render safe our position in case
of attack. It is about this time that General Grant finds the army
encumbered with an excess of artillery and, accordingly, sends back to
Washington over a hundred guns; how the Johnnies would like to have
some of these same weapons! All of them will come back again before the
Petersburg siege is over.

Those who remember clearly the events of the 18th will agree that the
most important one was the arrival, at 5 p. m., of the first mail
since leaving camp at Mitchell's Station. What joy its contents gave
those loyal hearts! Yet there were missives, in that coming of the
postman, for faithful lovers whose eyes, many hours before, had closed
in dreamless sleep, and in this life could never know how fondly they
were remembered. The enemy, as if to make amends for continued quiet,
began to shell the Ninth Corps just after our early breakfast, which we
had soon after four o'clock. For some reason, General Warren wanted our
Brigade nearer him, so at seven o'clock we were moved over towards the
left and, under a shelling fire, lay till well along in the afternoon.
Though there were six regiments in the Brigade it numbered, all told,
less than a thousand men. About two o'clock, we returned to the right
and, at eleven o'clock, reoccupied the works on which we had labored
the night before. General Warren in his report for this day states
that General Richard Coulter, commanding our Brigade, is severely
wounded. This, too, is the day of the arrival at the Front of the First
Massachusetts Heavy Artillery from its long service in the defenses
of Washington. It is assigned to the Second Brigade, Third Division,
Second Corps, though at present it is with the Second Brigade of
General Robert O. Tyler's Artillery Division.

For the greater part of the Potomac Army, the 19th is a quiet day,
though the men in their breastworks notice some sort of change on their
left. Of the day, General Warren says, "All our forces took up position
on my left. This brought out General Ewell's Corps, who attempted
to turn our right. He was repulsed, etc.... Rained in afternoon."
Regimental note-takers remark on the drawing of rations, including
fresh beef, and the fierce attack on their right, well along in the
afternoon and of the fact that their friends in the First Massachusetts
Heavy Artillery had a severe experience.

[Sidenote: MAY 18, '64]

The hot reception accorded the First Heavies is worthy of more than
passing mention. Recruited to the maximum of such organizations, the
Regiment was a wonder to the men who had been long in the field, for
it numbered about 1800 men, as large as two brigades of those who had
been in the thickest of the fray. The Confederates of Ewell's command,
desirous of ascertaining whether the Union forces were moving and,
incidentally, to capture if possible a tempting wagon train, in the
afternoon of the 19th, undertook to steal around the Union right,
bearing down thus about 5 p. m. along the Fredericksburg Pike on the
line of Federal supplies. Whatever the expectations of the enemy,
the point of attack was by no means unguarded, and in history, the
engagement is known as that of the Heavies, since not only were our
First men there, but the First Heavy of Maine was in line, and the
Second, Seventh and Eighth of New York as well. Swinton says that
the artillerists had not been in battle before, but under fire they
displayed an audacity surpassing even that of the experienced troops.
"In these murderous wood-fights, the veterans had learned to employ
all of the Indian devices that afford shelter to the person; but these
green battalions, unused to this kind of shelter-craft, pushed boldly
on, firing furiously. Their loss was heavy, but the honor of the
enemy's repulse belongs to them." Excellent evidence of the sturdiness
and steadiness of the men, with crossed cannon on their caps, is found
in the words of an old Confederate, spoken in 1901 at the dedication of
the regimental monument on the scene of the fight, known in the annals
of the First as Harris Farm:

 "I saw your men march on this field, not deployed, but like soldiers
 on parade, take aim and fire a volley straight from the shoulder.
 You seemed to me the biggest men I had ever seen. You were so near
 that I noticed that all wore clean shirts. There was the most perfect
 discipline and indifference to danger I ever saw. It was the talk of
 our men."

In Fox's book of Regimental Losses, he puts the killed and mortally
wounded of our friends, in this engagement, as one hundred and twenty
men.

FOOTNOTES:

[M] James Clay Rice was born in Worthington, Mass., December 27,
1829, and was graduated from Yale in 1854; after a period spent in
teaching in Natchez, Miss., he came to New York, studied law, began
its practice in 1856, and thus the war found him. He enlisted as a
private in the Thirty-ninth (Garabaldi Guards) New York Infantry, was
soon commissioned First Lieutenant, and Adjutant, and as a Captain,
was present at Bull Run. On the organization of the Forty-fourth New
York, or the Ellsworth Avengers, he was made Lieutenant Colonel, later
Colonel, and saw all of the active service of that regiment, winning
distinction at Gettysburg. At the time of his death he was in command
of the Second Brigade, Fourth (Wadsworth's) Division of the Fifth
Corps. Like Sedgwick, he was shot by a sharpshooter. His last words
were, "Turn me over towards the enemy; let me die with my face to the
foe."




NORTH ANNA RIVER


All agree that the 20th was a quiet day, though signalized by the
arrival of a mail with so many letters and papers that for a while the
general appearance was one of an out-of-door reading expanse, rather
than a vast army under fire from a vigilant foe, though the latter also
appeared to be quite good natured, and the bands of both armies made
the air resound with music. Even the evening following the torrid heat
of the day is described as moonlit and beautiful. General Meade says
of the 21st, 22nd and 23rd, that they were employed in moving the army
from Spottsylvania Court House to the North Anna River, and General
Warren states that his artillery began to move at 10 a. m. of the
21st, that the enemy did some artillery firing and that the men stood
to arms. His headquarters set out at noon. Local observers chronicle
some activity on the part of the foe with certain changes in regimental
positions and the actual starting at about noon, leaving pickets on
their stations to shift for themselves. They march through a part of
the country hitherto untouched by Union soldiers, and the people are
seemingly badly scared. The stop for the night is at Guinea Station,
covering a distance, someone says, of eleven miles. Though the men
turn out at three o'clock in the morning of Sunday, the 22nd, they do
not advance until almost noon, and then under a hot sun they marched
ten miles to a certain Bull's church (St. Margaret's) where are seen a
number of Confederate prisoners, and it is said that Lee passed through
in the morning. The worst feature of the march is the fact that it is
made on empty stomachs, for the rations have not come up.

[Sidenote: MAY 22, '64]

Of the country through which Grant and his soldiers are making
another flank movement, many remarks are made because of its improved
appearance over that of the region about Fredericksburg and northward,
where war had been raging for three years, and it had become a
veritable land of desolation. To the eyes of the soldiers it was
a delightful sight, and one writer in the Thirty-ninth pays it the
highest compliment possible by saying, "It looks like New England,"
and the same chronicler says he can't bear to see the men foraging for
pigs, hens and everything edible, somewhat forced thereto, on account
of the wagons being so far behind, and the tender hearted fellow
continues, much to the credit of his bringing up, "Many of the people
are poor and they need all they have for their own keeping." In army
annals, the 23rd is known as the day of the North Anna River. In his
report, General Warren states:

 "General Cutler's division leading got off promptly at 5. a. m.
 Reached forks, where one road goes to the ford and one to the bridge,
 at 9. a. m. Cavalry skirmishing a little in advance. A deserter
 says it is Rosser's cavalry; says there is artillery and infantry
 on the other side. Turned back to give that road to Hancock and
 got possession of a crossing at a mill at 1 p. m. By 3.10 p. m.,
 General Griffin's division had nearly all forded, and at 3.10 p.
 m. bridge-train began to arrive. About 4.30, bridge (pontoon) was
 completed and last of General Cutler's division crossed. About 6 a. m.
 enemy assaulted us. My right gave way, and the artillery drove back
 the enemy. We repulsed them everywhere."

From internal sources, we learn that the Thirty-ninth was started out
before 5 a. m., and marched rapidly towards the North Anna. Getting
on the wrong road a halt was had for an hour, and certain portions of
the Second Corps passed by, including the Tenth Massachusetts Battery,
the old friends of Poolesville, and later we got the right road and
reached Jericho Ford, though it was pretty deep for men of ordinary
stature. However, the crossing had been effected by others and the
pontoon bridge laid so that we went over dry shod. An attack was made
upon us soon after reaching the south side, the fight continuing until
after dark. The enemy had expected to drive us back to the steep banks
of the river, and possibly into it, but they made the error of letting
over too many of us, and our artillery was quite too effectual for
them. The high banks of the North Anna, would have made matters very
bad for us had not the rebel calculations miscarried. While there was
some loss, one killed in Company H, and several wounded, the loss of
the Confederates was considerable. We lay very quietly on our arms
throughout the night, no lights being tolerated lest we might reveal
our location to the foe.

While the Second Corps is doing considerable fighting on the Union
left and though the Thirty-ninth shifts its position, relatively the
24th is a quiet day. The enemy has fallen back a mile or so and he is
followed up, advantage being taken of the opportunity to tear up some
long stretches of the railroad and to bend the rails around trees, thus
rendering them quite useless for the future. The wagon train having
crossed the river, rations for four days are distributed and, as one
man states, "They are badly needed." Large numbers of the enemy keep
coming in, and they appear, for the most part, very glad to reach a
point where food is possible, even if the wagons are sometimes slow
in reaching us. As a variant on the unusual quiet of the day, a heavy
thunder storm imparts noise and moisture to the scene. It is on this
day that the Ninth Corps is formally incorporated with the Army of
the Potomac, General Burnside generously waiving any rights possessed
by the priority of his commission over that of General Meade. General
Warren speaks of spending all of the 25th in getting into position in
front of the enemy's line and driving in his (the enemy's) light troops
to his main force. "Found Hill's Corps intrenched between the North
Anna and the Little River. Lost about one hundred and fifty men and
officers during the day." During this day, some of the men had severe
experience on the skirmish line, fully nine hours of tedious duty, with
incessant firing along the line. A severe thunder shower marked this
day also, and it was a wet earth upon which the men undertook at last
to sleep.

[Sidenote: MAY 25, '64]

Again the flank movement had failed to discover an assailable point
in the confederate lines. They had been thoroughly reconnoitered and
"so great was the natural strength of the ground, so well were the
intrenchments traversed, so tenacious was the Southern infantry, that
it seemed impossible to produce any serious impression upon them. To
have attacked the army of Northern Virginia across intrenchment of the
kind found here, would have involved a useless slaughter." The Corps
Commander reports for the 26th, "Hard rain in morning at seven o'clock.
Remained in position all day. Rained in afternoon. At dark, began
to recross the North Anna River at Quarles' Mills. Roads heavy and
slippery with mud and approaches to stream bad. All not over till near
daylight." The day proves to be more than usually wet and disagreeable,
but in the forenoon many are surprised and pleased at the return of the
men, captured on the 8th at Alsop's farm, and retaken by Custer the
next day at Beaver Dam Station, who now rejoin the Regiment ready for
duty.

Skirmishing continues all day and the pickets are active, yet there is
no set engagement, the head officers having decided on still another
movement towards the inevitable left. At nine o'clock in the evening,
we move out of our works, under orders to not speak above a whisper, so
that our departure may not be suspected and the end of the 26th of the
month beholds us approaching the recrossing of the North Anna.

Early in the morning of the 27th, we recross the river and at 2.30 a.
m., some distance beyond the stream must halt and draw three days'
rations, which we are told must last us six. An hour later we are on
the march and struggle on through characteristic Virginia mud, so thick
and adhesive that many a footgear is left in its tenacious clutches.
There is very little halting for us, since we are trying to interpose
ourselves between Lee and Richmond, and we must move more rapidly
than the latter since he, being on the arc of an inner circle, has a
less distance to overcome than we. At eight o'clock comes a welcome
halt for breakfast, the pause being protracted for rest until nearly
noon, when we are up and off again, with very little cessation till
seven in the evening, having marched almost continuously twenty-two
hours and covering twenty-five miles. We had not had our clothes off
in twenty-four days; not a man thought of washing his face, much less
of taking a bath; nor is the strain over yet. In what condition men,
gently reared, found themselves may be imagined. Camp is pitched
near Mangohick Church. The 28th begins as early as four o'clock, and
following breakfast the march is resumed at six, and the Pamunkey
River is crossed at Newcastle. Halting some three miles beyond the
river, breastworks are built, the men proclaiming the digging easy, and
here we halt for the night, being about fifteen miles from Richmond,
the nearest point to the confederate capital as yet reached by the
Thirty-ninth.

[Sidenote: MAY 31, '64]

The record for the 29th is one of marching, waiting and digging. Though
ordered out at four o'clock in the morning with the further direction
to be ready to start at five, we wait till nearly noon, in the meantime
seeing the arrival of the Ninth Corps, after an all night's march. On
starting we find great masses of troops assembled in every direction,
our Regiment halting near the Fifth Corps' headquarters, where we
remain till near seven o'clock, when we proceed to the left, some
two and a half miles, where the Brigade throws up breastworks; the
Thirty-ninth going on picket later, the night proving a quiet one. It
would have been enjoyable if our haversacks had not been empty, the
injunction to make our last rations hold out six days not having been
found practicable. Though we find roses in full bloom considerably
earlier than at home, this does not offset hungry stomachs. About 7 a.
m., we retire from the picket line and join the other troops of our
Corps, and after a short march of about one mile, we draw rations of
fresh beef, which help out somewhat, and later still came the rations
we so much needed. The wagons could not come up so one hundred men
were detailed to go back to the train and bring the food with them,
this being after a day given to efforts to repel attacks that did
not seriously affect our Regiment. Beck of "E" Company records that
this day the old Second Division got together again under the command
of Brigadier General Henry H. Lockwood, though the fact is stated
elsewhere as provisional.




COLD HARBOR


The sun of May 31st rose red and torrid and the day proved to be
terribly hot. Fortunately the exegencies of the campaign did not
require any considerable activity, and the men had the privilege of
"sweltering" in the breastworks or of "lolling" under their shelter
tents, just back of the trenches. General Warren records of the day
that the skirmishers were pushed forward about one mile, without
opposition, beyond Bethesda Church. While there is the sound of
cannonading on both the right and left, the last day of May, so far
as our Regiment is concerned, is the safest seen since crossing the
Rapidan. The day is the prelude to the opening of the Cold Harbor
fight, one which will cover June 1-12, and it closes with the Union
forces extending nearly North and South. White House on the Pamunkey
has become the new base of supplies and here the Eighteenth Corps,
under General W. F. Smith, landed on the 30th, and by forced marches
will be able to take position between the Fifth and Sixth Corps on the
1st of June. The section now harried by the opposing armies was the
scene of active warfare two years ago, for Fair Oaks began on the 31st
of May and to-morrow's Cold Harbor will begin to repeat the horrors of
the Seven Days' Fight.

The efforts of Generals Grant and Meade to find an unguarded point
through which the Union Army might interpose itself between Richmond
and the Confederate Army have thus far proved unavailing. Whether
active at the head of his forces or weak and ailing, borne along his
line in a carriage, General Lee is still untiring in his watchfulness
and, loyally supported by such lieutenants as Ewell, Hill, Early,
Anderson and others, there is always a firm gray wall confronting the
determined line in blue. Attempts to force it had been unsuccessful
at the North Anna and Totopotomy and now, on McClellan's old battle
fields, another fierce assault is to be made on the enemy's works,
though the brunt of the charge will not come on the Fifth Corps this
day; rather will the story be told by those who fought in the ranks of
the Sixth and Eighteenth Corps, which had gained their places, some
portions thereof, late in the afternoon, and after desperate fighting
carried certain of the Confederate defences. Turning again to the words
of General Warren, we learn that there was a movement against the rebel
position which was intrenched with a large space of clear ground in
front, swept by artillery. The Corps suffers a loss of two hundred
killed and wounded and the line is extended four to five miles; the
Corps is attacked in several places, quite severely on the right just
before dark.

Lieutenant Dusseault of Company H has the following account of the
night of the 31st of May and the 1st of June, showing very well what a
portion of the Thirty-ninth was doing:--

[Sidenote: MAY 31, '64]

"On the skirmish line, last night, I became completely exhausted. We
were a mile and a half in advance of our main line; the sergeant with
me was of the One Hundred and Fourth New York; I left him in charge and
went to sleep. About midnight, when it was pitch dark, he roused me,
with the words, 'They are coming! They are coming!' It seems that the
enemy were marching in one, long, steady column towards our right. They
were so near that we could hear their voices, and their tramping shook
the earth where we lay. In the morning we found their earthworks empty,
and we so reported at headquarters. June 1st was pleasant but hot,
our skirmish line, a mile and a half from our main line, was in the
woods and close up to the enemy. At daybreak when we found their works
vacated, I reported to division officer of the picket, Major Pierce,
of the Thirteenth Massachusetts, who ordered me to advance my line.
But just as I was about to do so, we found the enemy were moving back
to our left. They passed within three hundred feet of our picket line,
thus putting us in a precarious position. Their flankers were within
two hundred feet of us, and we did not dare to move in the hour or more
that it took them to pass. There must have been five or six thousand
of them. They finally halted and slipped into their old works. Just
then, the New York Ninth Infantry, deployed as skirmishers advanced to
relieve us, making so much noise that they drew the enemy's fire and
several of the New York boys were killed. The rebels must have thought
the whole Yankee line was advancing, for they shelled the entire woods
severely. We lay as closely as possible, and when there was a lull
in the firing, we would fall back and thus gradually regained the
Regiment, and went to work at building breastworks. About 7 p. m., we
moved to our left, into an open field, where we threw up a new line
of works, making the eighteenth that we had started in this campaign.
There was a terrible battle in progress at our left, lasting till 9 p.
m., the Sixth and Eighteenth Corps losing heavily."

Though no part of the experience of the Fifth Corps, it is quite in
place to state that the battle which was heard at the Union left
was that of the Sixth and Eighteenth Corps in the beginning of the
sanguinary contest which was to rage along the lines of blue and gray
for almost two weeks and which, in these, the opening hours, marked the
attempt of the above named bodies to dislodge the Confederate divisions
of Hoke, Kershaw, Pickett and Field, reading from rebel right to left,
resulting in partial success but at the cost of between two and three
thousand men on our side. During the night of the 1st Hancock and his
Second Corps were withdrawn from the Union right, and by dint of a
very trying march were found at the extreme Union left in the morning
of the 2d of June, yet not in time for the early charge which had been
ordered for that day. The several corps are now in order from left to
right, Second, Sixth, Eighteenth, Fifth and Ninth, with a considerable
gap between the Eighteenth and Fifth, covered by a picket line only.
Captain Porter of the Thirty-ninth, in a paper read in 1881 before the
Military Historical Society of Massachusetts, refers to this hiatus
as an "interval over a most desolate piece of country, woody, rocky,
and quite hilly." The great 3rd of June charge, that to which Grant
in his Memoirs refers, saying, "I have always regretted that the last
assault at Cold Harbor was ever made," this bloody scene, also, was at
the Union left, the brunt being borne by the Second Corps, and in less
degree only by the men of the Sixth and Eighteenth Corps. Of the Fifth
Corps, Porter says, "Warren, who occupied a front of nearly four miles,
was altogether too much extended to allow of his having any available
force to assault with, and he was content with carrying the enemy's
skirmish line on his front." The Ninth Corps attacked the foe with some
success, pushing its lines well to the right of the enemy's left.

[Sidenote: JUNE 3, '64]

At noon of the 3rd, owing to the opinion of the several corps
commanders that further assaults would prove futile, General Grant
issued an order to the effect that there should be a suspension of
assaults until further notice. Then followed many days of digging,
applied to parallels and approaches and the making of reconnoisances,
thus keeping the enemy in a state of apprehension, lest he should
detach a portion of his forces to assist in the effort to head off
General Hunter in the Shenandoah Valley. General Warren's account of
the period gives very little of interest save that on the 4th, owing
to the withdrawal of the enemy from the front of the Ninth Corps, the
latter was moved around the Fifth to the space between the Fifth and
the Eighteenth Corps. On the 5th Warren made a reconnoisance on Shady
Grove road, and in the night withdrew to the rear, and was on the road
all night. The 6th he devoted to "putting things in order"; the 7th,
he sent Griffin's and Cutler's divisions to picket the Chickahominy,
and held Ayers and Crawford to support Burnside; 8th, 9th and 10th,
remained in camp; 11th, with all his corps, except Griffin and Cutler,
to Moody's, south of railroad, preparatory to further movement; 12th,
Generals Grant and Meade reached his headquarters at 5.30 p. m. Corps
started at 6 p. m. Reached vicinity of Long Bridge before midnight.

The notes made at the time by men of the Thirty-ninth consist largely
of statements of moving to the right or left and of coming back to
positions formerly occupied; of picketing and of sundry incidents, some
of which are appended, though, in the fighting for which the period
has such a bloody record, the Thirty-ninth bore a very small part,
yet it played its assigned role well, at no time failing to do with
alacrity whatever duty came in its way. While not actively engaged in
the assault of the 3rd, as stated above, the men were all on the alert
and anxiously expectant. On the 2nd General Lockwood, who had commanded
the reorganized Second Division a few days, was relieved and ordered
to Baltimore, there to await further orders. His methods were not to
the liking of General Warren. The general trend of the army was towards
the left, and in two installments the Corps marched on the 5th several
miles, fetching up at midnight at Cold Harbor, near the fighting points
of the 1st and 3rd days of the month, camping in the rear of the Second
Corps. Here follow three days of relative peace and quiet, in which
rations are drawn, cooked and consumed with relish and dispatch. "The
quietest time since the 3rd of May" is the record of one observer, and
another says, "It seems nice to be free from firing all the while,
though the bugles keep us in touch with camp life." Baggage wagons get
up on the 6th and officers, after picking out their valises are able
to enjoy a change of linen and, on this day, is promulgated the order
that our old brigade relations are changed and the whole organization
is transferred to the Second Brigade of the Third Division, the latter
being under the command of General S. W. Crawford while Colonel Lyle
remains at the head of the Brigade. The day also marks a slicking up
time, the camp being policed and the quartermaster deals out much
needed wearing apparel. Our camp is not far from the headquarters of
General Warren. Our change to the Third Division also changes the hue
of our corps badge, the maltese cross, from white to blue.

On the 7th, B. H. Dow, the only man wounded at Mine Run, returns to
his "C" Company. That an unusual degree of quiet prevailed in these
days appears when, on the 9th, the wagons brought up a desk for the
adjutant, the bands begin to play again, drilling is resumed and the
Second Brigade has a dress parade, but the event of all which pleased
the Thirty-ninth most was the return of Lieutenant Colonel Peirson, who
had been absent after his wounding at Laurel Hill. One of the boys thus
entered the incident in his diary: "We cheered him heartily; a brave
man commands the respect of all; his patriotism cannot be questioned,
when he has the privilege of a furlough of thirty days, but instead of
taking it comes back to his Regiment."

In Charles E. Davis's history of the Thirteenth Massachusetts Infantry,
we may read an excellent statement of the soldiers' feelings toward
General Grant:--

 "No matter what happened, we moved forward. No backward steps were
 taken--an experience to which the Army of the Potomac, hitherto, had
 been unused. The consequence was that the "Old Man," as General Grant
 was called, was always greeted with genuine enthusiasm, though he
 didn't seem to care very much for it. In his old blouse and hat he
 appeared like the rest of us,--ragged and dirty. Once when we passed
 him, he sat on a platform car, gnawing away on an old ham bone. As
 the boys cheered him, he gave the bone a flourish for a second,
 and then went on gnawing it as though we were miles away. It was
 wonderful how thoroughly this retiring, undemonstrative man had gained
 the confidence of the army. In spite of the hard work we had been
 having, the men were in good spirits, pleased that at last we were
 accomplishing something."

[Sidenote: JUNE 7, '64]

The 7th marks the departure from the corps of the Eighty-third New
York, Ninth Militia of the Second Brigade, its terms of enlistment
having expired, and it is to offset the going home of regiments,
through reaching their end of service, that great numbers of recruits
are coming in constantly. In the case of the Eighty-third, so severe
has been its losses, it takes away only one hundred and fifty men. The
ninth day gives the men a new exhibition, that of a correspondent of
the Philadelphia Inquirer being escorted through the army by a Provost
Marshal's guard, bearing on his back, a board labelled, "Libeller of
the Press," on account of certain libellous letters he had written to
his paper. However sad the man may have been, through his punishment,
his plight affords the observers a deal of amusement. During these days
mails arrive and depart and, after the complete rest of a few days,
to the survivors of the May experience, life really seems to be worth
living. With the 11th is associated the memory of reveille at four
o'clock, breakfast at six, and then a march which takes us across the
York and Richmond Railroad at about 11 a. m. and a mile or so south
of it we halt for dinner. The march ends near Bottom's Bridge on the
Chickahominy River, camps being pitched on the very ground occupied by
McClellan's troops two years before. The 12th is Sunday and so long
has been the interval since religious services were held, some men are
glad of the chance to hear a Christian Commission man preach; and the
Thirty-ninth is inspected by Colonel Lyle, brigade commander. At 7 p.
m. the line of march is once more taken up and we proceed some miles
towards the east, halting at eleven o'clock for a rest and supper.




TOWARDS THE JAMES RIVER


The veteran soldiers who are participating in this southward movement,
though they may not know the details that are in the minds of Grant
and Meade, are well aware that the grand purpose announced in the
Wilderness is still being developed and, that the "summer-long line" is
that which they are following. The Lieutenant General, having found
the way too effectually blocked via Cold Harbor as early as the 5th of
June, when Warren's men were withdrawn and sent towards the left of the
Union line, had determined to change his base of operations and, after
crossing the James, to lay siege to Petersburg, and thus to capture the
Capital of the Confederacy. The pause of the Fifth Corps for several
days had given the men the necessary rest and recuperation for the
lead they were to take in the new flank movement and now, just before
midnight of the 12th of June, they are awaiting the completion of a
pontoon bridge over which they may pass to the south side and so hold
the way open for the other troops to follow. General Warren refers to
the locality as Long Bridge, but the map which accompanies Humphreys'
"Campaign of '64 and '65" has it as "Long's Bridge," but in either
case, whether called for its length or some family resident near, the
structure had disappeared through the ravages of war, and a temporary
bridge becomes a necessity.

The Journal of the Fifth Corps Commander for this 13th of June has the
following entry:--

 "Our cavalry drove back the enemy's to New Market Cross Roads.
 Crawford's (Third) Division went to White Oak Swamp bridge to cover
 passage of trains and Second Corps. At 8 a. m. began to withdraw,
 bothered by McIntosh's (union) cavalry brigade, and only got as far as
 St. Mary's Church, though traveling nearly all night. Enemy did not
 follow."

Lieut. John H. Dusseault says:--

[Sidenote: JUNE 13, '64]

 "On June 13, we resumed our march at 1 a. m., and crossed the
 Chickahominy near Long Bridge, on pontoons, just before daylight.
 There was some slight skirmishing. At 6 a. m., we marched for two
 hours, covering about two miles only, and formed in line of battle.
 We were now in White Oak Swamp, between the James River and the
 Chickahominy, and the skirmishing was lively. We were marching on a
 straight road and we could see a fort nearly a mile in front of us.
 They opened upon us from the fort, and the first shell struck the
 road before it reached our column. The men opened to the right and
 left, and the shell ricocheted down between them. We then left the
 road and went into the fields and woods. If I remember correctly we
 went to the left of the road. Our Brigade advanced some ways in the
 direction of Richmond, which was perhaps seven or eight miles away,
 the balance of the division remaining in the rear as a support. We did
 some light skirmishing during the afternoon, and the enemy charged
 some dismounted cavalry, who were located upon our right, and drove
 them back some distance. Shortly after dark, somewhere between 8 and 9
 p. m., all of the officers of the brigade were ordered up to Colonel
 Lyle's (the Brigade's) headquarters. The Colonel told us of the
 position which we were in, stating that we were nearly surrounded, and
 that an attempt would be made at about midnight to get out. He also
 told us to tell our men of our position, also that no orders above a
 whisper should be given, and, that if we heard so much as a tin dipper
 jingling upon a man's haversack, to cut it off. We were told to get
 what rest we could between then and midnight. At about midnight the
 line fell in, seemingly without orders, faced to the left, and marched
 through a field where some tall grain was growing, and the men,
 knowing our position and being anxious to get out, kept increasing
 their pace and rattling the grain, so that it was necessary to halt
 them and to start them again from time to time until we had cleared
 the grain field. The night was very dark and the darkness favored our
 escape. We started again at Charles City Court House, not far from
 the James. At this time the Second Corps was crossing the James. We
 then found that while we were making this demonstration toward the
 enemy and occupying their attention, Grant had been moving the chief
 part of the army across the peninsular, toward the James River, and
 Petersburg. In fact, when we arrived, the Ninth Corps had crossed
 and the Second Corps was crossing the James. We crossed the James on
 the 16th, on the transport General Howard and were landed upon the
 Petersburg side at 9 a. m. I was told by another officer that it was
 understood that it was necessary that some small portion of the army
 should make this demonstration and occupy the attention of the enemy
 while the chief part of it should be crossing to the Petersburg side
 of the James and it was thought to be our turn to take the risk which
 attended it. General Warren is said to have remarked that he never
 expected to see us again."

After dark, we were withdrawn and started on a march which involved
the taking of a wrong road and the consequent loss of valuable time,
passing St. Mary's Church and just before daybreak of the 14th halted
on the road to Charles City Court House. Starting again at six, by ten
o'clock we were near the place named for that unfortunate British King
who lost both crown and head, the place showing plainly the effect of
McClellan's presence two years before. Were it not for the Court House
itself, a one-storied edifice with a porch, and a blacksmith shop the
place would be scarcely more than a name, but some one remarks, "We
must be getting somewhere for I can hear the steamers whistle on the
James River." Had we been supplied with rations our pleasure at the
prospect and the rest would have been greater, but our haversacks were
quite empty. However, we could go to sleep, which we proceeded to do at
the early hour of eight o'clock.

[Sidenote: JUNE 16, '64]

The 15th was not eventful save as it brought the long expected
wagon train and rations galore. There was a complete filling of all
receptacles with the necessities of army life, and after stuffing
ourselves with hardtack and the other good things that those wagons
carried we were in a mood to enjoy ourselves, though we couldn't help
wishing that the mail would come, bringing news from the far-away
homes in the North. With a sort of forewarning that exactions would
be made upon our vigor and strength on the morrow, again we turned in
early. Sure enough we were turned out at two o'clock in the morning of
the 16th for a march of three miles to Wilcox's Wharf on the banks of
the James and the sight of the glorious river and the banks, in many
cases, crowned with the mansions of aristocratic Virginians. The entire
country, robed in the brightest of green, was one to make an indelible
impression on the memory. The Thirty-ninth crossed the river on the
transports, "General Howard," "George Weems" and possibly others,
and by 9 a. m. we were all on the southern side. Here we found the
Seventh Massachusetts, an Old Colony regiment, just taking boat for
home. A splendid fighting body of men, they had earned the long rest
that was coming to them. The pause, when over the river, afforded an
opportunity for a plunge into the waters of the classic James, a chance
that thousands of the men embraced, the very first one since crossing
the Rapidan, and many declared that in all their army experience they
had found no place equal to it, certainly none that they enjoyed more.

Concerning this movement to the south of the James, a dispatch was sent
from army headquarters to Washington as follows:--

 "Our forces withdrew from within fifty yards of the enemy's
 entrenchments at Cold Harbor, made a flank movement of about
 fifty-five miles march, crossing the Chickahominy and James Rivers,
 the latter two thousand feet wide and eighty-four feet deep at the
 point of crossing, and surprised the enemy's rear at Petersburg."




PETERSBURG


The long-continued battle of Petersburg had already begun before
we were in battle line. General Butler, on the other side of the
Appomattox, on this Thursday morning through General Terry, had
assaulted Port Walthall with the intention of interrupting the coming
of rebel re-inforcements on the Richmond & Petersburg Railroad and, the
night before, troops of the Eighteenth Corps, which had been with us
at Cold Harbor, had attacked south of the river, and had there been a
supporting force at hand, the second as well as the first line of works
might have been carried. As troops of the Second Corps came up they
were sent against the works and, during the night and the following
day, the 16th, the contest continued along the line composed of the
Eighteenth Corps on the right, the Second in the centre and the Ninth
on the left. All this while we of the Fifth Corps were sporting in the
waters of the James. Meanwhile other portions of the Fifth Corps had
gone forward, and at four o'clock in the afternoon the Thirty-ninth
with its neighbors started on the road to Petersburg. After covering
some ten miles of the way, we halted at 10.30 p. m. for food and rest,
the route having been over hills and through swamps, difficult at the
best, all the more so at night.

It was early in the morning of the 17th when the march was resumed,
and at 9 a. m. we halted in the rear of breastworks, our entire route
having been enlivened by the sound of firing, more or less vigorous,
indicating a resumption of the days at Spottsylvania and Cold Harbor.
Moreover, Massachusetts men do not forget that it is the 17th of June,
and noise they had grown to think a regular accompaniment of that
illustrious date. We are at the Union left and massed in the rear
of the Ninth Corps, under Burnside, and the duty of our Corps is to
act as a support of the Ninth if needed. We are about two miles from
Petersburg and from many points the city is plainly seen. The cupola
of Dinwiddie County Court House will be a target for Union artillery
during many coming months. Lying in the breastworks through the day and
night, we were exposed to the missiles of the enemy; Lieut Wyman of
"H" and Captain Willard Kinsley of "K" as well as others were wounded.
Unless he could sleep in the direst confusion there was no closing of
the eyelids during this first night in front of Petersburg. In this
memorable siege, the 18th of June is a notable date, for then there
was concerted action along the entire line, though not in such uniform
time and order as General Meade desired. It was a bloody day in which
a vigorous effort was made to force the rebel lines before the arrival
of help from the Northward. This might have been done earlier in the
day, but, before the advance could be made, re-inforcements had arrived
to nearly, if not quite, equal the number of the Union soldiers, and
General Meade's orders were to hold what had been gained and to fortify
immediately. The casualties of the four days, 15th-18th, footed up
nearly two thousand killed and more than eight thousand wounded, the
charges of this 18th day ending assaults on intrenched positions. The
work of the Fifth Corps is thus described by a war correspondent:

[Sidenote: JUNE 18, '64]

 "On the left of the Ninth was the Fifth Corps, in the following order
 of divisions: from right to left--Crawford (3), Griffin (1), Cutler
 (4), Ayers (2). At early morning the advance was made and the enemy's
 withdrawal discovered. The Corps then prepared for a new advance,
 meanwhile keeping up a fierce fire of infantry and artillery. At noon,
 simultaneously with the attack of the Second Corps, a determined and
 vigorous advance was made. The ground to be crossed was generally open
 and cultivated, slightly rolling, and here and there artificially
 prepared with abatis, as well as naturally defended by undergrowth.
 The advance was against the south side of the Norfolk Railroad, and
 was partially, but not fully successful. In the evening again, at
 the time of Mott's attack in the centre (when the First Maine Heavy
 Artillery was so badly cut up) Griffin's and Cutler's divisions once
 more assaulted with great vigor. But here as before the labor was
 lost. The enemy foiled all our desperate endeavors."

The advance of the First Brigade, Third Division, is made at daybreak
and we find the enemy missing. We are passing over surface which was
fighting ground yesterday and last night; encountering the dead in
both blue and gray, a most gruesome sight, at the same time driving
back the rebel skirmishers until we come in sight of the Confederate
earthworks, when we halt and throw up works for our own protection.
Even danger and death can not wipe out human or, at least, boyish
nature. Near the brief halting place are mulberry trees, fairly black
with luscious, well ripened fruit, and not even rebel riflemen can
keep Yankee berry-pickers out of those tempting branches. We soon
advance, however, across a field and towards a railroad-cut some
distance ahead of us, and to reach it we have to run the risk of the
foe's rifles and cannon, snugly entrenched beyond the cut. We make
a rush for this cut and the tumbles that some of the men take in
entering it are funny even in battle's din. Colonel Davis's well known
avoirdupois gained such momentum in the rapid rush that halting on the
brink was quite impossible, and he rolled rapidly down the declivity.
There is skirmishing all day and an artillery duel in the afternoon.
Just at dark, a rapid movement is made across a ravine and orders are
quietly passed that when the Colonel's hat is raised on the point
of his sword, we are to rush forward to the edge of a bank, so near
and yet so far below the rebel works that they cannot depress their
cannon sufficiently to hit us. Officers are summoned later to brigade
headquarters where they are informed that there will be a night attack,
but, for some reason, changes come in the programme and in a new
position we again throw up breastworks. In an exposed condition, we lie
in them through the night and are saluted in the morning of Sunday, the
19th, by the enemy's fire at closer range.

[Sidenote: JUNE 19, '64]

The 19th falls on Sunday, though the particular day of the week
gives these soldiers very little concern, since each successive
twenty-four-hours is only one day more of "smoke and roar and
powder-stench" and of this particular interval, General Warren has
only the words, "Remained in position. Loss about three hundred." If
remaining in position brought such a record as this, what would it have
been had there been another effort to advance? The night before had
seen very vigorous work in the trenches and men tried to strengthen
them against possible attack, and so close were the workman to each
other and so emphatic their strokes, George A. Farrar of "E" was
wounded in the knee by a pickaxe and was obliged to go to the hospital.
Nothing in the world finds more ready and willing workers than the
throwing up of breastworks that may be used for defense and, under the
spur of hostile missiles, the laziest become most industrious. At such
times there are no suggestions that the other fellow ought to do it,
but everyone is doing something, if it is no more than loosening earth
with a bayonet or case-knife and throwing up the results with a cup
or tin-plate, hoping thus to stop a vagrant bullet. Continuous rattle
of musketry recalls the noise of the Wilderness and, with the evident
skill of the sharpshooters, it behooves everyone to lie low. Writes
one poor fellow, somewhat discouraged, "When shall we get through
this terrible campaign?" Another says, "The Thirty-ninth is about five
hundred yards (others put the distance as low as eighty yards) from
the Confederate works and our skirmishers are on a hillside, across a
ravine. At nightfall, we begin on the works again." This, doubtless,
is the point referred to by Captain Porter, years afterward, when at a
reunion of the Regiment, he said, "our skirmishers were among the first
to establish the line at what was afterward the Crater, blown up on the
30th of July, 1864, and that line was pushed nearest to the rebel line,
not excepting that of Fort Stedman and Fort McGilvery, by twenty yards."

Of the 20th, an officer records, "We worked till two o'clock last
night, and turned out at four this morning. The rebel sharpshooters
are on the lookout for a man careless enough to show himself. I am
twenty-four years old to-day." Another scribe in the same company
enters these words, "Wish I were at home to-day for it is our boy's
birthday," so closely does the absent soldier keep in heart and mind
to the loved ones at the hearthstone. While there is a trend towards
the west, General Griffin's Division (First) reaching the Jerusalem
plank-road and the Second Corps crossing it, our portion of the Fifth
Corps, except as a part of the Brigade moves off to the left to help
fill the gap made by the withdrawal of Griffin, remains as before. The
21st varies little from yesterday, men keeping pretty closely to their
places, the least exposure bringing attention from the enemy, and men
are wounded in spite of all care to the contrary. One of Burnside's
colored regiments is digging a traverse out to the picket line. Extreme
vigilance continues into the night, through fear of an assault by the
enemy, and at about 9 p. m., the most of the Regiment goes on picket.
Picket duty on the 22nd requires vigilance, "Yank" and "Reb" exchange
compliments whenever opportunity offers and Jonas P. Barden, Company
A, is killed. Quite late in the evening, the Regiment is relieved and
retires to its former location, the same being not remote from the
spot which in a few weeks would be known as the "Crater," and somewhat
further to the Union left, opposite prominencies will be called Forts
Sedgwick and Mahone, or in army parlance, Forts "Hell and Damnation."
It is on this day that the Second Corps suffers one of the severest set
backs in its entire history, the enemy succeeding in getting at its
left flank, in a manner unprecedented, and in carrying off four cannon
and more than two thousand prisoners.

[Sidenote: JUNE 24, '64]

Everyone is learning caution, but there are mortalities still, as with
S. B. Harris of "H" who is hit in the head and killed on the 23rd. It
is fair to suppose that Union sharpshooters are just as vigilant as
their opponents, and that Death visits, with no show of partiality,
both blue and gray. As the stay in these advanced trenches has not
savored at all of rest, any change seems desirable, hence orders to
move early in the morning of the 24th are heard with pleasure and,
before daylight, we are off to the left to take the places of Second
Corps men who had gone still further to the left, while the Ninth
Corps moves into our vacated places. One very careful observer states
that we lost our way and had to back and fill, as it were, at one time
coming near running into the enemy, who kept up an almost constant
shelling during the change. There seems to be less activity among the
sharpshooters, for which the soldiers are duly grateful. To-day the
original members of the Twelfth Massachusetts, the Fletcher Webster
Regiment, long in the Second Brigade of our Division, draw out of line
and start for home. The recruits, re-enlisted and drafted men of the
Twelfth are to become a part of the Thirty-ninth. The coming into our
ranks of one hundred and twenty-five men from the returning Twelfth,
is the crowning incident of the 25th. One hundred and six more men are
nominally transferred, but they are absent on sick leave, in rebel
prisons or elsewhere, and those received to-day, represent about all
the real additions to come from our friends who, after three years of
arduous labor, are homeward bound. The new position of the Regiment is
across the Petersburg & Norfolk Railroad and the depleted condition
of the 39th, following the campaign, is evident from the fact that
eighteen of the men from the Twelfth Regiment, added to those left in
Company C of the Thirty-ninth, called for just forty three rations in
the entire company.

It was not lack of excitement which prompted a certain Company A man
to a prank which afforded him and his comrades a deal of pleasure,
rather was it a desire for something out of the ordinary that, in
the midst of this, the severest campaign in the progress of the war,
suggested to him a variation. Taking pencil and paper, he wrote, "I
should be happy to correspond with any young lady so disposed; address
G. W. Cheney, Company A, 39th Regt., M. V. M., Second Brigade, Third
Division, Fifth Army Corps, Army of the Potomac." Thinking the idea
too good to be kept secret, he read it to the boys around the campfire
who were delighted with the plan and he had to write another, couched
thus, "I would be pleased to correspond with young ladies, 18 to 22,
with view to matrimony." Both of the ads were sent to the Boston Herald
and the writer thinks they were the first of the kind ever inserted
there. Two weeks later, or after the ads had had time to circulate,
the mail brought one hundred and six answers, representing every state
then in the Union; long letters, short and pithy ones, some perfumed
and embossed; no end of good advice, love, kisses, merry, sporting
fun and blessings; it was understood that the Colonel's good wife
was quite horrified at seeing the ad and there must have been some
uxorious advice to Colonel Davis since, though the next mail had over
two hundred letters for the advertisers, they were all destroyed on
the pretext that there were no such persons in the Regiment as those
addressed. This however did not prevent the enterprising young men
doing extensive corresponding over their own names.

The 26th is a quiet day; the 27th has its alarms with prompt response
but no attack. Long desired rain fell along towards night, but not
enough to satisfy the overheated men and the thirsty earth; so near are
pickets of the opposing armies, they could readily converse without
raising their voices, but they have not, as yet, reached that degree
of familiarity. The 28th, Tuesday, marks a change in the situation in
that we move to the front and right and proceed to throw up a line of
earthworks, stronger than those already in use with the expectation of
thereby affording shelter for suddenly attacked pickets and to better
resist any assault of the enemy. The month of June ends with the Corps
stretched along the Petersburg line, with the Ninth and Eighteenth at
the right and the Second and the Sixth at its left. By seeming common
consent, pickets cease firing, though the heavy guns thunder away;
evidently both Johnnie and Yankee would like a rest; after extremely
hard work, the regimental rolls are got into shape for muster which is
had on the 30th; another sign of semi-permanency is the coming up of
some of the sutlers who are anxious to resume operations, especially in
view of the possible coming of the paymaster. It is in these days that
the 1st Massachusetts Heavy Artillery, Second Corps, which received so
severe a handling at Harris's Farm, May 19th, yet most manfully held
its place, is once more encountered and the ravages of war were never
more apparent than in the fact that only three hundred are reported
present for duty out of eighteen hundred men who left the defenses in
the month of May.

[Sidenote: JULY, '64]

The first third of July, as far as the Thirty-ninth is concerned, is
quite uneventful. The comparative quiet that the men are experiencing
has become a necessity. The persistent bending of the bow, beginning
at the Wilderness, is bringing expected results. The fire of conscious
strength, so evident in the earlier encounters of the campaign, is
nearly burned out and recent trials of courage and endurance have shown
and, future struggles will exhibit, a lacking of that enthusiasm
which characterized the early days of May. Human bodies cannot endure
everything, their limitations are sooner or later determined and
such is the case with these survivors of the terrible exactions so
continuously made. General F. A. Walker says, "Men died of flesh wounds
which, at another time, would merely have afforded a welcome excuse
for a thirty days' sickness leave. The limit of human endurance had
been reached." General Grant, in his Memoirs, writes of the situation
after the assault on the 18th of June, "I now ordered the troops to be
put under cover, and allowed some of the rest which they had so long
needed." It is a protraction of this rest that our men are getting
in earlier July. From the 1st to the 10th of the month, the diary of
General Warren has no entry of greater importance than reference to the
building of a redoubt or the development of some plan on paper and,
though constant vigilance is evident, there are none of the exposure
and tests characteristic of the Wilderness and Spottsylvania.

To supplement the somewhat stilted rations furnished by the commissary
department, the sanitary commission is sending in a variety of
vegetables, fresh and dried, as well as fruits that are most gratefully
received by the men and they are working a great improvement in
general health. In our Regiment, appearances begin to resemble those
of winter quarters since roll calls, three times a day, are in order,
falling-in with guns and equipments. Ground is cleared for inspection
and those formal ordeals are had as of old, and guns have to be cleaned
up accordingly; prayer-meetings also are resumed. The 4th, usually
so noisy at home, is just the reverse in our particular locality,
though away off to the right, Butler and Smith fire salutes. In the
Fifth Corps, the impression apparently is that we have had noise
enough of late. In the evening, the pickets on both sides celebrate a
bit with cheers, perhaps in behalf of ancestors who, both North and
South, fought for a common cause. The weather continues very hot and
mutual forbearance permits the men to stretch their tents as awnings
back of the earthworks into which they are ready to tumble instantly,
should occasion arise. Heavy details are made of men for labor on a
new fort in process of erection to the southwest of our position, to
be called, at first, Fort Warren, but later to take the name of our
Colonel who, all unconscious of the fact, is rapidly approaching the
day of his departure. On the 7th of July the Third Division of the
Sixth Corps is detached and, by way of the James and Chesapeake Bay, is
sent to Baltimore to head off near Frederick, Maryland, the movement
of General Early and his men on Washington. This Confederate officer
had been ordered to leave the vicinity of Cold Harbor on the 13th of
June, and to proceed towards the Shenandoah Valley for the purpose of
making trouble for General David Hunter, who had been operating in that
section, Lee evidently thinking that his lessened battle front could
afford the withdrawal. A considerable battle followed on the 9th, at
Monocacy Junction, where Lew Wallace with a force made up of local
militia and certain Ohio one hundred days' men and the Third Division
of the Sixth Corps, was able to hold the Confederates long enough to
permit the arrival in Washington of the remaining two divisions of
the Sixth, the same leaving City Point the night of the 9th, and to
successfully repel the rebel assault upon Fort Stevens on the 12th.
Considerable effort was necessary to persuade General Grant that any
portion of the Confederate army was missing from his front, luckily
he was convinced in time to send a sufficient force to Washington to
destroy all of Early's expectations.

[Sidenote: JULY 11, '64]

The comparative calm of the first third of July was rudely broken on
the 11th. The day had begun much as usual and, from five o'clock in the
morning till five-thirty in the afternoon, there was the regular round
of camp and other duties when, for some unexplained reason, the enemy
began a fierce fire of artillery on our rations-train. As hitherto,
nearly all of the shells exploded way back of our lines but one, and a
man states distinctly in his diary, "the only one," struck close beside
Colonel Davis and, exploding, wounded him so severely that he died
very soon afterward, 7 p. m. Private Mentzer of "A," long years later,
recalls the sad happening thus: "Streets, tents, stockades, properly
aligned; camps, graded and drained; constant discipline, inspections,
dress parades, deportment, all better than those of any other regiment
I ever saw, tell me that Colonel Davis did his work thoroughly and
well. He sat on a rustic seat or bench, talking with a friend (Asst.
Surgeon of the Thirteenth), none other near, save a detail of pickets,
of whom I was one, just reported at headquarters, when a shell burst
and tore his body dreadfully, still he was the commander to the end."

Lieut. J. H. Dusseault, "H," describes the sad event thus:

 "The first shot fired, which we were wont to call the five o'clock
 express, hit a tree about fifty feet in front of our lines, cutting it
 off some forty feet from the ground; the rebels were really shelling
 our baggage train, some distance in the rear. Hitting the tree
 deflected the shell so that it passed downward through the canopy of
 leaves, arranged for shade above the officers' quarters, and burst
 under the Colonel, who was sitting cross-legged on a rustic seat
 with Assistant Surgeon L. W. Hixon of the Thirteenth Massachusetts.
 Both men were thrown down and the lower part of Colonel Davis' body
 seemed completely torn to pieces. My own quarters being not more than
 ten feet away, I was able to see the missile as it passed downward,
 after striking the tree. I helped pull the Colonel into his pit. His
 mind was clear and I heard him converse with Lieut. Colonel Peirson
 to the purport that he would be colonel now. To this Colonel Peirson
 replied, 'Oh no! You are going to get out of this.' The wounded
 officer, however, insisted that it was all over with him and he gave
 certain directions to the Lieut. Colonel saying that he would like to
 have him recommend Capt. F. R. Kinsley to be Lieut. Colonel and, his
 passion for details being strong even in death, he named a member of
 the drum-corps, who had overstayed his leave of absence and wanted him
 attended to when he returned. He requested also that a letter he had
 just written to his wife should be mailed and that the circumstances
 of his death should be added. Dr. Hixon, proclaiming himself also
 wounded, said he was unable to attend to the dying officer and it is
 possible that the surgeon of the First Massachusetts Heavy Artillery
 was called in to help dress the wound. After this he was placed on a
 stretcher and William S. Sumner of "H" was one of the men who carried
 him to the rear. As the enemy was shelling the road, they felt obliged
 to carry him through the woods and the way being very rough, the
 officer suffering terribly said to the bearers, 'Men, I wish you would
 take the road, I hate to ask you to do so, but this is terrible.'
 He died about the time the hospital was reached. A veteran of the
 Thirteenth Regiment claims to have a piece of the shell which killed
 Colonel Davis."

At this very time Colonel Davis was president of a court martial at the
headquarters of the Third Division and had been there earlier in the
day but, as the business in hand was not in proper shape, the court did
not convene and its president returned to his Regiment. Had it been
in progress, the chances are that our colonel would not have passed
out of life as he did. John S. Beck, "C," detailed as a clerk at the
court martial, writes thus: "I did not think it was the last time I
should ever see him.... I felt very badly about it, for he seemed like
a father to me. The boys felt blue enough. I think it will be hard to
fill his place. I turned in feeling very sad and downcast."[N]

[Sidenote: JULY 11, '64]

As with Tennyson's Brook, "Men may come and men may go," but the war
"goes on." The gallant officer, into whose care the dying colonel
committed the Regiment, was fully equal to the task. A member of
the famous Fourth Battalion, which served its period of volunteer
duty in Fort Warren at the breaking out of the war entirely without
compensation, he had been one of the first to volunteer in the
Twentieth Massachusetts where he was first lieutenant and adjutant and,
captured at Ball's Bluff, had experienced Richmond inhospitality. Then
as a staff officer, he had seen the fierce Peninsula campaign along
with Generals Dana and Sedgwick. An early selection of Governor Andrew,
he was made second to Colonel Davis in the raising of the Thirty-ninth
and we have grown pretty well acquainted with him during the preceding
months. As close to the enemy at Laurel Hill as he well could be, he
was severely wounded and he now takes his promotion with the good will
and thorough loyalty of every officer and man under his command. Major
Henry M. Tremlett who was still absent on detached service in Boston
becomes lieutenant colonel, and Captain F. R. Kinsley of the Somerville
Company, "E," succeeds Tremlett as major.

Were this history that of the entire war or even that of the Army of
the Potomac, the story of the remaining days of July would occupy very
little space, for the siege of Petersburg, actually beginning on the
15th of June, is to continue until the 2nd of April, '65, and may be
characterized as an unbroken engagement of almost ten months' duration
with occasional extra emphasis laid on this or that point along the
battle line, many miles in extent. Away at the right is the Eighteenth
Corps, holding the space from the Appomattox to the Ninth Corps which
stretches out till its left joins the right of the Fifth, which in
turn touches the right of the Second; this corps since the withdrawal
of the Sixth for service in Maryland, in Washington and later in the
valley of the Shenandoah, has become the extreme Union left, with its
line refused towards the south, and west of the Jerusalem plank-road,
only a fraction of the distance to be covered before the winter's stay
is ended. Even now the enemy is making vigorous effort to defend the
several railroads which connect Petersburg with the south, feeling
certain that Grant and Meade will not long delay trying to cut off the
city from its Weldon Railroad connections and, until that time arrives,
there will be more digging than charging along the rival lines, though
the exchange of sulphurous compliments will be so constant that
cessation rather than continuance will arouse remark.

[Sidenote: JULY 13, '64]

General Warren, who has his command well in hand, has no conspicuous
statement for this period, and even some regimental historians pass
over the interval with only a few and scattering remarks. It will
be understood that the most diligent picket and camp duties are
maintained all of the time, and very few if any idle days come to
either commissioned officer or enlisted man from one week's end to
another. Never was there a better illustration of eternal vigilance
than that displayed by both sides in this long game of opposites;
hence in our progress it will be unnecessary to mention more than the
passing events, in the least out of the ordinary. Colonel Thomas F.
McCoy of the One hundred and Seventh Pennsylvania succeeds Colonel
Davis as president of the court martial, while the body of the deceased
officer, with his faithful steed and Chaplain French, starts July 12th
on its long journey homeward. Many a member of the Regiment felt, if
he did not so express himself, as did the writer who put these words
in his diary, "I can't realize that he has really gone and will not
be with us at the front again." Early in the morning of this day, the
Regiment is aroused and at 2.30 a. m. moves into the large fort or
redoubt, for some time in process of erection. Of this, General Warren
makes mention, saying that he spent the day here, planning and cutting
timber, etc. At daylight of the 13th, everyone goes to work with pick
or shovel in making defensible the new fort. Here we are to remain till
the middle of August. Named at first for the commander of the Fifth
Corps, it will soon take the name of our late colonel. Covering about
three acres of ground, it is capable of holding a brigade. Situated a
mile or more below Petersburg, it is on the Jerusalem plank-road and
the next fortification south of Sedgwick, the Fort "Hell" of rebel
parlance. Lieutenant Dusseault says, "In building our fort, we dug a
trench twenty feet wide and ten feet deep, and threw up the rampart
on the inside. Thus there were eighteen or twenty feet of banking. The
fort was made square with a diagonal through it. We had a magazine in
it, and two wells were dug for a water supply. Besides our Brigade
there was with us also the Ninth (Bigelow's) Battery, which had
suffered so severely at Gettysburg."

The routine of duty, including at least three hours' work daily on
the fortifications, continues to-day, and all day and all night, too,
for that matter, since the stronghold must be one in fact as well as
name, men being so detailed as to keep the dirt flying; a writer in
the story of the Thirteenth Massachusetts Infantry says it took eight
men to get one shovelful of dirt from the bottom of the ditch to the
top of the work, the men standing in little nitches cut in the side
of the bank and passing the earth from one to another. This day also
marks the transferral of recruits and re-enlisted men of the Thirteenth
Regiment, the time of this staunch companion on many a march and hard
fought field having expired and the original members being about to
withdraw for their joyful journey home, though the actual union of the
one hundred remaining men of the Thirteenth and the Thirty-ninth does
not take place till the 14th of July, the only noteworthy event of
the day, unless mention is made of the withdrawal of the Second Corps
from its western position and its encampment south of the Fifth Corps,
thus leaving the Fifth at the extreme Union left. On the Fifteenth the
camp ground is thoroughly policed and General Warren superintends the
laying out of a camp for the men and pitching our tents, regular living
seems probable for a time at least. It is related that, reviewing some
of the work as already laid out, General Warren, who had been Meade's
chief engineer, asked who had projected certain lines and, when a
division commander was named, he sharply remarked, "General ---- had
better stick to his pills," and seizing a shovel worked off some of his
indignation by making the dirt fly with his major general hands. The
Masonic Lodge held its first meeting for many a day and voted to pay
for the embalming of Colonel Davis' body, and the expenses incident to
sending it home, also appointing a committee to look after the families
of brother Masons killed in the campaign.

The passion or appetite for drink is well illustrated on the 17th
in Lieut. Dusseault's effort to properly distribute eight canteens
(twelve quarts) of whiskey among one hundred men, on police duty, the
ration being one gill for each one but, for fear that the quantity
might intoxicate them, he discreetly gave out one half a gill per
man, thus retaining four canteens for a subsequent occasion. When he
lay down at night he put the canteens under his head, but despite his
care the canteens were stolen with no clue to the thieves, save the
maudlin condition in which several men were found. There seemed to be
no risk that men would not take to secure that which was worse than
useless for them, an enemy to steal away their brains. Several days
of continued routine of police, picket, drill and other features of
camp life follow, but entirely agreeable after the exactions of May
and June. Thursday, the 21st, the enemy varied the monotony by making
an artillery demonstration against Fort Sedgwick, possibly lest its
occupants should forget its nick name, "Hell." The cordial relations
existing on picket are well illustrated by an incident related of the
period where a Union soldier, crawling out carefully to reach his
station, was more than surprised to hear in unmistakable Southern
speech, the words, "Say, you Yank don't belong thar'; that's we uns
place; you uns place's over thar," a bit of information that the
Yank did not hesitate to avail himself of. Deserters are in constant
evidence, all coming in ragged and hungry.

[Sidenote: JULY 21, '64]

It was at Fort Davis that Corporal Dow of Company C got one of his
first experiences on horseback. Captain Hutchins sent him to Colonel
Peirson, one morning, in answer to the latter's request for a messenger
to City Point. On the Colonel's telling Dow that he was to ride a
horse to City Point, ten miles away, the poor Corporal stood aghast and
avowed his utter ignorance of an equine, his vocation being that of
a ship carpenter, saying, "I can tell you all about a boat, Colonel,
but I know absolutely nothing about a horse." "Oh! That's nothing,"
replied the officer, "you can stick on and the horse you will ride is
like a rocking chair." The animal that Colonel Peirson named was an
exceedingly easy riding beast but, unfortunately, the same had been
appropriated by an officer and ridden off on a somewhat questionable
errand; to make a fuss about it would be to give the officer away, so
Dow submitted to the caprice of the man in charge of the stable and
went off mounted on the Adjutant's steed, notoriously the worst riding
brute in the entire equine outfit. John Gilpin's condition after his
ride to Ware and back was nothing compared to that of the Corporal when
he returned; as he expressed it, if he had ridden a rail the entire
twenty miles, with sledge hammers pounding the ends of the same, he
could not have been more jolted and galled than he was at the end
of his twenty miles. A whiskey ration was being distributed when he
reached camp, and Dow remarked that he needed extensive application,
both within and without. "I guess I've killed your horse or he has
me," he remarked to the Adjutant as, walking very wide, he passed that
officer. "I hope you have," said the officer, "for then I can get a
better one." The steed really did die from the trip, and when the
Colonel called for Dow again, luckily for him, the easy going beast was
ready.

[Sidenote: JULY 29, '64]

Lest we should forget that we are in a state of war with our Southern
brethren, we are favored on the 24th and the 25th, late in the
afternoon, with certain iron compliments, the rebels even shelling the
picket line, a very unusual procedure, one shell entering the fort; as
many of their missiles fail to explode, we conclude that they must be
using a very poor grade of powder. The cannon opposite to us are manned
by the Washington Artillery, that crack New Orleans organization
whose batteries were found in all the great Confederate armies, east
and west. Towards the end of the month, a greater degree of activity
is apparent; the Second Corps moves out on the 26th and then returns
the next day; on this same 27th, loads of ammunition are bought up
and picket relations are less amicable than hitherto. We turn in July
29th, with orders to turn out at 2.30 the next morning; this we do on
the 30th and the Fifth Corps moves a half mile or so to our right into
trenches back of the Ninth, with the Second Corps similarly disposed at
our right. As yet we do not know what a large part of the country is
to learn soon, viz., that this 30th of July is to go down the annals
of time as the day of the "Crater." For weeks, under the direction of
Colonel Pleasants of the Forty-eighth Pennsylvania, his men have been
digging an underground way, in front of Burnside's advanced lines, to
a point beneath Elliott's or Pegrams' Salient, more than five hundred
feet distant. It was finished on the 23rd and in it were soon placed
8,000 lbs. of powder. To divert the attention of the enemy, lest he
might discover the undermining project, the Second Corps had been sent
across the James, to assist the troops already there in a demonstration
against Richmond, but when the mine was ready for exploding the corps
was hastily called back. Pages have been written of the event, of the
explosion, of the advance of troops, white and black, into the abyss
caused by the eruption and of their sorry fate beneath the concentrated
fire of the Confederates, under Mahone and his artillery, and the
unkind words that for many a year were uttered concerning Burnside
and his part in the well conceived though unfortunately consummated
project. Many of our Bay State regiments are in the Ninth Corps and
they perform with credit whatever duty falls to their lot. We are not
called upon for any part in the fight, though we have our share of
earache at the terrific explosion and the artillery firing afterwards.
July ends with the Fifth Corps back in the same position as that held
before the "Crater" episode, one of whose principal features was the
practical demonstration that negro troops are much like those of other
complexion and may be depended upon in an emergency.

Although August, 1864, is written deep in the hearts and memories of
members of the Thirty-ninth, up to and beyond the middle of the month
there is little to record except the regular round of camp life close
to the enemy's lines, and the rumors that are ever afloat where many
are assembled. The sending away of the Sixth Corps to the defense of
Washington and the inauguration of the Shenandoah Valley campaign
under Sheridan, whose only instructions, imparted to him by Grant at
Monocacy, in that meeting of August 6th, are "Go in," making matters
in the Petersburg Zone much more quiet than they would be otherwise.
A southside view of the situation is not amiss and the words of T. N.
Page, in his life of Lee, are appended:--

 "Jefferson Davis has declared that the remainder of the Petersburg
 campaign is 'too sad to be patiently considered.' Locked in his
 fortifications, with Richmond hung like a millstone about his neck,
 while the South was cut off piecemeal from possibility of contributing
 to his support, Lee, faithful to his trust, and obedient to the laws,
 put aside whatever personal views he might have held and continued
 to handle the situation with supreme skill. Before that army had
 succumbed it had added to Grant's casualty list, from the time he
 crossed the James, another sixty-odd thousand men, thus doubling the
 ghastly record of his losses.... Grant seems to be the one firm,
 clear-headed, practical man in all of the muddle of conflicting
 ambitions and confused orders. 'This man Grant grows on me,' Mr.
 Lincoln had said a year or two before--'He fights.' It was the one
 solution of the problem--to fight and keep on, no matter at what cost,
 till the other side should be exhausted. Grant recognized it and acted
 on it. Happily for the Union cause, Grant was the commanding general
 of all of the armies of the Union. Unhappily for the Confederate
 cause, Lee had not been given similar power. As dependent as was the
 South on his genius, the military command was still reserved in the
 hands of the civil authorities. He could not even appoint his chief of
 staff."

Of the period between the Mine and the month of March, 1865, General
Humphreys, in his story of the campaign, remarks on the movements of
the Army of the Potomac and that of the James to the right and the
left, resulting in the extension of our line of entrenchment in both
directions, and causing a corresponding extension of the Confederate
entrenchments on our left, and their occupation in stronger force
of their entrenchments on the north bank of the James. Very likely
these blazing, hot August days would have been blazing with gunpowder
in the furthering of the investment of the Cockade City had not the
departure of the Sixth Corps compelled the temporary suspension of the
western project and a continuance of the strengthening of the works
already built. So far, however, as anything akin to comfort beneath
the midsummer sun, in the exposed earthworks was concerned, nothing of
the sort was possible. Only when the king of day hid his shining face,
during the hours of night, could the intensity of his heat be forgotten.

[Sidenote: AUG. 4, '64]

Still, time was passing, and every day marked the approach of the
wind-up, so long and so devoutly prayed for. Regimental note takers
were observing everything out of the ordinary, and Horton of "E"
remarks, August 1st on a visit to the scene of the explosion, July
30, saying, "It is opposite the old brick house, where we were before
coming here" and he also comments on the burial of the dead, while a
flag of truce is up. Another, writing on the 2d, says, "Walked along
the front of our Corps, everything is under ground, covered ways for
teams and troops to pass out if the enemy is near, showing a vast
amount of labor." Thursday, the 4th, was a Fast Day, appointed by
the President, which was observed in Fort Davis by a suspension of
fatigue duty and religious services at 6.30 conducted by the chaplains
of the Sixteenth Maine, the One hundred and Fourth New York and the
One Hundred and Seventh Pennsylvania. The day was not observed by
all organizations, and along the line of the Ninth Corps there was
considerable firing. The versatile accomplishments of Union soldiers
are indicated in that on the 5th of August a member of Company H,
suffering from toothache, sought out an ex-dentist in the One Hundred
and Seventh Pennsylvania and had his aching molars filled; and the
scarcity of proper material is also shown in that the substance, used
for filling, was just ordinary lead, but it did the business. Who would
suppose that, through all of the ups-and-downs of an exacting campaign
the instruments, essential to such work would have been, carried and
what a substitute for a dentist's chair, with its varied attachments,
must have been the end of a log or an empty cracker box!

Almost every day brings one or more deserters from the rebel ranks, men
who are convinced that the game is really lost and can see no pleasure
or profit in the "last ditch" idea. They are invariably hungry, ragged
and dirty. On the 9th, Fred. Glines of "E," a Somerville boy, visits
the hospital of the Ninth Corps and there meets Professor John P.
Marshall, a respected instructor in Tufts College, a most pleasant
meeting for both parties. He also records the blowing up of an ordnance
boat, lying at the wharf in City Point, receiving fixed ammunition.
The incident is an item in the history of the war, whereby there were
a great loss of life and destruction of property. All told, the value
of property destroyed mounted into the millions and the number of
lives lost was between sixty and seventy; one hundred and thirty were
wounded; some battles had a smaller record. At the time the explosion
was ascribed to the careless handling of the ammunition cases.[O]

In the night of the 10th-11th there was a little artillery play in the
direction of Fort Davis, but it proved to be harmless. The 12th marks
the second anniversary of the muster-in of Company E, the first one
in the Regiment. This day also saw a new movement of the Second Corps
across the James River, another blow to be struck at Deep Bottom, if
practicable. Evidently Generals Grant and Meade thought the quiet
period had lasted long enough, besides the Lieutenant General thought
that the rebels had sent off three of their divisions to reinforce
Early in the valley. The truth was that only Kershaw's had gone, and
all the others were right on the spot, ready to receive callers or
boarders, it was all the same thing, and the expedition was not as
productive of results as the projectors had desired.

[Sidenote: AUG. 13, '64]

One scribe, on the 13th, writes, "Got paid off," and elsewhere mention
is made of the proximity of sutlers who are ready to settle old scores
and also to sell for cash. Rumors of coming activity are current on
the 14th and the next day, Monday, the Brigade marched out of the fort
giving place to the First Division of the Ninth Corps, negro troops,
and going back about two miles, we pitch camp and are evidently in
reserve for some project. The heavens also are active and the long
delayed rain comes in torrents for two hours in the afternoon. The
troops which relieved us were the colored division of the Ninth Corps,
under General Edward Ferrero, and of their appearance as we marched
out, Beck of Company C remarks, "Who of the Thirty-ninth will ever
forget the appearance of the colored troops sent to relieve us, as they
lay about outside, half buried in yellow mud and water, as we filed out
of the fort on that rainy morning? They had been marching all night in
the darkness, rain and mud, and were so completely exhausted that sleep
to them was the one great necessity, position and bed being secondary.
We carefully stepped over their bodies and soon were beyond the sound
of their snoring." A heavy detail is made on the 16th for work on Fort
Sedgwick, but day work is impossible there on account of the nearness
of Fort Mahone, or "Damnation," whose sharpshooters are regularly
gunning for the "blues." The detail had hardly more than begun to work
at 10 p. m. when the command came to cease from labors and to report
to the Regiment at once. There the information is imparted that the
corps will move at 3 p. m. of the coming day. On this next day, the
17th, when in line awaiting the expected "Forward" there comes the
order to break ranks and encamp for the night. Concerning the movement
against the Weldon Railroad, whole volumes have been written. It was a
part of Grant's effort to cripple the resources of the rebel army that
was being hemmed in gradually by the Union forces. The necessity of
the move had been recognized from the first and it had been delayed,
as already stated, principally by the departure of Sheridan and the
Sixth Corps to the Shenandoah Valley. We have noted the activity of
Hancock and his Second Corps, north of the James, made in the hope that
it might cause the return of some of the Confederates who had gone to
Early's relief, thereby enabling Sheridan to strike a heavier blow in
his present command.

Incidentally, it seemed that troops had been withdrawn from the
rebel right to strengthen those fighting Hancock and others, at the
Confederate left, and Grant saw his opportunity to strike again for the
Weldon track, and this is what he says in his Memoirs:--

 "From our left, near the old line, it was about three miles to
 the Weldon Railroad. A division was ordered from the right of the
 Petersburg line to reinforce Warren, while a division was brought back
 from the north side of the James River to take its place. The road
 was very important to the enemy. The limits from which his supplies
 had been drawn were already very much contracted, and I knew that he
 must fight desperately to protect it. Warren carried the road though
 with heavy loss on both sides. He fortified his new position, and our
 trenches were then extended from the left of our main line to connect
 with his new one. Lee made repeated attempts to dislodge Warren's
 Corps, but without success and with heavy loss. As soon as Warren was
 fortified and reinforcement reached him, troops were sent south to
 destroy the bridges on the Weldon Railroad, and with such success that
 the enemy had to draw in wagons for a distance of about thirty miles
 all the supplies they thereafter got from that source. It was on the
 21st that Lee seemed to have given up the Weldon Railroad as having
 been lost to him; but along about the 24th or 25th he made renewed
 attempts to recapture it. Again he failed, and with very heavy losses
 to him as compared with ours. On the night of the 20th, our troops
 on the north side of the James were withdrawn, and Hancock and Gregg
 were sent south to destroy the Weldon Railroad. They were attacked on
 the 25th, at Reams Station, and after desperate fighting a part of
 our line gave way, losing five pieces of artillery. But the Weldon
 Railroad never went out of our possession from the 18th of August to
 the close of the war."

The foregoing extract from the memoirs of the Lieutenant General has
been made as an indication of his opinion of the magnitude of the work
of August 18th in the progress of the war. The Army and Navy Journal of
August 27th, after noting the extraordinary storm of the 15th, "Which
swept away many tents and sutler's booths and filled the trenches with
water" and the fierce cannonading on the 16th, also that of 1 a. m. of
the 18th, lasting for two hours, has this to offer concerning the event
which figures so largely in the annals of our Regiment:--

[Sidenote: AUG. 18, '64]

 "At four o'clock, on the morning of Thursday, the 18th, and shortly
 after the heavy cannonading ceased, the Fifth Corps started from its
 camp (which was rather in reserve) with four days' rations, towards
 the Weldon Railroad. It took some time to get across the ground
 formerly held by the Second and Sixth Corps. Then the column marched
 towards Ream's Station, driving in easily the enemy's skirmishers,
 of whom a part were captured. Between seven and eight o'clock, the
 advance arrived at Six Mile Station, and busily setting to work, a
 mile of the track was torn up and burned, and the rails destroyed in
 the usual manner. The skirmishing up to this time had been very light,
 the enemy having obviously withdrawn to his left, and the whole move
 being made with hardly a show of opposition. While the First Division
 was tearing up the track, the others passed on towards Petersburg and
 after advancing two or three miles, took position so as to repel an
 expected attack from the enemy. They did not have long to wait. About
 noon, Walker's Virginia and Davis' Mississippi brigades came hurrying
 down the railroad. Ayres' Second Division was stationed at this point;
 the Third and Fourth Divisions, at his right; and the First on his
 left. The battle opened very promptly on the arrival of the enemy with
 sharp artillery firing. The enemy, a part of Hill's Corps, then rushed
 in with great impetuosity, falling with most force upon Hayes', Lyle's
 and Cutler's brigades, and succeeding in flanking a portion of our
 force, including Lyle's First Brigade, Crawford's Third Division, the
 latter brigade being brought forward under a severe enfilading fire.
 For two hours the firing was very hot, and as it was an open fight the
 losses were heavy. The main battle lasted till about three o'clock;
 but the skirmishing and cannonading continued till night, when both
 forces went to entrenching, the possession of the railroad still being
 left to our troops. Our loss is still somewhat uncertain, but it is
 somewhere from five hundred to one thousand. The Second and Third
 Divisions suffered most and the Thirty-ninth Massachusetts and the
 Fifteenth New York Heavy Artillery lost heavily. The enemy claims to
 have captured eight officers and one hundred and fifty men from us in
 this fight. The enemy's loss in killed and wounded was probably nearly
 equal to ours, but he lost few prisoners.

 Headquarters at night were at the Six Mile House, so called from its
 distance from Petersburg. That night and all the next day our forces
 were busily engaged in strengthening our lines, and in endeavoring
 to connect the right of the new position with the left of our old
 line. But towards the evening of Friday the enemy came out in force
 and pushed in between the new entrenchment and the old ones, flanking
 the Fifth Corps and sweeping off about fifteen hundred prisoners. The
 Ninth Corps arriving on the field of battle, checked the enemy. Our
 loss was about three thousand men. Saturday was comparatively quiet,
 but on Sunday the enemy again furiously attacked us, and was repulsed
 with heavy loss. On Monday and Tuesday, there was occasional firing
 along the centre, but our lines were otherwise undisturbed. Our forces
 still hold the Weldon railroad, the capture and retention of which
 have cost a week of the hardest fighting of the campaign."

General Humphreys, in his "Virginia, Campaign of '64 and '65," has the
following version of the story that specially touches our Division and
Brigade:--

 "General A. P. Hill, with Davis' and Walker's brigades under General
 Heth, and Weisiger's, Colquitt's and Clingman's under General Mahone,
 with Lee's cavalry and Pegram's batteries, moved to the Vaughan
 Road intersection. Heth was to attack Ayers, while Mahone, familiar
 with the woods, was to move concealed by it some distance beyond
 Crawford's right, break through Bragg's skirmish line, and take Bragg
 and Crawford in rear. About half past four in the afternoon, General
 Mahone with his command formed in columns of fours, broke through
 Bragg's skirmish line, faced to the right, and swept rapidly down
 toward General Warren's right flank, taking all Crawford's skirmish
 line and part of his line of battle in rear. His skirmish line fell
 back in the greatest confusion, and in doing so, masked the fire of
 his line of battle, and forced it to fall back, together with a part
 of General Ayres' division. Heth at the same time opened on Ayres'
 centre and left. General Warren, reforming the parts of Ayers' and
 Crawford's divisions that were broken, brought them forward again and
 regained the ground temporarily lost, taking some prisoners and two
 flags. General Willcox was ordered up to attack; and White's division
 (Ninth Corps) was formed facing to the right, and engaging Colquitt's
 brigade drove it back, and captured some prisoners. Mahone's command
 fell back rapidly in great confusion to their intrenchments, carrying
 with them the parts of Warren's command disorganized by the attack on
 their rear in the woods, and a large portion of the pickets."

As an illustration of one man's appreciation of a great battle, of what
he sees, the following extract is taken from the journal of Lieutenant
Dusseault:--

[Sidenote: AUG. 18, '64]

 "We turned out at 3 a. m. This was the day of the 'Battle of Weldon
 Railroad,' sometimes called that of the 'Six Mile House' or the 'Globe
 Tavern,' also 'Yellow House.' We began our march at five o'clock
 towards the railroad, southwest and towards our left, a distance of
 five or six miles to the 'Six Mile House,' it being just that distance
 from Petersburg. Here we found the rebel pickets and drove them before
 us. General Crawford's Division (Third), to which our Regiment
 belonged, formed a line of battle on the right of the railroad, and
 General Ayers of our Second Division formed on the left of the road.
 General Griffin's First Division was in the rear, tearing up the
 tracks as we thus advanced towards Petersburg. We had proceeded about
 a mile and a half in dense woods, when Hill's Rebel Corps charged us.
 The 'Six Mile House' is now behind us, Ayers' Division gives way,
 letting the enemy in on our left flank. There is nothing for us to
 do but fall back or be captured. The rebel line in front of us is
 within forty feet. The order is given to fall back. All were lying
 down flat on the ground at the time, the enemy in the same position,
 but ready to shoot as fast as we stood up. Colonel C. L. Peirson was
 already badly wounded in the bowels by a minie ball. He was able to
 stand long enough to give the command and then he fell. Just as I
 rose, a bullet struck me in the right side, broke the eighth rib and
 entered the lower lobe of the lung. I was taken off the field, along
 with the Colonel, to the field hospital just back of us. Sergeant
 Bradshaw, afterwards second lieutenant, and Private Thomas, both of
 Company H, were leading me and while thus supporting me, the latter
 was shot in the wrist, in consequence of which, hesitating a moment,
 he was captured. For a time I occupied the next cot to the Colonel's.
 I heard the surgeon say that he could not live twenty-four hours. As I
 remember, he was placed outside in a tent by himself to die. Three or
 four hours later, when the surgeons looked in upon him they saw that
 he had revived somewhat, and he was taken to the division hospital.
 His life was long despaired of. Few men recovered from wounds of like
 character received during the Civil War. As Major Tremlett was still
 absent, the command devolved on Capt. F. R. Kingsley of Company E. Our
 side was beaten for a time but, after being driven about a quarter of
 a mile, the men reformed and held the foe."

Fred. Baker of Company H had joined the Regiment as a recruit in
February, 1864; he was on the skirmish line on August 18th, and, the
position being a pretty warm one, he had been digging a pit to get into
for cover. About the time that the hole had become large enough for him
to get into it, some rebel shot and killed him. He fell into the pit
and some of the others covered him with the earth which he had removed.
He had dug his own grave.

Dexter Gray of Company E, who had been a schoolmaster before the war,
was shot in the head; he was so paralyzed that he could neither speak
nor move. His comrades were preparing to bury him, thinking him dead.
He knew everything that was being done but he could make no sign to
them, neither could he help himself in the least. But just before
they were ready to bury him, he recovered sufficiently to make them
understand, and the burial was postponed for about twenty years.

Many years later, General Peirson, having been requested to give some
personal reminiscences to the Salem Evening News, under what he calls
his last battle, recites the story of his experience in the foregoing
18th of August. After some prefatory statements, the General proceeds:--

 "General Grant's movements in that campaign were successively to the
 left, and the order soon came for us to move to the left until we
 crossed the Weldon Railroad, which was about the last remaining feeder
 for the secession troops around Petersburg and Richmond. Arriving
 there we began tearing up the rails for half a mile to pile up the dry
 sleepers and put the iron rails on top of the cobpile and then firing
 the sleepers, the rails by the heat and their own weight were rendered
 worthless."[P]

[Sidenote: AUG. 18, '64]

 "Moving through small trees, we came upon the enemy, who immediately
 attacked. Our men were ordered to lie down, and to receive and return
 the fire from their position. The commander cannot avail himself of
 such protection, since the men are likely to be less homesick if they
 see him apparently indifferent. Notwithstanding these precautions,
 there were soon wounded men in plenty, the colonel being shot through
 the body, falling at once upon his knees from the shock. Just at that
 moment one of the lieutenants, Severand, from the left company of the
 Regiment came up and reported, 'Everything is swept away from the
 left.' He was ordered to go out to the left and investigate. He never
 returned. I went then to that company and sent out the captain to make
 the same investigation. He did not return. I then went out myself, and
 meeting a secession soldier, remarked with some force, 'Drop that
 gun and come in here.' He obeyed, not understanding that I had no
 strength to compel him, and I learned from him that his troops had got
 behind our left flank. This view was soon confirmed by the direction
 from which the bullets came. I then gave orders, something like this,
 'Fours, right about, forward on the left company, March' or words to
 that effect, and the situation was saved.

 "By that time, I was so much exhausted by the loss of blood that I was
 carried to the rear, where there was a field hospital. When I met the
 regimental surgeon who was my dear friend, I saw tears come into his
 previously cheerful face, and I then knew that something serious had
 happened. They gave me a little tent and some of the wounded officers
 came to bid me good-bye. The major general, commanding the division,
 hearing that one of his colonels had come to grief, sent an aide to
 inquire what could be done for my comfort. From him I obtained an
 ambulance. Our chaplain went with me, also a wounded soldier, who
 died on the way, and we started for City Point, where were the main
 hospitals of the army. In a few miles we came to a field hospital,
 where I hoped to be allowed to remain, but the surgeon declined, I
 thought brutally, to receive me, though I afterwards learned that
 any other course would have been fatal to me. So we proceeded on our
 long journey. Arriving at the splendidly equipped hospitals at City
 Point, my wound was examined, the ball probed for, and found, and by
 an operation extracted. Inflammation had by this time set in, and I
 remained in a very dangerous state for many days.

 "While I thus lay on my cot, the hospital was visited by some well
 meaning but clumsy Christians, whose mission it was to supply the
 patients with testaments and tracts. They, seeing me, stopped to urge
 me, since I was so soon to meet my Creator, to turn from my evil ways
 while there was yet time, and to read the instructive words with which
 they burdened my couch. One of my friends afterwards said, though I
 cannot vouch for the truth of the story, that I had only strength
 enough to reply, 'Go to blazes.' However, I grew better slowly, was
 sent North on a stretcher, and put to bed in Barton Square, where my
 dear mother nursed me back to life. Some months after, when the war
 had closed, I went into business on Kilby street, Boston. One day
 there came into my office a well remembered soldier who proved to be
 the captain of the left company. He gave the military salute, and
 remarked, 'Colonel, I have come to report what I found on the left.'
 It seems that coming upon a secession picket, they had captured him,
 taken his weapons with most of his clothes, and persuaded him to
 go through a course of southern prisons from which he had only just
 returned."

Of the 19th, Lieutenant Dusseault has this to say, "The fight was
resumed. The rebels found a gap on our right and came through, thus
flanking us again. Our artillery opened on them as they were between
us and artillery, and the shells did us as much harm as they did the
enemy. The men of both sides were now pretty well mixed up in the
woods. Whichever squad was the larger would capture the other. This day
our Regiment was in the worst part of the line and suffered more than
any other, unless it was the Sixteenth Maine, which was captured almost
to a man."

In a paper read before the Massachusetts Military Historical Society,
December 13, 1880, Captain Charles H. Porter says of this day:--

 "The morning opened dull and rainy, with the troops in good spirits.
 No changes were made. The troops of their own accord strengthened the
 field works, making them quite strong. Nothing happened until about
 3 a. m., when the enemy showed considerable activity, the pickets
 firing and showing quite a bold front. General Lee, determining to
 drive us from the road sends two divisions under Heth and Mahone. The
 former has four brigades with eight pieces of artillery from Pegram's
 battalion. Six of the pieces are west of the railroad and two are
 east of the same. Mahone has Weisiger's, Colquitt's and a part of
 Clingman's brigades. Mahone has discovered that the right of the Fifth
 Corps does not connect with anything. The Ninth Corps, which has been
 ordered to fill the gap, has not yet reached its destination though
 it is two o'clock p. m. Doubtless the extremely wet day prevented the
 prompt arrival of the reinforcement. Our troops, finding everything
 quiet and not expecting an attack, disposed of themselves in every
 way, trying to keep as dry as possible, little thinking of the fate
 in store for them. Four o'clock was the hour agreed upon by Heth and
 Mahone, as the time when the flanking column should be in position and
 almost to the minute, Mahone's troops reached our skirmish line and
 drove it in. Then turning in the thick woods to the west, they moved
 in column directly upon the exposed right flank of the Federals. This
 exposed flank had been a subject of anxiety to General Warren, and he
 had issued orders accordingly.

[Sidenote: AUG. 19, '64]

 "While the Third Division was passing a quiet afternoon, the officers
 at headquarters were informed that Heth was attacking vigorously in
 front, this being principally against the Second Division. Our Third
 Division is still undisturbed. The butchers of the division are
 slaughtering cattle when the pickets of the Ninth Corps come tumbling
 in, saying that the enemy is advancing upon them. The woods are so
 very dense that nothing can be seen through them. Not even General
 Warren, himself, can discern anything. When, however, a line of men is
 discovered approaching, Warren is so sure that they are the delayed
 Ninth Corps contingent, he will not allow artillery to open on them, a
 very serious error on his part, for they are soon discovered to be a
 portion of the flanking Confederates, and that a considerable part of
 them is between our artillery and the Third Division. Our artillerists
 spring to their guns at once and open a rapid fire upon them. How does
 this act bear upon our Third Division, where the Thirty-ninth Regiment
 is? The very first intimation that Crawford's men have that all is
 not well with them, is the bursting of spherical case from the rear,
 in their midst. They are aware that the artillery is massed behind
 them, and they realize that something must have happened to bring
 such firing from their own comrades. Now, the firing in front from
 Heth and his men begins again, and our pickets are again attacked. It
 becomes necessary to seek protection from our own thirty guns. The
 men spring over the breastworks and hold them in reverse, thinking
 the pickets able to check the attack in front, and that their chief
 danger is from the rear. The suspense is soon broken when a line of
 confederate infantry comes rushing in upon them. All is now confusion.
 Without leaders, the men are completely demoralized. In the dark and
 dismal woods, dismayed by the fire from our own guns, the men make
 but a short resistance and this flanking column under Mahone captures
 nearly two brigades of the Third Division. The attack of Heth in
 front continues, adding to the confusion, but the rapid firing of our
 artillery convinces the enemy that there is nothing more for them in
 that direction, so they content themselves with the 2700 prisoners,
 whom they have swept almost entirely from the Third Division, and move
 up the Halifax road with more captives than they themselves number.
 As they thus move away the captured men narrowly escape the fire of
 Mahone's two cannon stationed on the east side of the railroad; the
 gunners think so large an array of men in blue must be an attacking
 party, but the condition is disclosed soon enough to prevent the
 possible slaughter.

 "Such men of the Third Division as have not been captured, seek safety
 in every direction, each man for himself. Dodging behind trees,
 now east, now west, some of the wrecked body of men get the true
 direction and come out at the edge of the clearing, looking towards
 our artillery. Here they behold a welcome sight. It is an advancing
 line of the Ninth Corps, responding to the evident need. It is the
 First Division of the Ninth Corps, composed largely of Massachusetts
 men, and they are friends indeed. We know that, having the situation
 well in hand, the position will be regained and the railroad held. The
 remnants of the Third Division are finally rallied near the Dunlock
 House. Picture, if you can, one little knot gathered together, about
 twenty-five in number, all that, at this time, can be assembled of a
 regiment that yesterday carried three hundred and fifty muskets into
 the first day's fight, whose commander was most grievously wounded on
 that day. They are soon marshaled to occupy, as far as they can, their
 old line of works. Very few sleep any during the night, as the weary
 hours roll on, and it seems as though daylight would never come to
 bring relief to the dread hanging over the command through the night.
 Mahone and his men retire to their defenses with feelings quite the
 reverse of those of their opponents and the 'Little Gamecock of the
 Confederacy' fully merits his appellation as he turns over his plunder
 to General Lee."

An excellent personal story of the second day is told by Sergt. George
E. Fowle, Company K, whose experience quite likely was similar to that
of nearly all the men of the Regiment who succeeded in getting out of
the confusion, free:

[Sidenote: AUG. 19. '64]

 "I was acting First Sergeant of Company K. Corporal S. A. McFeeley
 was my bunkmate, and was one of the color guard. We were stationed
 in the woods on the right of the railroad, where the rebels made
 vigorous demonstrations on our front while a large force turned our
 right flank. Our artillery was firing solid shot over our heads when
 the enemy broke through and came between us and our cannon. The guns
 were immediately depressed to reach the confederates and the shots
 coming through them and reaching us were the first intimation we had
 of anything wrong. McFeeley was sent back to stop the artillery and
 was captured. The line was doubled up as the enemy came down on our
 flank. I started back with the rest and came across a canteen with the
 string cut; picking it up, I took a drink and filled my own canteen,
 but when this was done I found myself alone, but I followed along in
 the direction which the others had gone. I came to a cart path, where
 I saw some of our men with a few Johnnies on the other side of the
 path. The bushes separating us were so thick and low that I had to
 spread them apart with my hands to get through, and when I did and
 straightened up, with my gun in my hand, I found myself looking into
 a rebel gun barrel, held by a Johnnie who was standing by the side of
 an officer, whom I took to be a colonel. I was told to throw down the
 gun, which I did and walked across the road where the officer took me
 by the shoulder and turned me around, saying, 'Get into the ranks,
 and we'll take good care of you.' There were so many prisoners that
 we were in all sorts of position, one, two and three deep. The man
 nearest me wanted to know where the Maryland Brigade was located.

 "I unhitched my knapsack and turned around to see if anybody was
 looking, and gave it a throw into the bushes. As I did so, I saw Joe
 Adams, the National color bearer, come out into the road, look up and
 down the same, and then he raised the colors over his head and threw
 them into the wheel-ruts, there happened to be a break in the guards
 near him. I threw off my scabbard and cut the strap which held my
 cartridge box. We were nearing the railroad tracks, where the rebels
 turned and marched up towards Petersburg. When I saw a good chance I
 jumped into the bushes and soon heard someone behind me, and turning
 saw Joe, Adams and another man. All this time we were getting more or
 less missiles from our own guns; the solid shot had been changed to
 shells and we were troubled quite as much as the confederates. We soon
 encountered a rebel with a gun in his hand, just as a shell exploded
 near our heads. To Adams' query as to where was the direction of the
 rebel rear, he replied, 'I'll be d--d if I know.' At this, I left them
 to see what I could do for myself in finding our own breastworks. In a
 short time I came across a lieutenant of the Sixteenth Maine, who was
 behind a tree, whereupon I found a tree also, but I didn't stop long,
 since I was not gaining ground. We could see the prisoners and the
 guard and occasionally a rebel would come our way.

 "I started back towards our works, but on arriving found no one there,
 so I sallied forth to where the right of the Regiment had been. Going
 some distance beyond where our right was, I saw some troops mount
 the breastworks. At first I couldn't make out who they were, blue or
 gray, but, stooping down, I found them to be our men, and I recognized
 Corporal Abijah Thompson, who beckoned me to come up his way. The
 ground was covered with muskets, which had been thrown down when the
 boys were captured. Colonel Wheelock of the Ninety-seventh New York,
 then commanding his brigade, was up on the right, and seeing the
 movement, he put his men in front of the works and charged out upon
 the enemy, capturing everything in sight, Yank and Reb, including the
 Colonel, who was going to take good care of me, a stand of confederate
 colors and, best of all, our own which Adams had thrown down.[Q] The
 state colors borne by Serg. William A. Mentzer of "A" were brought in
 safely by him, though by great effort.

 "On getting out of the woods into the field, there stood the First
 Division of the Ninth Corps in line; I ran down and told General White
 that the rebels had got our Brigade, and that they were on the road
 in there, not ten rods from where he sat on his horse, and he could
 get them all if he went in. The General turned around and said to one
 of his staff, 'They have got the road we came down.' He was waiting
 for orders from General Warren. It had been raining and I didn't
 know whether the gun that I had picked up would go off or not, so I
 pointed the muzzle towards the ground and fired. Whereupon the General
 said, 'Don't you know any better than that?' I went back to the line,
 borrowed some cartridges and caps and loaded the gun, when Colonel
 Lyle and the remnant of the Brigade came out of the bushes. His
 command resembled a color guard. A staff officer soon ordered me back
 into the breastworks. I picked up a sergeant's knapsack and soon made
 a set of sergeant's chevrons. Our company made two stacks of guns that
 night, and I put my gun across the stacks, and was in command of the
 company. Lieutenant Tidd and twenty-seven men of Company K were taken
 prisoners. Our captain was sick and had been taken to the hospital."

[Sidenote: AUG. 20, '64]

Of Saturday, the 20th, Captain Porter remarks that it opened quite
pleasantly and that the sunlight, struggling through the clouds, was
cheering to the lonely feeling troops of the Third Division, those
that remained in line. The Ninth Corps had made a complete connection
with the right of our division and further danger in this direction
was obviated. This day the engineers of the Fifth Corps marked out a
new line of works to be occupied in the open, just in advance of the
Dunlock House, about three hundred yards north from the Six Mile House.
This line ran near the woods in which so great disaster had befallen
our troops. Our Third division occupied ground to the right, east of
the railroad, which still divided the forces of the Second Division.
The breastworks were heavily made and were quite impracticable for
an assault in front. The lines of the Fifth and Ninth Corps were
continuations of each other. All lines in advance of this new one were
abandoned in the afternoon and evening of the 20th. While there was
hard work in the trenches there was no engagement with the enemy. The
latter had by no means given up the recovery of the railroad and was
making plans for the morrow. The juncture of the Fifth and Ninth Corps,
leaving no aperture in that direction, his attention was necessarily
drawn towards the left. It was said that General Roger A. Pryor of
Virginia, conspicuous in ante-bellum days, by his altercation with John
F. Potter, a fellow Congressman from Wisconsin, who named bowie knives
as duelling weapons, having retired from active army service, in his
capacity of independent scout, had climbed a tree and from this outlook
discovered, as he thought, the vulnerableness of the Union left.
Hastening to impart his discovery to General Mahone, the latter made
plans for an attack on the 21st. With the details of this unsuccessful
effort to repeat the tactics of the 19th, we have no especial concern,
except to state that this time, Mahone carried back no prisoners and
reported no victory. Ayers and his First Division were quite ready to
receive callers.

Of this campaign of four days, General Warren says, "The heat of the
first day (18th) was excessive, and on the march many fell out who
are here reported among the missing, but who will soon rejoin us.
About fifty were completely prostrated by sunstroke. The men were
kept working night and day, and every day were wet through with the
rains. The side roads and fields were almost impassable for artillery."
However much the Confederates may have lamented the loss of the Weldon
Railroad as a supply source, and to them it was a grievous one, the
conditions brought about by these terrible battle days in August
remained unchanged to the end. Grant was taking no backward steps and
with the grip of a bulldog, whatever he grasped, he held.

[Sidenote: AUG. 22, '64]

The losses met by the Thirty-ninth were frightful. May 4th, when
the Regiment crossed the Rapidan there were five hundred and thirty
men in the ranks, fully twice the number in any other two regiments
in the Brigade. Since then we had received from the Twelfth and
Thirteenth Regiments two hundred and twenty-eight transfers, bringing
the aggregate to nearly eight hundred men, yet so severe had been the
tests of the Wilderness, Spottsylvania and the attacks on Petersburg,
including this most recent calamity on the Weldon Railroad, on the
morning of August 22d only one hundred and two enlisted men and nine
officers reported for duty. Of course, some would eventually report
from the missing, which included not alone prisoners and wounded,
but stragglers as well, still the fact remained that the swoop that
Malone made upon the First Brigade on that August afternoon came near
finishing it. Colonel Peirson was seriously wounded and in hospital;
Major Tremlett was away on detached service; Captain F. R. Kinsley
was a prisoner in the hands of the enemy and the command devolved
upon Captain George S. Nelson of Company A. We have already seen that
Company K stacked nine muskets, under command of a sergeant, the night
of the 19th; ten men were reported left in Company C, and "E" Company
had only seven or eight of the original number. Terrible are the
ravages of war.

The several army corps along the southside of Petersburg are hereafter
to gradually strengthen the lines already established, to build new
forts and to place the Weldon Railroad in a condition that even its
recovery would in no way profit the Confederacy, since the impoverished
condition of the latter would be quite incapable of putting it into
a running condition. Colonel T. F. McCoy of the Hundred and Seventh
Pennsylvania, commanding the Brigade after the retirement of Colonel
Lyle, accounts for the procedure of the First Brigade during these
days. He says that the dead were buried on the 22d. On the 23rd the
division under General Crawford engaged in destroying the railroad from
the Yellow House in the direction of Petersburg, the First Brigade,
however, acting as a reserve to protect the working parties. The 24th,
what was left of the brigade rested quietly in camp. The 25th brought
orders to change camps, in doing which, however, other orders were
received to prepare for action, and the column immediately took up
the line of march towards Reams' Station, where the Second Corps was
heavily engaged with a large force of the enemy. It was at this point
that Colonel Peter Lyle, Ninetieth Pennsylvania, who had commanded
the Brigade so long, on account of severe illness, was obliged to
relinquish his command. Colonel McCoy,[R] succeeding, marched the
Brigade to the Yellow House, where he received orders from General
Crawford to report with his command to General Bragg, which he did,
and proceeded in the direction of Reams, but after marching about one
mile he was ordered to countermarch and encamp for the night. Next
day, 26th, camp was again changed and the men were ordered to throw up
works, southeast of the Yellow House.

[Sidenote: SEPT. 2, '64]

The digging that the Fifth Corps did in the vicinity of the Yellow
House became a part of the system of fortifications that were gradually
extended to Fort Fisher, the extreme western fort, where there was
a turn or refusal of the line to the southward, lest the favorite
maneuver of the rebels might be tried on the Union left. Day and night,
the work progressed, every day strengthening the coils which Grant and
Meade were casting about the doomed city, and every one knew that the
fall of Petersburg meant the end of Richmond also. A deal of ammunition
was wasted in the bombardment of Petersburg, yet it had to be kept up,
or the enemy would have thought the Yankees quite inefficient. They
grew almost indifferent to the missiles from the Union guns and fifty
years later they will tell of the tons of ammunition that were wasted
upon them and their city. The "Petersburg Express"[S] located near the
Friend House, and manned by the First Connecticut Heavy Artillery,
failed not in its two hundred pound compliments for weeks and months
and in the Twentieth Century the mortar itself will form a principal
part of the regimental monument in Hartford. Somehow there is more real
fighting over on the other side of the James where the Tenth Corps is
located and the enemy cannot dispossess themselves of the impression
that the Yankees really mean to get into Richmond that way.

By the last of the month, matters have resolved themselves into a long
steady round of fatigue and picket duty to the music of artillery
along the entire line, the attitude of the opposing guardsmen on duty
depending entirely on the agreements that they may have made with
each other. September 2d, General D. McM. Gregg, supported by General
Crawford's (Third) Division of the Fifth Corps started out on an errand
of some sort up the Vaughn road, towards the Plank Road and Petersburg;
in other words it was a case of marching up the hill and then marching
down again, for finding the enemy strongly entrenched, the entire force
returned to camp. This day also the foe forgot the tacit agreement of
friendliness and opened up a fire of musketry along the entire line,
killing a large number of men and effectually ending amicable relations
for some time.

While the fact of the occupation of Atlanta by the Union forces had
been understood as early as the 2d, no official notice of the success
was taken until the 4th, Sunday, when one hundred shotted guns were
fired from extreme right to the furthest left, the celebration lasting
about an hour, the enemy thinking it so queer a way of observing the
Lord's day that they, too, opened their batteries and added to the
din, arising from their own misfortune. "Westward Ho!" is evidently
still the watchword of our commander, for every effort is made to
strengthen the extreme left, and both sides watch out with the utmost
alertness. For the sake of rearranging a portion of our line of works
it became necessary to gain possession of the rebel rifle pits at
"The Chimneys," on the Jerusalem Plank Road, and General Mott, with a
backing from the Second Corps, was directed to accomplish the task,
this on the night of the 9th of September. The duty was done at the
point of the bayonet and the works were immediately reversed, the same
becoming of great advantage to the new possessors, General Walker of
the Second Corps pronouncing the operation one of the most creditable
in the entire siege. Of course, the foe did not let go without protest,
and subsequent nights were rendered lurid by his efforts to regain the
lost ground, but to no avail.

[Sidenote: SEPT. 16, '64]

The thoroughness with which the campaign is advancing appears on
Sunday, the 11th, when an engine is run over the newly laid railroad
from City Point to the Weldon road at Yellow House. The Confederates
are running trains to Stony Creek, twelve miles south of Reams; and the
remainder of the distance, around the Union left into Petersburg, is
effected by wagon, pretty slow and vexatious work! The firing along the
picket line, annoying and useless, had become very obnoxious to General
Birney of the Tenth Corps at the Union right, and to give the enemy
something to think about opened a heavy fire on the works in his front
and on Petersburg itself. The enemy also played during the afternoon on
certain signal towers along the front of the Eighteenth Corps. A very
tranquil evening followed this ebulition. Perhaps no event of the week
gave the Confederates so much pleasure as their success in surprising a
couple of cavalry regiments in charge of a large number of beef cattle,
some 2500 in number, near Coggin's Point on the James River and running
the vast herd into their lines and taking with them the careless
guards. While the rebels were thus supplying their commissariat,
others of their number made an attack on the entire skirmish line of
the Fifth Corps and capture nearly a hundred of the men. On the 16th,
the Second Brigade was assigned to forts on the left of the line, the
Thirty-ninth being ordered to Fort Duchesne. Camp was pitched just
outside the fort, along with the One Hundred and Fourth New York the
Eleventh, Forty-eighth and Ninety-eighth Pennsylvania, all under the
command of Colonel Richard Coulter of the last named regiment. The 19th
was enlivened by telegraphic news of Sheridan's victory near Winchester
where Early was sent "Whirling up the Valley," followed by salvos of
artillery in honor thereof. On the 28th, the paymaster left six months'
pay.

Ten days later, Thursday, the 29th, was a counterpart to a deal of
activity on the Union right, when business was actually suspended in
Richmond through fear that an assault was imminent; a column consisting
of Gregg's cavalry, supported by two infantry brigades, set out
towards the Poplar Springs Church road, beyond the Vaughan turnpike,
advancing about two miles. On their return, they were attacked by
Hampton's cavalry, the force that had stolen the cattle-herd, and a
brisk encounter followed. Friday, the 30th, extending into Saturday,
took place the battle of Peebles' farm between certain portions of the
Fifth and Ninth Corps and the Confederates, General Grant having in
mind a movement towards the Southside Railroad, expecting thus to still
further cripple the cities of Petersburg and Richmond, the result being
a considerable advance westward of the Union left. While all of this
commotion was taking place, the Thirty-ninth Regiment moved into the
fort, remaining there until the 16th of October, when it came out and
took a position on the Weldon Railroad half a mile in front of Fort
Duchesne, and a mile from the Globe Tavern or Yellow House.

So far as our Regiment is concerned, affairs are very quiet, though the
extended Union line towards the west affords opportunity for constant
work, day and night, for every man, and the number in the Thirty-ninth
is not very great, so large a portion of the survivors of the Regiment
being involuntary boarders in the Confederacy. The fact that less than
eleven months remain of the service for which the men enlisted causes
not a few remarks as to the gradual approach of the day of release,
though all must know that the future holds many possibilities of
battles and other exposure. Ignorance in this case is surely bliss.
The first third of October covers considerable activity on the Union
right, where Darbytown Road wins a place in battle lists, and the
cooler nights indicate the approach of another winter with its peculiar
exactions. The first frost comes on the night of the 9th-10th. From the
8th to the 11th all sorts of firing have been common in the vicinity
of Sedgwick or "Fort Hell" in local parlance, on the last named night
the pyrotechny being especially brilliant, a Richmond paper stating
that it was the heaviest mortar shelling of the siege, "The heavens
being ablaze with brilliant meteors, ascending, descending and shooting
athwart the horizon in almost countless numbers and unsurpassed beauty."

[Sidenote: OCT. 26, '64]

During these early October days, General S. W. Crawford is in command
of the Fifth Corps and with it, accompanying the Ninth Corps, a
reconnoisance in force is made on the 8th towards the Union left,
possibly with an idea of extending our works even beyond Fort McRae.
After a day of hard marching and constant skirmishing the troops
returned, wearied enough, to their starting point; but General Grant is
not satisfied, even yet, that he cannot reach the Southside Railroad.
A little past the middle of the month, or on the 19th, comes the most
unqualified report of victory in the Shenandoah Valley that the country
has yet heard. It is the story of Cedar Creek, fought on the 19th, when
differing from the dispatches after Winchester, just a month before,
where Early was sent "whirling up the valley"; so nearly annihilated
is the rebel army, it would be a very stiff breeze which could find
anything left to whirl. The activities for this month, as far as the
Fifth Corps is concerned, terminated with the joint move, on the 26th,
of the Second, Fifth and Ninth Corps along with Gregg's Cavalry against
the Southside Railroad, known as the Boydton Plank Road, some distance
east of the railroad. Very full and explicit instructions had been
issued to the designated troops, and the utmost care had been taken to
insure the safety of the entrenchments during the movement. The Fifth
Corps, or that part of it in the project, marched out on the Squirrel
Level Road, in a southwesterly direction towards Hatcher's Run, a small
stream rising near Sutherland Station on the Southside Road and flowing
southeastwardly into Rowanty Creek, a tributary of the Nottoway River.
The Lieutenant General was determined to leave no stone unturned to
secure the longed-for source of Petersburg's supplies. The country
itself revealed many of the Wilderness characteristics, there being no
roads and no chances to move artillery. In this confusion, the right of
the Second Corps, furthest west, was lost to the Fifth Corps, a fact
which enabled the enemy to get in between the two corps and capture a
considerable number of men, the Second Corps suffering more than the
Fifth, one whole regiment being run in. The mix-up was not unlike that
of the 18th of August, for rain set in and ammunition was scarce, our
leaders were ignorant of the lay of the land which the enemy seemed to
know perfectly; so the left flank movement ended with the return of the
troops to their former positions. On this same 26th the Thirty-ninth
moved to the left and garrisoned Fort Canahey.

A very good story of give and take is recorded of this week; at dusk
in the evening of Thursday, the 27th, one hundred volunteers of the
One Hundred and Forty-eighth Pennsylvania attacked the fort of the
enemy which succeeded that blown up on the 30th of July, climbed the
parapet, drove the occupants out and, for a brief period, were masters
of the situation, this being a plan to hold the attention of the
Confederates while the assault was progressing further to left, but the
enemy rallying quickly drove the Federal force back with considerable
loss on both sides. In return, Sunday night, the 30th, at about ten
o'clock, the rebels "relieved the pickets" in front of Fort Davis where
the Sixty-ninth and One Hundred and Eleventh New York were on picket
duty, and managed to capture nearly four hundred men. So delighted were
the Confederates with their success they proceeded to throw a strong
column against the works which had been uncovered by the capture of the
pickets, but the alarm had been given and the triumphant men in gray
were met with a fire of musketry that sent them back in a hurry and,
for a time, there was a merry firing bee along the entire line. For the
nonce, honors between blue and gray were easy and regular, expected
shooting was resumed.

Another and the last November for the Thirty-ninth begins and finds
the remnant of the Regiment doing garrison duty under the command of
Captain Nelson of Company A, and comparative quiet reigning along the
extended battle line, now reaching from the north side of the James
more than twenty miles to Hatcher's Run. Lieutenant Colonel Tremlett,
so long absent from the Regiment, returns on Friday, the 4th, relieving
Captain Nelson, who has led the organization since the capture of Major
F. R. Kinsley at the Weldon Railroad. Barring considerable excitement
on the 5th, near "Fort Hell," where lines were captured by the enemy
and reversed only to be re-taken and restored, day and night fully
sustaining the reputation of the locality, and efforts of like nature
in front of Fort Steadman on the 9th, the game of life and death was
played without special emphasis--just the steady, constant watchfulness
of thousands of men unwilling to allow any act of their adversary to
pass unnoticed. Tuesday, the 8th of November, brings the presidential
election, and the triumphant re-election of Lincoln, all soldiers
having the privilege of voting, a singular illustration of ways in
a republic where, in becoming a soldier the man does not lose his
citizenship.

[Sidenote: NOV. 24, '64]

The 24th was Thanksgiving Day in New England and many a prayer was
offered for the men at the front and many expressions of love and
recollection were speeded southward for the delectation of absent
ones. Nearly thirty tons of turkeys were said to have been sent from
the North to the armies, and this vast amount of food, accompanied
by all sorts of other meats and luxuries, must have gone far towards
furnishing forth at least one good old-fashioned dinner for many
thousands of men. As a sort of godsend to the enemy, possibly that
they, too, might be thankful, on the 19th, some forty or fifty head
of cattle, escaping from our corrals, made for the Confederate works
where they were received as enemies, yet later found a thoroughly warm
reception. On the 26th, the Ninetieth Pennsylvania, having reached
the end of its term of enlistment, started for Philadelphia. It had
been in the same division with the Thirty-ninth from the time of our
joining the First Corps and, for the larger part of the period, in
the same brigade. Its good qualities we had learned to appreciate.
An outgrowth of the Second Regiment, Pennsylvania militia, it had
served, under Colonel Lyle,[T] in the Three Months' call and, again,
for three years. Recruits and re-enlisted men were transferred to the
Eleventh Pennsylvania and all that were left of the originals were
off for home. Towards the end of the month summaries were prepared of
the losses sustained by the Army of the Potomac in the campaign so
relentlessly waged and, according to Surgeon Thos. A. McParlin, Medical
Director of the Army of the Potomac, from May 3rd to October 31st,
the number of wounded amounted to 57,496, exclusive of the Eighteenth
Corps while serving in this army, and he does not include the Ninth
Corps at the Wilderness and at Spottsylvania Court House. According to
data prepared by General Warren the killed and wounded in the Fifth
Corps, during this same period, amounted to more than eleven thousand.
The precautions taken to preserve life, and at the same time offering
readiness to receive as well as make attacks, taxed the highest talents
and ingenuity of engineers and soldiers. To the right and left, as far
as the eye could reach, were earthworks of the strongest character,
though few cared to take the risk of prolonged observations. There were
corduroy roads underground and covered ways of heavy trunks of trees
under four or five feet of earth to prevent shells from reaching those
beneath. Few men cared to be for any considerable time in these safety
holes, the monotony and closeness being terrible.

[Sidenote: DEC. 1, '64]

Though the Army of the Potomac is nominally in winter quarters, this in
no way prevents changes of location, the organization of raids and a
degree of activity hitherto unknown among the veterans of one or more
winter's experience, who are carefully watching rebels while, at the
same time, keeping a careful reckoning on the time intervening before
their muster-out. December comes in with a salute to the effect that
it is the last one the Regiment will see in the field. On Thursday,
the 1st, General Gregg leads a cavalry raid down the Weldon Railroad,
starting before daylight, riding as far as Stony Creek, twenty-two
miles below Petersburg, for the sake of destroying whatever stores
may be collected there and to destroy also whatever advance may have
been made in a proposed railroad connection between Stony Creek, the
present terminus of the Weldon Railroad, and the Southside Road through
a new track, laid down by way of the Dinwiddie and the Boydton Roads.
With considerable adventure, this was successfully done and with a
forty mile's ride, not to mention the fighting, to their credit, the
expedition was back again at 11 p. m.

The early part of the month saw the return of the Sixth Army Corps
from its experiences in the valley, and with the garlands of victory
fresh upon it, the corps took its place along the Petersburg line. In
July, when the Sixth started for Baltimore and Washington, the Union
front extended only a little further than the Jerusalem Plank Road; now
it is prolonged to Hatcher's Run, and every foot of the prolongation
has cost effort and blood; eight miles of new frontage dearly won.
Into this battle line Sheridan's "Foot Cavalry" settles as naturally
as though it has been away only a day or two on a casual raid. What
is left of Early's force has been back with Lee several weeks. Not
satisfied with the cavalry demonstration of the 1st, General Warren
is ordered to conduct a more formidable array on the 7th to the same
region. The troops, Fifth Corps, Mott's Division of the Second Corps
and a division of cavalry under Gregg, above 20,000 in number with
twenty-two pieces of artillery, have been massed on both sides of
the Jerusalem Road and after a cold night, in the face of a severe
rain, are off. On the Nottoway River, they come to where Freeman's
Bridge was formerly, twenty miles from Petersburg, and they cross
the stream on a pontoon bridge. Next day (8th) the march southward is
continued and at Jarratt's Station where the Weldon Railroad crosses
the Nottoway, thirty miles from Petersburg, they burn the bridge, two
hundred feet long, crossing the river. The railroad track is torn up
in the effectual manner characteristic of the times and Thursday night
is spent here. Friday (9th) the work of destruction continues down to
Bellfield, twelve miles further along. Of course there is skirmishing
with the enemy constantly, but he is not here in sufficient force to
offer substantial resistance. The troops bivouac for the night at Three
Creek, three miles this side of Bellfield. All the time the weather has
been wretched, the constant rain rendering the roads almost impassable
and, to crown all, this night (Friday) come snow and hail to add to
the general discomfort. Saturday (10th) the expedition faces towards
Petersburg, burning on the way back the buildings at Sussex Court House
in retaliation, so said, for the shooting of some of our stragglers and
here the army bivouacs; resuming the backward route the Nottoway was
reached in the evening of the 11th and, on the 12th, the old quarters
are struck by a very tired body of men; the net results being a march
fifty miles long, three railroad bridges destroyed, fifteen miles of
railroad track torn up and bent out of shape and a county court house
burned.

[Sidenote: DEC. 10, '64]

No mention is made in the official report of the quantity of apple-jack
which the curiously inclined Yankees sought and found and, to their
own harm, imbibed. The section had not been overrun before, and
consequently better stored farm houses were found than the men had
been seeing of late and, notwithstanding the rigors of the campaign,
possibly on account of them, they made merry with the seductive
liquids made from innocent cider. The story was long current that
one man, outside of fully three fingers of the booze, and growing
correspondingly free with the dignitaries, slapped General Warren
familiarly on the back, calling him "The little Corporal," a term
which ever afterwards clung to the soldier himself. Canteens of the
fiery stuff were carried back to camp for the benefit (?) of those who
did not go. Had the weather been more propitious, it is possible that
the expedition would have gone on twenty miles further to Weldon, on
the Roanoke.

In the foregoing episode, the Thirty-ninth bore its part, having
moved back to the rear line on the 5th and, at the start, taking the
advance of the infantry. Just before reaching Halifax Road, the 8th,
on indications of trouble ahead the Regiment was deployed and sent
forward as skirmishers to hold the road. Having established a line of
pickets, the Thirty-ninth stood by to guard the road while the main
column passed on. Shortly after dark we followed the troops, overtaking
them near Jarratt's Station, and there we took a hand in destroying the
railroad. On the 9th we had a place at the extreme left of the corps,
and picketed the front of the brigade, which was doing its best to
make the road a hard one for the rebels to travel. At 6 p. m. we were
withdrawn to Cross Roads, above Bellfield, one half going on picket,
the other half into camp with the Brigade. In the movement backward,
beginning on the 10th, we fetched up the rear and thus enjoyed frequent
tilts with the close following cavalry of the enemy who, in spite
of our best efforts, managed to capture any who straggled, in the
number, our Regiment losing four men. On the 11th, starting before
daylight, we crossed the Nottaway at four o'clock in the afternoon and
at nine halted for the night. On the 12th, we were back again before
Petersburg, having marched twelve miles. Encamping near the Jerusalem
Plank Road, we were ordered to build huts for the winter and, following
a week's work, we moved into our new quarters where, for about a month,
we had almost easy times. At any rate we were not right under the
fire of the enemy all of the time. We had to turn out at intervals on
account of real or fancied dangers; drill and fatigue duties had their
part and there were the regular details for guard and picket. Once we
served as guard for a wagon train which went outside for bricks and
boards, securing the same from a deserted house some five miles away.

It must be understood that absolute quiet in front of Petersburg was
out of the question. The extended works were like a mammoth keyboard
for an organ, whose dimensions transcended imagination and, seated
thereat, all the gods and goddesses of War played music that rivaled
the thunderbolts of Jove, now the low mutterings of distant lightning,
anon rising to the fierce reverberations of an equinoxial as when, on
the 19th of December, doubly shotted guns told the joy of the Union
that Thomas had annihilated Hood at Nashville or, on the 26th, when
Mars himself seemed to press those keys in token of the termination
of the March to The Sea and that Savannah had fallen. Always catching
up the refrain, the unterrified rebels, aided by their own warlike
deities, hurled it back upon us, sometimes like an echo, immeasurable
augmented, till veritably it seemed that the opposing lines, stretching
away beyond human sight, could not have evoked a greater riot of sound
had they been exits of Aetna and Stromboli. A topmost gallery seat in
this magnificent theatre of war afforded, in the very mildest passages
of Freedom's Oratorio, all the sound, melodious or otherwise, that the
average human ear could appreciate.

[Sidenote: DEC. 25, '64]

Christmas brought nothing more notable than a beautiful day, which in
the midst of a cheerless winter was not unwelcomed, but there were
none of the festivities which untold generations have developed as
essential features of the coming of the Prince of Peace and, for that
matter, what propriety could there be in observing the advent of the
Christ Child in an army, yet the world is full of just such anomalies.
As December nears its end and dies with the old year, careful observers
scan the retrospect, and in the deeds of Grant, Sherman, Thomas
and Sheridan, behold the utmost encouragement. Grierson, with his
cavalry marching from Tennessee to Louisiana, has discovered the
Confederacy to be a "shell with nothing in it." With Grant holding Lee
in his relentless clutches at Petersburg, Thomas looking about for
the scattered remnants of Hood's Army, Price driven out of Missouri,
Sheridan, at the head of his troopers, ready to vault into the
saddle, and Sherman turning his face towards Augusta and Charleston,
seemingly the "last ditch" is very, very near. Yet, that the enemy
is not disposed to yield till forced to do so, on the very last day
of the year, when "Happy New Year" is already ready for utterance by
millions of happy voices, the Union picket line, in the region of Forts
Wadsworth and Howard is surprised by a party of the enemy who charging
furiously, yelling and firing rapidly, drive our men back into their
main works with hardly a chance to exchange a shot. We lose two killed,
three wounded and thirty-five captured, and the Johnnies took back with
them the blankets, knapsacks and whatever other belongings they could
find. So alert and swift were the rebels, so well had they planned
their attack that they were out of range before the men in the forts
could return their compliments. So ends the year.

FOOTNOTES:

[N] It is claimed that the body of Colonel Davis was carried from the
field by Corp. S. H. Mitchell, "A"; Corp. B. F. Prescott and W. S.
Sumner, both of "H"; and Sergt. L. A. Spooner of Company I.

[O] November 14, 1911, when visiting the Robert E. Lee Home for
Confederate Veterans in Richmond, John Maxwell, an ex-confederate,
whose later days were passing in this congenial harborage, was
introduced and requested to tell the Northern visitors how he blew up
the Yankees. Nothing loth, the veteran in gray, holding in his hands
the works of an alarm clock, told the story of his sneaking into
the Union lines and, when opportunity offered, placing his infernal
machine, with his time-wheel for explosion properly set, where it
would do the most execution and then hastening away. His auditors,
so recently from the dedication of a Massachusetts monument on the
edge of the Crater, recalling an even greater explosion, were hardly
in position to find any great amount of fault with his act, since
"Sauce for the goose is also sauce for the gander." "Where were you,
Johnnie, when the thing went off?" was a natural question from one of
the hearers. "Oh, I was two miles away, making the best time possible
towards the Confederacy." (Vid. R. R. Serial No. 87. p. 954).

[P] When the rails, thus heated, were grasped at their ends by several
stalwart men and carried so that the red hot middle might hit a
good-sized tree, the extended iron would be bent almost double. The two
ends being somewhat divergent; four rails thus carried and thus applied
and symmetrically placed about a tree made a very good Maltese Cross,
the badge of the Fifth Corps and other army corps were wont to say
when, as at the North Anna, they saw many tokens of this sort, "Well,
the Fifth Corps has been here."
                                                               A. S. R.

[Q] At the last reunion, attended by Sergeant McFeeley, he gave the
following version of the day's incident, stating that when the Union
batteries began to play on our lines, the commander of the color guard
sent him back to stop the firing and in so doing, he ran into the
rebel line. At once he tried to hide behind some bushes but a Johnnie
got his eye on him and ordered him to come out, which he did. Walking
along in the ranks, a prisoner, he saw a reb have a stand of colors
and, on account of the rain, they were done up in their case, which
he recognized as one that he had mended, and he also knew the staff
which had been scarred by battle as belonging, both of them, to the
Thirty-ninth. Naturally McFeeley kept as near the colors as possible
and their present holder, who was very happy over his proud possession,
though he had only picked them out of the rut where Adams had thrown
them. When Wheelock's relieving column came charging through, McFeeley
stepped up to the rebel and remarked that he guessed he would hold that
same flag awhile, thus saving the precious token from gracing some
Confederate collection of curios.

[R] Colonel Thomas F. McCoy of Scotch-Irish lineage, was born in
Mifflin County, Penn., 1819. Having served seven years in the Militia,
President Polk made him a first lieutenant in the Eleventh U. S.
Infantry, when the Mexican War began. Participating in the principal
battles of that strife, he came home a captain. A lawyer when the
Rebellion began, he offered his services to Gov. Curtin and was made
deputy quartermaster general of the state. When Col. Thos. A. Zeigle
of the One Hundred and Seventh Penn. died July 16, '62, on the vote of
the line officers of the Regiment, he was made colonel. He had a part
in all of the varied service of the One Hundred and Seventh to the end
and went home a Brevet Brig. General. General Warren was particularly
warm in his appreciative remarks about the colonel. Going home to
Lewistown, Penn., he resumed the practice of law. Marrying May 22d,
'73, Miss Margaret E. Ross of Harrisburg, he led the life of respect
and responsibility, one of the most prominent citizens of his town, for
nearly half a century a ruling elder in the Presbyterian church and
died July 20, 1899. His son, Frank R., a West Pointer, an officer in
the Tenth U. S. Infantry, was wounded at San Juan, Cuba, and is now a
Captain on the General Staff, Washington. Ancestors of the Colonel were
in the Colonial Wars, members of Morgan's Riflemen in the Revolution;
were in the War of 1812, and through father and son, in every National
war since.

[S] Many opinions exist as to what and where the Petersburg Express
was. Some even aver that it was a Confederate institution. General H.
L. Abbot, in his History of the First Connecticut Heavy Artillery, has
the following, "To check an annoying enfilade firing from the left bank
of the Appomattox, a thirteen inch sea coast mortar was mounted on a
curve of the Railroad track by Company G. This novelty was widely known
as the 'Petersburg Express.' The mortar, on a heavy granite foundation,
since Sept. 25, 1902, has stood upon the State House grounds, Hartford,
as a memorial to the First Heavies."

[T] Peter Lyle, Colonel of the Ninetieth Pennsylvania, Bvt. Brig.
General, and for much of the service of the Thirty-ninth in the Fifth
Corps, commander of the Brigade, was born in Philadelphia, Christmas
Day, 1821. Receiving very little education from the schools, he was
apprenticed to the cigar trade while yet a boy. His marked boyish
predelection was love for military matters, and he drilled his boyish
associates, formed into a company, till they became noted for their
proficiency, accomplishing in their juvenile way wonders with their
broomstick guns. When only sixteen years of age, during the absence of
the officers, he commanded and paraded the City Phalanx. While still a
youth he organized an independent company which he commanded until it
was taken into the National Guards. In 1846 he succeeded to the command
of the company which before the war had increased to a battalion,
becoming a regiment in 1860 under the command of Colonel Lyle. His
organization had volunteered for service in the Mexican War but, the
quota being full, it did not go. At the outbreak of the Rebellion, the
Regiment, as the Nineteenth Pennsylvania, volunteered and so served for
three months. Reorganized in August, 1861, it was sworn in for three
years as the Ninetieth Regiment, still commanded by Colonel Lyle. He
never fully recovered from a wound received at Antietam. Subsequent to
the war he was elected sheriff in 1867, being a Democrat in politics,
serving a single term. Much that he had acquired during his term
was absorbed by an agricultural venture in Maryland which, failing
finally, he was thrown entirely upon the outcome of carriage making, a
business to which he gave immediate attention after the discharge of
the Regiment, his associate being his late Adjutant, David P. Weaver.
His last public appearance in a military capacity was during the riots
of 1877 when, though suffering agonies from bodily ills, he sat his
saddle and discharged his duties faithfully. Soon after he declined a
re-election to the command of the Regiment and died in Philadelphia,
July 17, 1879. His burial was attended with all the honors due a full
Brigadier General, his body having lain in state in the armory of his
Regiment that he had led so long and so well; it was buried in Ivy
Hill Cemetery by the side of his brother, David M. Lyle, the last
Chief Engineer of the Philadelphia Volunteer Fire Department. For the
foregoing facts we are indebted to Captain P. Lyle Weaver, a son of
Adjutant D. P. Weaver, himself a Philadelphia journalist.--A. S. R.




1865.


January, the month of good resolutions and merry greetings, finds the
opposing armies in front of Petersburg still grimly plying their guns
and wishing for the end of the war. In the campaign from the Rapidan
southward to the end of the year, Grant has lost in killed, wounded and
captured more men than Lee was reputed to have had under his command
when the fight began, yet the line in blue in front of the beleaguered
city is just as persistent, just as vigorous as when the siege was
started. While the exhaustless resources of the North are indicated by
Lincoln's call for a half million more soldiers and follows that with
a proposition to draft 300,000 more, Lee is writing the Confederate
Secretary of War, "There is nothing within reach of this army to be
impressed. The country is swept clear. Our only reliance is upon the
railroads. We have but two days' supplies." General B. F. Butler, after
the failure of the Fort Fisher attack has been relieved and sent home
to Lowell, and General Terry is organizing a new expedition against
the great fortification and ere the month is over his success will be
heralded the country over. In its snug cabins or huts, the Potomac Army
is gaining strength for the signal which will draw the men from their
repose and send them forward. The winter is unusually severe, but,
well clad and covered, the men in blue wot little of the sufferings of
their adversaries in gray who are passing through all of the anguish
which their fathers knew at Valley Forge. Of the Fifth Corps it need
be said only that it and its many regiments are writing letters home,
reading the matter sent them from those same homes, watching the foe
and looking toward the end. The end of the month was signalized by the
arrival of the so-called Peace Commission, consisting of Vice-President
Alexander H. Stephens of the Confederacy and others who, February 3rd,
met President Lincoln and Secretary Seward at Fortress Monroe, but, as
the President would not enter into any negotiations without assurance
of unconditional acknowledgment of perpetual union and the abolition
of slavery, which the Confederates were not prepared to grant, nothing
came of the meeting.

[Sidenote: JAN. 31, '65]

It is in this same January that Major A. R. Small, in his history of
the Sixteenth Maine[U] has the following very pleasant words about
the Thirty-ninth, words that the members of the Bay State Regiment
thoroughly appreciate and fully reciprocate:

 Among the strongest and most lasting attachments formed by the
 Sixteenth for other troops during its term of service was that for the
 Thirty-ninth Massachusetts, Colonel Davis commanding. I have no record
 of the date when it joined the First Brigade, but it was a day which
 marked an era of progressive good feeling, which ripened into warm,
 personal attachments. The Regiment was splendidly officered, and under
 its able commander was an ever present incentive for us to do our very
 best. We never reached its precision in the manual of arms. We doubt
 if in this particular qualification it had a superior in the army;
 certainly it had not an equal in the Corps. Colonel Davis had a quiet
 way of coming into our hearts and he came to stay.

Though the men in the ranks knew it not, nor for that matter did the
majority of the officers, yet it is stated that on the last night in
January orders went to the several Corps of the Potomac Army to be
ready to march. From that moment activity was prevalent; increased
firing along the front concealed to some extent the work of the
railroad in bringing up the necessary supplies from City Point. As
early as the 4th of February came orders to the Regiment to be ready
to move at a moment's notice. The 5th brought the order to report
at brigade headquarters where the other regiments of that body were
found, and the Corps was joined at 7 a. m. As usual Gregg's cavalry
had preceded us and as on several former occasions the Fifth Corps
leads the infantry to be followed by the Second and a repetition of the
Hatcher's Run incidents of last October and December. The Fifth Corps
is to pass around the enemy's right flank while the other troops assail
in front; Crawford's Division to which the Thirty-ninth belongs marches
last. Our direction is toward Dinwiddie Court House within two miles
of which we camp for the night. Monday, the 6th, we are detailed for
picket duty; in the afternoon we cross Hatcher's Run and in the first
battle-line we are at the right, the enemy being strongly entrenched
at Dabney's Mills. The first attempt to dislodge the rebels is
unsuccessful, but in a second charge we take the works which, however,
we are compelled to vacate because of lack of support.

The events of this day so far as the Second Brigade is concerned are
effectively told by Major Isaac Hall, historian of the Ninety-seventh
New York, at this time a part of the Brigade:

[Sidenote: FEB. 6, '65]

Early in the afternoon of the following day (6th), Crawford's Division
moved forward into the woods in search of the enemy. He was supported
on the left by Ayers' (Second) Division; Gregg's cavalry being on
the extreme flank. This movement covered the Vaughn and Dabney Mill
roads, and Baxter's Brigade was on the right of the column. The enemy's
skirmishers were soon reached and pressed back upon the main line of
Pegram's Division of Gordon's Corps, which also retired to the ruins of
an old mill, where it made a stand. As the brigade came to an opening,
a formidable fort--as was supposed--presented itself to view, and a
strife occurred between the color bearers of the Sixteenth Maine and
the Ninety-seventh New York as to which should first plant its standard
upon the fort. The contestant of the Ninety-seventh achieved the
victory; but great was his disappointment when instead of a veritable
fort he found only a huge heap of saw-dust. A lively musketry fire
was kept up here for twenty or thirty minutes, when Mahone's heavy
columns came to the support of the line in our front. This was a most
inopportune moment for the Fifth Corps; many of the men were already
out of ammunition and the line surged back in spite of the officers.
General Warren was himself at the front and with his ready glass was
coolly surveying the enemy. He was pointed to by the officers, and
as if ashamed of themselves the men faced about, but this was of no
account since only a few shots were fired; the best of men will not
stand with empty muskets and be shot down, and to charge with empty
cartridge boxes and unloaded pieces was out of the question; hence
the retreat was continued, not precipitately, but the line surged
slowly and sullenly to the rear. The enemy was not eager to follow,
as if doubting the sincerity of our retreat. An ordnance wagon had
been ordered up, and some four or five hundred yards in front of our
works Captain Trembly was met with an ammunition wagon with which, in
the narrow road, he could neither advance nor retreat and was about
to destroy it. The wagon was caught by the men and quickly changed
ends, and when our trenches were reached the ammunition was quickly
distributed. A part of the Sixth Corps had arrived, and as the Fifth
emerged from the woods it was fired into by the former, which seemed
inclined to dispute our passage to the rear, some raw troops mistaking
our line for that of the enemy. The latter did not press heavily upon
our fortified position but seemed satisfied to know that our forces
were well up. Our men lay upon their arms through the long, cold night.
The morning of the 7th was cold and rainy; the rain soon turned to
sleet which covered the ground and rendered the movements of troops
difficult and somewhat dangerous. Our hands became so benumbed that it
was difficult to handle our pieces, still we held our positions and
occasionally advanced upon the enemy, which seemed to consist of a
thin, gray line covering itself in the woods.

The foregoing wagon incident is told in quite a different manner by a
survivor of our Regiment who believes in giving credit to him to whom
credit is due:

 At the battle of Hatcher's Run, Feb. 6th, 1865, our forces made a
 charge on the rebels, driving them back quite a distance; four of our
 ammunition wagons followed in through a cart path, when all at once
 our line broke and began falling back. The Captain of the ordnance
 wagons became rattled and ordered Sergeant W. P. Brown of Company K,
 Thirty-ninth, who was ordnance sergeant under him, to have the drivers
 unhitch the mules and burn the wagons, he himself taking the first two
 wagons and destroying them. Sergeant Brown kept his head, turned his
 two wagons around and saved one of them, the other, breaking a pole,
 had to be abandoned; the Captain in the meantime lost his horse, which
 was caught by Sergeant Brown, who went back in search of the officer,
 whom he found wandering about like a crazy man. Brown managed to get
 him on his horse and piloted him to the rear. Now comes the injustice,
 the Captain was complimented very highly on his bravery, a picture
 came out in the New York papers showing him destroying the wagons
 to keep them out of the hands of the rebels, while Brown was never
 mentioned or noticed in any way. Brown said that if he had had full
 charge, he could have saved three of the wagons at least, for he would
 have been perfectly sober--"To him that hath shall be given."

The particular part borne by the Thirty-ninth was to form in line at 8
a. m. and then to be deployed as skirmishers in front of the Brigade.
Thus advancing, the skirmishers of the enemy were driven from three
lines of rifle pits back into their main works which were near. At
5 p. m. our line was ordered to advance upon them, but the assault
proving unsuccessful the line fell back to its original position where
it remained exposed to a galling fire till late at night, when it was
relieved. Wednesday, the 8th, was spent in bivouac, a couple of miles
back of the scene of Tuesday's activities. The next day (9th), the
Regiment went on picket and, when relieved on Friday, the 10th, it
moved back to its old camp, near the Jerusalem Plank Road to get the
men's baggage that had been stored there. After this ebulition, which
cost the Fifth Corps 1,165 killed and wounded and 154 missing, quiet
again fell on the army, and on the 11th, moving out to the extreme
Union left near Hatcher's Run, camp was again pitched and winter
quarters were once more prepared. One writer says that the Brigade was
camped near the Goshen House, the Fifth Corps being massed in rear of
the Second. However disagreeable such variations in what many would
have made a peaceful winter may have been to the soldiers, there is
not a doubt that the lesson of constant watchfulness was thoroughly
impressed upon everyone, officers as well as men. Here, subjected to
the accustomed routine of camp and picket duty, February wore away.

[Sidenote: MAR., '65]

The beginning of March brought little if any variation on the ending
of the preceding month, yet there was a feeling in most minds that the
month would bring on the commencement of active hostilities. Everybody
knew that Sherman had reached North Carolina, and that General Joe
Johnston, with such forces as he could secure, was trying to prevent
the further advance of the triumphant army northward. The line whose
beginning we heard announced amid the thunders of Spottsylvania had
encompassed Petersburg and was slowly but surely extending towards
that never ending left. Though the army did not know it, General Lee
in these March days had sought an interview with Grant with reference
to some solution of the problem so long under consideration. The
latter had wisely referred the matter to Washington, whence Lincoln
warned the Lieutenant General against having any conference with Lee
unless to accept his surrender. Save for just a little vigor shown by
Sheridan and his cavalry there was practically nothing doing in the
Old Dominion till away past the middle of the month when, on the 25th,
the Confederates made their charge upon Fort Steadman, in front of
the Ninth Corps, the very last aggressive movement on the part of the
Army of Northern Virginia, effectually demonstrating to the exacting
Confederacy that its soldiery had fired its last charge of ammunition
in attack and that hopeless resistance and flight were the only
resources left.

As side lights to the story of a single regiment in the great struggle,
it might be said that United States Senator E. B. Washburn of Minnesota
came down from Washington, arriving at City Point March 10th, the
bearer of the medal which Congress had voted to General Grant for his
distinguished services; the presentation was made in the main cabin
of the steamer which brought the Senator, the evening of the 11th,
the day itself having been given to a ride through the army and a
review of some of the troops. General Meade and staff were present
at the presentation, which was made in eloquent words by Washburn, a
personal friend of Grant, and the latter received his honor with all
the modesty that ever characterized all of his acts. While all this was
taking place and the infantry of the great army was gaining strength
for the coming ordeal, Sheridan and his ever untiring cavalry were
continuing the raid on which, with 10,000 riders, he had started from
Winchester, February 27th and, like a cloudy pillar by day and one
of fire by night, he had ridden southward, once more administering
severe punishment to Early and his followers; between Staunton and
Charlottesville, had destroyed mills and factories, a considerable
portion of the James River Canal, railroad bridges and tracks; and now,
with his wearied horsemen, is approaching White House on the Pamunkey
River.

Nor was March altogether one of idleness for the Thirty-ninth, since
the new quarters constructed in February had to be maintained, and
ordinary policing of camp will insure an appetite for any healthy
soldier, and picket duty added kept everybody busy even if they were
not marching and fighting. A newspaper correspondent of the day, having
been through the camp and finding it extremely well kept, commented on
the same in exceedingly complimentary terms, concluding with, "and the
soldiers are spoiling for a fight," which, coming to the observation
of the men, one of them thus moralized in his diary, "To say that a
soldier is anxious for a fight and is eagerly waiting for a combat
with the enemy is talk that savors of nonsense; only a lunatic would
use such words. A soldier can be brave and can most ardently wish for
the overthrow of the enemy, and be willing to fight if he must, but
he never desires battle when strategy will do just as well, unless
drunk or crazy like some of the newspaper men." Thursday, the 9th of
March, brought along a pleasure in that the Regiment passed in review
before that most excellent former division commander, General John C.
Robinson, who had been so severely wounded at Laurel Hill and was just
getting about once more. On the 14th, General Warren conducted a review
of the entire Corps, a fact that set men to remarking that a move-out
would soon be in order. Two days later, the 16th, another exhibition of
our soldierly attributes and attainments was made for the edification
of Secretary of War Edward M. Stanton and others, the Thirty-ninth
acquitting itself in a praiseworthy manner.

[Sidenote: MARCH 25, '65]

The expiring thrust of the Rebellion, the assault and temporary capture
of Fort Steadman on Saturday, the 25th of March, called for immediate
aid from different parts of the line, the Thirty-ninth with others;
coming at five o'clock in the morning it was a great surprise to all of
us; though the attack was about ten miles to the right, the noise of
heavy artillery was excessive, and the Fifth Corps in light marching
order was ordered to the rescue at once. The response was immediate and
eager, and the Corps had a commendable pride in itself as it moved out
of its several camps with brave Warren at its head, marching briskly
towards the conflict, but before the scene could be reached the firing
ceased and we were halted till, all danger passed, we were ordered back
to camp. Near the Gurley House the Corps was reviewed by President
Lincoln, it being not a little interesting that the President and his
family had arrived at City Point the night before and he was near
enough to see the 1600 prisoners taken at the Fort as they marched by.

It was March 24th, or the day before the assault on Fort Steadman, that
Generals Grant and Meade issued their orders for the general movement
against the enemy, the same to begin on the 29th. The Fifth Corps was
in reserve and occupying camps in the rear of and to the left of the
Second Corps. Griffin's (First) Division was on the right, closely
connecting with the Second Corps; Ayres' (Second) was next at Griffin's
left and Crawford's (Third) was still further to the left and near the
Halifax Road. The movable force of the Potomac Army consisted of the
Second and Fifth Corps and Sheridan's Cavalry. By the orders of March
27th General Warren was to march at 3 a. m. on the 29th and, crossing
Hatcher's Run at W. Perkin's house, thence to march to the junction
of the Old Stage Road and the Vaughn Road and from that point to open
communications with the Second Corps, having accomplished which he was
to move to a position in the vicinity of Dinwiddie Court House. These
orders were subsequently somewhat modified. How near these days were to
the end no one realized, though Grant had been exceedingly apprehensive
that Lee would endeavor to move out from his entrenchments and, if
possible, effect a junction with Johnston to the southward, yet not
even his far seeing mind realized that less than two weeks separated
these late March days from the final wind-up. History is to be made
rapidly in the coming days; Sheridan is to "push things," and the
latest enlisted man is to march and fight feeling that every step and
blow are telling against the effort to disrupt the Union.

[Sidenote: MARCH 29, '65]

The right of Lee's army is the object that Sheridan and his forces are
seeking. He has his cavalry well in hand and had asked for the Sixth
Corps, having in the Valley learned some of its qualities, but that
Corps was so placed in the entrenched lines that its withdrawal was
impracticable, and the Fifth was sent instead. Proverbially rainy,
March of 1865 outdid itself and so watered the scene of hostilities
that movements of any kind seemed almost impossible. [V]Warren's advance
began at 3 a. m. on the 29th according to schedule, General Joshua L.
Chamberlain commanding the First Brigade of Griffin's (first) Division
in the lead; the crossing was made by pontoons over Rowanty Creek, the
name given to the stream made by the union of Hatcher's and Gravelly
Runs. The Corps was halted at the Quaker Road whence, to insure against
surprise, advance guards and supports were pushed to within two miles
of Dinwiddie Court House. At 10.12 a. m. Warren was ordered by General
Meade to move up the Quaker Road to Gravelly Run and thence to throw
out parties to the right that he might find the left of Humphreys,
commanding the second Corps. At noon he was ordered to cross the Run
and advance to Boydton Plank Road which was done, though considerable
delay was occasioned by reason of the stream not being fordable and the
laying of a pontoon bridge was hindered by the exceptional steepness of
the banks of the stream. About this time the enemy was developed and
his skirmishers were driven back till near the junction of the Quaker
and Boydton Roads. Here, supported by Gregory of Griffin's Second
Brigade, Chamberlain attacked and drove the rebels beyond the junction.
It was about 6 p. m. when the assault was made, the sun being about
half an hour high. Pushing on rapidly to the Plank Road, we went into
bivouac at nine o'clock, holding the Plank Road from Gravelly Run to
near Rainey's house where Griffin halted for the night, his pickets on
the right reaching those of the Second Corps.

Sergt. Wm. A. Mentzer, Company A, recalls that in falling back he and
his tentmate, I. H. Mitchell, in their anxiety to get a few more shots
at the foe stopped behind an old shed, but they waited a bit too long,
for the Rebels were near enough to get a cross fire on them, on which
they started back in a hurry, but within a very few rods Mitchell got a
shot which went right through him; however, his height was just right
to enable him to throw his arm over Mentzer's shoulder and thus they
weathered the storm of bullets, which, he said, made the mud through
which they were running fairly bubble, for the enemy was determined to
get them, and glad enough they were to reach the reformed line of the
Regiment. Mitchell's wound healed all right and in 1913 he survives
with his Sergeant to tell the story.

From right to left, the Fifth Corps divisions are Griffin's, Ayres's
and Crawford's, the latter in which was the thirty-ninth being nearest
Gravelly Run. During the night began the severe rain already alluded
to, coming in torrents till the afternoon of the 31st. Full of swamps
and ravines, the sand and clay were easily transformed into quicksands;
much of the way was quite impassable unless corduroyed; a part of the
land was covered with dense forest and undergrowth, so that being very
flat the water was quickly carried off. Rowanty Creek, over which
the Corps had gone on the 29th, rose so rapidly that on the 30th the
pontoon bridge was one hundred feet too short and the wagons of the
Corps had to wait until mid-day of the 31st. Notwithstanding this
condition, Griffin's Division was advanced up the Boydton Road until
the enemy was driven into his main line of works along the White Oak
Road. During the 30th, the Thirty-ninth Regiment was on the skirmish
line all day while those behind were busy entrenching, though the work
was slow since all the tools that could be obtained belonged to the
pioneers, those in the wagons not being available, as stated before.
It was observed, as an interesting fact, that the advance was then
occupying substantially the same position held by Hancock in October
of the preceding year. On this 30th of March, General Ayres, according
to directions, sent out one of his brigades on a reconnoisance; his
advance reached the Holliday house without opposition, crossing a
stream which was to play an important part in the operations of the
next day, going over the same with so much ease that he did not deem
it worthy of mention as an obstacle in his report, though then the
rain was falling furiously. Meanwhile Crawford and his Third Division
had relieved the two remaining brigades of Ayres's Division and now
occupied the line from Gravelly Run to Rainey's house.

[Sidenote: MARCH 31, '65]

During these movements the proceedings of the enemy were quite visible
and from captures made by our troops it was learned that there was
a considerable tendency of the Confederates towards Five Forks. In
reporting this information to headquarters, Warren suggested that
Griffin be relieved by Humphreys and that the entire Fifth Corps should
support the advance of Ayres, intimating that, if allowed to do this,
he could effectually block the White Oak Road and prevent its further
use by the enemy. At 9 p. m. orders were received substantially in
accord with General Warren's proposition, and Warren at once disposed
of his forces so that Ayres should lead, supported by Crawford and
Griffin whenever the arrival of Humphreys would permit. At 8.15, in
the morning of the 31st, Ayres is informed by General Warren that
Merritt's cavalry has been driven from the White Oak Road and that he
must observe his left with the utmost care lest the enemy assail him
from the west as well as from the north, a possibility at every step of
the movement from the Rapidan southward. Still heavily falls the rain,
diminutive brooks become swiftly flowing streams and ordinary creeks
speedily grow to be roaring torrents.

[Illustration: LIEUT. COLONEL HENRY M. TREMLETT

Brevet Colonel]

It was 10.30 when Ayres's advance was made, but it seemed that the
enemy was like minded with the Union Army and he too was approaching
with a far larger force than that of the Federals. The Union line
slowly withdrew to its original position while other troops were
hurried to its support but without avail and to add to the dangers of
the situation a heavy column of the enemy was discovered approaching
from the west. Unable to withstand the Confederate advance, our lines
gave way in considerable confusion. Crawford's Third Division was
thrown into the breach but was too unsteady to stay, and so fell into
the general retreat before the enemy. The Thirty-ninth had been thrown
forward as skirmishers, they were known as the skirmishers for the
Brigade, being near the Holliday house and holding their place with
steadiness, but, outflanked by the enemy, of necessity they fell back
with the rest. General Baxter, commanding the Brigade, strengthened the
line of the Thirty-ninth with the Eleventh Pennsylvania, both regiments
being composed of hardened campaigners who did their best; but the odds
were too great and they slowly gave way, expecting to rally on the
division which, however, had fallen back to the branch of Gravelly Run.
Lieut. Colonel Tremlett who, as a member of the Twentieth Regiment, had
been inducted into battle at Ball's Bluff, here received his mortal
wound and was borne from the field. Captain Willard C. Kinsley, Company
K, was also mortally wounded and the command of the regiment devolved
upon Captain Cooper of Company F.

When General Warren reached the scene of conflict and realized the
situation he seized the flag of a Pennsylvania regiment and rode up
and down the lines, trying to stem the retreat but without avail, it
being evident that the men would not stop on the western side of the
branch of Gravelly Run, mentioned in the advance of Ayres on the 30th.
Still waving his flag and trying to halt the men on the eastern side
of the stream, he succeeded in once more forming a well ordered line
and the approach of the enemy was effectually withstood and Griffin's
men recrossing the branch drove the enemy back. By this time Humphreys,
still further to the east, sent reinforcements so that the rebels
were effectually prevented from making any further serious attack. At
2.30 in the afternoon the Union Army again advanced and effectually
drove the enemy back over all the ground won in the forenoon and never
halted until it was on the White Oak Road, the Confederates themselves
saying it was one of the most gallant charges that they had ever seen.
"Crawford now reached the road and, following the line of the rebel
entrenchment to the east, connected with Miles of the Second Corps, who
had advanced and driven the enemy into their works to the east and to
the Plank Road." Ayres also had not fired a musket in this advance, was
halted just before reaching the road, and, still covering the left near
the house of W. Dabney, looked down the road towards Five Forks. The
enemy had failed in his effort to double up the Union left and what was
worse for him had lost the White Oak Road and was effectually penned up
within his works.

[Sidenote: APRIL 1, '65]

All this time Sheridan was having more trouble than usually fell to the
lot of Little Phil. He was near Dinwiddie Court House and the cavalry
of the enemy was making a more stubborn showing than was their wont,
indeed the men in blue were yielding to those in gray and late in the
afternoon, Warren sent a brigade (Bartlett's) of Griffin's Division to
Sheridan's relief, this being the first of the Fifth Corps to move to
the assistance of Sheridan in response to his call for infantry.

April 1st, so often mingled in Anglo Saxon minds with fooleries of all
descriptions, was one of intense earnestness to the long time rivals
along that line, reaching from the other or further side of James
River to Five Forks, a distance of nearly or quite forty miles. Good
Bishop Berkeley's aphorism as to the Star of Empire and its western
way has another application as General Ord and his divisions from the
Twenty-fourth and Twenty-fifth Corps leave the north side of the James
to Weitzel and his colored troops, and moving westward occupy space
to the left of the Sixth; from the right of the latter, Parke and the
Ninth Corps extend to the James. Humphreys and the Second Corps are
between Ord and the Fifth Corps, while Sheridan and his troopers are at
the extreme left, making sure that the Confederates shall not escape to
the southward. So generally have the rebel lines been reduced at Lee's
left, it seems strange that the Union troops in that locality did not
advance into the all but empty trenches. A wonderfully alert line of
men is that which, looking northward, sees the earthworks which must
be stormed, and that right early. The showing of Confederate cavalry
at the Union left, with the constant coming of infantry, demands its
destruction and this is the task that Sheridan has set for himself on
this day.

The last day of March saw Sheridan at the close of a day not entirely
to his liking, and a portion of the Fifth Corps was hurrying to his
aid. General Horace Porter in his "Campaigning with Grant" says, "The
Fifth Corps had borne the brunt of the fighting ever since the army
had moved out on March 29th; and the gallant men who composed it, and
who had performed a conspicuous part in nearly every battle in which
the Army of the Potomac had been engaged, seemed eager once more
to cross bayonets with their old antagonists. But the movement was
slow, the required formation seemed to drag, and Sheridan, chafing
with impatience and consumed with anxiety, became as restive as a
racer struggling to make the start." For many reasons the advance
of Warren's men towards Five Forks was slow; Ayres and the Second
Division went first and reported to Sheridan or one of the latter's
staff officers before daylight of the 1st; under orders, the commands
of Griffin and Crawford began their march towards Five Forks before
daylight of the 1st. The movement was made with considerable caution
because of information as to the positions of the enemy, stated the
night before by Sheridan, and with consequent slowness. At 7 and 8 a.
m. respectively Griffin's and Crawford's Divisions halted and were
permitted to cook their breakfasts and to rest, General Warren halting
with them. In the formation of the Corps finally, Crawford was on the
right, Ayres on the left with Griffin massed in rear of Crawford's
right flank; Baxter's Brigade in which the Thirty-ninth was ranged held
the extreme right of the Third Division.

[Sidenote: APR. 1, '65]

The orders were to advance to the White Oak Road and to swing to the
left, keeping the sun over the left shoulder. When the advance was made
it was found that the line was half a mile too far to the right and a
readjustment was necessary. In this effort, Crawford's Division was
thrown directly into the air and it seemed as though he were marching
away from the field. General Warren[W] hastened to rearrange the
confused line, an effort not unaccompanied with difficulty. In
this particular movement, as a regiment in the Third Division, the
Thirty-ninth bore its part and of this Captain Charles H. Porter says:--

 After getting over the White Oak Road we never saw any clearing of any
 description until we came over the cleared field in which were the
 chimneys of some houses, which is marked "chimneys" on the map. We
 swung to the north of those chimneys and as the line came around we
 went into the woods again. Coulter, who had been in reserve, was now
 on the line of battle and connected with the Second Brigade, Baxter's.

It was a very wide sweep that the Third Division made and in its
progress a battery was captured, the division being under fire all of
the time, and this advance of Crawford's men caused an evacuation of
the enemy's entrenchments. Again quoting Captain Porter, we have:--

 As the Third Division neared Five Forks, under orders from General
 Warren, the troops were faced west and we pushed on with our left a
 little north of the White Oak Road, and when we reached the clearing
 known as Gilliams' we found the enemy had made a final stand and
 erected temporary earthworks at right angles to their original lines.
 The men being out of breath and the formation somewhat broken, the
 troops halted and opened a desultory fire upon the enemy. General
 Warren, hastening up, quickly discovered the cause of the delay and,
 after giving a little time to the reforming of the troops, a very
 good line was formed, and under the gallant leadership of him who
 had commanded us for more than a year the troops sprang forward and
 carried the works. General Warren's horse was shot under him, directly
 astride the works; and Lieut. Colonel Richardson received the bullet
 that would have struck our beloved corps commander. By this time, the
 night was well upon us, and, the enemy being thoroughly dispersed,
 the troops were halted and General Warren sent one of his staff to
 find General Sheridan and to ask for further orders. The aide reached
 Sheridan and received in reply the words that orders had been sent to
 Warren, and not long after Bankhead's return, Colonel Forsyth arrived
 with the order from Sheridan relieving Warren from the command of the
 corps.

 Thus on the field of battle after the most successful day's work that
 he had ever taken part in, Warren was deprived of the command of the
 corps which he had commanded since March, 1864, and a position which
 he had earned by soldierly courage and brilliant conduct on many
 fields. Beginning at Great Bethel, his name is associated with every
 field upon which the Army of the Potomac was engaged. The insulting
 remark and the tone and gestures of Sheridan, when he alluded to
 Warren's services on this day, are a disgrace to this brilliant man.
 There is no excuse nor palliation for them. The most ardent friend
 that Sheridan has cannot explain away the insult conveyed to one of
 the bravest and most devoted of soldiers in the Army of the Potomac.

 Crawford's Division suffered more than the other portions of the
 corps, its casualties being nearly equal to those of the other
 two divisions. We came under fire as soon as any of the corps and
 continued to be under fire until after the attack on Gilliam's field.

Long years after the war Sergt. Wm. A. Mentzer of "A" was wont to tell
of seeing Sheridan at Five Forks with his Staff, riding along the rear
of our lines, shouting, "See the Sons of B----s run! Give them H--L,
boys!" "After going a little way into the woods we came to the rear of
the Rebel works, where I saw a lad behind the same firing at our folks.
Jamming on my bayonet I jumped to the works and ordered him to come
out; he looked up and had the impudence, with a smile on his face, to
say, 'I wish you would let me fire these five cartridges.' I think I
swore some and told him I'd put the bayonet right through him unless he
came out at once, and he came. When going to the rear with my prisoner
I saw General Warren riding the same way, but not till the next morning
did I know that our great and good leader had been relieved of his
command."

[Sidenote: APR. 2, '65]

April 2d, as usual when the most important military operations are to
be undertaken, is Sunday and at 4.45 a. m. signal guns announced the
general advance of the Union forces in front of Petersburg, from the
Appomattox to Five Forks and beyond. Within half an hour, Wright of
the Sixth Corps sends word to Grant that he has carried the enemy's
lines in front of his position, and Parke of the Ninth reports that he
has captured the outer works with artillery and 800 prisoners, and,
before seven o'clock, the Lieut. General telegraphs President Lincoln
at City Point the good news. This is the day in which Richmond, the
Confederate Capital, lulled into fancied security, quite ignorant of
the havoc along the Petersburg lines, is actually attending church and
President Davis is summoned from his pew in St. Paul's church with
the overwhelming news that the Yankees are coming. How pandemonium
broke loose, how the iron clads and other ships in the James River
were destroyed; how the three bridges which spanned the James were
burned; and Richmond, itself, by a fire set by the Confederates and
extinguished by the Union troops, suffered worse than Columbia from
the alleged inhumanity of Sherman--all this is history. Every man who
wore the blue seemed to have a mission to find someone in gray and the
latter, be it said to his everlasting credit, was nothing loath to be
found.

Until the afternoon of the 2d, the Fifth Corps was employed on the
field of Five Forks in caring for the wounded, burying the dead and
destroying the old arms of the captured Confederates. After these
accomplishments the Corps, now under General Griffin, received orders
to proceed towards Petersburg, Chamberlain's Brigade of Bartlett's
Division (till yesterday, Griffin's) leading. Whatever opposition was
encountered, it was speedily swept away and, at Church Road Crossing
of the South Side Railroad, fifteen miles from Petersburg, a passing
train of cars was captured. Crossing the railroad he was ordered to
push out if possible to the Cox Road, crossing the line of march at
right angles. The First Division continued towards Sutherland Station,
still nearer Petersburg, while Crawford's coming up, at about 3 p. m.,
went over the road with cheers, thence passing down the same about
seven miles it turned to the left, marching till 6.30 before halting
for the night. In some places the stream at which the stop was made is
called Namozine while General Humphreys' map has it Whipponock and here
some annalist says the enemy got combative during the evening and the
Thirty-ninth, as usual, went out on skirmish duty, when a few shots
seemed to settle the matter for the rebels, of whom nothing more was
heard during the night.

[Sidenote: APR. 4, '65]

The great Confederate army that had withstood our onslaughts so many
years is clearly trying to escape "on the run" is the thought in the
minds of those who follow. The Union cavalry, led by the fiery Custer,
is keeping the rear guard of the enemy in plain sight and the infantry
is following as rapidly as it can. With the exception of Willcox's
Division of the Ninth Corps, which is occupying Petersburg, the entire
Potomac Army is in the chase; it is the day when Godfrey Weitzel
marches into Richmond and extinguishes the conflagration started by
the retiring foe; President Lincoln, leading his son, Tad, enters
Petersburg and personally congratulates Grant on the great victory; of
the meeting General Horace Porter says, "I doubt whether Mr. Lincoln
ever experienced a happier moment in his life." The Fifth Corps follows
hard after the cavalry, picking up many prisoners with five pieces of
abandoned artillery and a number of wagons. At night, with Crook's
Division of cavalry, the Corps encamps on the Nazomine Road, near Deep
Creek. On the morning of the 4th, the Corps moves directly and rapidly
towards Jetersville, a station on the Richmond and Danville R. R.,
Sheridan thinking that the rebels are collecting at Amelia Court House
about eight miles northeast of Jetersville. On arriving we are ordered
to entrench with a view of holding the point until the main army can
come up. The position of the Corps is an exposed one, of which Sheridan
in his report says, "The enemy lost its last chance of escape by
failure to advance and attack the comparatively small force and so
march on its way to Burkeville." However, luckily for the troops at
Jetersville, the Confederates are not reaching the Court House as
rapidly as Sheridan thinks and by the afternoon of the 5th, the Second
and the Sixth Corps are up and ranged in line with the Fifth. While
not described in detail, the whole world knows that everybody was busy
in those days with scant time for sleep at night, but through the
bewildering maze of horse and foot, it is ours to follow only the men
of a single corps and that the Fifth. Many a page might be given to
reciting the incidents of Sailor's Creek, the last pitched battle in
the East, but our regiment was not in it. At last Sheridan had obtained
his wish and the Sixth Corps, having been sent to him, wins renown in
this final struggle, while the Fifth moves off at the right of the
Second through Paineville on Deatonville. It proved a long, rapid and
tiresome march, a distance of thirty-two miles to Ligontown Ferry,
experiencing no greater variety on the way than the destruction of
abandoned army wagons, gun carriages and caissons of the enemy and the
capture of some prisoners.

Says Powell in his History of the Fifth Army Corps, "No army in the
world could stand such losses as Lee was meeting every day, and no
troops could long endure the strain and fatigue of marching all night
and fighting by day, as Lee's men were now enduring. They were by this
time deprived of everything, even food, and those captured presented
a pitiable condition." Though the slumbers of the Union Army are not
as prolonged as they may have been at other times, nevertheless there
are halts and rations are had, and with full stomachs and a boundless
supply of ammunition the pursuit is maintained. Friday, the 7th,
General Meade orders Griffin with the Fifth Corps to proceed to Prince
Edward Court House while the Second and the Sixth keep up the direct
pursuit. Our Corps crosses the South side R. R. at Rice's Station, just
fifty miles west of Petersburg and forty from Appomattox. General
Grant's first letter to General Lee, relative to surrender, bears the
date of the 7th and the answer of the great Confederate, asking for
terms, is dated the same day. Whatever his intentions, Lee does not
await the statement of Grant, but pushes on through the night towards
the west on his hopeless task. The morning of the 8th beholds the
tireless Second Corps, closely followed by the Sixth, in eager pursuit.
The Fifth Corps also has an early start and striking the Lynchburg R.
R. at Prospect Station, twenty miles from Appomattox, at about noon,
follows thence Ord's forces towards Appomattox Court House and at 2 a.
m. of the 9th, Sunday, bivouacks about two miles from the site of the
immortal scene so soon to be enacted having marched twenty-nine miles
from Prince Edward's Court House.

[Sidenote: APR. 9, '65]

Meantime, on the 8th, Grant and Lee had again exchanged courtesies, the
former writing to Lee that his surrender could be accepted only on the
understanding that his soldiers should not take up arms against the
United States until properly exchanged, and the famous Virginia names
the 9th as the day for their meeting, stipulating however that it need
not necessarily lead to his surrender, and 10 a. m. as the hour. All
this is not known to the rank and file, who for ought they know are
still due for weeks of marching and fighting, though for the last few
days there has been considerably more of the former than of the latter.
Accordingly there was no surprise abroad when the familiar assembly
call rang out on the morning air of the 9th and without rations the day
before, or breakfast this morning, at four o'clock, the Corps moved
from its bivouac and reached the headquarters of General Sheridan at
6 a. m. The cavalry evidently was hotly engaged and the Twenty-fourth
Corps was moving out when Ayers of the Fifth (Second Div.), followed by
Bartlett and the First Division, took position also. General Griffin
reported that the failure of the Third Division to be in line with the
others was entirely the fault of the commander, though he had been
notified of the necessity of keeping well closed up; as a result the
division did not reach its proper position till after hostilities for
the day were over.

The 9th day of April will figure in history as one of the most
important dates ever recorded; the correspondence, now passing between
Grant and Lee, will rank with the other all but sacred documents in our
national records. Hostilities had begun and our lines were pressing
forward, driving the enemy, when a message was received from Sheridan
that fighting should cease as the Confederates were about to surrender.
On the scenes that follow--those beneath the famous apple tree and
within the parlor of Wilmer McLean, where foemen "worthy of their
steel" were assembled--it does not behoove us to linger, for they are
as familiar as household tales throughout the land. The two pre-eminent
figures, those of Grant and Lee, meet face to face, each one increasing
the esteem in which he must be held as long as the Nation lives.

    "These in the robings of glory,
      Those in the gloom of defeat,
    All with the battle-blood gory,
      In the dusk of eternity meet."

While the great majority of the triumphant army, setting their faces
homeward, start on the return march the next day after the surrender,
to the troops of General Ord and the First Division of the Fifth Corps
is entrusted the honor as well as task of receiving the formal "laying
down of arms" by the beaten Confederates. This crowning event does
not take place until the 12th, the Fourth anniversary of the firing
upon Sumpter, when at nine o'clock in the morning General Joshua
L. Chamberlain of Maine, having asked for the services of his old
Brigade, the Third, had the same ranged in line to receive the oncoming
Southrons. "It was not long before a column of gray was seen marching
down the valley which sent a thrill of excitement through every
individual present. The Union troops were brought to attention. Evans'
Brigade of Gordon's Corps led the advance of the Confederates. As its
head reached the extreme right of Chamberlain's line, it was wheeled
into company line first and subsequently into general line confronting
the Union troops. Then each regiment stacked arms, unslung cartridge
boxes and hung them on the stacks, and finally laid down their colors.
It was a trying scene. And then, disarmed and colorless, they again
broke into column and marched off, disappearing forever as soldiers of
the Southern Confederacy."[X]

[Sidenote: APR. 14, '65]

While to the Fifth Corps came the honor of receiving the formal
surrender of the Confederates the fact that the men had to linger
here, at least some of them, until the 15th brought upon them certain
hardships, disagreeable in spite of their pleasure over the successful
ending of the campaign. For some reason, perhaps the destruction of
bridges on the route, supplies did not reach the army, so that there
was positive suffering on account of lack of food. Only a few days
before, hungry rebel stomachs had been filled through the foresight
and kindness of Grant, and now the victorious Yankees are experiencing
want themselves; somehow there comes to mind the Scriptural expression,
"He saved others, himself He cannot save." To crown all, a severe rain
fell during the 14th, so without tents and minus rations, the soldiers
passed a miserable day and night. It was about noon of the 15th, that
the Corps began its retrograde movement, but the rain had rendered the
roads well nigh impassable, hence the course backward had few of the
features of a triumphal procession, everyone being on the lookout for
expected rations, but none arrived, and after dark came the orders to
halt, break ranks and make the best of the situation for the night;
meanwhile the rain was falling incessantly. The 16th dawned cold and
raw and under the circumstances the men were as comfortable when
marching as when nominally resting. At noon the Appomattox was reached
and, on a temporary bridge it was crossed, and soon after Farmville was
gained, a place more conspicuous in history than in fact.

Here, at 4 p. m., came the dispatch announcing the death of President
Lincoln and the already discouraged men had a deeper pitch of woe to
bear, naturally the rank and file of them ascribing the assassination
to the Confederate leaders rather than to a half-crazed actor. It is
said that to properly drape their colors, some of the bearers actually
dipped their handkerchiefs in ink. The next day, Monday, the 17th, the
homeward route was resumed by way of Burkeville, and on the 21st the
Second Brigade encamped at Blacks & Whites Station on the Southside R.
R. Evidently the Fifth Corps was distributed along the road, for Powell
mentions Sutherland Station, near Petersburg, as the camping place,
reaching the same on the 23d; and a diarist of the Thirty-ninth, who
was at corps headquarters, places the same at Nottoway Court House.
However placed, in due time the army learned of the surrender of
Johnston in North Carolina on the 26th. Here too were welcomed back
many of the men who were captured in the Weldon R. R. incident, among
them being Major F. R. Kinsley upon whom devolved the command of what
was left of the Regiment.

We observed May Day by breaking camp and resuming the march towards the
North, passing through Petersburg on the 3d, taking hurried glances at
what had occasioned us so many months of toil and danger. The James
River was reached at Manchester, just across from Richmond, so as
to pass through the former Capital of the Confederacy on Saturday,
the 6th, taking note in passing of Libby Prison, Castle Thunder and
the State House. Near the latter to review the Army of the Potomac,
excepting the Sixth Corps, were standing Generals Meade, Henry Wager
Halleck and other officers. The Sixth Corps was still doing guard duty
along the railroad, between Burkeville and Danville. On the 9th, we
pass over the famous battlefield of Fredericksburg where Massachusetts
regiments suffered so severely. We cross the Rappahannock on pontoons
below the city, this being our tenth and last time, and Friday, the
12th of May, beheld us on Arlington Heights, near Fort Albany and
almost on the very spot of our first camping ground when, in September,
'62, we crossed the Potomac and entered the enemy's country, thus
ending where we began. What days of wearisome marching, long and dreary
vigils on picket line and vidette, what dangers of the embattled field
the interval covers! The extended line marks our duties along the
Potomac, in Washington, from Harper's Ferry to Antietam and thence
southward to the Rapidan, with a backward turning to Bull Run and
Thoroughfare Gap, through the Wilderness, Spottsylvania and Petersburg,
the pursuit, surrender and return, till now the circle is complete.
With so much behind us, what wonder that visions of home become more
and more absorbing!

[Sidenote: MAY 23, '65]

However, there yet remained the Grand Review for which in part
Sherman's Army had made the trip from North Carolina, and it was an
inspiring sight to see the many tents of the men who had made the
world-famous "March to the Sea" as they were spread over the heights
back of Alexandria. Very likely the Review was worth all it cost, but
to the men who had to undergo the fatigue incident to it, there was
no little bitter mingled with the sweet; some even claimed that the
exhibition of Tuesday, the 23d, when the Potomac Army marched in review
was the most exacting they had ever taken and they thought it was for
the express and only purpose of gratifying a sightseeing proclivity
of certain authorities well up the line; Sherman's men paraded on the
24th. The next night, that of the 25th, there was an illumination
by the Army of the Potomac, candles being lighted on every tent and
rockets were sent up. The brigades turned out, every man carrying a
candle and thus marched to corps headquarters, where hearty cheers
were given for General Griffin. For the remainder of the month there
is little more than a waiting for the final muster-out and occasional
visits to Washington, Alexandria and other near-by points of interest.

The coming of June simply intensified the home-longing and the feeling
that we must go very soon. The ceremony of muster-out began on the
2d, terminating on the 3d, on whose night comes the statement that we
will depart at 8 a. m. of the 4th. According to schedule, we start,
the day being Sunday, and march into Washington and there wait till 2
p. m., when the train is taken for Baltimore; the same proved to be a
slow one for we do not reach the city until five o'clock. Then comes
the march through Baltimore, the boarding of another train and an all
night's ride to Philadelphia, arriving in time for a breakfast at the
Cooper Shop, whose hospitality we had tested on our way southward in
September, '62. Thence we ride through New Jersey to New York city,
where a lunch is furnished by the New England Relief Association,
before going on board a steamer bound for Providence, whence by rail
we reach Boston early in the morning of the 6th. The wait in Boston is
very short and another train transports us to Readville at 8 a. m. and
we are assigned to quarters there. By a singular coincidence Lieut.
Colonel Tremlett who had been severely wounded at Gravelly Run, March
31st, and was sent home to Boston, dies this very day in his Beacon
Street home. While passes were readily given to the homes represented,
all were glad to return and receive their discharges and pay on the
14th of June. Thus ends the story of devotion and sacrifice of a
regiment that had gone forth to help save the Union and whose members
now are returning to the paths of peace. They have made an honorable
record, not alone pleasing to themselves but to the hundreds of those
to follow and who, in the years to come, will call their memory
blessed.

They are returning to their homes,

    "Where the matron shall clasp her first-born
      With tears of joy and pride;
    And the scarred and war-worn lover
      Shall claim his promised bride!"

      --_Bryant._

FOOTNOTES:

[U] One of the most pleasant memories of war times is that of the
almost David and Jonathan relations that existed between certain
regiments. This was the case with the Thirty-ninth and the Sixteenth
Maine; either one had a feeling of security if, in the hour of danger,
it was supported by the other; exposed repeatedly to a common peril, in
a measure, the history of one is that of both; each regiment had the
highest regard and respect for the leaders of its fellow organization
and for years after the war exchange of courtesies on reunion occasions
was an expected event. Closely related in early history as were Maine
and Massachusetts, the equal intimacy between representatives of the
two states in camp and march and on the field lingers long in the minds
of those who participated.

[V] Condensed from a paper prepared by Captain Charles H. Porter and
read by him before the Massachusetts Military Historical Society
January 11, 1886.

[W] Governour Kemble Warren was born in Cold Spring, Putnam Co., N.
Y., January 8, 1830, and was graduated from West Point, No. 2, in a
class of forty-four members, very few of whom, however, are known to
fame, Cuvier Grover and Powell T. Wyman being the most noted among
his loyal classmates and Wm. T. Magruder and Robert Ransom among the
rebels. Assigned on graduation to the Topographical Engineers, he was
in constant and active service till his appointment as mathematical
instructor at West Point, 1859, and there the Rebellion found him.
At first he was Lieut. Colonel of the Fifth (Duryea's Zouaves), N.
Y. Volunteers, soon succeeding to the colonelcy; he was the last to
leave the field at Big Bethel, remaining to rescue the body of Lieut.
J. T. Greble, the first Regular Army officer to lose his life in the
war. He helped build the forts on Federal Hill, Baltimore. He served
in the Peninsular Campaign, acquiring a brigade in May, '62, and, in
the subsequent months, there was very little doing by the Army of the
Potomac in which he did not bear a conspicuous part. His bronze figure
on Little Round Top must forever tell the story of his watchfulness and
alertness at Gettysburg and the members of the Fifth Army Corps, to a
man, never failed to chant his praises. The incident of his suspension
from his command at Five Forks is a blot on the fame of Sheridan and
made Warren's place in the hearts of his followers warmer than ever.
A skillful engineer, he was constantly employed in the army up to the
time of his death, which no doubt was hastened by the unfortunate
occurrence of April, '65. His relations with the Thirty-ninth, after
the war, were of an unusually intimate character. He died in Newport,
R. I., August 8, 1882.

[X] From the history of the Fifth Army Corps, William H. Powell, pp.
863-4.




IN REBEL PRISONS.


While men of the Thirty-ninth suffered in nearly all of the
prison-houses of the South, the greater number spent their periods of
confinement in Salisbury, N. C. The two hundred and thirty-two swept
off August 18-19, '64, at the Weldon R. R., after incarceration at
Libby and Belle Isle, were taken to Salisbury and there spent the time
till their liberation in February, '65. Among the unfortunates was John
H. Eames who was First Sergt. Co. C, and whose diligent care secured
the data concerning his fellow sufferers which perfected the State
House rolls and gave the boon of certainty to many a stricken home in
the old Bay State. His tabulated statement bears the following names:--

Company A:--Serg'ts, J. W. Cottrell, J. P. Dodge; Corp's, T. Bean, G.
W. Cole, S. C. Packard; Privates, F. D. Adams, G. J. Boodry, G. W.
Burnham, W. S. Evans, J. K. Gibbs, C. M. Goodwin, A. S. Haskell, R. E.
Mears, W. Hunting, J. H. Mitchell, D. F. Morse, L. Marteau, W. Myers,
L. E. Ordway, J. H. Perkins, J. M. Sawyer, E. Stevens, G. F. Whitcomb.

Company B:--Serg'ts, E. S. Davis, J. R. Robinson; Corp's, G. A.
Andrews, E. H. Lewis; Privates, W. M. Bills, J. Cassidy, M. Cunningham,
F. Edmonds, J. Gunning, J. Kilduff, Geo. McDonald, T. P. Mohan, P.
Reaney, H. R. Smith, F. T. Start, D. O. Sullivan, Charles Swan, C.
Wadsworth, J. Burns captured Dec. 11, 1864.

Company C:--Serg'ts, J. H. Eames, I. T. Morrison; Privates, J. M.
Baldwin, S. C. Bowen, Wm. Cheeney, F. J. Curtis, E. C. Dean, B. J.
Ellis, P. Gleason, E. Ireland, A. Joyce, J. Lange, J. McGee, M. F.
Roberts, W. H. Rogers, W. S. Smith, Wm. Vaeight.

Company D:--Serg't, H. Curtis; Corp's, W. H. Burns, W. E. Colburn, A.
Derby, C. C. Dickerman, H. Newcomb, E. Thomas; Privates, F. Becker, A.
Bullard, C. Bushnell, E. Damon, S. DeForrest, T. Doyle, J. Durgin, J.
E. Forbes, J. F. Green, W. Hayden, D. Kanily, W. G. Keep, T. H. Lunt,
P. Moran, E. Pierce, G. W. Savill, H. Shavlin, J. Sheehan.

Company E:--Serg'ts, J. Kennedy, E. Ladd; Corp's, F. A. Glines, D.
Gorham, J. E. Horton, W. L. Howard; Privates, J. M. Allen, W. H.
Bartlett, J. Brown, J. B. Canfield, C. L. Carter, J. Creedan, Geo.
H. Hatch, P. D. Horgan, C. G. Jones, D. Kendrick, J. F. Locke, A.
W. Phillips, John Riley, T. P. Shaw, F. W. Thompson, L. Ulrich, J.
Vancleff, H. K. Webster.

Company F:--Serg'ts, W. Doherty, H. B. Horton, D. Wood; Corp's, J.
Bagth, B. J. Hall; Privates, P. Conway, J. Day, W. E. Dean, G. W. Gay,
J. A. Hathaway, B. L. Howland, W. H. Jones, D. S. Kane, J. A. Lawler,
S. Packer, T. W. Paul, D. M. Phillips, F. C. Skinner, E. H. C. Smith,
J. Smith, A. P. Terry, G. L. Titus, W. Walsh.

Company G:--Serg'ts, J. Adams, H. C. French, W. H. Jacobs; Corp's, J.
D. Day, P. J. Shaw, T. G. Short; Privates, J. Bannon, W. Bright, C.
Danbenmayer, W. G. Dodge, D. R. Ewell, M. Fitzgerald, C. E. French,
M. Gorman, F. K. Hanson, Z. M. Hayden, H. F. Hersey, S. W. Hutchins,
J. Kennedy, H. W. Leavitt, T. Murphy, J. S. Neal, S. V. Smith, C. A.
Spaulding, E. A. Spear, N. W. Thayer.

Company H:--Serg'ts, C. W. Richardson; Corp's, E. J. Childs, B. F.
Prescott, S. O. Savil; Privates, J. Brunel, P. Collins, M. Dailey, J.
Davis, J. Doody, J. Farren, R. T. Gammon, R. T. Holmes, T. Kelley, J.
Keniston, E. F. Kimball, E. McCarthy, G. C. Millett, J. H. Millett,
R. Monk, T. Murray, P. Shean, D. Southworth, F. H. Sumner, G. N. B.
Thomas, E. Tileston.

Company I:--Serg'ts, E. Brown, J. Currier; Corp's, W. H. Beal, W. H.
Clough, W. Collins, S. Hardy; Privates, W. L. Allen, J. D. Bispham, C.
B. Butterfield, D. O. Chamberlain, S. C. Chace, A. M. Cole, E. Curran,
S. Gourley, T. Hoey, C. O'Brien, A. E. Smith, N. D. Stearns, F. E.
Travis, C. H. Williams.

Company K:--Corp., S. Richardson; Privates, J. Bacon, M. Baldwin,
J. Brannagan, F. M. Bryant, M. Butler, C. H. Colgate, R. Curry, G.
W. Dean, E. Haskins, S. T. Hooper, W. H. Jones, C. H. Kingsbury, A.
Lapurve, J. F. Leslie, R. Lombard, J. McGuire, T. Mahony, T. Marran, T.
W. Morrill, E. O'Donnell, Peter Parks, J. F. Ramsdell, M. D. Reed, A.
H. Richardson, M. Rowland, C. Scott, J. H. Sheehan, F. Spokesfield, G.
A. Sprague, E. O. Hemmenway captured Dec. 11, 1864.

In Sergeant Eames' well preserved record, on its final page, is
written,--"This book I arranged while in prison from information from
the members of the reg't and, to the best of my knowledge and belief,
is strictly true. The leaves I purloined from the rebel surgeon's
hospital book; the cover I carried through prison, having received it
with, of course, the original leaves through the mail, Aug. 18, 1864."

 "Left Salisbury Prison at seven o'clock, Feb. 20, 1865; cars started
 for Greensboro at 8; we rode on top, very cold and slow riding;
 arrived at G. (fifty miles) at about 7 a. m. Changed cars and lay over
 until 7 p. m. Left for Danville, Va.; slept nearly all night, reaching
 D. at daylight; changed cars and started immediately for Richmond,
 enjoying the prospect of homeward bound. Washington's birthday, Feb.
 22; arrived in Richmond about 2 a. m. Waited till 9 a. m. when we
 were put into Libby Prison, remaining there till nine o'clock of the
 following morning. Then we started by boat down the River, passing
 safely through the obstructions; saw two rebel rams, Fort Darling and
 other places of interest, reaching the landing (Aiken's) after two
 hours' sail, and were received by Yankee cavalry and escorted to the
 Yankee truce-boat, some 3 or 4 miles down the river; passed through
 the Eighteenth Corps, mostly colored troops, who used us finely giving
 us bread, tobacco, etc. On seeing the good old Flag we felt that we
 were free again. We got to our boat all right, except wet feet and
 some weariness. We soon got the first drink of Yankee coffee for five
 months and more; it tasted splendidly and we got plenty to eat and
 felt like new men. We had a safe trip down the river, arriving at
 Annapolis Feb. 26, '65; started from Salisbury Prison, Monday; reach
 Annapolis Saturday. This journal was written on the way home, written
 under difficulties and excitement, and, as a consequence, is not very
 minute.

 "P. S. Many of the poor fellows who lived to leave prison, died soon
 after reaching home so that, at the time Lee surrendered as far as I
 could ascertain, four-fifths of those sent to Salisbury were dead, the
 remainder being more or less broken in health."




CORPORAL F. A. GLINES' DIARY.


Of the foregoing list, Glines, Horton and Locke, all of "E," kept
diaries or some form of record, as did Corp. E. H. Lewis of "B," the
first two until a few days before their deaths; Private Locke, after
the war, embodied his recollections in a very interesting lecture,
delivered by him many times. From all of these sources items have been
gleaned through the body of the history and especially in the following
pages. From the carefully preserved diary of Corporal F. A. Glines
extracts are made as follows:--

 Fri., August 19, 1864--Lay in line all night; moved a little to the
 right; were attacked and flanked and I, with the greater part of my
 reg't, was taken prisoner; were taken to Petersburg under guard; very
 rainy and muddy.

 Sat., 20--Lay in a field all night; very wet, cold and uncomfortable;
 were taken through the town and put on an island, at the north side of
 the Appomattox.

 Sun., 21--Lay on the island all day; drew rations for one day; I had
 bread and a small piece of pork, full of worms.

 Mon., 22--Were called up at 2 a. m.; left the island at 4; were put
 aboard the cars and sent to Richmond; are quartered in Libby Prison;
 drew rations for one day, half loaf corn-bread and a small piece fresh
 meat.

 Tues., 23--Were sent across the street to another prison; were
 searched and all articles of any value were taken from us; were sent
 to Belle Isle this afternoon; met John Davis (H) here; am in the
 Forty-fifth Squad.

 Wed., 24--Very hot; are having tents put up for us; we have two meals
 a day; quarter loaf of corn bread at 10 a. m. and corn bread and soup
 at 3 p. m.; have to sleep on the ground with no covering.

 Thurs., 25--Very hot and uncomfortable; signs of rain to-night; had
 only one meal to-day.

 Fri., 26--Very heavy thunder-shower; last evening several men tried to
 escape; do not know how many succeeded; several shots fired at them;
 one man killed and three wounded.

 Sat., 27--Sergt. French, Co. G., shot by the guard, one other man
 wounded; got our tents to-day.

 Sun., 28--Very hot; were counted this morning.

 Mon., 29--2000 more prisoners sent here this afternoon; enlarging the
 space for prisoners.

 Thurs., Sept. 8--My twenty-first birthday; pleasant weather.

 Fri., 9--Were counted to-day; the squads, filled up, stayed outside
 nearly all day; took different tents when we came in.

 Sat., 10--Great fire in Manchester last night; great deal of dispute
 about tents.

 Thurs., Sept. 15--Those men whose terms of service have expired were
 sent for to-day and their names taken; there was quite a large number
 of them from nearly all the states.

 Fri., 16--Slept cold last night; a warm day; the guard which has been
 guarding us has been relieved by a lot of old cocks who hardly know a
 gun from a broomstick; the old guard went off last night.

 Thurs., 22--A Dutch reb lieutenant in here this afternoon, trying to
 enlist Germans in the reb. service; met with poor success, the boys
 were too loyal for him; the guard-tents on the hill removed.

 Sun., 25--A lot of our men went out to-day to work for the reb
 government as coopers, carpenters and shoemakers; they are a small
 loss to us; the fewer such men the government has, the better for us.

 Mon., 26--Some of our men building breastworks for the rebs opposite
 the camp; it is a pity that they cannot be made to charge on them with
 rebs behind the works; did not get anything to eat till about 2 p. m.

 Tues., 27--John Davis sent to the hospital; a boat load of tents came
 over this morning.

 Wed., 28--Counted this morning; two men buried themselves outside with
 the intention of escaping, but one of our men told the Lieutenant, who
 has kept them in their hole all day buried up to their necks.

 Thurs., 29--Heavy cannonading in the direction of Fort Darling; some
 excitement in Richmond; a battery planted opposite us, across the
 river; counted to-day; had to stay out nearly all day; got nothing to
 eat till evening; was very hungry and faint; new tents put in place of
 the old ones.

 Fri., 30--It is six weeks to-day since we were "gobbled" and about as
 miserable a six weeks as ever I passed, but "nil desperandum"; 670
 prisoners sent here to-day, the greater part captured at Winchester.

 Sat., October 1--Very heavy cannonading in the direction of Fort
 Darling; a great deal of excitement in Richmond; the guards have
 orders to shoot us if we make any cheering or noisy demonstration;
 rained all day, passed a cold, miserable and comfortless day.

 Sun., 2--Rained nearly all last night; some cannonading this morning;
 a man shot by the guard last night; cloudy nearly all day; the
 quartermaster and quartermaster sergeant of the island sent to Castle
 Thunder for selling rations.

 Mon., 3--Another man shot by the guard this morning; about 200 more
 prisoners were sent over here this evening from Libby.

 Tues., 4--1100 men were sent away from here this morning; said to be
 going further south; they were furnished with two days' rations.

 Wed., 5--600 more men sent off this morning.

 Thurs., 6--900 of us were turned out at 2 a. m. and furnished with two
 days' rations; marched off the island and lay till four o'clock just
 off the island, got aboard the cars on the Richmond and Danville R. R.
 and started en route for Salisbury, N. C.

 Fri., 7--Rode on the cars all night, reaching Danville at 10 a. m., a
 most painful ride; we were packed in like herrings; changed cars and
 reached Greensboro, N. C, at 10 p. m.; were marched out into a field
 for the night; very cold and windy.

 Sat., 8--A very cold night, slept very little; left Greensboro this
 morning and reached Salisbury this evening, a very cold ride; 100
 men were packed into each car; have drawn no rations since Thursday
 morning.

 Sun., 9--We are in a field of about ten acres, we have no shelter
 and have to sleep on the ground with no covering, drew rations this
 morning. Saw Captain Kinsley and the rest of the officers; they are in
 the field with us in log houses, separated from us by a guard.

 Mon., 10--Did not sleep any last night, it was so cold; drew rations
 of half loaf of bread and a pint of boiled rice; 2000 more men sent
 here from Belle Isle.

 Tues., 11--Slept in the house last night, quite comfortable; drew only
 half loaf of bread to-day; two men died last night; strong talk of
 paroling; guess it's only "chin."

 Wed., 12--Water very scarce, went outside to-day with some dippers
 after water.

 Thurs., 13--Slept in the house last night, slept very cold; drew
 rations of hard bread and rice soup to-day; the best rations we have
 drawn since we came here.

 Sun., 16--During the night Captain Davis of the 155th New York
 Regiment was shot by the guard through the head, he was killed almost
 instantly.

 Wed., 19--All the officers sent away this afternoon; 500 more
 prisoners sent here this evening from Danville, Va. Have been a
 prisoner two months to-day.

 Thurs., Nov. 10--One of our squad fell into the well to-day and
 escaped almost miraculously with a sprained shoulder.

 Wed., 23--Cleared off this morning; pleasant but very cold; Charley
 Jones died this morning at eight o'clock; Allen died at 2 a. m.

 Thurs., 24--Thanksgiving Day at home; we are on half rations to-day; a
 hard Thanksgiving day for us, but better times are coming, boys, "Wait
 a little longer!"

 Fri., 25--Made a grand rush for freedom this noon, but we were driven
 back by the guard and about twenty-five or thirty were killed and
 wounded; we are on half rations again to-day.

 Sat., 26--Phillips died this morning; received a letter from home this
 evening. It seems good to hear from the dear ones at home; it was
 written Sept. 27.

 Mon., 28--146 colored prisoners came in yesterday from Richmond; they
 have been captured about two months.

 Tues., 29--A large number of our men going out to enlist in the rebel
 service. I am pretty hard up, but I am bound to stick to Uncle Sam.

 Fri., December 2--Rather cloudy but comfortable day; full rations
 again to-day, bread, meat and rice soup, so I satisfied my hunger for
 the first time in a long time.

 Tues., 6--400 more prisoners arrived here yesterday, mostly cavalry
 captured in the Valley; 525 men enlisted in the reb service.

 Tues., 13--350 men enlisted in the reb service to-day; Thompson of our
 company went with them; he is the first man to enlist from our company.

 Wed., 14--Slept in the hospital last night.

 Fri., 16--30 men from our Corps sent in here to-day; three are from
 our regiment and bring interesting news from the boys.

The entry for the 16th was the last made by the young man, whose
Somerville home was as pleasant and comfortable as any which that most
attractive place afforded; whose father was fretting at the absence of
his son, yet the latter, putting duty to his country before all others,
was faithful to the end and died on the 6th of January following, his
body sleeping with nearly 13,000 others in a nameless grave.




CORPORAL JOHN E. HORTON'S DIARY.


Corporal John E. Horton was a very regular observer and chronicler of
passing events, seldom if ever missing a day. The following extracts
are given, not all that he wrote but rather where his records add to
those already given from Corporal Glines' entries. A faithful husband
and father, nearly every day has some reference to the wife and the
baby boy in the far away home and on the 21st of August he laments his
inability to get a letter through the lines to Laura, his wife:

 Tues., August 23--(The prisoners are in Libby.) Slept first rate.
 Wash up and eat breakfast. They put part of us into another building
 opposite; take our names, number of regiment and where we were born,
 then search us, take our haversacks, etc. Give us rations about 1 p.
 m., take us to Belle Isle; there are a little over 3,000 of us here.
 We are divided into squads of 30; Ladd is our Sergeant.

 Thurs., 25--Brown is at work, outside, helping the cook; get our
 rations from across the river; attend prayer meeting.

 Mon., 29--About 2100 came from Libby, of the Second Corps; they were
 taken the 25th at Ream's Station; am sorry to see them.

 Tues., 30--Provisions are very high; small loaves of bread are $5.00
 in Confederate money and $1.00 in greenbacks; coffee, $15.00; sugar,
 $12.00; onions, $1.00; apples, $2.00 and $3.00. For $1.00 we get
 one-fourth of a loaf of bread, a small piece of bacon and a little
 bean soup, just enough to keep us alive.

 Sat., Sept. 3--They have stopped the speculation in corn bread. The
 Lieutenant says all of it is ours and he will see that we get it.
 Write a short letter to Laura; fear she may not get my letters; there
 is a prayer meeting every night. I attend and hope they may do me good.

 Sun., October 16--Sell my ring for $60.00 Confederate money and buy a
 blanket for $40.00. Am sorry to part with the ring, but the blanket
 will do me more good. A number die every day.

 Thurs., 20--Our rations are bread, molasses and rice soup.

 Thurs., 27--500 more prisoners arrive from Richmond; they were taken
 in the Valley and belong to the Sixth, Eighth and Nineteenth Corps.

 Fri., 28--Twenty-seven died in the last twenty-four hours; it is sad
 to see men suffer and die off in this way; my health is still good;
 have nothing but rice to-day.

 Sat., November 5--A number take the oath of allegiance to old Jeff.
 The Union boys hooted them and kicked one so that he died; Creedon
 took the oath.

 Tues., 8--To-day is Election; wish I were at home to vote for Old Abe.
 Get no bread or meat, but about a quart of rice soup; feel hungry and
 weak.

 Wed., 9--Get some bread; went sixty hours on a little over a quart
 of poor rice soup. Felt quite weak and faint, but feel better since
 getting some bread; from twenty-five to fifty die every day.

 Fri., 11--Get bread, meat and soup, but no salt in soup or on meat,
 there is none in camp.

 Sat., 12--The long roll was beat three times last night; someone
 stoned the guard; have only nine months more to serve.

 Mon., 14--The coldest night of the season thus far; sell a pair of
 socks for $5.00 Confederate money and buy some salt at $1.50 a pint.

 Wed., 16--Rained a little in the night. The papers say Abe is elected
 sure.

 Fri., 18--Help take Allen of the Fourth New Hampshire to the hospital;
 think he cannot live long. It is a sad sight to see how the men are
 dying off.

 Sun., 20--This does not seem like the Sabbath; little Orren is
 seventeen months old; wish I were at home to see him.

 Mon., 21--Rheumatism troubles me some; Allen of the Fourth New
 Hampshire died last night.

 Sat., 26--Get a letter from Laura dated Oct. 2d, and another this
 afternoon, dated August 27th; they are all well; am very glad to hear
 from them. Phillips (E) died last night.

 Mon., 28--The Rebs count every division at the same time to stop
 flankers; have an attack of diarrhea.

 Tues., 29--370 take oath of allegiance to Jeff and go into the rebel
 army; short rations and so many dying urge them to this step; diarrhea
 a little worse.

 Wed., 30--Am some better; this is my thirty-fifth birthday; hope to
 be able to spend my next at home. It is a real Indian Summer day.
 P. Merrill of the First Massachusetts Cavalry died in our tent. The
 chimney in the hospital fell, killing one man and wounding several.

 Thurs., December 1--A fine day for the first of winter; am much
 better; sold my rations and bought some bread flour; Locke gave me
 some pills.

 Fri., 2--It is just fifteen weeks since I was taken prisoner, am in
 strong hopes of being exchanged soon; feel about well.

 Sun., 4--Could hear the church bells and it made me feel homesick; how
 I wish I could be at home with my wife and boy.

 Sat., 10--Stormed all night; about three inches of snow fell; a cold,
 bad night for us prisoners, but I managed to keep warm. Gorham (E)
 died this morning about two o'clock; he was sick but a short time.

 Mon., 12--It froze hard, very cold for those who have no blankets.
 General Winder and some other rebel officers were here to inspect the
 condition of the prisoners. Am some better to-day, got wheat flour.

 Fri., 16--A few more Yankee prisoners come in, three of the
 Thirty-ninth, one (Burns) from "B" and one (Hemmenway) from "K,"
 captured last Sunday (11), near Weldon. Sorry to see them here, but
 glad to hear from the regiment.

 Thurs., 22--Drew bread, syrup and soup, no meat for a long time.

 Sun., 25--Cloudy, with raw, cool wind; a dull Christmas for me. We
 got one-half a loaf of bread and a little rice soup for our Christmas
 dinner, breakfast and supper; wish I were at home, but see little
 signs of an exchange.

 Wed., 28--Tipton was elected our squad sergeant in place of White
 (deposed); our tent run for Haun, but he got beat; think we have
 a good sergeant. Rumor says there is to be a general exchange of
 prisoners the first of January; hope it is true.

 Thurs., 29--Rained quite hard all night and our tent leaked some; do
 not feel very well but hope I shall not be sick.

 Fri., 30--A cool, dull day. Have the diarrhea quite bad, but am in
 hopes to get rid of it soon. John Locke gave me some pills.

 Sat., 31--Rained about all day; comes on cold and snows some. Had
 the diarrhea very bad all night; a cold, dull, disagreeable day for
 the very last of 1864. It looks like a dark prospect ahead for us
 prisoners, but I am in hopes to be exchanged soon; so the story runs.

 Sun., January 1, 1865--A fine pleasant morning but cool. It does not
 look like a very happy New Year for me, but am in hopes to get out of
 this soon. God grant it may be a happy and pleasant one to my wife and
 boy. Am a little better this morning.

Five days later the hand that wrote the foregoing and that had given
daily evidence of its fealty to God, home and country, in devotion to
duty and in a daily record of deed and thought, was cold in death,
for on the 6th of January Horton died and what was mortal of him was
borne out to the trenches to rest with the more than two score of his
comrades of the Thirty-ninth who had gone the sad way before him. And
thus perished almost 40,000 loyal men, faithful to the end and, "When
the Roll is Called up Yonder," it seems highly probable that the most
of those, who thus endured cold, hunger and every form of privation in
token of their appreciation of duty, will stand a fairly good chance of
being able to answer "Here."




FROM DIARY OF CORPORAL EDWARD H. LEWIS, CO. B.


As the Corporal's record goes over the same time and place of other
diarists, care is taken to avoid repetitions.

 Salisbury, the last of October--The death rate is heavy, owing to bad
 weather and small rations; the latter also being poor in quality,
 consisting of what is supposed to be coarsely ground corn meal,
 including a great deal of the cob. It is mixed with hot water, no
 salt or seasoning of any kind, and baked in large loaves, about three
 inches thick and these loaves are cut into squares of about three and
 one-half inches, the same being a ration for twenty-four hours. In
 addition to this we have been having about three-quarters of a pint of
 something called "soup." It is made of North Carolina peas (usually
 called "cow-peas"), decayed bacon very active with maggots, and water,
 the process of brewing being as follows: A large kettle receives its
 bushels of peas, along with its due proportion of the said animated
 bacon and the necessary liquid, and the combination is boiled until
 the outer cuticle of the pea is loosened, scarcely longer, and then is
 dipped out for the sustenance of Yankee unfortunates. Were this all,
 it would not be so bad, but the foam which appears upon the surface
 of the soup is very far from being unsubstantial, since therein float
 hundreds of the vermicular denizens of peas and bacon. Not exactly as
 appetizing as the bouillon of home preparation nor as clear, yet with
 closed eyes and bated breath, we manage to enclose it, probably to our
 bodily good, if not to the satisfaction of our several senses.

       *       *       *       *       *

 Nov. 10--Charles Wadsworth, Company B, dies to-day.

 Nov. 24--Many of the boys suffering from hunger, thirst and general
 exposure, took the oath of allegiance to the Confederacy to-day,
 thinking by so doing to find an opportunity to escape and reach our
 lines; fully three hundred have done this during the month of November.

 Nov. 25--The attempt to break out of prison to-day was unsuccessful.
 The prisoners were divided into three divisions, the first being
 called the Wood Division, since it was expected to make the attack on
 the big gates where wagons bring in our wood; the second division was
 to break through the bakeries, while the third was to spike the pieces
 of artillery that were trained upon the enclosure; mine was the Bread
 Division and in the effort we lost six killed and ten wounded.

 Nov. 27--James Kilduff, Co. B, dies to-day.

 Dec. 5--Was asked to enlist in the Confederate army and thus escape
 this terrible suffering. I replied most positively that I would stand
 by the old Flag if I died here.

 Dec. 27--My shoes, such as they were, were stolen last night and I am
 barefooted. Could only wrap my feet in rags which I picked up in small
 pieces. Three rebel Catholic priests came into the prison to-day and
 tried to influence our Catholic boys to serve in the Confederate army
 and succeeded in getting many of them.

 Feb. 19--Leave Salisbury early in the evening, we know not where.

 Feb. 21--Arrive in Raleigh, N. C., this morning, where we are detained
 during active military operations on and near the Cape Fear River,
 near Wilmington, N. C.

 Mar. 5--Leave Wilmington on transports for Annapolis, Md., which we
 reach on the 8th at 10 p. m. Here we are detained and enrolled, also
 relieved of all clothing and reminders of prison life, Uncle Sam
 issuing to us new suits of clothing.

 Mar. 15--Receive two months' pay and commutation for six months and
 eleven days as prisoner, $84.50 in all. (The commutation covered half
 rations for the prison period at 25 cents a day.)

 Mar. 16--Leave Annapolis, Parole Camp, for home, having a furlough
 till April 13.

 April 14--Reach Baltimore on my return and at 11 p. m. hear the news
 of President Lincoln's assassination; the returning prisoners, several
 hundred in number, offer their services to the Provost Marshal in case
 of need.

 April 21--Detailed to take charge of Barracks, No. 43 (Annapolis), and
 am put to work on the pay roll for this barrack.

 May 3--Proceed from Annapolis to Camp Distribution, north of
 Alexandria, Va.

 May 23--Leave camp for Washington via Chain Bridge and, having
 rejoined my regiment, take part in the Grand Review.

 June 14--Paid off at Readville and discharged from the state service.

 June 20--With Co. K of the Thirty-fifth, my Company (B) of the
 Thirty-ninth is given a reception and review by the City Government of
 Roxbury who were in office 1862, and those on duty now.




JOHN F. LOCKE'S RECOLLECTIONS.


 'Twas a gloomy march from the immediate rear of the Confederate Army
 to Petersburg and a weary night that was spent in the yard of the
 penitentiary of that town. In the morning we were relieved of all
 military equipments such as knapsacks, haversacks, canteens, etc., and
 also all blankets, shelter-tents, overcoats, or extra clothing.... The
 next day we were removed to an island in the Appomattox and the rain,
 setting in, rendered the night hideous enough. The boys gathered in
 squads and, sitting back to back, on the damp, spongy ground, tried to
 sleep but, with such a hapless present and such a hopeless future, few
 could enjoy that luxury.

 The next day the whole 1800 were escorted out of town about two miles,
 that we might take the cars for Richmond. Three hard-tacks (the first
 food received from our captors' hands) were given us to make us hungry
 and that we might enjoy our excursion. The sound of the battle in
 progress (the 21st) on the same ground where we were captured was
 plainly heard, and we could but wish that the results might be more
 favorable than those of the 19th.... Towards the last of the afternoon
 we arrived in Richmond and as we alighted from the coal cars we were
 told that only one hotel in the place could accommodate us and that
 one was "The Libby" and, as we were strangers in town and might
 wish to look around a little, we were escorted through some of the
 principal streets.

 Finally the procession brought up in front of Libby and we were stowed
 away in it; thus in nine of its rooms were packed 1800 men. We spent
 a portion of our time in examining our new quarters, the walls of
 which were covered with the names of former fellow sufferers. Here
 we received our first half loaf of corn bread which was not so bad
 in quality as it was in quantity. Then came orders from the Prison
 Inspector, Dick Turner, to hand over all moneys to him for safe
 keeping, and some unsophisticated ones obeyed, having their names
 duly registered, but I have not heard that Turner gave any receipt
 or that anything ever came back. After a very uncomfortable night,
 owing to our crowded condition, we were glad to see the morning and
 soon afterward we were taken across the street (Carey) to Pemberton
 prison and distributed in its rooms in squads of twenty-five. Turner
 soon came in and, in his insolent, arrogant style, ordered us to
 strip ourselves that our clothes might be searched, for he was not
 satisfied with the amount already given up. Stripped naked, and with
 our clothing a few paces in front of us, we saw our garments searched
 for valuables.

 Our wallets, watches, jackknives, rings and everything of comfort
 or value that was not absolutely necessary was gathered into a heap
 and Turner, with greedy eye, not only inspected but appropriated. At
 the end of a long half hour we were permitted to dress and then were
 conducted back to Libby, and other squads followed, the procession
 continuing till well into the next day, everyone being pretty
 thoroughly plucked. After all, many of the cunning Yankees were able
 to circumvent the rebels, since bills of large denominations were
 hidden in such queer places as ears, mouth and hair, thus enabling the
 possessor to procure needed comforts in coming days.

 Having been, in this manner, completely robbed, we were formed in line
 for Belle Isle; as the dismal name was sounded our spirits fell, for
 we had heard the stories of suffering there, but to Belle Isle we went
 and were conducted to one corner, containing about an acre and a half
 of ground, enclosed by a low breastwork and a deadline. This part of
 the island was so low that the spring freshets invariably covered it.
 The soil is composed largely of sand and is prolific of fleas, bugs
 and other kinds of insects too disagreeable to mention. The place
 was extremely hot by day and, through its lowness, cold by night;
 alternately roasted and all but frozen we passed seven miserable weeks
 upon Belle Isle, but why thus named beautiful we could never imagine.

 For three weeks we were without shelter, then came six good A tents
 for every squad of one hundred men. When it rained or was colder than
 usual, we were wont to lower the tent upon us, using it as a blanket;
 here we would lie and all but smother till the call for rations was
 sounded the next morning at about nine o'clock. Our rations consisted
 of a piece of corn bread, 5 x 2-1/2 in. in size and a small piece of
 rancid bacon or boiled fresh beef. Towards three in the afternoon a
 half pint of soup, composed of wormy beans, was issued and, though
 the hogs of the keeper usually tasted it first, we relished it and
 were glad to get it. While we thought this pretty hard fare, the time
 was to come later when we looked back upon these days as those of
 comparative plenty.

 By new arrivals our numbers were soon swollen to fully 6,000 men,
 among them being a portion of a regiment of Germans so new to the
 country that they were unacquainted with our language, hence a deal
 of trouble for them, as in their ignorance they would wander over the
 dead line after a chip for fuel, but they never returned. During the
 day we were permitted to go to the water, through a narrow passage,
 as often as we pleased, but at night only five were permitted to go
 at a time. A sergeant (H. C. French) of Co. G, our regiment, having
 taken his turn, was coming back and of course there was a rush to be
 the next one to go down, by the boys in the yard, and in their haste
 they pushed the sergeant, who was quite weak from illness, into the
 ditch of the dead line. Without a word of warning he was instantly
 shot dead by one of the sentries, the bullet passing through his
 head. This sentinel was a young fellow of sixteen years who, with his
 mother, while living near Mitchell's Station had been supplied with
 food during the whole of the previous winter by the commissary of our
 Brigade. We were told that he was paid for this act of ingratitude by
 a two weeks' furlough home.

 An incident will illustrate the straits to which the lack of food will
 drive otherwise decent men. We were counted regularly once a week,
 usually on Saturdays, the object being to find out whether any were
 escaping. To effect this numbering we were filed out, one by one, into
 a vacant lot which bordered on the river. While here one day, several
 of the boys completely buried themselves in the sand, hoping to get
 away from the island in the following night. No loss was suspected
 on our return but, during the afternoon, a poor hungry wretch went to
 the gate and, calling for the sergeant of the guard, offered to reveal
 something of importance if he would give him a loaf of bread. The
 rebel agreed, whereupon he was shown where the Yankees were concealed
 in the sand. It is only fair for the sergeant to state that he knocked
 the informer down with the butt of his musket, saying that if he were
 as mean as that, he would go and kill himself.

 The Confederate mode of punishing petty offenses among us was most
 cruel. The culprit was placed astride a tall, carpenter's horse, some
 six feet in height, and ropes were tied to his feet, fastened to the
 ground and then drawn as taut as possible; his hands were fastened
 behind him and tied to the horse. In this condition the unhappy
 sufferer was obliged to pass three or four hours; most always they
 were taken down insensible and some of them never recovered from this
 brutal usage. On the 5th of October came orders to be ready to march.
 Joyfully we obeyed, confident that our destination was the land of
 the Stars and Stripes, though rations of a loaf and a half of corn
 bread clearly pointed in another direction, our halting place being
 on the south side of the James where, by the side of the Richmond and
 Danville R. R., we lay all day eating our three days' rations. At 5 p.
 m. a train of baggage cars drew up and the painful fact dawned upon us
 that we were simply going to exchange one prison for another.

 So closely were we packed, lying or sitting was out of the question
 and all had to stand. We reached Salisbury, N. C., three days after
 leaving Belle Isle, and in the evening of the 8th we were turned
 into the prison enclosure where we saw very little to invite us,
 though the place was comparatively clean then. The light of fires
 revealed the shivering forms of unhappy prisoners who had preceded
 us to this place of detention. It was one of the coldest of autumnal
 nights and we came so late no provision had been made for us, so,
 hungry as we were after fasting two days, tired and cold, we faced
 the uncomfortable night. Worn out with hunger and fatigue, we threw
 ourselves on the frozen ground with no covering save the heavens,
 which were very cold that night; dressed, the most of us, in summer
 blouses with no underclothing, it was one continuous shiver till the
 rising sun gladdened our eyes and warmed our bodies. We lay down close
 to each other but, as the night grew colder and the wind whistled more
 sharply, the end men with one side exposed, unable to endure the cold
 longer, would leave for some fire or exercise till at last the entire
 line would dwindle away.

 A day's ration of half a loaf of wheat bread and a nice slice of
 meat put us in proper condition to examine our quarters. The field
 comprised about seven acres, somewhat triangular in shape with a
 twelve-foot-high board-fence surrounding it, on whose outside, about
 four feet from the top, was a continuous platform for the sentries.
 Facing the entrance were three little brick houses about 30 x 15 and
 at their right, at right angles, were three other similar buildings;
 in one corner stood a large brick edifice, formerly a cotton
 factory, now called the penitentiary, adjoining which was the prison
 cook-house; near by were two wooden buildings, one a hospital, the
 other occupied by citizen prisoners; of the large structure, three
 rooms were occupied by deserters from our army, and two others by
 rebel deserters, than whom a more graceless lot I never saw. On the
 north side of the prison-yard and back of the brick buildings were
 four wooden shanties, built of rough timbers and occupied by our
 officers who were captured when we were, separated from us only by the
 beat and bayonet of the sentinel.

 Wood was brought in and distributed in a very peculiar manner, since
 everybody attacked the load at once and to the strong went the major
 part of the fuel, while the weaker men had to suffer. On our arrival,
 the whole enclosure was covered with grass, but it soon disappeared.
 Meanwhile the days were growing colder and our appetites keener; on
 our way hither I had sold the stockings off my feet for a boiled beet,
 now I exchanged a good pair of pantaloons for a miserable rebel pair
 and five dollars, Confederate scrip, and though my blouse was about
 worn out I felt as happy as a lark in so doing, for by the proceeds
 I was able to buy another pair of socks and had enough money left
 for little extras of food for a week or ten days. There were only
 three wells in the enclosure (four more were dug later) which yielded
 hardly water enough for drink, thus putting bathing entirely out of
 the question. There being no bucket for drawing the water, we supplied
 its place by our tin cups, which we lowered with strings made from
 suspenders and bootlegs. Through constant dipping the wells were
 transformed into mudholes, so that a nominal quart of water was really
 one-fourth red clay.

 Made desperate by the prospects of the coming winter, a plan for an
 escape was formed to be led by General Joseph Hayes (formerly Colonel
 Eighteenth Massachusetts Volunteers commanding First Brigade, Second
 Division, Fifth Corps; captured at the Weldon R. R.) but discovery of
 the plot resulted in the removal of the officers to Danville, Va.,
 and the collapse of the scheme. For the distribution of food the
 prisoners were divided into divisions of one thousand each and these
 into squads of one hundred, each one being looked after by a sergeant
 from its own numbers. About the 1st of November tents were issued,
 two to a squad, ours receiving for one the fly of an officer's tent,
 the other a small McClellan, the two affording protection for only a
 small part of the squad, and those who got any good from them were the
 immediate friends of the sergeant. All others had to seek cover under
 ground which they secured by digging holes, somewhat larger than those
 of woodchucks, but of the same general nature. Pitiable indeed was the
 condition of the men by this time, since the heavy rains had turned
 the whole enclosure into a veritable pig-sty whose soft red clay could
 be made into bricks without further mixing.

 The death-rate increased at an alarming rate, so that from forty to
 fifty were carried out each day to the dead-house. Nearly all of the
 workshops had been changed into hospitals, also two floors of the old
 factory building. The dead-house was one of the lower floors of one of
 the work-shops where, when the weather was bad and the dead were not
 readily removed, as many as eighty corpses, stark and cold, could be
 seen piled one upon the other like corded wood. On the coming of the
 cart to remove them, they were thrown into the same with the least
 formality possible and so carried off. As we had no means of bathing,
 one of the worst features of the yard was the mass of animated insect
 life. Oh! the horrors of such creatures! Through them it might be said
 that we suffered a thousand deaths. Never at rest, always vigorous,
 they inhabited every nook and crevice of that dismal yard. They were
 worse than death. The terrors of a Spanish Inquisition could not bring
 to bear a mode of torture so vile as these filthy vermin.

 Then the state of the yard! The principal diseases were dysentery and
 pneumonia, so that disease bred corruption and malaria. Those who
 were taken sick, if their squad sergeant were attentive, were carried
 to Hospital No. 3, and if, on examination, it were evident that the
 ailment was incurable, he was sent to a hospital to die. The good
 wheat bread of our earlier rations was changed to corn bread, made
 of the coarsest cob meal and given to us with rancid molasses. Meat
 was issued, after a time, about once in fifteen days and then at the
 rate of eight pounds of beef and bones to a hundred men. At such times
 all parts of the creatures were used; the heads with eyes and horns
 still attached were often issued and in some way made victuals of. All
 small bones capable of being chewed were swallowed as a dog gulps his
 osseous food and the larger and harder ones were crushed with stones
 and boiled for hours; the soup thus obtained was thought a great
 luxury. To obtain salt a day's ration would be exchanged for enough of
 this necessity to last a fortnight or so, of course the exchange meant
 a fast for the day whose ration was traded.

 Occasionally flour or meal was given us in the raw and without salt;
 this was cooked into paste and gruel and very thankful all were to
 get it; oftentimes the prisoners were kept on one-half the regular
 rations, possibly one-quarter of the time, and sometimes we went as
 many as three days with no bread whatever. It was this starvation
 process that drove good men to enlist in the southern army. About
 the 12th of November a thick cup of rice soup was given out; the
 next and the following day, we got only rice water, then came flour
 without salt. Wood was now issued regularly, each squad getting four
 sticks of eight foot timber. This particular afternoon it was green
 pine. To add to our troubles a mist arose, so that the only way we
 could cook our food was by piling the logs on top of each other and
 placing a coal underneath which we took turns in keeping alive with
 our breath, till all had cooked their meal. It was a hapless sight
 that we afforded that afternoon, black with dirt and smoke, as we ate
 our food. We had gone so long without food that we had almost lost the
 sense of hunger and this little meal only served to wake our appetite.
 Before eating my ration, I could walk about the yard without resting;
 afterwards I was so weak that I fainted in going to my tent, for I was
 failing rapidly; my old pantaloons were worn out and slit from the
 knee downward; the sleeves of my shirt and blouse were almost gone, my
 shoes and socks worn through, my hair matted with dirt and filth, my
 complexion that of a negro, my body truly was more dead than alive.

 My condition was that of my associates in misery, and it was then
 that the rebel authorities opened a recruiting station in our midst,
 offering a loaf of bread and fifty dollars in gold to each one who
 would enlist; six hundred went out. With the exception of a few
 desperate characters, all hearts were softened at the sight of so much
 misery, the faint hearted had mostly enlisted in the rebel ranks and
 those who remained were true blue and had determined, live or die, to
 stand fast to their principles. Without anything being said, oaths
 began to be dropped and testaments to be read; while cant was never so
 ridiculous and intolerable, true religion and a pure morality began to
 be the life of the mass.

 About the last of November, a friend with whom I had become acquainted
 on Belle Isle was appointed wardmaster of Hospital No. 5; hearing
 of my condition, he sent for me. I went and was received like a
 brother, the dirt washed from me, there being plenty of water in the
 hospitals, clothes taken from men who had died were given me and I was
 nursed, cared for and fed out of his own rations till my life, which
 was slowly ebbing away, was coaxed back again. This friend, a total
 stranger before my capture, was a sergeant in a Pennsylvania cavalry
 regiment and our acquaintance began at a devotional meeting where were
 laid the foundations of the strongest Christian friendship. He was
 a veritable ministering angel to all those who came under his care,
 and from his conduct I learned that Christianity was not merely a
 sentiment but a life, not an idea but a reality.

 As remarked before, few cases were admitted to the hospital that were
 not considered hopeless; from our ward of two rooms, having forty
 patients, five or six would be carried to the dead-house every night.
 Army surgeons are bad enough anywhere, but those provided at Salisbury
 were worse than the common run. Coming in at the time appointed, they
 never came at any other, they would go along the line of men lying on
 the floor, hitting the patient with their feet to attract attention,
 would contemptuously inquire, "Well, what's the matter with you
 to-day?" and, without waiting for a reply, would prescribe any one of
 the medicines that happened to cross their minds. There were, indeed,
 three honorable exceptions, but they could only express their sympathy
 by words of encouragement. Our ward doctor, the most of the time, was
 a medical student of the latter class.

 November 25th came a decided effort to break out; unfortunately the
 plot had not been worked up so that a sufficient number understood
 the plan, so that the effort was made at two instead of four o'clock,
 when only three divisions had been prepared. On the appearance of
 the relief at that time, someone gave the watchword, "Who's for
 liberty?" and, as quick as a flash, every one of those sentinels was
 disarmed and the boys were using their guns against the sentinels
 on the fence. The noise of the struggle of course soon brought the
 troops to the scene and forming on the fence began firing. If theirs
 had been the only resistance, we might have succeeded; unfortunately
 for us, the Sixty-ninth North Carolina, a newly recruited regiment,
 was just outside, awaiting transportation, and they were brought to
 the support of the guards, and many of the Salisbury citizens, afraid
 of their property if we got away, trotted down with their fowling
 pieces and old flintlocks. The fence was soon covered with enemies
 who began a murderous fire on every tent in the yard, though not a
 third part of the prisoners knew what was up until it was too late
 and then, recognizing the hopelessness of the effort, everyone tried
 to hide himself from the terrible fire. The guards having recovered
 from their fright proceeded to exercise vengeance by discharging the
 two pieces of artillery loaded with boiler screws amongst us. No one
 knows how many were killed, but sixty or seventy were wounded, most
 of them lying in their tents. The wounded were all placed in the same
 hospital, were all treated with the same surgical tools and gangrene
 set in with all, and all, save two or three, died.

 Of my company (E) twenty-four were captured, the most of them strong
 healthy men. As the winter advanced and the cold grew more intense,
 many of them lost hope and dropped away. From my position in the
 hospital, to which I had been elected after recovering sufficient
 strength, I was able to be of help to them. I passed out crust-coffee
 and opium pills whenever I could get them. The stoutest hearted man
 in the company was the first to die. A native of Maine, a blacksmith
 by trade, Jones seemed the one best fitted to endure hardship,
 yet, allowing himself to become disheartened, he quickly fell a
 prey to disease. On one of my visits to the boys I found one of
 them, a corporal (Glines), failing fast. I asked permission of the
 superintendent to admit him to the hospital as a patient and it was
 granted. Two days later, I heard that another corporal (Horton) of
 my company, a near neighbor and friend at home, wished to see me. I
 found him lying in the mud of his tent, and I knew by the look of his
 face that he could not live. He asked me if I could do anything for
 him or, at least, give him some opium. I got some of the pills for
 him and told him I would do what I could towards getting him into the
 hospital. Knowing that he could not live much longer he said, "Tell
 the folks at home I died trying to do my duty and thinking of them."
 Going back to the ward, I besought the privilege of bringing him to
 the hospital. The superintendent replied that there was no vacancy,
 but would be on the morrow, but I might go after supper and get him
 and give him a place under a bunk. I went upstairs and cooked our
 scanty meal and, while doing so, the night patients were brought in.
 While eating my supper, one of the nurses, a pompous fellow, came in
 and said that one of the patients was a young fellow who insisted on
 seeing me before going under his bunk. On being told that I was busy
 upstairs the nurse said he whined, "I wish you would call Johnnie, one
 moment," but he put a stop to his "nonsense," as the nurse said, by
 showing him his place for the night and said that he had fainted in
 taking it. Indignant that my friend had been denied so small a favor,
 I hurried down to the place where he had been put and cried, "Fred,"
 and, as no answer came I supposed him asleep and thought I would not
 disturb him. After finishing my work at midnight, I went upstairs
 to retire; shortly afterward the nurse in attendance called that a
 corporal, under the bunks, was dead. Hurrying down, I found my friend
 stiff and cold in death in the middle of the floor. A friend and
 playmate from boyhood, the merriest boy of us all, smart in school,
 most joyous in sport, he was the life of our youthful circle. We had
 enlisted together; his parents, brothers and sisters were all well
 known to me and I must tell the sad story to them--how he had died in
 a hospital of which I was an attendant, yet had been unable to comfort
 him in his dying hours. The sight of my grief was a good lesson to the
 nurses who were more ready to grant favors thereafter. Horton, the
 other corporal, died the same night.

 A great many died from the effects of the cold weather; numbers of
 them had their feet frost-bitten and, as they were not taken care of,
 mortification set in, to be followed by death. Many a poor fellow,
 weak with disease, left his tent at night, and, stumbling in the
 darkness would fall and being too weak to call for help would be found
 in the morning a frozen corpse. Finally, without any warning, on the
 to us ever memorable 20th of February, '65, orders came to have the
 sick ready for removal. It was with joyful hearts that we obeyed and,
 when the gate was opened that we might carry them out, we could hardly
 contain ourselves for joy. Only when the cars had fully started could
 we realize that Salisbury, with its filth and dirt, its misery and
 degradation, its dying and dead, was being left for good. With feeble
 voices we sang "Praise God from Whom all Blessings Flow" and many a
 prayer of thanksgiving was breathed that we had lived to see the glad
 hour.




SERGT. MAJOR C. K. CONN


Sergt. Major Chas. K. Conn, originally of Company K, was wounded May 8,
'64, captured and carried to Richmond. After recovering from his wounds
he was retained as a clerk, one of his duties being to make out the
lists of those who were to be paroled. Having a happy thought one day
while preparing a roll of names, he wrote his own among those of men
about to start for God's country, and when the party in charge called
for those thus enumerated, Conn stepped forth with the invalids to
whom parole privileges were confined in 1864. One of the Confederate
officers, noticing him among the sick men, asked him what he was doing
there. To the query the quick witted Yankee replied, "I heard my name
called and so responded." The facts in the case were not discovered
till after Conn had gone too far to be called back, though he felt
extremely shaky until he was safely aboard the Union vessel.




J. F. LESLIE'S RUSE


This Company K man thought his liberty worth risking something for;
captured Aug. 19, '64, he too had been taken to Richmond, "Libby" and
Belle Isle, where he informed his comrades he purposed trying the
sick dodge by way of the hospital, for he had discerned that the sick
and wounded would go first. His friends tried to dissuade him, saying
that he would surely be found out and might be made to suffer all the
more on account of his attempted cheat. He tried the rebel doctor
every morning with his complaints, but was careful to take none of
the latter's medicine, throwing all of it away. At last the surgeon,
suspecting shamming on the Yankee's part, prepared a Spanish-fly
plaster, 4 x 8 inches in size, which could not be disposed of as his
medicine had been. Leslie put it on his body, keeping it on all night,
and when he visited the doctor in the morning and was asked if it had
had any effect he was able to show a blister the full size of the
plaster. This convinced the officer that our man was not shamming, for
as he said, "Any man who could stand that could not be 'playing it',"
so he was sent to the hospital in Richmond, "Yankee, 21," as it was
called. On getting there he hardly dared move for fear of being sent
back. One morning the hospital doctor, saying that he would give him
something to make him sleep, left a potion with the injunction to make
sure that it was taken; there was no way open but to take it, but it
was spat out the moment the steward passed to the next patient. The
look of astonishment on the doctor's face the next morning convinced
the patient that it was a dose for final sleep that the surgeon had
prepared; at any rate he never came near Leslie's cot again. In a few
days the "artful dodger" was paroled, while his comrades were sent to
Salisbury and Andersonville where the most of them died.




CORPORAL CHARLES H. BARNES' STORY.


A picture of Andersonville, as it appeared in the summer and fall of
1864 and the following winter, is drawn by Corporal Charles H. Barnes
of Co. I, who was wounded the 8th of May and, two weeks later, while
going from Fredericksburg to Belle Plain Landing, on his way with
others to Washington and Convalescent Camp, was captured, carried
to Richmond and shut up in Libby Prison, where he passed through
the usual experience of being searched, etc. Three weeks later in
company with more than a thousand fellow prisoners, he was started for
Andersonville, Georgia; having ninety of them in an ordinary box car
was pretty close work, since they could neither sit nor lie down, so
had to stand. At Goldsboro they were unloaded and like cattle turned
into a pasture without supper or shelter, but unlike cattle they
could not eat the grass about them; rain was falling hard and, wet to
the skin, they had to stand closely together for the sake of warmth.
Starting again in the morning they reached Andersonville, just a week
after leaving Richmond, the cars running only about three miles an
hour, any greater speed being provocative of accident:--

 I was wearing a pair of boots that came to me from home the day I was
 taken prisoner and I hated to part with them, but I got so hungry when
 on the cars that I traded them with one of the guards for a dozen
 biscuits and a pair of old shoes full of holes. I ate the biscuits
 pretty quick, and still was as famished as before, and I wished I
 had the boots back to trade again. We were told that it was a lovely
 place inside of the stockade, but we found it quite the reverse.
 There were 39,000 men within the enclosure living in holes and tents
 made of pieces of old shirts, blankets and anything they could get
 that would hold together. When we marched in, we had to stand a while
 before assignment to some place in which to stay, when some of the
 men, already initiated, said that we had better be looking for places
 to camp in, we having thought that some sort of shelter would be given
 us. So we hunted around and found a soft bit of earth which some
 fifteen of us occupied; ere long some of the old timers came round to
 see if we had anything they might wish. On waking, the next morning,
 each man found his pocket cut, but the thieves got nothing, since
 every man was dead broke.

 There were two stockades, one inside the other, about twenty feet
 apart and as many feet high in most places; along the top were
 shelters for the guard and about twelve feet from the inner wall was
 the dead line. It was made of scantling nailed on the top of posts,
 about four feet in height and if a prisoner touched it, which he
 was quite likely to do, the guards would shoot him if they could. A
 small brook ran through the middle of the yard; sluggish generally,
 it became a raging torrent after severe rains. One day some of the
 stockade fell over into the water and some of the prisoners swam out
 to the floating logs and so raced out to freedom, for they were going
 too rapidly to be recaptured. For our first twenty days it rained
 nearly all the time and the only cover our party had was a piece of
 an old blanket, which as many as possible would put over their heads
 while the rest ran around trying to keep warm until the time came to
 exchange, an all day and all night series.

 After some searching I found four members of my own regiment, they
 having a tent made of old shirts and parts of old blankets which
 they had pinned together with broken sticks. Three of the boys could
 scarcely move on account of the scurvy, but one of them asked me to
 come in and stay with them, which I was glad to do, though I had to
 lie at their feet until one of them passed on, only a few days later.
 Shortly afterwards the other ones died and two of the Thirty-ninth had
 what was left which, while it did not keep out the rain, did keep off
 the direct sun, a no small comfort in that terribly hot place. We had
 two half pieces of blankets, nearly used up and almost covered with
 what Robert Burns called "crawlin' ferlies," the fearful pests of our
 lives. I undertook one day to wash my shirt, trying first one corner
 of it which went to pieces, so I dried the garment carefully and
 without further effort at washing wore it almost nine months.

 First and last many tunnels were dug, in several of which I bore a
 hand; I don't know how many succeeded in getting out but there must
 have been several hundred; bloodhounds were put on their track and
 those who were brought back were put in the chain-gang. Among so many
 men there must be some bad ones, a few very bad; they even resorted
 to murder in their efforts to secure what some of the prisoners
 possessed. To rid themselves of this terrible set of evil men a
 vigilance committee of the well disposed was organized and by sheer
 force of numbers, overpowered and sentenced to death six of them. The
 rebels, to their credit, furnished material for the gibbet and the
 execution took place, much to the relief of those who had to continue
 there.

 Our drinking water came from holes in the ground four or five feet
 deep; while it was pretty clear, there were many dead maggots in the
 bottom, though we did not mind them, thinking the water so much better
 than that in the brook. One day in August a stream of water broke out
 just inside of the inner stockade; it ran all of the time, but the
 dead line was between us and the water; we procured boards and made a
 trough and then got permission to put it up, so that we had fine water
 all the rest of the time we were there. To this day it is known as
 the Providence Spring. Aside from scurvy, severe enough to loosen my
 teeth, I was not sick a day while in the prison. Our rations for the
 most part were a pint of boiled rice without any salt for twenty-four
 hours and oftener it would be forty-eight, for every time Captain Wirz
 discovered a new tunnel he would punish all of us by skipping our
 rations. Occasionally we would get some small black beans, such as the
 planters raised for their hogs; these we would try to cook with green
 pitch-pine with results that can be imagined. I have blown myself
 black in the face many a time trying to cook them and then had to eat
 them raw.

 There was a sick call every day and when a man answered the same, all
 he got for his pains was a dose of sumach berries. No matter what the
 complaint might be the remedy was always the same, for it was all they
 had to give. Sometimes a man could be seen buried up to his chin; he
 had the rheumatism and if he could endure the antidote two or three
 days, he would come out cured. One boy, to get some extra food, told
 the captain one day where a new tunnel was in progress, and after the
 officer had gone out, the men shaved one side of his head and on his
 breast and back put big placards, bearing in big black letters the
 word "Traitor." He was then marched all over the camp and tormented
 almost to death; the enemy finally took him outside, which was just
 what he wanted.

 After Stoneman's raid, the rebels thinking Andersonville no longer
 safe began to distribute us elsewhere and I sampled the bull-pen of
 Savannah, Ga.; the stockade of Millen, also in Georgia; and then was
 sent back to Savannah where I was paroled and sent down the River,
 to go on board a Union steamer; the sight of the Stars and Stripes
 brought tears to every eye. On board, our heads were shaved, we
 were bathed, clad anew and were judiciously fed; our old clothes
 went overboard. After reaching Annapolis I tipped the scales at
 seventy-five pounds, less than half my weight when I enlisted. After
 a brief stay in Parole Camp, I was paid off and sent home on a thirty
 days' furlough, where I was sick all of the time, but I returned to
 the camp at the end of the time to be furloughed again, this time for
 sixty days. On getting back to camp the second time, and wearying of
 it, I put my name down among those to be returned to their regiments
 and I reached mine the day after Lee surrendered.




REGIMENTAL VETERAN ASSOCIATION


The beginnings of the Association seem to have been lost in the
interval between 1867 and the present; it is agreed, however, that the
first four meetings were held in Boston hotels and that they were not
very largely attended. The time was too near the date of getting home
and the pleasures of that supreme event far outweighed any rehearsal
of common dangers in war-experiences. Of the 5th gathering, the first
basket picnic of the veterans of the Thirty-ninth and their lady
friends, there is in substance the following account:

Downer's Landing, Hingham, was the place and Thursday, August 17th,
the date; the party, numbering 300, left Litchfield's Wharf at 9.15
a. m. on steamers "Wm. Harrison" and "Emeline," arriving about 11
o'clock; a half mile walk brought all parties to the "Melville Gardens"
which had been hired for the day. Noon saw the tables spread with
the many good things brought by the members. Before repairing to the
hall for dancing, Colonel C. H. Porter, President of the Association,
introduced as speakers, Lieut. Colonel Hutchins, Major Graham, Captain
Brigham, Lieuts. Mulligan and Mills, Sergeants Eames and Gardner. At
3 p. m. came a dress parade with one hundred and fifty men in line,
Colonels Porter and Hutchins dividing the honors of commanding. A
letter was read from General G. K. Warren, regretting his inability to
be present, a disappointment to the veterans, as they had expected to
meet their former commander once more; everyone of the Regiment and,
for that matter, every regiment in the Fifth Corps, holding the officer
in the highest esteem. On the formation of the line and led by Edmunds
Band, the company marched back to the landing, reaching Boston at 5.15
o'clock, all happy and conscious that the presence of the ladies had
added no little to the enjoyment of the day.

The reunions of 1872, '73 and '74 were held in Boston Hotels; in 1875,
Oct. 6th in Woburn was held the most notable of the Association's
gatherings thus far, General Warren being the distinguished guest and
Company K, along with citizens of Woburn, the hosts. There were present
166 men with General Peirson at their head; drum corps and brass bands
furnished music and everyone joined heartily in the reception to the
eminent soldier. At the rooms of the selectmen, the public had a chance
to meet General Warren. At the armory the meeting was called to order
by Captain Hutchins and the chief feature was the presentation to
General Warren of a magnificent Maltese Cross in Gold, the badge of the
Fifth Corps, the cost $100.00 having been met by the veterans. In the
afternoon a banquet was served in Lyceum Hall to more than four hundred
guests, the good people of the town having vied with each other in
making the occasion memorable. At the post prandial exercises, remarks
were made by Captains Hutchins and Tidd; there was an extended address
by J. A. Harvey, Co. C, followed by the introduction of Sergt. Abijah
Thompson, Co. K, as Toastmaster, who read an original poem after which,
and the playing by the band of "Hail to the Chief," General Warren
spoke briefly to the following effect, "I rise to acknowledge the kind
attentions I have received to-day. Those who have spoken have referred
in such kind terms to me, and your marks of approbation have been so
many that I do not feel prepared to speak for the Fifth Army Corps, as
I could wish. I hope you will excuse me. I shall carry from this place
a sense of having been honored more than I deserve. (Cries of no, no.)
The feelings which this day has inspired will always remain, and you
have laid on me a debt of gratitude I never can repay." Col. C. H.
Porter responded for General Peirson, letters were read from General J.
C. Robinson, and Colonels Farnham and Tilden of the Sixteenth Maine;
further responses to toasts were given by Maj. Ambrose Bancroft of the
Thirty-second Regiment, Capt. J. P. Crane of the Twenty-second, Capt.
C. S. Converse of the Fifth, Lieut. John L. Parker of the Eleventh and
others, the exercises terminating in an evening's levee which lasted
till midnight.

The Centennial year, 1876, found the veterans 150 strong in Natick, the
guests of Co. I.; 1877, August 28th, Co. D of Quincy did the hospitable
act with 220 comrades present. In 1878, Co. E of Somerville, on the
6th of Sept, helped celebrate the 16th anniversary of the departure
of the Regiment with 225 veterans in attendance, the event gaining
unwonted interest through the presence of General John C. Robinson who
had been the Division Commander of the Regiment at the Wilderness and
at Spottsylvania, losing there a leg; there was a spirited address by
Mayor Bruce of Somerville, an extended historical paper by Col. C. H.
Porter with speeches of greater or less length by Gov. A. H. Rice,
Gen'l N. P. Banks, Collector Beard, Secretary Pierce, Speaker Long,
General Peirson and others, the celebration continuing with music and
dancing till after midnight. A pleasant feature of the afternoon was
the presentation of an elegant punch bowl and ladle to General Robinson
by Lieut. C. K. Conn to whose words the General responded so happily
that all recognized him as a good talker as well as fighter.

[Illustration:
        Newport Sept. 1. 1878

        Capt. Chas H Porter
        No. 27 State Street
        Boston Mass

        My dear friend

        I am very sorry that the necessity for being in New York City on
        the 6th prevents my being with you at Somerville.

        The 39th Massachusetts have been exceptionally kind to me, and I
        am grateful for it. I have got hard work to do to set right the
        record of my army career, and the recollection of this friendly
        feeling helps to keep up my nerves for going through with the
        undertaking.

        I hope you will all have a fine day and a happy one.

        Yours truly
        G. K. Warren]

August 27th, 1879, found the survivors of the Thirty-ninth in Taunton,
guests of Co. F with Capt. J. J. Cooper president of the day and 125
veterans on hand; Adjutant O. A. Barker welcomed the old soldiers to
the city and after a short business meeting, line was formed for the
Agricultural Fair Grounds where Hiram Maxfield of Silver Springs fame
served one of his imitable clambakes. In 1880, Sept. 15th, Medford was
the entertaining place with Co. C at the front, Jas. A. Harvey being
President. Oct. 5th, '81, the "old boys" came back to Woburn again,
the reception being in the hands of the following named men of Company
K., C. K. Conn., Geo. E. Fowle, Capt. L. R. Tidd, A. L. Richardson,
J. F. Ramsdell, A. P. Barrett, J. Fred Leslie, A. Thompson and A. R.
Linscott. Again Woburn has the honor of entertaining General G. K.
Warren and he is accompanied by General J. C. Robinson, the valiant
Division Commander, along with General Peirson, the ever popular
regimental commander. At the dinner which was served in Lyceum Hall,
remarks were made by those named above, Col. Porter and others. Before
another reunion, General Warren will have passed away.

The regimental line formed again in Natick, Oct. 10, 1882; again Co. I
plays the role of entertainers with fully 150 survivors to honor the
occasion. Dinner was served in Concert Hall; Col. C. H. Porter spoke
at length in praise of General Warren who had died the 8th day of the
preceding August; resolutions of sympathy and respect were passed by
the veterans and a contribution was made to a Fifth Corps fund to honor
the General's memory. Remarks followed by Comrades Barrett, "K"; Beck,
"C"; Locke, "E"; Eames, "C"; Oliver, "E," and others. 1883 brought the
veterans to Quincy again with Co. D. Point Shirley in Winthrop was the
place of meeting, August 26, 1884, with Co. H as entertainers. Roxbury,
the home of Co. B, entertained next, Sept. 23, 1885. Company G came to
the front Sept. 16, 1886, at Nantasket. The ladies of Somerville, in
behalf of Co. E, furnish the dinner for the reunion of 1887, Sept. 6th.
Through the selection of the Executive Committee, Bass Point was the
place of meeting in 1888. Sept. 11, 1889, brought the clans to Medford,
once more, with Co. C.

Sept. 24, 1890, the beginning of another decade, brings the veterans
to Woburn, the home of Co. K, for the third time. As usual, great
preparations were made for the reception, the principal guests, aside
from the veterans themselves, being the widow and daughter of General
Warren, and General Peirson and wife who with the wife of Mayor
Johnson and the wife of the Hon. John Cummings formed the receiving
line in the hall of the Y. M. C. A. The formalities of the occasion
were conducted by Colonel C. H. Porter and Sergeant Abijah Thompson,
"K," and 166 survivors pressed forward, glad of the opportunity of
grasping the hands of their friends. Dinner was served in Lyceum Hall.
The after-dinner exercises were presided over most happily by Sergt.
Thompson who introduced Mayor Johnson, General Peirson, the Hon. John
Cummings, Colonel Porter and others. Company A was the host Sept.
7, 1891, at the old Lynnfield camping-ground, and the occasion was
rendered notable by the following paper, prepared for the day by Lieut.
Elbridge Bradshaw of Co. H:


A VACATION IDYL

 Some thirty years ago, leading a sedentary life and gradually sinking
 into a semi-bituminated condition, my medical adviser, alarmed at my
 symptoms, ordered travel and change of scenery. Having learned that
 Virginia contained more travel and scenery to the square mile than
 any other spot on the globe, I determined on visiting that State.
 Being of a timid nature and fond of Company, I joined myself to
 about a thousand other invalids, similarly afflicted, and seeking
 the same remedy, forming ourselves into a methodical organization.
 For convenience we divided ourselves up into groups of one hundred
 men each, using for purposes of distinction the first eleven letters
 of the alphabet, omitting the letter J. For menial service, i. e.
 to look after our physical wants, each group hired for such purpose,
 six servants, viz. a captain, two lieutenants, with a cook, a drummer
 and a bugler or fifer, the latter two being hired to wake the
 excursionists in the morning. To keep these captains and lieutenants
 in order, we placed over them a colonel, a lieut. colonel and a major,
 at the same time they being our head servants or butlers. These people
 added to themselves an adjutant to run errands, a chaplain, a doctor
 and a pill-driver. To insure a faithful discharge of duty, from each
 group were chosen a dozen fellows called sergeants and corporals who
 were set over the others.

 Virginia at this time being in a tumultuous condition, and the U.
 S. Government having heard of our organization's plan of travel and
 objective points, invited us, through its Chief Magistrate, to walk
 over Virginia as peace officers, punching the heads of belligerants
 and arguing with the discontented, an invitation which we accepted.
 When President Lincoln secured our services he loaded us with
 benefits, first massing us at Lynnfield, giving us canvass houses to
 protect us from the dew and damp, sweet straw to nestle in, a pretty
 blue uniform, a belt to keep us from bursting, an iron toothpick, a
 tube of iron with a wooden handle, a little black bureau, in which to
 keep our collars, cuffs and bric-a-brac, a black cotton pantry for
 provisions and plates, with a round tin vessel for whiskey. Uncle Sam
 also gave our servants (the shoulder-strapped ones) toasting forks to
 stick pigs with and red sashes with which to gird their persons when
 running and chasing the pigs down. Rendered proud and arrogant by
 their good clothes and shoulder straps, our servants rose on us and
 captured our organization, styling themselves our superior officers,
 and our entire body the Thirty-ninth Regiment of Massachusetts
 Volunteers. To give the usurpation a flavor of legality, they procured
 from Governor Andrew commissions indicating officially their rank
 and authority. On the whole they exercised their powers with great
 moderation and kindness.

 Though to the last, we suffered them to think themselves our
 superiors, yet in reality, they still continued to be our servants,
 caring for our food, clothing and morals, furnishing us clean, airy
 lodgings having adequate fire-escapes, so that in fact we had nothing
 on our minds worth mentioning and all we had to do was to travel and
 fight; in a word, take our pleasure. They also taught us many pretty
 and amusing tricks; how to stand up straight in rows to be shot at;
 to abstain from whiskey (with quinine in it); to use the pickaxe and
 spade with the least expenditure of muscular energy and, in mud and
 night marches, to say our prayers without even stopping. As soon as
 we could march without scalping each other's heels, we left Lynnfield
 for active service and mighty active it proved on the start, our first
 engagement being a footrace against time through Boston. We left
 Lynnfield with cooked rations, meaning saltpork and hardtack.

    How dear to this heart is the old army hardtack,
    As Lynnfield's reunion presents them to view;
    When eaten with raw pork or fried into doughnuts,
    The rations that beat him, are scat'ring and few.
    How oft in our marches, he's braced up our courage,
    As with gnawing and growling we've hobbled along;
    Oh! well may the hardtack, the old army hardtack
    Prove a classical theme for an old veteran's song.

    That dear army hardtack was a limber old codger,
    In the hands of a Thirty-ninth's amateur cook;
    In his grip, the old hardtack took metamorphosis
    Not mentioned by Ovid, nor in Parloa's cook-book,
    As a pudding or pie in a cob-house as a dumpling,
    As a fry or a toast, or a raw on the shell;
    That old army hardtack, that blessed old hardtack!
    For every recipe turned out equally well.

    I have eaten high banquets at Young's and at Parker's,
    I have tasted their beef, roast turkey and lamb;
    But all of these dishes are flat and insipid,
    Beside the old hardtack of dear Uncle Sam;
    For the old army hardtack is seasoned with memories
    Of battles and sieges when wearing the blue;
    Of marchings and flankings and digging of trenches,
    And loving communion with old comrades too.

    The old army hardtack speaks, too, of dear comrades,
    Whose faces are missing to-day in our line;
    Their battles all fought, their warfare all ended,
    But whose virtues still live in mem'ry's pure shrine,
    Then cheer the old hardtack, the square army hardtack,
    Who was flinty and wormy at times, I must own,
    But when at Mine Run, he took a vacation,
    His absence was greeted with many a moan.

                           Chorus.

    The old flinty hardtack, the iron bound hardtack;
    The moss-covered hardtack, we all knew him well.

 Travelling the next three years through Virginia and its environments,
 we were often obstructed by mud and other earthern impediments,
 and the scenery was much disfigured and frequently obliterated by
 sulphurous clouds of smoke, hence excursioning for health and pleasure
 was, on the whole, a failure. Speaking for myself, individually, the
 climate didn't agree with me a bit. This I attribute largely to the
 horizontal metallic showers with which that region was infested and
 against which no ordinary cotton umbrella was an adequate protection.
 Indeed the atmosphere was so impregnated with little pellets of lead
 and ragged chunks of cast iron, that my system must have absorbed
 about fifty-five pounds of old junk and brought it home with me for,
 on my return, I weighed 190 lbs. against 135 when I left Lynnfield.

Natick with its Company I entertained for the third time, October 5,
1892; Quincy and Co. D did the hospitable act, also for the third time,
in 1893, August 30; Roxbury and Company B were the entertainers in 1894
and Co. H of Dorchester received at the U. S. Hotel, Boston, Sept.
25, 1895; for 1896, no record is found, but Sept. 6, 1897, Co. E and
Somerville appear again; it is Medford and Co. C in 1898; Woburn and
her K Company in 1899. The old century ends, as far as our Regiment is
concerned, October 10, 1900, with I Company and Natick, while the new
one begins Sept. 7, 1901, on the old campground at Lynnfield; Sept. 22,
1902, finds the veterans again in Quincy; Sept. 24, 1903, in Roxbury;
August 19, 1904, with Co. H. at Nantasket. Then with no special company
distinctions the reunions follow, directed by the Executive Committee,
at Squantum Inn, Sept. 21, 1905; Bass Point, Sept. 6, 1906; in a
Dorchester hotel, October 23, 1907; again at Bass Point, Sept. 29,
1908; at Revere Beach for three successive years, viz. August 30, 1909,
August 18, 1910, and August 18, 1911. Fifty years after the departure
of the Regiment from Massachusetts, nearly a hundred (92) veterans
assembled again in Somerville with Company E and a large number of
prominent citizens to celebrate the semi-centennial; the state armory
was the gathering place and General Peirson was the marked figure on
the occasion while wives, daughters and other lady friends added to the
pleasures of the hour; Sergt. Abijah Thompson of Co. K was the oldest
man present, he having seen fully 90 years. After the dinner, over
which Comrade the Rev. John F. Locke said grace and at which Lieut. J.
H. Dusseault, Co. E, presided, there was speaking by Ex-Mayors Edward
Glines, C. A. Grimmons and John M. Woods, the latter a veteran of the
war, and the first named a brother of Fred Glines of Co. E who died
in Salisbury. Mayor Burns of Somerville extended the courtesies of
the city to the veterans and welcomed them all most heartily. General
Peirson was received with accustomed enthusiasm and was heard with
rapt attention. The half century event was a great success. The 51st
anniversary was observed in Medford, with the survivors of Co. C,
Sept. 6, 1913; the day, the place, the guests, quite one hundred in
numbers, made the event notable; the forenoon's meeting was in the hall
of the S. C. Lawrence Post, G. A. R., while the dinner was served in
the drill-room of the magnificent armory, presented to Medford and the
State by General S. C. Lawrence.




REGIMENTAL ROSTER


Nothing in the story of a regiment is of greater importance than its
Roster, for therein appears the record of the individual whether the
same be good or bad. One man alone makes a small appearance, yet a
thousand men make a regiment and every volunteer, whether commissioned
or enlisted, is entitled to the best that can be said of him. If, in
addition to his military service, his career in civil life may be given
in outline so much the better, for in America every able bodied man is
potentially a soldier. The foundation for the following Roster is found
upon the muster rolls, carefully preserved in the State House, Boston,
and additions have been made thereto through the information afforded
by members of the Veteran Association.

The careful reader will observe in scanning the data afforded by the
Roster that the ages of the soldiers almost entirely range between
those of eighteen and forty-five years, these being the respective
limits of legal enlistment; at the same time everyone is well aware
that a large part of the army was made up of boys in their early teens;
also we know full well that many a man went in long after reaching
the maximum age for military service. As a fact, then, very many men
lied their ages up or down; so far as the grand average, however, is
concerned the "over" age compensated for or offset those who were
"under." Since the muster-in rolls or enlistment papers are sources
of all data concerning the age of volunteer and, it being well known
that very many of them were and are incorrect, the wonder rises as
to the source of statements that have gone the rounds of the public
press in late years, wherein the ages represented by the soldiers are
carefully tabulated. However, from whatever source obtained, as worthy
of presentation here the following alleged facts are given:

 Discussion has elicited an official statement that about 2,800,000
 Union men enlisted; there were about 5,000,000 men called out on both
 sides. Of these nearly 4,500,000 were under twenty-one; there were
 about 332,000 who were under sixteen and there were 1,500 in the Union
 Army who were not fifteen years old. Less attention has been given
 to the men who were over age, but every regiment can give its cases
 of men fifty, sixty and even seventy years of age whose great excess
 would average up many a juvenile volunteer. When, however, the rolls
 afford no such statements, where is the statistician acquiring his
 alleged facts?

For the sake of brevity and economy of space the following
abbreviations are used:

A. A. G. = Assistant Adjutant General; b. = born; bur. = buried; bvt.
= brevet; batt. = battalion; Capt. = Captain; Co. = Company; Col.
= Colonel; com. = commission or committee; Corp. = Corporal; cr. =
credited; d. = died or dead; des. = deserted; det. Serv. = detached
Service; dis. = discharged; disa. = disability; en. = enlisted; ex. of
s. = expiration of service; F. & S. = Field and Staff; G. O. = General
Order; H. Arty. = Heavy Artillery; Infty. = Infantry; k. = killed; lat.
add. = latest address; Lt. or Lieut. = Lieutenant; M. = married; M. I.
= Mustered-in; M. O. = Mustered-out; mos. = months; mus. = musician;
M. V. M. = Mass. Vol. Militia; N. F. R. = no further record; N. G. =
National Guard; O. W. D. = Order, War Department; Pris. = Prisoner;
prom. = promoted; re-en. = re-enlisted; rep. = reported; res. =
resigned; S. = single; S. H. = Soldiers' Home; S. S. = sharpshooters;
S. O. = Special Order; Sergt. = Sergeant; trans. = transferred; U. S.
C. T. = U. S. Colored Troops; V. R. C. = Veteran Reserve Corps; w. =
widower; wd. = wounded; W. D. = War Department.

In reciting facts pertaining to each name, the same order obtains
throughout the Roster; first comes the family name of the soldier,
next his Christian appellation; in some instances time and place of
birth are given; as a rule, age, whether married or single, occupation
and place of residence follow in order; next, date of enlistment or
muster-in; incidents of army life are next in place, and then the
time and manner of leaving the army; finally are given incidents of
civil life and latest address if the same be known. The application of
abbreviations and the order are seen in the following supposed case:

 Jones, John, 20, S.; shoemaker, Natick; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 5, '64,
 Wilderness; dis. disa., Aug. 20, '64; Selectman, Natick, 1880, '81;
 1913, Natick.

Printed in full the foregoing would be as follows:

 Jones, John, at the age of twenty years, single, a shoemaker living
 in Natick, enlisted August 22, 1862, or was mustered in on that date;
 he was wounded in the battle of the Wilderness and, on account of
 wounds or disability therefrom, was discharged August 20, 1864; he was
 a Selectman in Natick in 1880 and '81 and in 1913 is still residing
 there.




FIELD AND STAFF

COLONELS


 P. Stearns Davis, 44, M.; stationer, Cambridge; August 29, 1862;
 Phineas Stearns Davis was born in Brookline, June 23, 1818, his
 Christian names coming to him from an ancestor who bore a part in the
 Boston Tea Party; his earlier education, received in the Brookline
 public schools, was supplemented by a journey around the world; in the
 publishing of schoolbooks he was long associated with his brother,
 Robert, on Washington Street, Boston; deeply interested in Free
 Masonry, Colonel Davis had been Master of Putnam Lodge, Cambridge, was
 a member of St. Paul Chapter, Royal Arch, and was a charter member
 of St. Bernard's Commandery, Knights Templar of Boston; entering
 the Militia at a very early age, the beginning of the War found him
 Division Inspector on the Staff of General Samuel Andrews of the
 First Division; later promoted to the rank of Brigadier General, he
 was serving in 1862 on a Board of Examination, thereby rendering
 signal aid to Governor Andrew; he passed thence to the Thirty-ninth
 Regiment. On leaving his home, he said to his mother who had expressed
 wonder, if not regret, at his going, "Mother, if I should live to
 see the end of this war without going and doing my whole duty to my
 country, I should never rest," and he went away with her blessing.
 Perhaps no man throughout the strife entered the service with
 higher motives than those which prompted Colonel Davis. Possessing
 as high an ideal of discipline and drill as he had of morality and
 patriotism, he proceeded to enforce them with the result that few if
 any organizations in the volunteer service excelled the Thirty-ninth
 in true soldierly qualities. Early called to the command of a brigade,
 it was truly said of him that he never was assigned to any position
 which he did not fill. The particulars of his death, July 11, 1864,
 have appeared in the body of this book; his funeral, held with Masonic
 honors in the Unitarian Church of Cambridge, was on July 18, the
 entire city being in mourning, with all places of business closed;
 flags were at half-mast and in the audience assembled to honor his
 memory were the City Council of Cambridge, Governor Andrew and Staff,
 Adjutant General Schouler, Mayor Lincoln of Boston and a wide range
 of other civil and military officers; Free Masonry in which he was
 so prominent was represented by Putnam Lodge to which he belonged,
 officers of the Grand Lodge, St. Bernard's Encampment of Boston, and
 the National Lancers also were present. Speakers at the services were
 the Rev. Chandler Robbins, who had officiated at his marriage, and
 Chaplain E. B. French who had accompanied the remains of his commander
 home. With the long escort, the body of Colonel Davis was borne to
 Mt. Auburn Cemetery, having as bearers General Samuel C. Lawrence,
 Colonels C. L. Holbrook and L. B. Marsh, Postmaster Leighton and
 Deputy Sheriff L. L. Parker, the burial being with Masonic rites.

 Charles L. Peirson, from Lieut. Colonel July 13, 1864; owing to the
 stress of the "Battle Summer" campaign, his severe wound at the Weldon
 R. R. August 18, '64, and subsequent absence from the Regiment, not
 to mention the red tape that ever did hedge military matters about,
 it was not till the 23d of November, 1864, that Colonel Peirson
 was mustered in to his rank: the Records of the War Department,
 Washington, D. C., state:

 Peirson is now held and considered by this Department, under the
 provisions of the Act of Congress, approved February 24, 1897, to
 have been mustered into the service of the United States in the grade
 of Colonel, Thirty-ninth Massachusetts Infantry, to take effect
 from July 13, 1864, and to have held that rank until the date of his
 discharge from service.

 Upon the recommendation of Major General G. K. Warren, Peirson was
 commissioned Colonel of Volunteers by brevet, to date from March 13,
 1865, for meritorious conduct in the battles of the Wilderness and
 Spottsylvania in May, 1864, and as Brigadier General of Volunteers,
 by brevet, to date from March 13, 1865, for gallant and meritorious
 conduct in the battle of the Weldon Railroad in August, 1864.

[Illustration: COLONEL CHARLES L. PIERSON

B'v't Brigadier-General]

After months of prostration, incident to his wound, and on the clear
evidence of his inability to return to the Regiment, Colonel Peirson
resigned and was mustered out of the service January 11, 1865.
Subsequent to the war, General Peirson was long in the iron business,
Boston; on his retirement therefrom, he found occupation for his well
earned leisure in historical studies, particularly with reference to
the Civil War, being a member of the Loyal Legion, which he commanded,
1895, and the Massachusetts Military Historical Society. His city
residence is at 191 Commonwealth Avenue; his summer abode is at Pride's
Crossing, city of Beverly.




LIEUTENANT COLONELS


 Charles L. Peirson, 28, S.; civil engineer, Salem; wd. May 8 and 10,
 '64, Spottsylvania; prom. Colonel; Charles Lawrence Peirson was born
 in Salem; was graduated from Lawrence Scientific School, Harvard,
 1853; was a Corporal in the Fourth Battalion, under Major T. G.
 Stevenson, which in the spring of 1861 did gratuitous service in Fort
 Warren, Boston Harbor; later commissioned First Lieut. and Adjutant in
 the Twentieth Massachusetts, he was taken prisoner at the Battle of
 Ball's Bluff and suffered three months' confinement in Libby Prison,
 Richmond; on his return to his regiment he was detailed for special
 service on the staff of General N. J. T. Dana and also later upon
 that of General John Sedgwick, thus passing through the Peninsula
 campaign; it was while on sick leave from such service that he was
 notified of his appointment to his new position in the Thirty-ninth
 Regiment.

 Henry M. Tremlett, from Major July 13, 1864; absent at the time on
 detached service in Boston Harbor he did not rejoin the Regiment until
 October following; wd. March 31, '65, at Gravelly Run, he died of
 wounds at his home in Boston, June 6th following, the very day of the
 return of the Thirty-ninth. The six weeks immediately following the
 battle were spent in the hospital at City Point; thence he returned to
 Boston, getting there May 9th, apparently on the road to recovery, but
 the setting in of intermittent fever proved to be too great a trial of
 his strength; his body was buried in Forest Hills Cemetery. Of him a
 writer in a Boston paper wrote at the time:--

 His standard of manliness was one of noble action rather than of
 puling pretension, and his whole life showed him to be a loving son,
 a dear brother, a kind and generous companion, a devoted friend and a
 truly loyal man, willing to sacrifice his life for the noble cause for
 which he contended.




MAJORS


 Henry M. Tremlett, b. Dorchester, July 15, 1833; 29, S.; merchant,
 Boston; Aug. 28, 1862; educated at Chauncy Hall School, Boston, he
 succeeded his father in mercantile life on Foster's Wharf; when
 Governor Andrew called for volunteers to serve in Fort Warren in the
 spring of 1862, he was one of those who filled the ranks of the Fourth
 Battalion, serving therein as First Sergeant. On the organization
 of the Twentieth Regiment, he was commissioned Captain and in that
 capacity bore his part in the fatal day at Ball's Bluff and was with
 the Army of the Potomac through the Seven Days' Fight. With the
 Thirty-ninth he participated in all of its experiences till, in the
 fall of '63, he was ordered to Boston where for quite a year, as
 Provost Marshal, he had charge of the draft rendezvous till after the
 death of Colonel Davis and the severe wounding of Colonel Peirson his
 return was necessary, serving thereafter as Lieut. Colonel.

 Frederick R. Kinsley, July 13, '64, from Captain, Co. E; not mustered;
 captured, Aug. 19, '64, at the Weldon R. R., was held until the
 following March; came home in command of the Regiment; M. O. as Capt.,
 June 2, 1865; soon after the war, with two brothers, he bought and
 worked a large farm in Dorchester, N. H.; represented the town in the
 Legislature; in 1911 he removed to Lowell where, in 1913, he makes his
 home.




ADJUTANTS


 Henry W. Moulton, 21, M.; currier, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; was
 first commissioned in the Thirty-fifth, Aug. 12, '62, and was trans.
 as above. Owing to the detailing of Adjutant Washburn, Lieutenant
 Moulton took his place; wd. May 10, 1864, Laurel Hill; absent, sick,
 until his discharge; dis. disa., Dec. 5, 1864.

 Orville A. Barker, from Co. C, Dec. 5, '64; prom. Captain, April 3,
 '65; not mustered; M. O. June 2, 1864; a druggist for many years in
 Taunton, Captain Barker found time to serve as Treasurer of Morton
 Hospital and for thirty-five years was Clerk of the Baptist Church; he
 died Feb. 21, 1912.




QUARTERMASTER


 Edward E. White, 34, --; --, Cambridge; August 25, 1862; prom.
 Captain, April 3, '65; not mustered; brevet Capt. and Major, U. S.
 Volunteers, March 13, 1865; M. O. as 1st Lieut., June 2, 1865.




SURGEONS


 Calvin G. Page, 33, --; physician, Boston; August 22, 1862; dis. as
 Major, disa., Nov. 16, '63; an A. B., Harvard, 1852, he took his M. D.
 there in 1854; d. March 29, 1869.

 William Thorndike, 29, M.; surgeon, Beverly; Nov. 17, 1863; an A. B.
 from Harvard, 1854, he also gained there his M. D., 1857; had seen
 service as Ass't Surgeon, Thirty-fourth Massachusetts Volunteers,
 whence he came to the Thirty-ninth; his efficiency in the Regiment was
 thoroughly appreciated by the men, and General Peirson affirms that
 recovery from the wound received at the Weldon R. R. was the result of
 the care and attention of his surgeon; the son of the latter, William,
 Jr., also Harvard, 1892, and M. D., 1896, is a Boston practitioner,
 whose wife is a daughter of the late General William Tecumseh Sherman;
 Surgeon Thorndike died in 1887.




ASSISTANT SURGEONS


 James L. Chipman, 31, --; physician, Milford; August 25, 1862; dis.
 as 1st Lieut. disa., May 23, '64; later, June 26, '65, 1st Lieut. and
 Ass't Surg. Forty-third U. S. C. T.; M. O. Oct. 20, '65.

 Henry H. Mitchell, 23, --; physician, East Bridgewater; August 25,
 1862; res. Nov. 3, '64, as 1st Lieut. for prom. as Major and Surgeon,
 Thirty-sixth U. S. C. T.; res. June 15, 1864.

 John F. Butler, --, --; physician, Chesterfield, N. H.; 1st Lieut.
 May 27, 1863; an M. D. from Harvard, 1854, a classmate of Surgeon
 Thorndike, he was M. O. June 2, 1865.




CHAPLAIN


 Edward Beecher French, 29, M.; clergyman, Chatham; August 18, 1862; a
 graduate of Harvard's Divinity School, 1859, Chaplain French enlisted
 as a private from his pastorate, and was commissioned from the ranks;
 of him Thomas E. Small remarks, "At the battle of the Wilderness the
 Chaplain was right up at the front with the boys and when Daniel
 Burnham of our Company was shot and about to die, the Chaplain took
 his last message and whatever he had to send to his wife and family
 and comforted him in his last few moments of life; he accompanied the
 remains of Colonel Davis from Petersburg to Cambridge and spoke at the
 funeral; M. O. June 2, 1865; he was born in Lowell, Nov. 20, 1832;
 his earlier years were spent in Holliston; his first pastorate was in
 Chatham, whence he was the first man to enlist in the Thirty-ninth;
 after the war he served pastorates in Babylon, L. I., and Perth Amboy,
 N. J., but his health, enfeebled by exposures at the front, broke and
 recovery was sought in Texas and Wisconsin, but without avail. He died
 July 14, 1907, in Harwich with relatives of his wife, who had preceded
 him to the other world, and his body was laid by the side of hers in
 the Harwich burial ground."




NON-COMMISSIONED STAFF


SERGEANT MAJORS

 Charles Henry Chapman, 21, S.; student, Cambridge; prom. 2d Lieut. Co.
 G, Nov. 11, 1862; Brown University, Class of 1861.

 T. Cordis Clarke from Co. B; Dec. 8, '62; prom. 2d Lieut. Nov. 13,
 '62; vide Co. E.

 Charles W. Hanson, from Co. A; Dec. 6, '62; prom. 2d Lieut. Jan. 25,
 '63; vide Co. H.

 Joseph A. Merrifield, from Co. A, Feb. 20, '63; prom. 2d Lieut. Sept.
 20, '63; vide Co. F.

 Edwin Mills, from Co. E; Sept., '63; prom. 2d Lieut. Jan. 8, '64; vide
 Co. A.

 Charles K. Conn, from Co. K, April 28, '64; wd. and pris. May 8, '64;
 prom. 2d Lieut. Feb. 1, '65; vide Co. H.

 George H. Dennett, from Co. K, Feb. 1, '65; prom. 2d Lieut.; not
 mustered; M. O. June 2, 1865, as Sergt. Major; d. Malden.


QUARTERMASTER SERGEANT

 Henry B. Leighton, 25, --; --, Cambridge; Sept. 4, 1862; prom. 2d
 Lieut. April 3, '65; not mustered; M. O. as Q. M. Sergt. June 2, 1865.


COMMISSARY SERGEANT

 Lucius W. Hilton, 21, --; --, --; Sept. 4, 1862; M. O. June 2, 1865.


HOSPITAL STEWARD

 Frederick Harvey, 27, M.; apothecary, Dorchester; dis. Sept. 7, 1863,
 S. O. W. D.

 Orville A. Barker, from Co. F, Oct. 13, '62; prom. 2d Lieut. Nov. 8,
 '63; vide Co. C.

 George A. Stuart, 22, S.; chemist, Boston; March 9, 1864; trans. June
 2, 1865, to Thirty-second Infantry.


PRINCIPAL MUSICIAN

 Matthew Woodward, from Co. F, Nov. 1, '63; M. O. June 2, 1865.

 (To avoid needless repetition of dates in regard to transfers to and
 from the Regiment the following facts are stated here:--June 25, '64,
 on the M. O. of the Twelfth Massachusetts Infantry, the men whose
 enlistments had not expired were trans. to the Thirty-ninth, and on
 the 13th, of July, '64, under similar circumstances, men were received
 from the Thirteenth Massachusetts. When, June 2, '65, the Thirty-ninth
 was preparing to go home all members whose terms were not expiring
 were trans. to the Thirty-second Massachusetts and were M. O. with
 that organization June 29, 1865).

 In battle-names, Spottsylvania may include both Alsop's Farm and
 Laurel Hill.




COMPANY A


 From South Danvers, after the War to become the town of Peabody.


CAPTAINS

 George S. Nelson, 27, M.; tanner, South Danvers; August 18, '62; res.
 March 2, 1865; had been commissioned Captain in the Thirty-fifth,
 August 12, '62, and was trans. as above; at last account, Capt.
 Nelson's address was 880 Seminary Avenue, Chicago.

 As Acting Captain, 1st Lieut. Henry F. Felch of Company E commanded
 the Company on its return to Boston.


FIRST LIEUTENANTS

 Emory Washburn, Jr., 24, --; lawyer, Cambridge; Aug. 25, '62; the son
 of Ex-Governor Emory Washburn, he was born in Worcester, Oct. 1, 1837;
 graduating from Harvard College in 1860, he had just taken his degree
 of LL. B. in 1862 when he was commissioned in the new regiment then
 forming; evidently his direct service, if any, in the Thirty-ninth was
 brief, for on the first Monthly Report he appears as detached and a
 member of the staff of General Charles Devens, also a Worcester man;
 in this capacity he did excellent work, as appears in the report of
 General Devens, after the battle of Fredericksburg, written Dec. 17,
 '62, wherein he says, "I am under especial obligations, for their
 zeal and fidelity, to my staff," including with two others, "my aide,
 Lieut. E. Washburn, Jr." It would appear that Adjutant Washburn
 returned to the Regiment for one week at Poolesville, Md., resigning,
 January 24, 1864; he died in 1885.

 Charles H. Porter, from 2d Lieut. Co. D, Jan. 25, '63; prom. Captain,
 Sept. 8, '64; not mustered; M. O. as 1st Lieut. June 2, 1865; as
 a member of the Loyal Legion, Captain Porter was conspicuous in
 promoting its interests; was Junior Vice-Commander, 1897; Registrar,
 1903-5; Recorder, 1906-11; no veteran of the Regiment took more
 interest in its annual reunions than did Captain Porter, and for years
 he was practically its motive power. His papers on the campaigns in
 which he bore a part were valuable contributions to the Massachusetts
 Military Historical Society. Born in Weymouth, 1843, he was only six
 weeks old when the family removed to Quincy; his early education
 was had in the Quincy High School; his business life was that of
 insurance; he was almost constantly in public life, twelve years on
 the School Board, three years Selectman, the First Mayor of Quincy,
 1888, he was re-elected; several years on the State Board of Health;
 first Commander, Paul Revere Post, G. A. R.; commissioned as Lieut.
 Colonel in Seventh M. V. M. by Governor Andrew, he was widely known as
 Colonel Porter; he was seven years Trustee of the Chelsea Soldiers'
 Home and was ever prominent in local business organizations and in
 Masonic Circles; d. Aug. 10, 1911.


SECOND LIEUTENANTS

 George H. Wiley, 23, M.; shoemaker, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; res.
 Jan. 7, '64; had been commissioned in the Thirty-fifth Aug. 12, '62,
 and was trans. as above; was 3d Lieut. Co. H, Fifth M. V. M., three
 mos. service; d. May 19, 1910, Boston.

 L. F. Wyman, Feb. 23, '64, from Co. K; returned to "K," Mar. 2, '64.

 Edwin Mills from Sergeant Major, Jan. 8, '64; dis. on account of wds.
 rec'd May 10, '64, Oct. 19, '64.


ENLISTED MEN

 Adams, Francis D. (Corp.), 27, M.; upholsterer, Boston; July 9, '63;
 recruit to Twelfth Infty.; trans. thence to the Thirty-ninth and later
 trans. to the Thirty-second and afterwards M. O.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64,
 Weldon R. R.

 Adams, Joseph, 44, M.; mechanic, Stowe; Aug. 18, '62; wd. May 8, '64;
 dis. disa., Jan. 18, '64.

 Aitken, Samuel, 19, S.; mason, Boston; June 26, '61, in Co. A, Twelfth
 Regiment; to compensate for protracted absence without leave to Oct.
 1, '63, he was trans. to the Thirty-second and thence M. O.

 Ames, John, 21, S.; laborer, Boston; July 9, '63; recruit to the
 Twelfth Infty., trans. thence to the Thirty-ninth; trans. to One
 Hundred Sixty-eighth Co., Second Batt. V. R. C.; dis. June 7, '65.

 Andrews, Timothy, Jr., 33, M.; spar maker, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; M. O.
 June 2, 1865; d. 1896.

 Badger, George H., 30, M.; shoemaker, Stoughton; Aug. 18, '62; dis.
 disa., Oct. 22, '63.

 Bancroft, George W., Jr., 20, M.; teamster, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62;
 dis. May 20, '65--report of Adjutant General says, "ex. of s."

 Barden, Jonas P., 18, S.; farmer, Lynnfield; Aug. 18, '62; k. June 22,
 '64, Petersburg, Va.

 Barnard, Henry, 21, S.; stonecutter, Hanover; Aug. 15, '61; in Co. C,
 Twelfth Regiment by way of compensation for unexcused absence was, at
 last, trans. to Thirty-second Massachusetts Volunteers for final M. O.

 Batchelder, Benjamin A. (Wagoner); 40, M.; teamster, Chatham; trans.
 Sept. 7, '62, V. R. C.; d. --.

 Bean, Thomas, b. Mar. 19, 1833; 29, M.; shoemaker, Easton; Aug. 18,
 '62; Corp. April 27, '63; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65;
 shoemaker and farmer; in Legislature, 1870; has held all offices in G.
 A. R. Post; 1913, Easton.

 Belcher, John, 28, S.; shoemaker, Framingham; July 13, '63; dis.
 disa., May 4, '65.

 Bemis, Winfield S., b. Nov. 16, 1844; 18, S.; farmer, Stowe; Aug. 18,
 '62; trans. V. R. C. Jan. 18, '65; M. O. from Co. I, Eighteenth V. R.
 C. June 29, '65; lastmaker and shoemaker; 1913, West Medway.

 Bessom, Edward A., 25, M.; barber, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; prom.
 Corp., trans. Feb. 11, '64, Co. A, Twenty-fourth V. R. C.; M. O. June
 28, '65.

 Blaisdell, John O. (Corp.), 30, M.; shoecutter, So. Danvers; Aug. 18,
 '62; Sergt. June 1, '63; wd. Feb. 6, '65, Hatcher's Run, Va.; prom.
 2d Lieut. June 7, '65; M. O. as Sergt. June 2, '65.

 Blauvelt, James, 42, M.; carpenter, Chatham; Aug. 18, '62; trans. July
 9, '63, V. R. C.

 Bloomer, Joseph, N., 23, M.; mariner, Chatham; Aug. 18, '61; dis.
 disa., March 3, '63.

 Boodry, George J., 35, M.; bootmaker, Easton; Aug. 18, '62; prisoner
 from Aug. 19, '64, to Jan. 2, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Bowker, Edward H., 21, S.; artist, Boston; Aug. 18, '62; trans., Jan.
 5, '64, V. R. C.; dis. disa., Aug. 20, '66, Fort Wayne, Mich., from
 Third Independent Co., V. R. C.

 Brennan, James, 21, S.; paper hanger, Boston; June 26, '61; in Twelfth
 Infty., re-en. Jan. 5, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Brett, Charles G., 19, S.; blacksmith, Stowe; Aug. 18, '62; Corp. May
 1, '65,; M. O. June 2, '65; d.

 Brown, Frank P., 23, M.; telegrapher, Boston; June 28, '63; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Burnham, Daniel, 32, M.; farmer, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; k. May 11, '64,
 Spottsylvania.

 Burnham, Eli H., b. July 19, 1833; 29, M.; shoemaker, So. Danvers;
 Aug. 18, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, Lynn.

 Burnham, George S.; 26, S.; shoemaker, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64, Alsop's Farm; M.O. June 2, '65; 1913, Essex.

 Burnham, George W., 32, M.; shoemaker, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; pris. Aug.
 13, '64 to March 2, '65; M. O. June 13, '65; d. 1902.

 Burnham, James H., 19, S.; farmer, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; wd. May 8,'64,
 Spottsylvania; M. O. May 11, '65; 1913, Essex.

 Burnham, Wilbur (Corp.), 20, S.; carpenter, Essex; Aug. 18, '62;
 Sergt. Dec. 4, '62; d. May 21, '63.

 Butler, Benjamin F., 29, M.; currier, Salem; Aug. 18, '62; trans.
 Navy, April 21, '64.

 Channel, John F., 19, S.; shoemaker, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; dis. disa.,
 Jan. 29, '63.

 Clifford, James A., 23, S.; bookbinder, Boston; Aug. 18, '62; dis.
 disa., April 2, '63.

 Cole, George W., 20, S.; shoemaker, No. Bridgewater; Aug. 18, '62;
 Corp. March 17, '63; pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; 1 French
 Ave., Brockton.

 Conant, Edward, 19, S.; pail maker, Stowe; Aug. 18, '62; Corp. April
 29, '63; wd. May 8, '64; trans. Co. D, Twenty-fourth V. R. C.; dis.
 June 27, '65.

 Cottrell, Jefferson T. (Sergt.), 21, --; mariner, Bangor, Me.; Aug.
 18, '62; wd. May 8, '64, Spottsylvania; supposed to have d. in Rebel
 Prison.

 Cottrell, Justin W., 19, S.; mariner, Bangor, Me.; Aug. 18, '62; Corp.
 Sept. 20, '62; Sergt. Feb. 11, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. Parole
 Camp, Annapolis, Md., Sept. 10, '64.

 Cunningham, Eugene B., 22, S.; mechanic, Saxton's River, Vt.; Aug. 18,
 '62; dis. disa., Dec. 13, '63.

 Curran, John, 21, --; --, Boston, cr. Canton; July 1, '63; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Darling, Ezekial B., 29, M.; shoemaker, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; wd.
 Feb. 6, '65, Hatcher's Run; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Dean, Samuel D., 19, S.; shoe dresser, No. Bridgewater; Aug. 18, '62;
 Corp. Feb. 11, '64; k. March 31, '65, White Oak Roads, Va.

 Dodge, Harrison A. (Sergt.), 22, S.; tanner, So. Danvers; Aug. 18,
 '62; trans. V. R. C. March 18, '64.

 Dodge, John P. (Corp.), 29, M.; tanner, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62;
 Sergt. Sept. 30, '63; 1st Sergt. Feb. 11, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64,
 Weldon R. R.; d. Jan. 15, '65; Salisbury, N. C.

 Doyle, William A., 21, --; --, Charlestown; July 9, '63; from the
 Twelfth Infty., Co. C; trans. to the Thirty-second and thence M. O.

 Dyer, Lewis R., 17, S.; printer, Lowell; June 26, '61, in Twelfth
 Infty.; re-en. Jan. 5, '64; trans. and prom. Sergt. June 25, '64;
 trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Eischman, John, 26, --; shoemaker, Marblehead; a recruit to the
 Thirteenth Infty., where he is entered as Ehrman, Co. A, and trans. to
 V. R. C., July 14, '64; however, his name is among those coming from
 the Thirteenth and is duly trans. to the Thirty-second, where he is
 recorded as "absent, sick"; the chances are that he never saw either
 the Thirty-ninth or the Thirty-second.

 Eldridge, Prince, Jr., 31, M.; mariner, Chatham; Aug. 18, '62; trans.
 Navy, April 21, '64; dis. disa., Naval Hosp'l, Norfolk, Va., April 19,
 '65; d.

 Ellis, Daniel W., 18, S.; mariner, Chatham; Aug. 18, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65; Carver.

 Evans, William S., 21, S.; brickmaker, Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; d. Feb. 3, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Fannon, John 38, S.; operator, Lawrence; July 16, '63; recruit to the
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Field, William, 48, M.; mechanic, Harwich; Aug. 18, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; b. 1800; was a soldier in the Mexican War, the oldest man in the
 Regiment; dead.

 Fish, Henry F., 22, M.; laborer, Milton; July 17, '63; recruit
 to the Twelfth Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Flint, James F., 30, M.; shoemaker, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; dis.
 disa., June 11, '63; d.

 Flynn, Daniel B., 18, S.; shoemaker, Stowe; Aug. 18, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; M. O. June 29, '65.

 Fogg, Joseph 24, S.; tanner, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; dis. disa.,
 Feb. 19, '63.

 Foster, Henry, 21, S.; boatman, Lowell, cr. Brighton; July 24, '63;
 recruit to the Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth, and
 thence to the Thirty-second and M. O.

 Freeman, Warren H., 18, S.; clerk, Boston; Dec. 1, '61; recruit to the
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth and dis. Sept. 13, '64,
 S. O. W. D., No. 86.

 Gibbs, John K., 44, M.; laborer, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; d., a
 prisoner, Dec. 2, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Goodwin, Charles M., 26, M.; brickmaker, Boxford, Aug. 18, '62; wd.
 May 10, '64, Laurel Hill; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; dis. May 15, '65, ex. of
 s.; Beverly.

 Gould, Charles (Mus.), 23, M.; powder maker, So. Danvers; en. July 26,
 '62; des. Aug. 7, '62.

 Gould, William A. 18, S.; Mariner, Chatham; Aug. 18, '62; wd. Aug. 18,
 '64, Weldon R. R.; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Guilford, Jacob O., 21, S.; shoemaker, Middleton; Aug. 18, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 29, '63.

 Guppy, George F., 25, M.; shoemaker, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; dis. disa.,
 Sept. 9, '62.

 Hampton, Samuel, 45, M.; physician, Stowe; Aug. 18, '62; Pris. June 5,
 '64; d. on or about Sept. 20, '64, Andersonville, Ga.

 Hanson, Charles W. (1st Sergt.), 26, M.; clerk, So. Danvers; Aug. 18,
 '62; Sergt. Major, Dec. 6, '62; prom. 2d Lieut. Jan. 25, '63; vid. Co.
 H.

 Haskell, Albert S., 19, S.; blacksmith, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; d. Feb. 2, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Hebard, Henry J. A., 18, S.; engineer, Milton; July 21, '61; en. in
 Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth and dis.
 Sept. 21, '64, O. W. D.

 Hegner, Anthony P. (Corp.), 18, S.; locksmith, Lynnfield; Aug. 18,
 '62; wd. May 8, '64, Spottsylvania; dis. disa., Oct. 3, '64.

 Henry Abial R., 29, S.; carpenter, Boston; July 14, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence trans. to Thirty-second
 and M. O.

 Hilton, William L., 23, S.; painter, Medfield; Feb. 13, '62; recruit
 to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth and dis. Feb. 12, '65,
 ex. of s.

 Hunting, Willard, 24, M.; Aug. 18, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; Weldon R.
 R.; d. Dec. 5, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Jones, Asa L., b. June 20, 1840; 22, S; Aug. 18, '62; mariner,
 Harwich; Corp. Dec. 1, '62; Sergt. March 17, '63; prom. Lieut. Sixth
 U. S. C. T., Sept. 15, '63; wd. before Petersburg, June 15, '64; dis.
 disa., Sept. 22, '64; merchant, pilot, fishermaster, seven years;
 capt. of a lightship eleven years; keeper of lighthouse and undertaker
 since 1889; from 1892 to 1897, inclusive, Selectman; 1913, Harwich.

 Johnson, George, 21, S.; shoemaker, Brunswick, Me.; Aug. 18, '62; des.
 Feb. 11, '63.

 Knapp, Charles P., b. Sept. 13, 1843; 18, S.; farmer, Needham; Aug.
 18, '62; trans. V. R. C., Feb. 5, '64; dis. from Co. I, V. R. C., July
 3, '65; as patient, guard and nurse in smallpox hospital, Washington,
 May 17, '63--Aug. '64; guard duty, Elmira and Syracuse, N. Y., till
 April, '65; same duty in Indianapolis, Ind., till M. O.; farmer and
 machinist; 1913, Caryville.

 Kraetzer, Julius F., 20, S. clerk, Boston; July 16, '61; en. in
 Thirteenth Infty. and re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth and
 thence trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Lee, Edward, 35, M.; blacksmith, Boston; en. July 14, '63; recruit in
 Co. I, Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth, and des. Nov.
 14, '64.

 Livermore, Lorenzo D., 26, S.; yeoman, Spencer; July 14, '63;
 in Twelfth Infty., Co. I; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.; was wd., shoulder, Wilderness, while in the
 Twelfth; b. So. Royalton, Vt.; Livermore had served in Co. H, Tenth
 Mass., Infty.; wd. at Fair Oaks, he was dis. Oct. 27, '62, for disa.
 and later was drafted; d. Leicester, Sept. 22, '85; bur. in Old
 Cemetery.

 McArthur, Peter, 30, M.; farmer, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65; d. June, 1896.

 Mansfield, William O., 21, S.; farmer, Lynnfield; Aug. 18, '62; dis.
 disa., June 10, '63; Wakefield.

 Marteau, Ludovic, 28, S.; baker, Worcester; July 24, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Maxwell, John, 31, M.; July 13, '63; laborer, Spencer; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.; d. May, '96, Spencer, bur. St. Mary's Cemetery.

 Mears, Rufus E., 21, M.; shoemaker, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; d., a
 prisoner, Salisbury, N. C., Oct. 27, '64.

 Mears, Samuel, Jr., 37, M.; laborer, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; dis. disa.,
 Dec. 23, '63; en. V. R. C. July 30, '64; dis. Nov. 21, '65, O. W. D.;
 d.

 Mentzell, Herman, 21, M.; merchant, Amesbury; June 28, '63; recruit to
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the Thirty-second
 and M. O.

 Mentzer, Moses H., b. Oct. 19, 1843; 18, S.; painter, Stowe; Aug. 18,
 '62; M. O. June 2, '65; painter and farmer; Com'der, G. A. R. Post;
 1913, Bolton.

 Mentzer, William A., Jr., b. Nov. 7, 1841, Worcester; 21, M.; grocer,
 Malden; Aug. 18, '62; Corp. Sept. 20, '62; Sergt. Sept. 22, '64; M. O.
 June 2, '65; provisions, farming and teaming; 1913, Hudson.

 Merrifield, Jos. A. (Sergt.), 26, M.; --, Boston; Aug. 18, '62; Sergt.
 Major Feb. 20, '63; 2d Lieut. Sept. 20, '63; 1st Lieut. May 4, '64;
 wd. May 8, '64, Spottsylvania; res. Jan. 14, '65.

 Miles, Edward P., 19, M.; farmer, Marlborough; Aug. 18, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R., to May 18, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; d. 1904.

 Milliken, James (Corp.), 22, M.; shoecutter, So. Danvers; Aug. 18,
 '62; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Mitchell, Isaac H., b. July 10, 1836; 25, M.; shoemaker, Lynnfield;
 Aug. 18, '62; Corp. Sept. 22, '64; wd. March 31, '65; White Oak
 Roads; no M. O.; carpenter, policeman, constable; 1913, Lynnfield.

 Mitchell, Jonathan H., 33, M.; shoemaker, Lynnfield; Aug. 18, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Sept. 3, 1891.

 Mitchell, Samuel H., b. Nov. 2, 1844; 18, S.; shoemaker, Lynnfield;
 Aug. 18, '62; Corp. Nov. 13, '62; at Five Forks captured two rebels
 and turned them over to the Provost Marshal; shoe business; two years
 in Boston City Council; 1895-6 in Massachusetts Legislature; M. O.
 June 2, '65; 1913, Brighton.

 Morse, Benjamin G., 25, --; shoemaker, Boston; Feb. 13, '62; in the
 Twelfth Infty., Co. D; trans. to the Thirty-ninth and dis. March 23,
 '65, ex. of s.

 Morse, Daniel F., 18, S.; shoemaker, Needham; Aug. 18, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d.

 Moulton, William J., 20, S.; farmer, Lynnfield; Aug. 18, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65, in Co. E; d. 1905, Wakefield.

 Mullen, Patrick, 23, M.; laborer, Boston; July 14, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Murphy, James, 33, M.; shoemaker, Stoneham; Oct. 12, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Myers, William, 38, M.; shoemaker, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Nichols, Wendell G., 24, S.; farmer, Lynnfield; Aug. 18, '62; k. Aug.
 18, '64, Weldon R. R.

 Nutting, Albion, 34, M.; machinist, Stowe; Aug. 18, '62; d. Oct. 14,
 '64, Washington, D. C.

 Ordway, Lewis E., 18, S.; farmer, Roxbury; Feb. 9, '64; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; M. O. May 20, '65, ex. of s.

 Osborne, Paul, 22, S.; shoemaker, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; d. of
 wounds, Oct. 26, '64.

 Packard, Sylvanus C., 18, S.; shoemaker, No. Bridgewater; Aug. 18,
 '62; Corp. Sept. 27, '63; Pris. Weldon R. R., Aug. 19, '64, to March
 2, '65; M. O. July 14, '65; d.

 Patterson, Joseph R., 22, M.; butcher, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 19, '63.

 Perkins, John H., 23, M.; teamster, Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; had been
 prisoner of war; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Pierce, John, Jr., 22, S.; Aug. 18, '62; dis. disa., Jan. 2, '63.

 Plummer, Nathan F., Jr., 26, M.; clerk, Boston; July 9, '62; recruit
 to the Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Powell, David, 18, S.; farmer, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62; wd. May 5,
 '64; M. O. July 1, '65; Saugus.

 Purcell, George J., 18, S.; laborer, So. Danvers; en. Aug. 6, '62;
 trans. Sept. 18, '64, from Co. H to V. R. C.

 Purington, William E., 18, S.; farmer, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62;
 trans. Feb. 15, '63, to V. R. C.

 Reynolds, Marcus (Mus.), 19, S.; clerk, No. Bridgewater; Aug. 27,
 '63; recruit to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Richardson, Francis S., 24, S.; farmer, Lynnfield; Aug. 18, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; d.

 Richardson, William L., 20, S.; hostler, Salem; Aug. 18, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; Cambridgeport.

 Roy, John, 25, M.; seaman, Boston; Sept. 18, '63; recruit to Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Ryder, Alvah (Corp.), 48, M.; mariner; Aug. 18, '62; dis. disa., Nov.
 26, '62.

 Saunders, Charles R. P., 31, M.; carpenter, Newburyport; Aug. 18, '62;
 M. O. June 2, '65; d. 1906.

 Sawyer, James M., 19, S.; farmer, Sudbury; Aug. 18, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; M. O. July 18, '65; Clinton.

 Schoen, Frederick, 30, M.; clerk, Worcester; July 25, '63; recruit
 to the Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Schwartz, Jacob, 28, S.; clerk, Taunton; July 28, '63; recruit to
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Shaw, Zenas, 38, M.; shoemaker, Halifax; Aug. 18, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Simonds, George N. (Mus.), 32, M.; clerk, So. Danvers; Aug. 18, '62;
 wd. May 5, '64, Wilderness; M. O. July 12, '65.

 Small, Thomas E., b. Feb. 17, 1844; 18, S.; mariner, Harwich; Aug. 18,
 '62; M. O. June 2, '65; for past seventeen years, carrier of U. S.
 mail, passengers and express; many years secretary and treasurer Board
 of Trustees, M. E. Church; 1913, So. Harwich.

 Smalley, Henry, b. Feb. 12, 1842; 20, S.; mariner, Harwich; Aug. 18,
 '62; Corp. Sept. 30, '63; M. O. June 2, '65; cashier, B. & M. R. R.,
 since Oct., 1867; 1913, Winchester.

 Smith, Cyrus D., 21, --; --, So. Danvers; N. F. R.

 Smith, George, 21, S.; laborer, Bangor, Me.; Aug. 18, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Smith, Nathaniel, 21, S.; farmer, Chatham; Aug. 18, '62; dis. disa.,
 June 12, '63.

 Snow, Eric M., 42, M.; harness maker, Chatham; Aug. 18, '62; dis.
 disa., March 26, '63.

 Spencer, Roland J., 18, S.; hostler, Nantucket; Aug. 18, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Stevens, Elbridge, 18, S.; Aug. 18, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R.
 R.; d. rebel Prison, Richmond, Va., date unknown.

 Story, Asa, 33, M.; shoemaker, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; d. Nov. 11, '62,
 Washington, D. C.

 Summers, George M., 34, M.; shoemaker, Lynnfield; Aug. 18, '62; M. O.
 July 12, '65.

 Tyler, John O., 24, S.; morocco dresser, Salem; Aug. 18, '62; trans.
 Navy, April 21, '64; Lynn.

 Varnum, John, 24, M.; shoemaker, Essex; Aug. 18, '62; wd. May 12, '64,
 Spottsylvania; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Whitcomb, George F., 18, S.; farmer, Stowe; Aug. 18, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; d. Jan. 2, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Whiting, Walter B., 21, S.; bookbinder, Boston; Aug. 18, '62; dis.
 disa., Oct. 23, '62.

 Wiley, Samuel (Sergt.), 21, S.; shoemaker, So. Danvers; Aug. 18,
 '62; missing after July 16, '64; supposed to have been murdered by
 guerrillas.




COMPANY B

Roxbury


CAPTAIN

 William W. Graham, 33, S.; machinist, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; wd. May
 10, '64; prom. Major, June 7, '65; not mustered; M. O. as Captain June
 2, '65.


FIRST LIEUTENANTS

 William T. G. Spear, 27, M.; tradesman, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; k.
 Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R. R.; the Lieutenant, on account of ill health,
 had resigned before leaving Mitchell's Station, the resignation had
 been accepted, but the notification was lost in a mass of papers at
 headquarters, and was not found till after his death; very far from
 being religiously inclined, Lieut. Spear's whole nature was changed by
 certain revival meetings at Mitchell's during the winter, and when his
 death-stroke came his constant and only words, till death sealed his
 lips, were, "What a blessed thing is religion."

 Joseph A. Merrifield, from Co. D, May 4, '64; wd. May 8, '64; res.
 Jan. 14, 1865.

 Melville C. Parkhurst (B), prom. Captain, June 7, '65; not mustered;
 M. O. June 2, '65, as 1st Lieut.; long Chief of Police, Somerville;
 1913, Somerville.


SECOND LIEUTENANTS

 Julius M. Swain, 26, S.; cashier, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; trans. to
 U. S. Signal Corps, March 3, '63; bvt. 1st Lieut. and Captain U. S.
 Vols. March 13, '65; res. June 14, '65; dead.

 T. Cordis Clarke, from Co. E; dis. disa., July 19, '64; on detached
 service Aug. 10, '63; Ordnance Dept., 2d Div. 1st Army Corps.

 Melville C. Parkhurst, from Co. E; prom. 1st Lieut. (B), Jan. 15, '65.

 Charles H. Perkins, from Co. D, March 1, '65; Com. Sept. 8, '64; M. O.
 June 2, '65; dead.


ENLISTED MEN

 Adams, George E., 25, S.; sawyer, Boston; July 22, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R.
 R.; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Allison, Joseph, Jr. (Sergt.), 38, M.; boiler-maker, Roxbury; Aug. 20,
 '62; prom. 1st Sergt.; wd. June 19, '64, Petersburg, Va.; d. July 10,
 '64.

 Andrews, George A., 22, M.; teamster, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; prom.
 Corp.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Arnold, Edwin L. (Corp.), 20, S.; machinist, Adams; Aug. 20, '62; dis.
 disa., June 30, '63.

 Arnold, William, Jr., 28, M.; moulder, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; 1913, Stoneham.

 Backup, James B., 18, S.; clerk, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. July 17,
 '63, for commission, Thirty-sixth U. S. C. T.; 2d Lieut. Aug. 13, '63;
 1st Lieut. May 1, '64; Capt. Oct. 21, '64; dis. Jan. 23, '65.

 Bartlett, Abner D. (Corp.), 34, M.; pattern-maker; Blackstone; Aug.
 20, '62; dis. Feb. 4, '63.

 Bartlett, John L., 45, M.; rope maker, Roxbury; Aug. 31, '62; dis.
 disa., June 3, '63.

 Batcheller, Holland M., 43, M.; provisions, Needham; Aug. 20, '62;
 dis. May 5, '63, for Commission, U. S. C. T.

 Bell, James H., 26, M.; shoemaker, Ashland; July 21, '63; recruit to
 the Twelfth Infty., Co. H; trans. to Thirty-ninth; prom. Corp. March
 1, '65; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Bennett, Alden B. (Mus.), 44, --; --, Boston; June 10, '63; evidently
 a recruit; trans. to the Thirty-second and M. O.

 Bennett, Harrison M., b. March 22, 1843; 19, S.; farmer, Springfield;
 Aug. 30, '62; prom. Corp.; wd. May 10, '64, Laurel Hill; dis. disa.,
 Dec. 24, '64; graduated in Law, National University, 1870, Washington,
 D. C., also in Medicine, Howard University; practiced medicine 10
 years, since then, clerk Treasury Dep't, Washington, 1913, Takoma
 Park, Washington, D. C.

 Betts, Charles R., 25, S.; July 24, '63; recruit to Twelfth Infty.,
 Co. A; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Bills, Walter M., 26, S.; fireman, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; d. Jan. 24, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Blake, Daniel P., 27, M.; shoemaker, Halifax; Aug. 23, '62; wd. June
 23, '64, Petersburg; trans. V. R. C., Jan. 10, '65; also recorded as
 dis. Dec. 2, '64, Rendezvous, Va.; vide letter, W. D., Jan. 6, 1888;
 1913, Halifax.

 Briggs, Arthur M., 33, M.; teamster, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 16, '62.

 Brown, George, 23, S.; farmer, Southborough; July 16, '61; in
 Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 5, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth thence
 to the Thirty-second and M. O.

 Bryant, Roscoe L., b. July 12, 1849, Woburn; (Mus.), 13, S.;
 carpenter, Woburn; Aug. 20, '62; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Burns, James, 41, M.; laborer, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; Pris. Dec. 11,
 '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Butske, Carl, 30, S.; baker, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; died, no date or
 place.

 Carleton, William, 31, S.; mason, Boston; Aug. 20, '62; k. May 8, '64,
 Spottsylvania.

 Cassidy, John, 27, S.; laborer, Boston; July 20, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty. Co. B; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64;
 trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Chapin, Charles H., 24, M.; artist, Boston; July 9, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence des. March 4, '65.

 Childs, John F., 21, M.; shoemaker, Natick; March 11, '62; recruit to
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence dis. March 11, '65,
 ex. of s.

 Clarke, T. Cordis (1st Sergt.), 19, S.; clerk, Roxbury; prom. Sergt.
 Major, Dec. 8, '62.

 Crafts, William G., 18, S.; painter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis.
 disa., Nov. 12, '62.

 Cronan, Daniel, 19, S.; plumber, Boston; June 26, '61; according to
 rolls, but '62 would accord better with the record; trans. from Co. B,
 Twelfth Infty. to the Thirty-ninth and thence dis. June 2, '65, ex. of
 s.

 Cunningham, Martin, 22, S.; laborer, Acton; Sept. 26, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R.
 R.; escaped from train on southern way; trans. to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Curtis, John M., 45, M.; laborer, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. disa.,
 June 9, '63.

 Dailey, John, 23, S.; lather, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. disa., July
 17, '63.

 Daly, James, 24, S.; silversmith, Boston; June 26, '61; en. Co. B,
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence des. 1865; he had
 already des. in first enlistment and had come back.

 Davis, Edward S., 18, S.; plumber, Roxbury; prom. Sergt.; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; d. March 20, '65.

 Davis, Gardner C., 28, S.; fireman, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; prom.
 Sergt.; missing May 8, '64, Spottsylvania.

 Devines, David S. (Corp.), 33, M.; tinsmith, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62;
 des. May 6, '63.

 Diguer, Richard, 34, M.; blacksmith, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 18, '65.

 Doyle, Patrick, 19, S.; paper stamper, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; Corp.
 March 1, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Draper, Curtis W., 18, S.; shoemaker, Wayland; Aug. 20, '62; Corp.
 March 1, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; b. Wayland, Sept. 27th, '46, he was
 not quite 16 years old at enlistment; was in every battle and skirmish
 in which the Thirty-ninth took part, never lost a day's duty and never
 was struck by an enemy's missile, save once, and then it was a spent
 bullet; youngest soldier from the town.

 Dudley, Charles, 20, S.; farmer, Wayland; June 26, '61; in Co. B,
 Twelfth Infty.; des. and came back; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence
 trans. to Thirty-second, to make up time, and was M. O. June 29, '65.

 Dyer, Simon D., 43, S.; bookkeeper, Roxbury; en. Aug. 3, '62; N. F. R.

 Edmands, Thomas, 18, S.; paper hanger, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; en. in Rebel Army.

 Ernest, Anet, 20, S.; farmer, Baltimore, cr. Springfield; Sept. 20,
 '64; July 13, '64, he had en. as 21 years old, a Boston shoemaker, in
 Co. A of the Fifth M. V. M., 100 days; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Fisher, Andrew J., 22, M.; bootmaker, en. Concord, N. H., cr. Boston;
 July 27, '63; recruit to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth,
 thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Fizzell, James, 18, --; plumber, Springfield; Sept. 20, '64; from Co.
 A, Fifth M. V. M., 100 days, where he was carried as Frizzell; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Flanagan, Anthony, 23, S.; lather, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Foley, John E., 38, M.; tailor, Boston; Aug. 20, '62; dis., May 3,
 '65, O. W. D.

 Frahm, Louis, 40, M.; shoemaker, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; k. Aug. 18,
 '64, Weldon R. R.

 Frederick, Benjamin B., 34, M.; carriage painter, Roxbury; Aug. 20,
 '62; dis. disa., Dec. 4, '63.

 Gallagher, Edward, 30, M.; laborer, Boston; Aug. 1, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Gordon, Horace, F., 36, M.; shoemaker, Roxbury, Aug. 20, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Green, John W., 25, M.; teamster, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; missing, May
 8, '64, Spottsylvania.

 Gunning, John, 25, M.; laborer, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; d. prison hospital, Dec. 10, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Ham, Henry A., 28, S.; clerk, Boston; July 27, '63; recruit to
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Henry, Daniel, 33, M.; piano maker; Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; k. May 10,
 '64, Spottsylvania.

 Hicks, William L., 18, S.; clerk, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. disa.,
 Nov. 11, '63.

 Hiedenway, David, 37, M.; shoemaker, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. June
 9, '65; roll also says "d. Dec. 14, '66"; vid. p. 52 of the narrative.

 Holbrook, Silas P., 28, S.; clerk, Dorchester; July 16, '61; in
 Thirteenth Infty., re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence
 dis., S. O. W. D., July 19, '64, for Commission, 2d Lieutenant,
 Forty-fifth U. S. C. T.; res. April 25, '65.

 Howard, Ephraim F., 18, S.; blacksmith, No. Bridgewater; Aug. 20, '62;
 trans. V. R. C., Sept. 30, '63; dis. Aug. 25, '64, from 102d Co.,
 Second Batt. V. R. C.

 Huggins, Arthur H., 22, S.; plumber, Boston; Aug. 20, '62; dis. disa.,
 Sept. 19, '63.

 Hunter, James, 22, S.; carpenter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. disa.,
 Feb. 6, '64.

 Hunter, Robert L., 44, M.; carpenter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; absent at
 M. O. in Philadelphia; vide letter, W. D., Jan. 22, '94.

 Jones, William, 21, S.; bootmaker, Taunton; Aug. 4, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Kelly, Edward, 43, M.; carder, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; trans. V. R. C.,
 Sept. 16, '63; dis. disa., Oct. 24, '65, from Sixteenth Co., Second
 Batt. V. R. C.

 Kelly, John, 20, S.; ropemaker, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; d. Nov. 26,
 '64, Washington, D. C.

 Kelly, William, 39, M.; laborer, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; trans. Jan. 5,
 '64, V. R. C.; dis. from Third Independent Co., V. R. C., Aug. 29, '66.

 Killduff, James, 37, M.; ropemaker, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; d. a
 prisoner, Nov. 27, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Landgreve, George, 39, M.; carpenter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; missing,
 May 8, '64, Spottsylvania.

 Leach, Rodney M., 28, M.; bootmaker, No. Bridgewater; July 16, '63;
 recruit to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Ledwith, John, 21, S.; laborer, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; prom. Corp.; M.
 O. June 2, '65; 1913, Peabody.

 Lewis, Edward H., 18, S.; clerk, Stoneham; Aug. 20, '62; prom. Corp.;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, 22 Quincy Street,
 Chicago; though b. in Roxbury, Jan. 5, 1845, his life has been spent
 largely in the West; his well kept diary was drawn upon in the making
 of this history; he is a member of U. S. Grant Post 28, Dept. of Ill.

 Loker, James D. (Sergt.), 34, M.; policeman, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; d.
 Dec. 30, '62, Poolesville, Md.

 Lull, Stephen, 29, M.; shoemaker, Halifax; Aug. 20, '62; June 2, '65.

 Macarty, Edward H., 22, S.; provisions, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; d.
 April 29, '65.

 McDonald, George, b. 1844; 18, S.; laborer, Middleborough; en. Sept.
 2, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; escaped; M. O. June 2, '65; machinist;
 ass't. chief, Fire Dep't; 1913, Pawtucket, R. I.

 McDonald, John, 35, M.; en. Aug. 31, '62; wd. May 10, '64,
 Spottsylvania; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Mackenzie, Daniel, 29, M.; baker, Roxbury; Aug. 31, '62; dis. disa.,
 July 19, '63.

 McNeil, William C., 32, M.; painter, Boston; July 13, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 McNulty, Thomas, 33, M.; porter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; wd. May 10,
 '64, Spottsylvania; M. O. June 2, '65.

 McPherson, John J., 25, S.; baker, Boston; Oct. 8, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth and M. O. May 19, '65.

 Melton, Joseph L., 30, M.; shoemaker, Halifax; Aug. 20, '62; d. Nov.
 9, '63, Alexandria, Va.

 Milner, Thomas K., 34, M.; Carpenter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; d. April
 29, '65.

 Mitchell, Franklin A., 41, S.; carpenter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; d.
 from wds. June 2, '64, according to the rolls, but G. V. Shedd's diary
 has it June 20.

 Mohan, Terrance P., 18, S.; painter, Boston; Aug. 20, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; paroled, Oct. 7, '64; M. O. May 18, '65.

 Moore, Sidney, 19, S.; farmer, Westport; Oct. 12, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. as "returned deserter"; N. F. R.; not carried
 to roll of the Thirty-second.

 Morgan, John, 33, M.; butcher, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. disa.,
 April 22, '63.

 Moses, George F., b. Aug. 24, 1843; 19, S.; farmer, Milton; Aug. 20,
 '62; lost left arm, May 10, '64, Laurel Hill; dis. disa., March 17,
 '65; for many years, watchman at State House, Boston; resides in
 Roxbury, 1913.

 Monroe, James, 18, S.; farmer, Provincetown; Oct. 19, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Murphy, Thomas, 24, S.; farmer, Charlton; July 25, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Murray, Patrick, 21, S.; painter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; wd. May 10,
 '64, Spottsylvania; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Noble, Joseph A., 33, M.; painter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. Dec.
 22, '63; later in Co. H Fifty-sixth Massachusetts Infantry.

 Nolan, Patrick, 39, M.; brass finisher, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; wd. no
 time or place given; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Nute, Joseph, 40, M.; carpenter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. June 29,
 '65.

 Palmer, Rensilleir L. (Corp.), 34, M.; piano key maker, Roxbury; Aug.
 20, '64; Sergt. March 1, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Perkins, Henry S., 21, M.; provisions, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. as
 Corp. June 16, '64, O. W. D.

 Perkins, Jonathan, 36, M.; laborer, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; M. O. July
 10, '65.

 Plympton, William P., 23, S.; mechanic, Springfield; Sept. 20,
 '64; M. O. June 14, '65; had been dis. Sept. 19, from Co. A, Fifth
 Massachusetts Volunteer Militia (100 days), to re-en. here; 1910,
 Insurance, Southbridge.

 Pyne, Frederick (Sergt.), 29, M.; carpenter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62;
 prom. 1st Sergt.; dis. O. W. D., July 29, '63.

 Reaney, Patrick, 26, W.; laborer, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; d. Feb. 26, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Rich, Giles H. (Sergt.), 21, S.; lawyer, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis.
 June 20, '63, Washington, D. C., for Captain's Commission, First U.
 S. C. T.; prom. Lieut. Colonel, Oct. 13, '64; M. O. Sept. 29, '65,
 Roanoke Island, N. C.

 Richardson, William R., 32, M.; teamster, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; prom.
 Sergt.; 1st Sergt., March 1, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Ricker, Oliver P., b. 1837; 26, M.; expressman, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62;
 prom. Sergt.; prom. 2d Lieut. Sept. 8, '64; dis., June 6, '65; clerk;
 1913, Dorchester.

 Robinson, Andrew J. (Corp.), 28, M.; mason, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; M.
 O. June 18, '65.

 Robinson, John R., 24, S.; mason, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; Pris., Aug.
 19, '64; d. Dec. 6, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Roland, Richard, 20, S.; waiter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. disa.,
 June 9, '63.

 Rosemere, Conrad (Corp.), 22, S.; pattern maker, Roxbury; Aug. 20,
 '62; M. O. June 2, '65; as Rosemeyer, he had served from May 24 to
 Aug. 31, '61, in the First Massachusetts Infantry.

 Russell, Edmund, 27, M.; farmer, Wayland; Aug. 20, '62; by the fall of
 a tree, his leg was broken March 7, '63; on recovery he was sent to
 Readville, Mass. and detailed as cook; dis. May 16, '65; went West.

 Saunders, Abraham, 25, M.; carpenter, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis.
 disa., June 9, '63.

 Schaffer, Henry, 27, --; clerk, Concord; July 22, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. March 31, '65, Hatcher's
 Run; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Schroeffel, Phillip (Mus.), 35, M.; --, Roxbury; M. O. June 2, '65;
 1913, Roxbury.

 Scott, Peter F., 42, M.; laborer, Taunton; July 25, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Shea, Peter E., 32, M.; rope maker, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. disa.,
 Nov. 16, '62.

 Shedd, Albert A., 23, S.; tradesman, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; dis. April
 12, '64 for Commission in Forty-third, U. S. C. T.

 Shedd, George V., 21, S.; clerk, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; his diary enters largely in the history; 1913, Preston, Conn.

 Skinner, George F., 19, S.; carpenter, So. Reading; Aug. 20, '62; wd.
 Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R. R.; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Smith, Charles H., 26, M.; seaman, Boston; July 29, '63; recruit
 to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. March 31, '65,
 Hatcher's Run; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Smith, Henry R., 23, S.; farmer, Ashland; July 21, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth; Pris.; d. Nov. 6, '64,
 Salisbury, N. C.

 Smith, Peter, 30, M.; laborer, Adams; July 14, '63; recruit to Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth, thence to the Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Smith, Sidney, Jr., 21, S.; machinist, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Somerby, Frank (Corp.), 20, S.; clerk, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; 1913, Roxbury.

 Spellan, Dennis, 41, M.; farmer, Southborough; Dec. 22, '63;
 recruit to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Stepper, Joseph, Jr., 19, S.; moulder, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; wd. May
 8, '64, Spottsylvania; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Stevens, Charles E., 18, --; student, Springfield; Sept. 20, '64;
 M. O. June 2, '65; had been dis. Sept. 18, '64, from Co. A Fifth
 Massachusetts Volunteer Militia to re-en. here.

 Strickland, William, 23, --; butcher, Canton; Aug. 4, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. May 8, '64, Spottsylvania;
 trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Strong, Edward A., 31, S.; farmer, Gt. Barrington; July 15, '63;
 recruit to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Stuart, Thomas, 24, --; laborer, Taunton; Aug. 4, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. Dec. 4,
 '64.

 Sturtevant, Henry B., 20, S.; cordwainer, Stoneham; June 26, '61; had
 deserted from Co. D, Twelfth Infty., Sept., 8, '61; was arrested Sept.
 2, '64, and sent to the Thirty-ninth to serve out term; trans. to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Sullivan, Dennis O., 23, M.; lather, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Sullivan, Thomas, 21, S.; laborer, Roxbury; Dec. 21, '63; wd. May 10,
 '64, Spottsylvania; dis. disa., no date; 1913, Roxbury.

 Swain, Edwin A. (Corp.), 29, S.; tradesman, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62;
 prom. Sergt.; dis. Dec. 3, '63, for Commission in Third U. S. C. T.

 Swan, Charles, 21, S.; teamster, Springfield; July 15, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R.
 R.; d. Feb. 2, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Sweat, Charles W., 29, S.; machinist, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Symmes, Alfred, 42, M.; organ builder, Roxbury; Aug. 30, '62; dis.
 disa., July 6, '63.

 Taft, Isaac D., 31, S.; farmer, Uxbridge; July 18, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Turner, Charles, 21, S.; groom, Boston; July 29, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; des. from hospital, no date
 given.

 Tyree, John C., 18, S.; laborer, Springfield; Sept. 20, '64; M.
 O. June 2, '65; had been dis., Sept. 19, '64, from Co. A, Fifth
 Massachusetts Volunteer Militia (100 days), to re-en. here.

 Wadsworth, Charles, 30, S.; moulder, Plymouth; July 17, '63; recruit
 to the Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris.; d. Nov. 11, '64,
 Salisbury, N. C.

 Warren, George, 22, S.; agent, Boston; July 9, '63; recruit to Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Wheeler, George, 40, S.; teamster, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 White, William H., 38, M.; carpenter, Brookline; Aug. 20, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 21, '63.

 Whitman, Henry B., 25, M.; shoe cutter, Middleborough; July 14, '63;
 recruit to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. May 15, '65,
 O. W. D.

 Whitaker, Channing, 18, S.; farmer, Needham; en. Sept. 2, '62; wd. May
 10, '64; M. O. June 19, '65; graduated at the Massachusetts Institute
 of Technology, 1869, as Civil Engineer, in which Department, for
 a number of following years, he was a professor; during his later
 years he was Consulting Mechanic and Patent Engineer with the Lowell
 Machine Shops, with residence in Tyngsboro; d. July 23, 1913; his
 contributions to this history are prominent features.

 Wilborg, William, 32, M.; coppersmith, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; wd. May
 12, '64, Spottsylvania; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Williams, Henry, 20, --; merchant, Springfield; Sept. 20, '64; M. O.
 June 2, '65; had been dis. Sept. 19th from Co. A, Fifth M. V. M., to
 re-en. here.

 Wilson, Thomas A., 25, M.; moulder, Roxbury; Aug. 20, '62; wd. June
 18, '64, Petersburg; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Winters, Thomas B., --, --; --, Sandy Hook, Md.; en. Oct. 1, '61;
 recruit to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. Aug. 18,
 '64, Spottsylvania; dis. Oct. 1, '64, ex. of s.

 Wood, James, 23, S.; clerk, Boston; en. Aug. 30, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.




COMPANY C

Medford


CAPTAIN

 John Hutchins, 42, M.; ship-carpenter; Medford; Aug. 14, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R. R.; M. O. June 2, '65; Lieut. Colonel June
 7, '65, not mustered; had served as Captain in the 3 mos. term of
 the Fifth M. V. M., Co. E, 1861; U. S. Navy Yard, Charlestown; d.
 Medford, Oct. 12, 1905; b. York, Me., Oct. 17, 1820; came to Medford
 when 16 years old; early in the Militia he also was foreman of the
 local fire company, and was a member of the Masonic order. Dying
 at the Medford Inn, his home for several years, Oct. 12, 1905, his
 funeral on the 15th was conducted in the Lawrence Armory with the
 highest military honors, many of his old comrades in arms being
 present; burial was in Oak Grove Cemetery; "He never shirked a duty."


FIRST LIEUTENANTS

 Perry Coleman, 28, M.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; res. Nov. 7,
 '63; was 2d Lieut. in Co. E, Fifth M. V. M. 3 mos. term, 1861; d.
 Washington, D. C.

 Charles W. Hanson, from Co. E, Nov. 8, '63; Pris. Aug. 18, '64; prom.
 Captain Sept. 8, '64; vide Co. E.

 Orville A. Barker, Sept. 15, '64; Adjutant Dec. 5, '64.

 William McDevitt, April 3, '65; not mustered; M. O. June 2, '65, as 2d
 Lieut.; long in Paving Department, Boston, 1913, Allston.


SECOND LIEUTENANTS

 Isaac F. R. Hosea, 30, M.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; the most of
 Lieut. Hosea's service was with the Brigade Pioneer Corps and he was
 commanding it when captured, Aug. 19, '64; prom. 1st Lieut. Jan. 15,
 '65; M. O. June 2, '65, as 2d Lieut.; had served as 1st Sergt. in Co.
 E, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term; long clerk B. & M. R. R.; d. April 16,
 1893, Medford.

 Orville A. Barker from Hosp. Steward, Nov. 8, '63, mustered Dec. 7,
 '63, vice Hosea on detached service; prom. 1st Lieut. Sept. 15, '64.

 William McDevitt from Co. K, Sept. 15, '64; prom. 1st Lieut. April 3,
 '65.


ENLISTED MEN

 Alden, William F., July 20, 1833; (Corp.), 29, M.; clerk, Medford;
 Aug. 14, '62; dis. disa., Jan. 21, '63; had been in Co. E, Fifth M. V.
 M., 3 mos. term, 1861; engraver, policeman and janitor, Medford; 1913,
 Cambridge.

 Alley, Charles Q., b. Sept. 18, 1842; 20, S.; baker, Medford; Aug.
 6, '62; trans., no date, Forty-eighth Co., 2d Batt., V. R. C.; dis.
 June 26, '65; wholesale notions and toys; for forty-six years a member
 of Methodist S. S., Rockford, Ill., for twenty-eight years Assistant
 Superintendent, for forty-four years church usher, for twenty-eight,
 Secretary and Treasurer of the Eastern Veterans' Association of the
 Civil War; he retains the knapsack received at Boxford, as well
 as cap, canteen and haversack, his old army overcoat dates from
 Thoroughfare Gap, Oct., '63; 1913, Rockford, Ill.

 Baldwin, John M., 28, M.; carpenter, Ashburnham; July 15, '63;
 recruit; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Ballou, Charles H., 34, S.; carpenter, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O.
 May 18, '65.

 Barker, William S., 29, M.; watchmaker, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Barnard, David A., 19, S.; baker, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; trans. Co. A,
 Sixth V. R. C.; dis. July 6, '65.

 Bates, Hiram W., 32, M.; carpenter, Brighton; July 10, '63; recruit,
 trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Baxter, George M., 35, M.; cabinet-maker, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; dis.
 disa., Oct. 31, '62.

 Beck, John S., 18, S.; --, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; his diary indispensable to the history; b. Portsmouth, N. H.,
 1838; engine and carriage painter till he entered U. S. Railway Mail
 Service; leader Medford Band, Commander Post 66, G. A. R., etc.; d.
 Jan., 1910, Gloucester.

 Beirne, James, 18, S.; currier, Medford; July 29, '62; k. May 10, '64,
 Spottsylvania.

 Blanchard, William H., 27, S.; pork packer, Medford; Aug. 9, '62; M.
 O. June 2, '65.

 Bond, Dudley, 43, M.; Aug. 8, '62; dis. disa., Jan. 21, '63;
 confectioner, Medford.

 Booker, George D. (Corp.), 23, S.; farmer, Medford; Aug. 14, '62;
 trans. Nov. 26, '64, to V. R. C.; M. O. June 28, '65, from Co. B
 Twelfth Reg't. V. R. C.; had been in Co. E, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos.
 term, 1861; died in Medford.

 Bowen, Samuel C., 22, S.; seaman, Barnstable; May 7, '64; Pris., d.
 Nov. 27, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Briggs, Benjamin M.; 29, M.; ship carpenter, Walpole; Aug. 14, '62; M.
 O. May 19, '65.

 Bunker, Benjamin, Jr., 44, M.; shoemaker, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; dis.
 disa., Oct. 26, '62.

 Busha, Stephen, 25, S.; moulder, Medford; July 22, '62; missing, May
 8, '64, Spottsylvania.

 Caldwell, George F., 29, S.; merchant, Fitchburg; July 16, '63; M. O.
 May 18, '65.

 Carr, Royal S., 23, S.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; Corp. Nov. 1,
 '63; Sergt. May 10, '64; wd. May 23, '64, No. Anna River, Va.; M. O.
 June 2, '65; had been in Co. E, Fifth Massachusetts Volunteer Militia
 in 3 mos., term, 1861; 1913, Winchester.

 Chaffin, James W., --, --; teamster, Boston; recruit to Thirteenth
 Infty., Co. I; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. Feb. 27, '65, ex. of s.;
 real name Marion E. Fisk, vide letter, W. D. Jan. 30, 1904.

 Champlin, George H., 19, S.; laborer, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; prom.
 Corp.; d. Jan. 4, '64, Culpepper, Va.

 Cheeney, William, 45, M.; ship carpenter, Medford; July 16, '62; dis.
 disa., June 18, '63.

 Chenery, George W., 24, S.; clerk, Sudbury; July 8, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Churchill, George A., 21, S.; laborer, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; June 2,
 '65.

 Clapp, George L., 19, S.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Clapp, Meletiah O. (Corp.), 24, M.; ship carpenter, Medford; Aug. 14,
 '62; trans. Navy, April 19, '64; dis. from the "Mendota," June 11,
 '65; had been in Co. E, Fifth Massachusetts Volunteer Militia 3 mos.
 term, 1861.

 Collins, John J., 22, S.; brick maker, Romney, N. H., cr. Boston; Dec.
 1, '64; dis. Feb. 23, '65, Annapolis, Md.

 Cooledge, Charles H., 22, S.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; Pris., d.
 Nov. 27, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Coughlin, Owen, 18, S.; laborer, Medford; Aug. 9, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Crockett, Edward F., 18, S.; clerk, Medford; July 29, '62; dis. Aug.
 15, '64.

 Currell, Henry G., 18, S.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; Pris.; d.
 Sept. 14, '64, Andersonville, Ga.

 Curtis, Frank J., 21, M.; bolter, Medford; July 18, '62; Pris.;
 d. Feb. 26, Richmond, Va.; had been in Co. E, Fifth Massachusetts
 Volunteer Militia, 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Cushing, Henry H. D. (Sergt.), 21, M.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62;
 dis. disa., Jan. 27, '64; had been in Co. E, Fifth Massachusetts
 Volunteer Militia, 3 mos. term, 1910, Medford.

 Cushing, Joseph M., 22, S.; baker, Medford; Aug. 11, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Cutter, Benjamin P., 20, S.; clerk, Medford; July 28, '62; absent at
 M. O. June 2, '65.

 Dean, Elijah C., 31, S.; yeoman, Oakham; July 13, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; dis. May
 25, '65.

 Dow, Albert F. (Sergt.), 29, M.; ship carpenter, Medford; Aug. 14,
 '62; M. O. June 2, '65; had been in Co. E, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos.
 term, 1861.

 Dow, Benjamin H., 30, M.; moulder, Aug. 14, '62; prom. Corp.; wd. Nov.
 28, '63, Mine Run, Va.; trans. Ninth Reg't, V. R. C.; dis. June 26,
 '64.

 Dushuttle, Henry L., 18, S.; shoemaker, Medford; July 12, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 23, '62; later Co. I, Second H. Arty.

 Dyer, Charles E. (Mus.), 17, S.; gold beater, Medford; Aug. 14, '62;
 M. O. June 2, '65.

 Eames, John H., b. Dec. 16, '64; (Sergt.), 27, S.; carpenter, Medford;
 Aug. 19, '62; 1st Sergt. June 7, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R.
 R.; 2d Lieut. Sept. 6, '64; 1st Lieut. April 3, '65; M. O. June 2,
 '65; M. O. as 1st Sergt.; came home from the war broken in health and
 for several months totally blind; recovering his health, from 1870
 to 1876, postmaster at Medford; later, removed to Marshfield Hills,
 where he now resides; the data, concerning war prisoners from the
 Thirty-ninth, are largely due to him; had been in Co. E, Fifth M. V.
 M., 3 mos. term, 1861; for 12 years, Selectman, assessor or overseer
 of the poor in Marshfield; 1913, Marshfield Hills.

 Ellis, Benjamin J., 27, M.; cabinet maker, Medford; Aug. 14, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. May 21, '65.

 Ellis, Hezekiah C., 43, M.; laborer, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Fisk, Marion E., vide Chaffin, James W.

 Fletcher, Joel M. (Corp.), 26, S.; carpenter, Medford; Aug. 14, '62;
 wd. June 18, '64, Petersburg; d. Aug. 25, '64; had been in Co. E,
 Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Fletcher, Thomas M., 21, M.; clerk, Medford; July 28, '62; wd. May 6,
 '64, Wilderness; M. O. Aug. 14, '65; had been in Co. E, Fifth M. V.
 M., 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Fox, Terrance L., 24, M.; weaver, So. Hadley, cr. Easthampton; July
 16, '63; recruit to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. Aug.
 18, '64, Weldon R. R.; M. O. May 25, '65.

 Gage, George W. (Wagoner), 45, M.; wood turner, Charleston; Aug. 14,
 '62; dis. disa., Dec. 9, '63.

 Gilbert, Henry E., 26, M.; farmer, Southbridge; July 14, '63; recruit
 to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. disa., Sept. 20, '64.

 Gill, Anderson L. B., 28, M.; gold beater, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; wd.
 May 10, '64, Spottsylvania; trans. Jan. 7, '65; V. R. C.; dis. disa.,
 Aug. 7, '65.

 Gillard, Thomas H., 31, S.; calker, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Gleason, Patrick, 18, S.; currier, Medford; Aug. 6, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; d. Nov. 14, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Goodale, Edward, 36, M.; painter, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; trans. Feb.
 15, '64, V. R. C.; dis. from Co. I, Second V. R. C., June 26, '65.

 Gordon, Orange S., 22, S.; weaver, Worcester; July 14, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. May 24, '65.

 Graff, Frederick, 33, S.; baker, Westford; July 21, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Graves, Austin, 25, S.; bootmaker, Hopkinton; July 14, '63; recruit
 to Twelfth Infty.; wd. Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R. R.; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Haley, James T., 21, S.; cooper, Waltham; Oct. 26, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Harding, William, 18, S.; mason, Medford; Aug. 11, '62; k. May 10,
 '64, Spottsylvania.

 Hart, Michael, 30, S.; laborer, Boston; July 24, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R.
 R.; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Hartshorn, Elbridge B., 35, M.; upholsterer, Medford; Aug. 4, '65;
 dis. May 18, '65, O. W. D.

 Haskell, Charles F., 18, S.; laborer, Medford; Aug. 8, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 23, '63.

 Hatch, Edwin B., 36, M.; Aug. 14, '62; prom. Corp.; k. March 31, '65,
 Hatcher's Run.

 Hathaway, Henry R., 19, M.; laborer, Medford; July 29, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64.

 Hathaway, Nelson F., 23, S.; carpenter, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Hathaway, Rodney C., 22, S.; mason, Medford; July 31, '62; prom.
 Corp.; k. Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R. R.

 Heath, Andrew J., 27, M.; farmer, Medford; July 18, '62; dis. disa.,
 Oct. 26, '62.

 Hervey, James A., 34, M.; lawyer, Medford; July 29, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Holbrook, Frederick W. D., b. Jan. 26, 1840; 22, M.; civil engineer,
 Medford; Aug. 14, '62; dis. Feb. 9, '64, O. W. D. to accept position
 in the Engineering Department Defenses of Washington, under General
 J. G. Barnard, remaining there till after close of the War. From
 discharge to date, every year is accounted for with service from
 Hoosac Tunnel to Puget Sound, largely in R. R. development. For
 twenty-five years he has been in or near Seattle, Washington, in whose
 professional and social life he has been and is a prominent factor;
 1913, Bremerton, Wash.

 Hoyt, Moses C., 42, M.; farmer, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; dis. May 15,
 '65, O. W. D.

 Hubbell, Joseph P., 29, S.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; d. July 7,
 '63, Washington, D. C.

 Ireland, Edward, 19, S.; farmer, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; k. March 12,
 '64, Lawville, Va.

 Ireland, Edwin, 19, S.; painter, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; M. O. June 29, '65.

 Ireland, Henry A., Jr. (Corp.), 22, S.; wheelwright, Medford; Aug. 14,
 '62; wd. May 12, '64, Spottsylvania; Sergt. March 9, '65; M. O. June
 2, '65, as Sergt.; had served in Co. E, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term,
 1861; 1910, Medford.

 Jepson, Samuel G. (Corp.), 30, M.; machinist, Medford; Aug. 14, '62;
 M. O. June 2, '65.

 Johnson, John, 25, S.; sailor, Gloucester; Jan. 9, '64; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64, Weldon R. R.; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Jones, Obadiah, 18, S.; farmer, Randolph; Feb. 25, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second Infty. and M. O.

 Joyce, Alfred, 32, M.; carpenter, Medford; Aug. 2, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; d. Nov. 7, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Joyce, Henry S., 33, M.; joiner, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Joyce, Samuel W., 21, S.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; d. July 20,
 '63; Middleburg, Va.

 Joyce, Winslow, b. Feb. 6, 1844; 18, S.; clerk, Medford; July 31, '62;
 M. O. June 7, '65; sealer, weights and measures, and inspector of
 milk; 1913, Medford.

 Kendrick, Coleman C., 44, M.; joiner, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; trans.
 Dec. 1, '63, Forty-eighth Co., 2d Batt., V. R. C.; dis. March 16, '65;
 also, Kenrick.

 Kendrick, Edwin T. (Mus.), 17, S.; farmer, Medford; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Lange, Joseph, 21, S.; clerk, Worcester; July 24, '62; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Lewis, Joseph, 24, M.; painter, Boston; July 13, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Litchfield, Otis V., 26, M.; carpenter, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Livingston, Robert, 36, M.; bolter, Medford; Aug. 6, '62; Pris.; d.
 Sept. 14, '64, Andersonville, Ga.

 McDermott, Bernard E., 29, S.; clerk, Boston; June 8, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. May 6, '64, Wilderness;
 trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 McGee, James, 23, S.; clerk, Stoughton; Oct. 28, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. March
 21, '65, Annapolis.

 McLaughlin, Michael, 19, S.; laborer, Calaise, Me.; July 21, '61; en.
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. Aug. 12, '64, ex. of s.

 McNamara, Bernard, 24, S.; painter, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; des. Feb.
 6, '63.

 Mahall, John, 21, S.; laborer, Fall River; July 24, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Manning, John A., 25, S.; teamster, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Merritt, Benjamin F., 40, M.; sailor, Scituate; Aug. 14, '62; dis.
 disa., Aug. 21, '63.

 Meston, Peter D., 36, M.; bookbinder, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Mitchell, Thomas O. H., b. June 13, 1826, Bath, Me.; 37, M.; joiner,
 Medford; Aug. 11, '62; wd. May 12, '64, Spottsylvania; M. O. June 2,
 '65; ship-joiner and house carpenter; 1913, Medford.

 Morrison, Isaac T. (Corp.), 41, M.; ship-carpenter, Medford; Aug. 14,
 '62; prom. Sergt.; Pris.; d. Feb. 23, '65, Salisbury, N. C.; had been
 in Co. E, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Northey, William H., 39, M.; mason, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Osborn, Alvin W., 20, S.; gardener, Medford; Aug. 12, '62; Corp. March
 1, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Pratt, James H., 33, S.; farmer, Belchertown; July 14, '63; trans.
 from Twelfth Infty., to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Prouty, John L., 43, M.; mason, Medford; July 31, '62; dis. disa.,
 June 17, '63.

 Putnam, Charles, 29, M.; shoemaker, Grafton; July 14, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R.
 R.; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Ramsdell, Emory W. (Corp.), 32, W.; shoemaker, Medford; July 22, '62;
 wd. Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; M. O. June 2, '65; had been in Co. E,
 Fifth M. V. M., in 3 mos. term, 1861; 1910, Medford.

 Redman, Wallace St. C., 27, M.; civil engineer, Medford; Aug. 8, '62;,
 dis. disa., June 19, '63; later served in Navy as Assistant Engineer.

 Richardson, Charles A., 18, S.; blacksmith, Medford; Aug. 8, '62; wd.
 May 8, '64, Alsop's Farm; M. O. June 2, '65; with Fairbanks Scales
 Co. forty-seven years; joining the East Boston Methodist Church
 in 1879, he has been S. S. teacher, Assistant Superintendent and
 Superintendent; of his S. S. class, four members became clergymen,
 one, John L. Bates, governor--there were no black sheep; successively
 Church Treasurer and Secretary of the Board of Trustees, he has been
 Class Leader for almost thirty years; an officer in the United Order
 of the Golden Cross in 1883, he has been Treasurer of the United Order
 of the Pilgrim Fathers since 1896; 1913, East Boston.

 Richardson, Franklin, 36, M.; carpenter, Medford; Aug. 7, '62; prom.
 Corp.; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Roberts, Joseph W., 24, S.; brakeman, Boston; July 22, '61; trans.
 from Co. C, Thirteenth Infty. to Thirty-ninth; dis. Aug. 22, '64, ex.
 of s.

 Roberts, Milton F., 20, S.; carpenter, Medford; Aug 11, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R. R.; M. O. June 2, '65; appointed carpenter
 in the U. S. Navy Dec. 12, 1879, he served in this capacity till his
 retirement, Feb 21, 1903, as Chief Carpenter with rank of Lieutenant;
 his last sea service was on the Oregon, being one of those who saw the
 part taken by the vessel, under Captain Clark, in the destruction of
 the Cristobal Colon, near Santiago and the consequent end of Spanish
 rule in America. Lieut. Roberts was ordered to the Oregon while
 she was building in San Francisco, and was on board through all of
 the famous trip down the Pacific Coast, around Cape Horn and up the
 Atlantic, one of the most remarkable cruises in modern naval history;
 his experiences on this voyage would make a most entertaining volume;
 the results of the trip are matters of history, but every member of
 the Thirty-ninth feels a measure of reflected glory in that one of
 his comrades had a part in the building, cruising and fighting of the
 Oregon; since his retirement, Lieut. Roberts has resided in Medford;
 b. Medford, April 17, 1842, he attended the public and private schools
 of the town and Spaulding's Academy for Bookkeeping in Charlestown;
 for many years was a member of the Medford Fire Dept. and is in
 the Masonic Order Lodge, Chapter, and Commandery; for 27 years has
 belonged to the Royal Arcanum and for more than ten years has been a
 member of the Veteran Association, Lawrence Life Guard; from boyhood
 has attended the Universalist Church.

 Rogers, William H., 18, S.; laborer, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; Pris.; d.
 Feb. 14, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Rugg, George J., 43, M.; carpenter, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. May
 31, '65.

 Samson, Albert A., 21, M.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; prom. Corp.;
 dis. Oct. 26, '63, for promotion; N. F. R.

 Sargent, Walter H., 18, --; shoemaker, Bridgewater; Feb. 10, '62;
 trans. from Twelfth Infty.; dis. Feb. 28, '65, ex. of s.

 Senter, John H., 38, M.; gardener, Medford; Aug. 11, '62; trans. Aug.
 19, '63, to Co. E, Fourteenth Regt., V. R. C.; trans. back to Co. C
 Jan. 9, '64; M. O. May 24, '65.

 Sheridan, James A., 20, M.; clerk, Dedham; Aug. 27, '63; recruit to
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Simpson, John H., 21, S.; clerk, Medford; July 17, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64, Spottsylvania; dis. Dec. 20, '64.

 Smith, William S., 35, M.; chemist, Boston; July 17, '63; recruit Co.
 I, Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 14, '64; d. Nov.
 17, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Southworth, William B., 23, S.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 20, '64.

 Stevens, Samuel M. (Sergt.), 27, M.; ship carpenter, Medford; prom.
 1st Sergt.; k. May 10, '64, Spottsylvania.

 Thompson, Edward, 20, S.; seaman, Methuen; July 13, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Thompson, James, 18, S.; laborer, Medford; July 23, '62; wd. Aug. 19,
 '64, Weldon R. R.; dis. disa., May 17, '65.

 Trask, Charles H., 26, S.; shipwright, Boston; July 9, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Tucker, Aaron, 32, M.; teamster, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; prom. Corp.;
 M. O. June 2, '65.

 Tufts, Augustus, 45, S.; farmer, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; dis. disa.,
 Jan. 27, '64.

 Tully, Isaac J., 21, --; framemaker, Boston; July 9, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence trans. to Thirty-second
 and M. O.

 Turner, Samuel H., Jr. (Sergt.), 24, M.; calker, Medford; Aug. 14,
 '62; wd. May 8, '64, Spottsylvania; M. O. June 14, '65; had been in
 Co. E, Fifth M. V. M., in 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Tyler, Henry H., 21, S.; clerk, Medford; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Vaeight, William, 22, S.; blacksmith, Swanzey; Aug. 5, '63; recruit to
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O.
 June 14, '65; Schouler has "Voight."

 Vickery, John F., 29, M.; June 10, '63; recruit to Twelfth Infty.;
 trans. to Thirty-ninth; d. Aug. 12, '64, Alexandria, Va.

 Voight, Wm., vide Vaeight.

 Walker, Benjamin, 45, M.; bolter, Medford; Aug. 1, '62; dis. disa.,
 Nov. 20, '63.

 Walker, William A., 18, S.; laborer, Medford; Aug. 11, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Wayland, Henry P., 22, S.; gardener, Swampscot, Aug. 14, '62; des.
 Feb. 6, '63.

 Webb, Lemuel, 32, M.; sailor, Scituate; Aug. 14, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Welch, Charles, 22, S.; slater, Salem; July 26, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Whitney, Jophanus, 18, S.; painter, Medford; Aug. 10, '62; Corp., May
 29, '64; Sergt. (Color bearer), March 2, '65; wd. April 1, '65; M. O.
 June 22, '65, Philadelphia, Penn.; b. Avon, Me.; en. Co. E, Fifth M.
 V. M., Nov. 12, 1859; through successive promotions became Colonel,
 Aug. 6, '97; commanded Regt. in Spanish War; Brig. Gen'l, 2d Brigade,
 Feb. 23, 1901; retired as Major Gen'l, Feb. 23, 1908; in early life,
 learned painter's trade; later was a cigar-maker; twelve years on
 Medford Police Force; for many years on State Police Force; since
 1908, its Chief; 1913, Medford.

 Whittaker, James L., 36, M.; machinist, Medford; July 28, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 15, '63.

 Williams, John, 28, M.; Aug. 5, '63; sailor, Boston; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Wilson John (1st), 21, S.; calker, Lawrence; July 28, '63; on M. O. of
 Reg't trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.




COMPANY D.

Quincy


CAPTAINS

 Edward A. Spear, 45, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; Aug. 14, '62; wd. Aug. 18,
 '64; Petersburg; dis. disa., Sept. 9, '64; had been 1st Lieut., Co.
 H, Fourth M. V. M., 3 mos. term, 1861; b. Dec. 7, 1816, Quincy; d.
 there, June 25, 1897.

 William G. Sheen, from Co. I, Sept. 8, '64; brevet Major, April 1,
 '65; M. O. June 2, 1865.


FIRST LIEUTENANTS

 William G. Sheen, 24, M.; jeweller, Quincy; Aug. 14, '62; had been in
 Co. H, Fourth M. V. M., 3 mos. term, 1861; trans. Oct. '63 to Co. I,
 vice, Mulligan, res.

 John D. Reed, from Co. F, Sept. 20, '63; prom. Captain, Co. I, Sept.
 6, '64.


SECOND LIEUTENANTS

 Charles H. Porter, 19, S.; clerk, Quincy; Aug. 14, '62; prom. 1st
 Lieut. Jan. 25, '64; vide Co. A.

 Oscar Persons, from Co. K, Feb. 4, '63; res. Oct. 24, 1863; took up
 newspaper work and for last twenty years of his life was connected
 with the Hudson Enterprise; d. June 26, 1901, Hudson.

 Joseph A. Merrifield, from Co. F, Oct. '63; prom. 1st Lieut. May 4,
 '64, Co. B.

 George A. Barker, from Sergt; May 4, '64; taken prisoner, Aug. 19,
 '64; prom. 1st Lieut. Sept. 8, '64; not mustered; M. O. June 2, 1865,
 as 2d Lieut.


ENLISTED MEN

 Ahearn, Thomas, 27, S.; bootmaker, Quincy; Aug. 6, '62; Pris. May 21,
 '64; Feb. 17, '65; M. O. June 5, '65.

 Alden, Albert M., 28, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 15, '62; dis. disa.,
 Sept. 11, '63; later, Co. B, Sixtieth Massachusetts, 100 days.

 Alden, Henry A., 19, S.; wheelwright, Quincy; July 18, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Armstrong, John L., 44, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 21, '62; trans. to
 Second Co., Second Batt., V. R. C.; dis. July 14, '65.

 Badger, Ezra (Wagoner), 44, M.; farmer, Quincy; July 30, '62; d. Oct.
 14, '62.

 Bailey, Christopher T. (1st Sergt.), 30, M.; bootmaker, Weymouth;
 Sept. 7, '63; dis. disa., Nov. 26, '64.

 Barker, George A. (Sergt.), 21, S.; clerk, Quincy; prom. 2d Lieut.,
 May 4, '64; vide Co. D.

 Barry, Benjamin, 44, S.; seaman, Quincy; July 31, '62; dis. disa.,
 Nov. 15, '62.

 Barry, Patrick H., 20, S.; painter, Boston; en. July 22, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. July 8, '64; dis. disa.,
 Oct. 28, '64; in 1897, Adjt. Gen'l, Nebraska; lat. add., Lincoln, Neb.

 Baxter, Thompson, Jr., 19, S.; student, Quincy; Aug. 12, '62; dis.
 disa., April 27, '65.

 Becker, Ferdinand, 29, S.; shoemaker, Boston; July 22, '63; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; d. Jan. 17, '65, Salisbury.

 Bertwhistle, James F., 24, --; --, Darnestown, Md.; en. Sept. 19, '61,
 in Twelfth Infty.; Pris. July 1, '63; Gettysburg; paroled, when or
 where, not stated, and the name was carried to the Thirty-ninth; just
 a name and nothing more.

 Brackett, Walter P., 21, S.; seaman, Quincy; July 29, '62; trans. to
 Navy April 22, '64; dis. from U. S. vessel, Chicopee, July 18, '65, as
 seaman.

 Brophy, John, 31, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 3, '62; trans. Co. H,
 Second V. R. C.; Sept. 25, '63; dis. July 31, '65.

 Brown, Samuel (Sergt.); wheelwright, Quincy; July 18, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64, Spottsylvania; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Bullard, Asahel, 32, S.; yeoman, Oakham; July 13, '63; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64, to March 3, '65; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Burk, Walter, 35, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; Aug. 6, '62; d. Dec. 22, '63.

 Burns, William H., 19, S.; boatman; July 29, '62; prom. Corp.; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; d. Nov. 27, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Bushnell, Charles, 28, M.; shoemaker, Abington, cr. to Roxbury; Sept.
 28, '63; d. prisoner Nov. 14, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Campbell, Allen, N. F. R., except "k. in action June 17, '64," the
 date is that of the first day at Petersburg.

 Carteze, George, 23, S.; ship carpenter, Boston, cr. Groton; July 27,
 '63; recruit to the Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence
 to the Thirty-second and M. O.

 Cheatham, James B., 43, --; --, Quincy; Aug. 29, '62; dis. disa., June
 26, '63.

 Christian, James B., 43, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 30, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 24, '63.

 Churchill, Thaddeus (Sergt.), 39, M.; painter, Quincy; Aug. 4, '62;
 dis. Oct. 18, '63, for commission, U. S. C. T.

 Cleverly, George F., 29, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 31, '62; dis.
 disa., Oct. 2, '63; had been in Co. H, Fourth M. V. M., 3 mos. term,
 1861.

 Coffin, Paul G., 36, M.; July 29, '62; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Colburn, William E., 38, M.; teamster, Quincy; prom. Corp.; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; d. Feb. 18, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Collier, George W., 30, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 31, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 5, '63.

 Collins, Michael, 44, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; Aug. 2, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Cotter, John, 21, S.; seaman, Barnstable; recruit to Twelfth Infty.;
 trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Cowper, John, 25, S.; laborer, Charleston; July 27, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Crane, Seth, 41, M.; laborer, Quincy; July 29, '62; d. Dec. 22, '63.

 Curtis, Albert (Mus.), 21, S.; bootmaker, Abington; Aug. 13, '62;
 trans. March 13, '65, V. R. C.; M. O. May 31, '65.

 Curtis, Henry (Sergt.), 34, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 29, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Daley, Daniel, 29, M.; ledgeman, Quincy; Aug. 6, '62; dis. disa., Aug.
 23, '63.

 Daley, Garrett, 39, M.; ledgeman, Quincy; Aug. 1, '62; d. April 5, '65.

 Damon, Edward, Jr., ledgeman, Quincy; Aug. 2, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64,
 Weldon R. R.; d. Jan. 3, '65, Salisbury, N. C.; had been in Co. H,
 Fourth M. V. M., 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Darren, George W., 29, M.; machinist, Boston; Nov. 14, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 DeForrest, Samuel D., b. June 16, 1845; 20, S.; farmer, Quincy; July
 15, '62; Pris. Aug. 14, '64, to Feb. 28, '65; M. O. July 18, '65;
 stationary engineer; 1913, Quincy.

 Derby, Alden, 20, --; shoemaker, No. Bridgewater; Feb. 24, '62;
 recruit to Thirty-ninth; prom. Corp.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; N. F. R.

 Derry, Barden B., 26, M.; boatman, Quincy; wd. May 8, '64; 1st Sergt.
 March 1, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Dickerman, Charles C., 22, W.; clerk, Quincy; Aug. 2, '62; prom.
 Corp.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. Jan. 28, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Donley, James, 18, S.; laborer, Quincy; Aug. 1, '62; d. Feb. 1, '65.

 Dooner, John, 27, M.; teamster, Quincy; July 29, '62; dis., disa.
 March 1, '63.

 Doyle, Thomas, 40, --; --, Buffalo, N. Y.; June 7, '64; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Drury, Charles A., 23, S.; bootmaker, Concord; July 14, 62; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Dunn, Arthur, 25, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 15, '62; Pris.; d. Jan.
 28, '64, Belle Isle, Richmond, Va.

 Durgin, Jonathan, 40, M.; teamster, Quincy; July 31, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64, Laurel Hill; d. Pris. Jan. 5, '65, Salisbury.

 Ela, Elisha P. C., 26, M.; stonecutter, Quincy; Aug. 1, '62; k. May 8,
 '64, Spottsylvania.

 Euderle, Joseph L. (Corp.), 20, S.; blacksmith, Quincy; Aug. 6, '62;
 wd. May 10, '64; M. O. June 3, '65, S. O. W. D.; had been in Co. H,
 Fourth M. V. M., as Enderly, 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Fineran, Patrick (Mus.), 18, S.; farmer, Quincy; July 18, '62; prom.
 Sergt.; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Forbes, James E., 25, S.; stonecutter, Quincy; Aug. 6, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Fowler, Theodore W., 42, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 29, '62; M. O.
 May 30, '65.

 Freeman, John C., 22, S.; clerk, Southbridge; recruit to Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris.; d. Florence, S. C., Feb. 18,
 '65.

 French, Joseph T., 38, M.; clerk, Quincy; Aug. 1, '62; N. F. R.

 Garvere, Patrick, 44, M.; stonecutter, Quincy; July 31, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '62.

 Gavin, Patrick H. (Corp.), 18, S.; farmer, Quincy; July 18, '62; wd.
 May 12, '64; trans. V. R. C., Feb. 3, '65; dis. from Co. A, Eighteenth
 V. R. C., June 2, '65.

 Gifford, Charles E., 18, S.; laborer, Florida; Aug. 22, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Gould, Samuel, 18, S.; laborer, Florida; Aug. 22, '64; d. April 11,
 '65, Long Island, N. Y.

 Green, John F., 31, M.; seaman, Marblehead; July 10, '63; Pris.; d.
 Dec. 15, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Groves, George D., 27, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; Aug. 5, '62; des. Sept.
 14, '62.

 Hanson, Hans C., 28, S.; sailor, Ashland; July 21, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; recorded as trans. to the Thirty-ninth, June 25, '64,
 but he had died the preceding 14th of April, Andersonville, Ga.

 Harrington, John, 25, M.; shoemaker, Concord; July 14, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Hayden, Joseph W., 43, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 29, '62; dis.
 disa., June 2, '63; later in Tenth Battery.

 Hayden, Josiah, Jr., 38, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 29, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Hayden, William, 18, S.; stonecutter, Gloucester; Aug. 13, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. Dec. 31, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Haynes, Joseph P. (Corp.), 40, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 15, '62;
 Pris., June 7, '64; dis. May 22, '65.

 Hazleton, Benjamin L., 22, S.; farmer, Boston; Nov. 7, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence trans. to V. R. C.; N.
 F. R.

 Hersey, George W., 31, M.; painter, Quincy; Aug. 31, '62; trans. Navy,
 April 22, '64; dis., June 7, '65.

 Hill, John, Jr., 24, S.; currier, Quincy; Aug. 7, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Hobbs, John J., 38, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; Aug. 31, '62; dis. disa.,
 April 3, '63.

 Horgan, Cornelius, 33, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 25, '62; des. April
 28, '63.

 Howley, Thomas, 44, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; Aug. 21, '62; dis. disa.,
 June 2, '63.

 Howley, Thomas, Jr., 18, S.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 31, '62; absent
 at M. O., sick; N. F. R.

 Hughes, James, 42, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 29, '62; d. May 13, '64.

 Huntress, Elijah, 19, S.; farmer, Quincy; Aug. 24, '62; wd. May 10,
 '64; dis. on account of wds., May 8, '65.

 Huntress, Truman H., 21, M.; teamster, Quincy; Aug. 4, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65; 1913, Brockton.

 Kanily, Daniel, 27, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; Aug. 6, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; wd. April 1, '65, Five Forks; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Keep, William J., 19, S.; paper maker, Duxbury; March 14, '62; recruit
 to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d.
 March 19, '65.

 Kelly, James, 43, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 26, '62; M. O. May 18,
 '65.

 Kelly, John, 19, M.; farmer, Quincy; July 19, '62; d. a prisoner, July
 2, '64, Richmond, Va.

 Kingsbury, Charles G., 27, S.; bootmaker, Medway; Jan. 16, '65; d. May
 30, '65.

 Kittridge, Josiah N., 24, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 31, '62; d. Oct.
 23, '64, Quincy.

 Leavitt, Charles F., 19, S.; stonecutter, Quincy; Aug. 19, '62; prom.
 Sergt.; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Littlefield, Henry B., 21, S.; farmer, Holliston; July 14, '63;
 recruit to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; trans. March 13,
 '65, V. R. C.

 Lunt, Theodore H., 35, M.; stone cutter, Quincy; Aug. 6, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. Oct. 23, '64, Annapolis, Md.

 Luzarder, Joseph M., 19, S.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 22, '62; k. Aug.
 18, '64, Weldon R. R.

 Luzarder, Moses, 23, S.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 23, '62; dis. disa.,
 Jan. 26, '64; later Co. B, Sixtieth Massachusetts, 100 days.

 McCarthy, John, 44, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 19, '62; wd. Aug. 18,
 '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 McGlone, Michael, 27, M.; stone cutter, Quincy; Aug. 4, '62; d. May
 12, '64, Belle Plain, Va.

 Mahan, Patrick, 37, M.; laborer, Boston; July 29, '63; recruit to
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the Thirty-second
 and M. O.

 Mahoney, James, 38, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 29, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64; trans. Nov. 3, '64, to Eighty-second Co., Second Batt., V. R. C.;
 M. O. June 28, '65.

 Marsden, Joseph, 35, S.; yeoman, Charlton; July 14, '62; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; d. Aug. 28, '64, Bristol,
 Penn.

 Miller, Charles H., 19, M.; clerk, Quincy; Aug. 29, '62; dis. March
 12, '64, S. O. W. D.

 Miller, George L., 44, M.; stonecutter, Quincy; July 29, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 4, '63.

 Moran, Patrick, 35, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 19, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; M. O. June 7, '65.

 Moriarty, John, 24, S.; farmer, Quincy; July 15, '62; M. O. June 3,
 '65.

 Morrison, Sylvander H., 19, S.; ledgeman, Quincy; July 26, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Moynihan, John, 21, M.; laborer, Boston; July 22, '63; recruit to the
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Murray, George H., 24, M.; cabinet maker, Boston; Aug. 2, '62; recruit
 to Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd.
 May 28, '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Murray, Michael A., 27, M.; mason, Boston; July 9, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Nelson, John, 24, S.; porter, Worcester, July 25, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Newcomb, Harrison G. O., 32, M.; boot-trimmer, Quincy; July 31, '62;
 dis. disa., Feb. 11, '63.

 Newcomb, Henry A. (Corp.), 39, M.; trader, Quincy; July 29, '62; d.
 Dec. 23, '64, a prisoner in Salisbury, N. C.

 Newcomb, Isaac T., 44, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 30, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 11, '63.

 Nightingale, Frederick, 22, S.; teamster, Quincy; Aug. 4, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 17, '62.

 Nightingale, Samuel (Corp.), 23, S.; clerk, Quincy; July 29, '62; dis.
 disa., Aug. 19, '64.

 O'Brien, Timothy, 37, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 31, '62; wd. May 10,
 '64; dis. June 15, '65.

 Parrott, Albert, 18, S.; boatman, Quincy; July 29, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Parrott, Luther H., 22, M.; seaman, Quincy; July 29, '62; trans. to
 Navy April 22, '64; dis. June 12, '65.

 Peck, George E., 21, S.; farmer, Acton; July 18, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Percival, George P., 32, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 31, '62; wd. May
 10, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Perkins, Charles H., 20, M.; clerk, Quincy; July 31, '62; prom. 2d
 Lieut. Sept. 8, '64; vide Co. B.

 Perry, Samuel N., 40, M.; carpenter, Quincy; Aug. 6, '62; d., a
 prisoner, March 31, '64, Andersonville, Ga., grave 274.

 Pierce, Eli, 43, S.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 26, '62; Pris. Aug. 14,
 '64; d. April 3, '65.

 Roach, Maurice, 29, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 29, '62; dis. at Tuton
 General Hospital, Delaware, May 31, '65.

 Rodgers, Horace C., 19, S.; student, Quincy; Aug. 1, '62; ab. at M. O.
 June 2, '65, detached duty.

 Russ, George W., 39, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 31, '62; wd. Aug. 18,
 '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Russell, George A., 24, S.; seaman, Quincy; July 29, '62; trans. Sept.
 26, '63, to V. R. C.; as he re-en. Aug. 25, '64, in Co. E, Ninth V. R.
 C., he must have been dis. at some date in his first enlistment.

 Sargent, George, 34, M.; farmer, Foxboro; July 11, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. May 15, '65.

 Savill, George W., 31, M.; stonecutter, Quincy; Aug. 7, '62; d. a
 prisoner Dec. 4, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Shavlin, Hugh, 18, S.; ledgeman, Quincy; July 30, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64, to March 3, '65; M. O. June 30, '64.

 Sheehan, Jerry, 20, M.; teamster, Quincy; July 30, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Simonds or Simons, William (Corp.), 44, M.; stonecutter, Quincy; Aug.
 2, '62; wd. May 8, '64; trans. Co. E, Sixteenth Reg't, V. R. C.; M. O.
 July 5, '65.

 Slattery, Edward, 29, M.; laborer, East Weymouth; July 17, '63;
 recruit to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. disa., Dec.
 24, '64.

 Sweet, John, 19, S.; painter, Shelburne; June 13, '64; recruit to
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; des. July 29, '64.

 Taylor, Marcus, 20, S.; farmer, Quincy; July 26, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Thayer, John J. H., 29, M.; engineer, Quincy; July 23, '62; dis.
 disa., March 2, '65.

 Thomas, Erasmus, 34, S.; stonecutter, Quincy; Aug. 2, '62; prom.
 Corp.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. March 14, '65.

 Trask, George W. (Corp.), 21, M.; stonecutter, Quincy; July 29, '62;
 wd. May 8, '64; M. O. June 8, '65.

 Walsh, Michael, 30, S.; laborer, Worcester; July 26, '65; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Ware, Henry A., 18, --; --, Quincy; Aug. 8, '62; N. F. R.

 Watts, George H., 24, S.; porter, Boston; June 26, '61; en. Twelfth
 Infty.; re-en. Jan. 5, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Wellman, John H., 31, S.; shoemaker, Attleborough; July 14, '62;
 recruit to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Willett, George A., 19, S.; boatman, Quincy; Aug. 2, '62; dis. disa.,
 Jan. 31, '63.

 Williams, John (1st Sergt.), 24, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 15, '62;
 dis. disa., Nov. 20, '64; had been in Co. E, Fourth M. V. M., 3 mos.
 term, 1861.

 Williams, William, 21, S.; seaman, Boston; April 28, '63; recruit to
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Wood, Thomas, 32, M.; bootmaker, Quincy; July 30, '62; k. June 19,
 '64, Petersburg.

 Young, William J., b. Sept. 8, 1837; 24, M.; seaman, Quincy; July 26,
 '62; M. O. June 2, '65; seaman, Quincy.

[Illustration: A Panel from the Old Soldiers' Monument, Somerville. The
first erected in Massachusetts.]




COMPANY E

Somerville


CAPTAIN

 Frederick R. Kinsley, b. July 30, 1829, Croydon; 33, S.; brickmaker,
 Somerville; Aug. 15, '62; Major June 13, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to
 March, '65; Colonel June 7, '65; M. O. as Captain June 2, '65; was 2d
 Lieut., Co. I, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term; vide F. & S.

 Charles W. Hanson, Sept. 8, '64; not mustered; dis. disa. as 1st
 Lieut. April 22, 1865.

 Lieut. H. F. Felch commanded the Company on its return.


FIRST LIEUTENANTS

 Joseph J. Giles, b. March 24, 1842; 20, S.; painter, Somerville;
 Aug. 15, '62; in 1863 for 11 mos. A. D. C. to Military Governor,
 Washington; dis. disa., Aug. 23, '64; had been in Co. I, Fifth M. V.
 M., 3 mos. term, 1861; 1913, real estate and insurance, Somerville.

 Henry F. Felch, from Co. F, Sept. 15, 1864; on resignation of Captain
 Nelson, Co. A, Lieut. Felch was trans. as Acting Captain; 1913, Natick.


SECOND LIEUTENANTS

 Willard C. Kinsley, 29, S.; brickmaker, Somerville; Aug. 9, '62; 1st
 Lieut. Nov. 13, '62; vide Co. H.

 T. Cordis Clarke, from Sergeant Major, Nov. 13, '62; trans. to Co. B,
 Nov. 12, '63.

 Charles W. Hanson, trans. from Co. H Nov., '63; prom. 1st Lieut. Co. C.

 Isaac F. R. Hosea, from Co. C, Dec., '63; prom. 1st Lieut. Jan. 15,
 '65; not mustered; M. O. June 2, '65.


ENLISTED MEN

 Abbott, Jesse B., 25, M.; carpenter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; M. O.
 May 16, '65; d. Cambridge, Feb. 18, 73.

 Allen, James M., 18, S.; brickmaker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; d. Nov. 23, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Amsden, Julius A., 27, S.; bootmaker, Ware; cr. to Brookfield; July
 13, '63; recruit to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. June
 25, '65.

 Arnold, William J., 18, S.; teamster, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; wd.
 May 8, '64, Laurel Hill; M. O. May 20, '65; d. Ashland, 1905.

 Baker, William A. (Corp.), 25, M.; hospital attendant, Somerville;
 Aug. 12, '62; dis. disa., Oct. 26, '63; d. Cambridge March 25, 1897.

 Bartlett, William H., 21, M.; calker, Beverly; July 10, '63; recruit
 to Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. Nov.
 18, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Bean, George W. (Corp.), 23, M.; artist, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 Pris. Oct. 11, '63, for 17 mos.; M. O. May 12, '65; Somerville police
 force; 1912, Cambridge.

 Belding, Charles H., 22, S.; provisions, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 trans. March 31, '64, V. R. C.; dis. Oct. 3, '64; provision dealer;
 1913, Malden.

 Benz, August, 21, S.; sausage-maker, Somerville; Aug. 15, '62; d. Oct.
 5, '64, on transport Utica, James River.

 Bledden, Thomas G., 38, S.; So. Reading, cr. to Chelmsford; Aug. 13,
 '64; trans. to 32 and M. O.

 Bodge, George A., 18, S.; teamster, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; prom.
 Corp., Sergt. and 1st Sergt.; prom. 2d Lieut. April 3, '65; M. O. June
 2, '65, as 1st Sergt.; never ill nor had a furlough; Somerville police
 force; d. Nov. 4, 1899.

 Bodge, George W., 44, S.; carpenter, Chelsea, cr. Weymouth; Jan. 7,
 '65; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O. Bolton, John T., 20, S.;
 clerk, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; on det. Serv. Ordnance Dept.; M. O.
 June 2, '65; d. Mexico, April 23, 1885.

 Boynton, William F., 30, M.; painter, Somerville; March 29, '64; dis.
 disa., Co. D, Jan. 12, '65; had been in Co. D, Fifth M. V. M., 9 mos.
 term, 1862-3; d. Aug. 29, 1892, Somerville.

 Bradley, George C., 23, S.; sailor, Boston; July 27, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Brotchie, James, 18, S.; painter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65; many years Somerville employee; 1912, Cambridge.

 Brown, James, 20, S.; b. April 19, 1829; laborer, Boston; July 23,
 '63; recruit to Co. D, Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Bucknam, Davis P. (Corp.), 25, M.; mason, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 dis. disa., June 18, '63; d. July 10, 1910, Somerville.

 Byrnes, John, 31, M.; teamster, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; trans. Feb.
 15, '64, V. R. C.; dis. July 3, '65; Boston elevated; 1913, Somerville.

 Canfield, John B., 35, M.; carpenter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, to March 3, '65; M. O. June 14, '65; d. Nov. 12, 1897.

 Carr, William M., 22, M.; ropemaker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 9, '62; had been in Co. I, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term,
 1861; d. Chelsea, 1893.

 Carter, Charles L., 20, S.; driver, Boston; June 26, '61, in Twelfth
 Infty.; for some reason, not given, was trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. Feb. 9, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Champney, Lewis C., 23, M.; moulder, Adams; July 14, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O. Clark, Gustavus A., b. April 16, 1830; 25, S.; hospital attendant,
 Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; Corp. May 23, '63; M. O. June 1, '65;
 eighteen years Boston P. O.; 1913, Somerville.

 Clemmens, James, 20, S.; Fall River, cr. Falmouth; seaman, July 28,
 '63; recruit to Thirteenth Infty., Co. D; trans. to Thirty-ninth,
 thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Cole, Chandler G., 44, M.; sawyer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; wd. Aug.
 18, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d.

 Coles, Ambrose W., 28, M.; painter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; lost
 left arm Feb. 7, '65, Hatcher's Run, Va.; dis. May 16, '65; d. 1882,
 Somerville.

 Collett, Herbert, 26, M.; painter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 8, '63; d. Philadelphia since 1899.

 Conner, Thomas, 36, M.; bootmaker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; dis.,
 disa. March 12, '63; d.

 Creedon, John, 18, S.; seaman, Philadelphia; en. April 20, '64, Co. F,
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; "Supposed to have joined the
 Rebels," says the State House Record, but whether from the Twelfth or
 Thirty-ninth, not stated.

 Crosby, Elkanah (Corp.), 24, S.; trunkmaker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 prom. Sergt. March 1, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; had been in Co. I, Fifth
 M. V. M., 3 mos. term; 1912, Somerville.

 Crowley, Daniel (Mus.), 21, S.; machinist, Somerville; Aug. 20, '62;
 M. O. June 2, '65; 1912, Somerville.

 Cutter, George, 27, M.; teamster, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; des. June
 3, '63; later seen in N. Y. Cav. Reg't.

 Dailey, Ebenezer W., 40, M.; carpenter, Marlborough; Jan. 2, '64;
 recruit to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to V. R.
 C. March 15, '65; dis. disa., June 13, '65, from Co. G, Sixteenth V.
 R. C.

 Davis, Amos F., 19, S.; trader, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; det. Serv.
 Ambulance Corps; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, Dorchester. Dodge, Albert
 H., 29, M.; carpenter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; des. Sept. 18, '64;
 from Nova Scotia; d.

 Dodge, William H., carpenter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; M. O. May 18,
 '65; brother of Albert; d. 1896.

 Dusseault, John H. (1st Sergt.), 22, S.; carver, Somerville; Aug. 12,
 '62; prom. 2d Lieut. Oct. 20, '63; vide Co. H.

 Dyer, Jonathan C., 24, S.; --, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; trans. to
 Navy April 22, '64; dis. from Naval Hospital, Norfolk, Va., Aug. 20,
 '64; d. 1903, Somerville.

 Edlefson, Charles E., 19, S.; grocer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '64; dis.,
 disa. Feb. 26, '63; d. Dec. 24, 1891, Somerville.

 Emerson, Samuel, 36, M.; teamster, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; M. O.
 June 5, '65; police force, Boston; d.

 Fairchild, Willard C., b. Sept. 23, 1832; 28, M.; teamster,
 Somerville, Aug. 12, '62; wd. slightly May 8, 10, and 12, '64; in
 right arm, Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R. R.; trans. Co. H, Third Reg't., V.
 R. C.; 1913, Fitchburg.

 Farrar, George A. (Wagoner), 38, M.; teamster, Somerville; Aug. 14,
 '62; wd. June 18, '64; dis. disa., July 29, '65; Worcester; d. June
 27, 1901, Somerville.

 Fay, Walter, 34, --; --, Somerville; Aug. 15, '62; trans. Aug. 1, '63;
 V. R. C.; dis. disa., Jan. 9,'64; d. Sept. 25, 1904, Somerville.

 Felker, Samuel O., 35, S.; cabinet-maker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; k.
 as Corp. May 10, '64, Spottsylvania.

 Fellows, Charles C, 34, S.; blacksmith, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; det.
 Serv.; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Sept. 11, 1897.

 Fitcham, Charles E. (Corp.), 20, S.; clerk, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 trans. Sept. 23, '64, Seventy-fifth Co., 2d Batt. V. R. C.; dis. Aug.
 10, '65, Hartford, Conn.; d.

 Flinsky, Leon, 27, S.; watchmaker, Raynham; Aug. 5, '63; recruit
 to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; ab. sick in Hosp.,
 "supposed to have deserted," but his name is carried to the
 Thirty-second.

 Flood, Thomas, 33, M.; laborer, Easton; Oct. 16, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; though his name is brought to the Thirty-ninth, he
 had des. May 31, '65; a name, but no man.

 Fuller, John E., 18, S.; gardener, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; wd. June
 18, '64; dis. disa., Feb. 12, '65; police force, Somerville; 1912,
 retired.

 Gilcrease, Elijah H., 30, M.; carpenter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 dis. disa., April 22, '63; d. Feb. 18, 1888, Somerville.

 Glines, Frederick A., 18, S.; mail clerk, Somerville; Aug. 12,
 '62; prom. Corp. July 1, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. Jan. 6, '65,
 Salisbury, N. C.

 Goodhue, Levi K., 28, M.; carpenter, Beverly; recruit to Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Gorham, David, 26, M.; hospital attendant, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 prom. Corp.; d. a prisoner Dec. 11, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Graham, William F. C., 24, M.; cabinet-maker, Somerville; Aug. 12,
 '62; ab. sick after May 19, '63, supposed to have deserted; from Nova
 Scotia.

 Grant, Edward L., 29, M.; teamster, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; det.
 Serv. Ordnance Dept.; M. O. June 2, '63; d. Feb. 5, 1911, Somerville.

 Gray, Dexter, 24, S.; hospital attendant, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 prom. Corp.; wd. Aug. 18, '64; dis. disa., May 17, '65, from General
 Hospital, Whitehall, Va.; d.

 Hadley, Eugene B., 34, M.; engineer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; k. Feb.
 6, '65, Hatcher's Run.

 Hafford, John, 18, S.; butcher, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; dis. disa.,
 June 20, '63; d. Nov. 15, 1905.

 Hagan, Patrick, 43, M.; trader, Somerville; Aug. 13, '62; dis. disa.,
 April 13, '63; claimed to have served in Crimean War; d.

 Hale, Edward M., b. March 31, 1841; (Sergt.) 21, S.; clerk,
 Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; absent on detached service at office
 of Adjutant General, Washington; M. O. June 2, '65, as absent;
 bookkeeper and accountant; 1913, Passaic, N. J.

 Hanley, John H., 30, M.; trader, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; dis. disa.,
 Aug. 12, '63; d. Somerville.

 Harburn, William M., 18, S.; --, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; k. Aug. 18,
 '64, Weldon R. R.

 Harlow, George R., 24, S.; hospital attendant, Somerville; Aug. 12,
 '62; wd. May 10, '64, also Aug. 19, '64; dis. disa., March 17, '65;
 lat. add. Chattanooga, Tenn.

 Haskell, William J., 20, S.; farmer, Otis; July 13, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Hatch, George H., 18, S.; baker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; d. Feb. 1,
 '65, a prisoner, Salisbury, N. C.

 Hill, George A., b. March 6, 1842; 20, S.; carpenter, Somerville; Aug.
 12, '62; dis. disa., April 29, '63; drug business, later real estate
 and fire insurance; 1913, Springfield.

 Horgan, Patrick D., 19, S.; hostler, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, to May 20, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; d.

 Horton, John E., 32, M.; milkman, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; prom.
 Corp.; July 1, '64; d. Dec. 10, '64, a prisoner, Andersonville, Ga.
 His diary freely drawn upon in this history.

 Howard, William L., 28, S.; shoemaker, Lynn; July 13, '63; recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; dis. as
 Corp. May 26, '65.

 Howe, Henry E., 19, S.; milkman, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; d. Nov. 22,
 '63, a prisoner, Richmond, Va.

 Hutter, John, 34, S.; shoemaker, Abington; June 26, '61; in Twelfth
 Infty.; re-en. Jan 5, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Hyde, Richard J. (Sergt.), 20, S.; brass tubemaker, Somerville; Aug.
 12, '62; d. Aug. 13, '64, a prisoner, Andersonville, Ga.; had been in
 Co. I, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Hyde, Thomas L., 23, S.; butcher, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64; dis. disa., March 9, '65; last heard from in N. Y. city in 1905.

 Jones, Charles G., 29, M.; carriage-smith, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 d. a prisoner Nov. 23, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Johnson, Mortimer, 19, S.; farmer, Sudbury; July 16, '61; in
 Thirteenth Infty. and re-en. Feb. 19, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth;
 dis. Jan. 5, '65, O. W. D.

 Jordan, John F., 18, S.; farmer, Boston; Oct. 16, '63, recruit to
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Kelly, Thomas P., b. Sept. 11, 1842, So. Boston, 18, S.; glass cutter,
 Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; dis. disa., Oct. 27, '63; glass cutter; Jun.
 and Sen. Vice Com'der, G. A. R. Post; 1913, Medford.

 Kendrick, David, 43, M.; watchmaker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. Annapolis, Md., March 15, '65.

 Kennedy, John, 28, M.; Aug. 12, '62; blacksmith, Somerville; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, escaped, recaptured, finally came back; M. O. as Sergt.,
 June 2, '65; d. S. H. Chelsea, Jul. 24, 1898.

 Kenneston, E. F., 19, S.; baker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; dis. disa.,
 April 21, '63.; d. soon after the war.

 Kinmings, Francis M., 19, S.; shoemaker, Bolton; July 16, '61; in
 Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Feb. 19, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth and
 dis. as Corp., no date.

 Ladd, Edward, 22, --; --, Boston; July 22, '61, in Twelfth Infty.;
 re-en. Feb. 20, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64;
 drowned in the Potomac River April 23, '65, though his name was
 carried over to the Thirty-second.

 Levins, Morris, 26, M.; cook, Boston; en. Jan. 6, '62, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth and was M. O. Jan. 5, '65, ex. of s.

 Locke, John F., b. March 27, 1844; 18, S.; clerk, Somerville; Aug. 12,
 '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. May 26, '65; studied in Meadville,
 Penn.; Harvard Divinity School, 1870; Unitarian clergyman, 25 years,
 in Stowe; Boston's Y. M. C. U.; Castine, Me.; and Wolfboro, N. H.;
 since Dec. 10, 1894, Shelf Dep't, Boston Public Library; Locke was
 detained in Richmond till after the Rebel Evacuation and was the first
 to hang out a Union flag; 1913, Dorchester.

 Lovett, Washington, 23, S.; currier, Somerville; d. July 14, '64,
 Annapolis, Md.; had been prisoner.

 McCarthy, John, 24, M.; laborer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; trans.
 to Co. F, Fourteenth V. R. C.; dis. May 15, '65; d. Nov. 2, 1907,
 Somerville.

 McDonald, George F., 18, M.; Seaman, Framingham; June 28, '63; recruit
 to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second
 and M. O.

 McGurdy, Alexander, 38, M.; glass worker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 trans. Sept. 12, '62, to Co. F, Fourteenth V. R. C.; dis. July 15,
 '65; d.

 McJunkin, Samuel, 21, S. (Mus.); hostler, Somerville; Aug. 14, '62; M.
 O. June 2, '65; d. May 9, 1887, Somerville.

 McNall, George, 28, M.; glass worker, Somerville; Aug. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 12, '65; d.

 McQuade, John, 42, M.; laborer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; dis. disa.,
 Jan. 23, '63; d.

 Merrett, James H. (Mus.), 29, --; --, Somerville; Aug. 20, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 6, '62.

 Merritt, John S., 37, M.; laborer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; det.
 Serv. Construction Corps; M. O. June 2, '65; d.

 Mills, Edwin (Sergt.), 21, S.; plumber, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 prom. Sergt. Major, Sept. '63.

 Moran, James, 18, S.; glass worker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; prom.
 Corp.; d. Aug. 7, '65.

 Murray, Thomas, 22, S.; blacksmith, Worcester; July 28, '63; recruit
 to Thirteenth Infty.; trans. as deserter to Thirty-ninth and as such
 carried to the Thirty-second.

 Myers, George, 21, S.; carpenter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; wd. May
 23, '64, North Anna River, Va.; dis. as Sergt., March 2, '65, disa.;
 d. Dec. 30, 1896, Florida.

 Newell, James H. (Mus.), 29, M.; machinist, Somerville; Aug. 20, '62;
 dis. disa., Dec. 13, '62; had been in Co. F, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos.
 term, 1861; d. Jan. 4, 1893, Jamaica Plain.

 Northey, George A., 29, S.; baker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; wd. and
 taken pris., May 8, '64; dis. disa., March 6, '65; d. Sept. 4, 1902,
 Malden.

 O'Brien, Daniel, 19, S.; shoemaker, Boston; June 26, '61, in Twelfth
 Infty. and, for some unstated reason, trans. to the Thirty-ninth; at
 the time was in Haddington Hosp., Philadelphia; N. F. R.

 O'Brien, Thomas; no data except "Sept. 20, '64," as enlistment, and
 trans. to Thirty-second.

 Odiorne, William, 26, M.; laborer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; wd. May
 13, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d.

 Oliver, Francis J., 18, S.; trader, Somerville; Aug. 14, '62; Pris.
 Oct. 11, '63; d. Oct. 10, '64, Andersonville, Ga.; grave, 1059.

 Oliver, Judson W. (Sergt.), 30, M.; currier, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 M. O. June 2, '65; had been in Co. I, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term,
 1861; 36 years in the Police Dep't of Somerville; d. April 7, 1908.

 O'Neil, Henry, 40, M.; glass worker, Somerville; Aug. 14, '62; dis.
 disa., May 15, '63; d.

 O'Sullivan, John, 43, M.; laborer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; wd. June
 18, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Nov. 19, 1875, Cambridge.

 Otta, Antone, 37, M.; civil engineer, Beverly; July 29, '63; d. of
 wds., July 18, '64, Alexandria, Va.

 Paine, Jeremiah T., 28, S.; carpenter, Somerville; Aug. 15, '62; d.
 Oct. 13, '63, Washington, D. C.

 Palmer, William D., 31, M.; plumber, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; k. as
 Sergt. May 8, '64, Spottsylvania. Parkhurst, Melville C. (Corp), 20,
 S.; grocer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; prom. from Sergt. to 2d Lieut.
 Sept. 8, '64; vid. Co. B.

 Perry, Gideon W., b. Jan. 6, 1840; 22, S.; hosp. attendant,
 Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; in Aug., '64, detailed as pioneer; M. O.
 June 2, '65; farmer; 1913, West Fairlee, Vt.

 Phillips, Albert W., 43, M.; teamster, No. Bridgewater; Jan. 4, '64,
 in Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; d. a prisoner, Nov. 26,
 '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Pinkham, Horace W., 25, S.; carpenter, Somerville; Aug. 14, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 9, '62; d.

 Powers, Martin, O., 21, M.; farmer, Medford; July 14, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; ab. on detached duty, he was carried as such to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Powers, Robert, 40, M.; laborer, Somerville,; Aug. 12, '62; k. May 10,
 '64, Spottsylvania, Va.

 Randall, George W., 25, S.; Machinist, Charleston; July 16, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Richards, Henry, 32, S.; bookkeeper, Amesbury; July 29, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Richardson, Henry C., 18, S.; mechanic, Boston; July 8, '61; in
 Twelfth Infty.; re-en. Feb. 16, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Riley, John, 2d, 20, M.; baker, Falmouth; July 28, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Roberts, John S., 23, S.; bookkeeper, Somerville; Aug. 13, '62; State
 House rolls say, "Missing since Aug. 19, '64"; Lieut. Dusseault says
 he was k. while carrying the Brigade Colors on that disastrous day.

 Rollins, Samuel P., 18, S.; baker, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; d. Nov.
 22, '62, Offutt's Crossroads, Md. Shaw, Henry, 20, S.; paper hanger,
 Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; det. Serv. Hosp.; M. O. June 2, '65; 1912,
 Somerville.

 Shaw, John B., 23, S.; paper hanger, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; 1912, Somerville.

 Shaw, Thomas P., 28, M.; yeoman, Warren; July 1, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Skehan, John, 23, S.; laborer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; dis. disa.,
 Feb. 8, '65.

 Smith, Albert H., 21, S.; farmer, Florida; Aug. 22, '64; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Smith, Addison, 39, M.; cordwainer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; trans.
 July 1, '63, to V. R. C.; dis. disa., March 17, '64, David's Island,
 N. Y. Harbor; d. June 25, 1895.

 Smith, Sidney N., 27, M.; mechanic, Winchendon; July 20, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. May 22, '65.

 Smith, William M., 22, S.; farmer, Florida; July 14, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Stevens, Leslie, b. Aug. 9, 1846, Walpole; (Corp.) 18, S.; moulder,
 Somerville; Aug. 14, '62; dis. disa., Jan. 25, '63; iron moulder,
 sewing machine agent, teacher of boxing and breeder of St. Bernard
 dogs; Q. M., Post 94, G. A. R.; 1913, Canton.

 Stickney, Herman C., 21, S.; farmer, Somerville; Aug. 13, '62; special
 duty; dis. disa., April 22, '63; 1912, Somerville.

 Thomas, William H., 32, M.; gentleman, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; prom.
 Sergt.; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Thompson, Frank W., 18, S.; farmer, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. Jan. 10, '65, Florence, S. C.

 Ulrich, Lewis, 30, S.; laborer, Chatham; July 27, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Van Cleff, John S., 35, S.; sailor, Boston; July 25, '63; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; d. a prisoner Feb. 1, '65, Salisbury,
 N. C.

 Van de Sands, George (Corp.), 18, S.; clerk, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 prom. Sergt.; dis. Aug. 23, '63, O. W. D. for commission, Tenth U. S.
 C. T.; d.

 Webster, Henry K., 28, M.; clerk, Lawrence; July 16, '62, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. May 15, '65.

 Wentworth, Alonzo P., 33, M.; laborer, Charleston; July 9, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. May 18, '65.

 Whitmore, Joseph W., 28, M.; carpenter, Somerville; Aug. 12, '62;
 Pris. Oct. 10, '63; supposed to have died in Rebel Prison.

 Wilcutt, William C., 30, S.; laborer, Somerville; Aug. 13, '62; des.
 Sept. 9, '62; had been in Co. F, Fifth M. V. M. 3 mos. term, 1861;
 later in Co. K, Fifty-ninth Infty. from which he deserted; Willcut
 seemed a fitting name.

 Williams, John, 32, --; seaman, Boston; July 29, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth and was dis. disa., Aug. 7, '64.

 Wilton, George T., 28, S.; boatman, Conway; Aug. 1, '63; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth and was wd. May 5, '64, Wilderness;
 dis. disa., Aug. 18, '64.

 Woodward, Elbridge G., 23, M.; farmer, Colrain; Aug. 1, '63; trans. to
 V. R. C., March 21, '65; des. from 22d Co. Second Batt. V. R. C., June
 28, '65.

 Wright, Robert, 23, --; boiler maker, Ashfield; July 26, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.




COMPANY F

Taunton


CAPTAIN

 Joseph J. Cooper, 34, M.; nailer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd. Feb. 7,
 '65, Hatcher's Run, Va.; bvt. Major, April 1, '65; M. O. June 2,
 '65; b. May 8, 1828, Preston, England; came to America, when three
 years old; as a boy, worked in Taunton Cotton mill; as a young man,
 worked at tack making; in Pittsburg, Penn., from 1854 to beginning
 of the Civil War; after the war, engaged in the nail business in
 Bridgewater and continued the same for years; later he followed the
 same business in Taunton, retiring several years ago; from boyhood,
 he was interested in the Fire Department, being an active member of
 the Taunton force for many years, and then Ass't Engineer; was a
 lifelong member of the Baptist Church; a life member of the Old Colony
 Historical Society, his interest continued to the end; Lieut. James E.
 Seaver, secretary of the Society pays the Major this tribute, "Always
 an honest man! A man with the strongest convictions which he held to
 the last, if he believed them to be right; a good friend, an excellent
 neighbor, a good citizen and a brave soldier"; he died August 22, 1912.


FIRST LIEUTENANT

 Isaac D. Paul, 38, S.; dresser, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; k. May 8, '64,
 Spottsylvania; a member of the Masonic Order, Confederate Masons
 carried his body to the rear and buried it with Masonic Rites; had
 been a corporal in Co. G, Fourth M. V. M., 3 mos. service; before the
 war, had been Supt. in the Whittaker Cotton Manufacturing Co. For a
 time, Post 55 of Taunton bore his name.


SECOND LIEUTENANT

 John D. Reed, 35, S.; grocer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; prom. 1st Lieut.
 Sept. 20, '63; vide Co. I.

 Joseph A. Merrifield, from Sergt. Major, Sept. 20, '63; trans. to Co.
 D, Oct. '63.

 Henry F. Felch from Co. I, Oct. 25, '63; wd. Aug. 18, '64; prom. 1st
 Lieut. Sept. 15, '64, Co. E.


ENLISTED MEN

 Adams, George F., 24, M.; nailer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Alexander, William, 21, S.; laborer, Boston; July 27, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Anthony, Sylvanus, 28, M.; farmer, Uxbridge; July 5, '63; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Austin, Charles B., 33, M.; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. May 10, '64, to May
 10, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Babbitt, Charles E., 20, M.; tailor, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; k. May 8,
 '64, Alsop's Farm.

 Babbitt, Frank S., b. Dec. 22, 1843; 18, S.; tailor, Taunton; Aug.
 25, '62; trans. to U. S. Signal Corps, Sept. 1, '63; served in Army
 of the Potomac; 1865 to 1889, manufacturing machinery; 1882-'83,
 Representative in General Court; 1887, Alderman, Taunton; 1888-'93
 inclusive, Bristol Co. Commissioner; 1891-'93 inclusive, Mayor of
 Taunton; 1894-'97, Administrator of Estates; 1897-1900 inclusive,
 Chief of Police; 1901 to date, Probation Officer, Massachusetts
 Superior Court; 1913, Taunton.

 Babbitt, George H., Jr., b. Sept. 7, 1841; (Sergt.) 20, S.;
 auctioneer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; auctioneer and
 commission merchant; 1871-'72, Rep. General Court; later was Coroner,
 Deputy Sheriff, Justice of the Peace, Constable, Ass't U. S. Marshal,
 Enumerator, etc.; d. Dec. 9, 1877.

 Barker, Orville A., b. June 17, 1840, 22, S.; apothecary, Taunton;
 Aug. 22, '62; prom. Corp.; prom. Hosp. Steward, Oct. 13, '62; vide F.
 & S.

 Barnes, Charles A., 27, S.; bookkeeper, Taunton; Dec. 28, '63; d. July
 15, '64, Taunton.

 Barnes, William L., 35, M.; painter, Roxbury; July 15, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. disa., April 22, '65.

 Barnum, George D., 29, S.; bootmaker, Boston, cr. to Holliston;
 July 14, '63, in Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Barrows, George L., 18, S.; shoemaker, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; trans.
 Co. F, Twenty-fourth V. R. C., March 13, '65; dis. June 28, '65.

 Betagh, James, 35, M.; laborer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Corp., Jan. 1,
 '64; wd. May 10, '65; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to May 16, '65; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Boardman, Alfred, 24, S.; shoemaker, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; trans. to
 U. S. Navy, April 19, '64; dis. July 31, '65.

 Borden, Clark P., 20, S.; harness maker, Fall River; Aug. 22, '62; wd.
 May 8, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Braddock, William, 26, M.; knife cutter, Chatham; Oct. 1, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; M. O. May 15, '65.

 Brewster, Charles W. (Corp.), 19, S.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62;
 dis. March 31, '65.

 Briggs, Preserved, 26, M.; wheelwright, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Brizzee, Lorenzo, 29, M.; farmer, Deerfield; July 16, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.;
 name also found, Brizzer and Brizzie.

 Brooks, Freelove, 29, M.; armorer, Springfield; July 11, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Brunn, John, 25, S.; shoemaker, Roxbury; Sept. 23, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence as prisoner of war to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Burt, Henry A., 25, S.; machinist, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 16,
 '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Carney, John, 22, S.; shovel maker, Acton; July 23, '63; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Cochran, Matthew, 28, M.; sailor, Marblehead; July 10, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd., time and place not given; dis.
 disa., June 7, '65.

 Cole, Charles H., 19, S.; hostler, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Conway, Patrick, 28, S.; farmer, New York, cr. to Truro; Oct. 5, '63,
 in Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; dis.
 June 13, '65.

 Cotter, Edward A., 22, S.; shoemaker, Dorchester; June 26, '61, in
 Twelfth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 5, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis.
 disa., April 3, '65.

 Crooker, Lucius (Sergt.), 23, S.; clerk, Bridgewater; Aug. 22, '62;
 dis. Dec. 22, '63, for commission, U. S. C. T.; vide Seventy-seventh
 Infty. and Tenth H. Arty.; reporting in New Orleans he was
 commissioned 1st Lieut. and ordered to Ft. St. Philip and made Post
 Adjutant; later became Provost Marshal in N. O., remaining there till
 Reg't was M. O. Later still was secretary of U. S. Consul at Panama;
 he died several years ago.

 Cummings, John A., 25, --; --, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; des. Aug. 29,
 '62.

 Daniels, George M., 32, M.; mason, Adams; July 14, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd., no time or place stated; trans.
 to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Day, John, 32, S.; fisherman, Gloucester; July 22, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. from wds. Oct.
 28, '64.

 Dean, Anson J., 18, S.; machinist, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Corp., March
 1, '65; wd. June 18, '64, and March 31, '65; M. O. May 25, '65.

 Dean, Erastus L., 18, S.; machinist, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; k. May 8,
 '64, Spottsylvania.

 Dean, William E., 24, S.; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to March
 2, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Delphin, Joseph, Jr., 19, S.; carpenter, Taunton; Aug. 22, '63; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Doherty, William (Sergt.), 33, M.; laborer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62;
 Pris., Aug. 19, '64, to May 16, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Dunbar, Robert, 28, S.; plasterer, Boston; July 27, '63; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. Aug. 19, '64; des. March 2, '65.

 Elms, Cyrus O., 35, M.; carpenter, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd., Aug.
 19, '64; trans. Feb. 25, '65, to Co. A, Tenth V. R. C.; dis. May 26,
 '65.

 Ensminger, John, 22, S.; farmer, Stockbridge; July 15, '63; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. May 31, '65.

 Findell, Adolphus, 44, --; --, Taunton; Aug. 3, '63; though given on
 the State House rolls as trans. from the Thirteenth Infty., his name
 does not appear in that regiment, nor in the Twelfth; dis. disa.,
 Sept. 26, '64.

 Gay, Abraham S., 34, M.; shoemaker, Natick; March 17, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. March 17, '65, ex. of
 s.

 Gay, George W., 19, S.; stitcher, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Grover, Hartson C., 27, S.; blacksmith, Canaan, Me., cr. Methuen; July
 13, '63, in Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth thence to Co. A,
 Ninth V. R. C.; dis. July 22, '65.

 Gushee, Sacuel M., 17, --; --, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; N. F. R.

 Hall, Benjamin J., 18, S.; printer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; prom. Corp.
 July 1, '64; Pris.; d. Dec. 6, '64, Salisbury.

 Hall, Daniel, b. Nov. 27, 1839; 23, --; --, Boxford; Nov. 21, '62,
 in Washington, D. C.; trans. Aug. 1, '63, U. S. Signal Corps; served
 in Dep't, N. C., Dept. of Shenandoah, Georgetown, D. C.; dis. as
 Sergt. July 5, '65; says he was in the Navy, '61 and '62; through the
 treachery of a Lieutenant, he and twelve others were prisoners of war
 ten months; rolls say M. O. in absence, June 2, '65; salesman; 1913,
 S. H. Togus, Me.

 Hall, Eben A., 22, M.; printer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Corp. Sept.
 1, '63; Sergt. Feb. 1, '65; Pris. Feb. 7, '65, to April 30, '65; M.
 O. June 2, '65; Rep. in General Court; Executive Council with Gov.
 Butler; publisher of Greenfield Gazette; d. New Orleans, March 17,
 1900, while on Press Excursion to that vicinity.

 Hall, George W., 18, S.; seaman, Boston; Aug. 23, '62, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Hall, Rufus W., b. July 30, 1836; 34, S.; machinist, Taunton; Aug.
 22, '62; Pris. May 8, '64; recaptured by Sheridan, May 9; dis. disa.,
 April 28, '65; machinist; 52 years in Mason Machine Works, including
 army service and nineteen months disa. at close; 1913 (retired),
 Taunton.

 Haniford, William, 20, S.; farmer, Chelmsford; July 11, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Harris, Alfred B., 21, S.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; trans. Jan.
 12, '64, U. S. Signal Corps; served in Depts. of Ohio, Va., and N. C.;
 taken pris. Feb. 18, '65, near Fort Anderson, N. C.; d. April 7, '65,
 Taunton.

 Harvey, William F., 22, M.; moulder, Taunton, Aug. 22, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 2, '64.

 Hathaway, James A., 18, S.; nailer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Pris., Aug.
 19, '64; d. Jan. 10, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Hewett, John G., 29, M.; dresser tender, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 12, '63.

 Holloway, Isaac N., 27, M.; shoemaker, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May
 10, '64, and Aug. 18, '64; dis. May 12, '65.

 Horton, Horace B. (Corp.), 36, M.; mason, Taunton; Aug. 8, '62; prom.
 Sergt. Nov. 1, '65; wd. and prisoner, Aug. 19, '64; paroled, N. F. R.

 Howland, Benjamin L., 21, S.; cooper, Taunton; Oct. 16, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Jewett, Jesse G., b. Oct. 9, 1840, 21, S.; clerk, Bridgewater; Aug.
 22, '62; Corp. March 2, '63; dis. Jan. 2, '64, for Commission, U. S.
 C. T.; vide Seventy-seventh Infty. and Tenth H. Arty.; with Sergt.
 Crocker he reported to General Wm. Dwight, New Orleans; commissioned
 1st Lieut.; sent to Fort St. Philip, serving as boarding officer,
 i.e., looking after contraband goods in passing vessels; later, served
 on staffs of Generals Hamlin, Banks, Hurlbert, Canby, Sheridan and
 J. W. Sherman; resigned June 7, 1866; clothing business and farming
 till 1871; since then with Old Colony, or N. Y., N. H. and H. R. R. to
 date, in Paymaster's or Treasurer's Dept.; 1913, Dorchester.

 Jones, William H., 23, S.; harness maker, Chatham; July 27, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans.
 to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Kane, David S., 20, S.; farmer, Bridgewater; Aug. 27, '62; wd. May 10,
 '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. July 24, '65.

 Kellar, Balthaser, 24, M.; clothier, Littleton; Nov. 5, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Kelly, William, 21, S.; mule-dresser, Taunton; Aug. 29, '62; dis.
 disa., March 4, '63.

 Kelly, William B., 23, S.; painter, Taunton; wd. Aug. 18, '64; d. Aug.
 30, '64, Philadelphia.

 King, Edward, b. June 6, 1843, 19, S.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62;
 on detached duty, the most of his service; M. O. June 2, '65; in
 National Banks and manufacturing companies, in Taunton or Newcastle,
 Penn.; 1913, New Castle.

 Knapp, George L. (Corp.), 36, M.; carpenter, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62;
 dis. disa., June 3, '64.

 Knapp, Lorenzo S., 29, M.; farmer, Richmond; July 15, '62; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Laahy, Jeremiah, 42, M.; laborer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64; dis. disa., Dec. 3, '64.

 Lane, Henry A., 27, S.; coppersmith, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Corp.
 March 2, '63; Sergt. Jan. 1, '64; wd. June 19, '64; M. O. June 8,'65.

 Lawler, James A., 20, S.; farmer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10,
 '64; Pris., Aug. 19, '64, to March 2, '65; M. O. June 13, '65.

 Leonard, Henry F., 34, M.; tinner, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Leonard, William E., 24, M.; moulder, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Lincoln, Daniel, 35, M.; carpenter, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; d. May 10,
 '64, Laurel Hill, Va., from wds. rec'd on the Eighth, Alsop's Farm.

 McClearance, Archibald, 43, M.; weaver, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; dis.
 disa., June 18, '63.

 McFarland, Samuel G., 18, M.; clerk, Winchester; July 21, '62; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Makepeace, Norman G., 23, M.; shoemaker, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd.
 May 5, '64; M. O. June 20, '65.

 Mason, William W., 35, M.; wheelwright, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Corp.
 Oct. 29, '62; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Mitchell, Edward, Jr., 19, S.; clerk, Bridgewater; Aug. 22, '62; dis.
 disa., Oct. 13, '63.

 Mitchell, Nathan, 21, M.; clerk, Bridgewater; Aug. 22, '62; d. Sept.
 27, '62, Edwards Ferry, Md.

 Monroe, Charles E., 21, S.; apothecary, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; dis.
 for prom. hospital steward, U. S. A., Feb. 17, '63; March 14, '64,
 prom. 1st Lieut. and assistant surgeon, One Hundred and Seventy-fourth
 Ohio Vols.; M. O. June 28, '65.

 Naylor, Abraham C., 23, M.; machinist, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Nelson, William, 44, M.; dresser, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. May 8,
 '64, recaptured by Sheridan May 9; wd. Aug. 18, '64; dis. disa., April
 18, '65.

 Nichols, William L., 21, S.; blacksmith, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Corp.
 Dec. 1, '64; wd. Feb. 7, '65; M. O. May 27, '65.

 Packer, States, 30, M.; laborer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; d. a prisoner
 Jan. 4, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Paull, Dyer S., 34, M.; teamster, Taunton; Aug. 22, '65; dis. disa.,
 Nov. 18, '64.

 Paull, Thomas W., 21, S.; nailer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, to March 13, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Pearson, Charles E., 28, --; --, Taunton; Corp. Nov. 1, '63; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Phillips, Dexter M., 24, M.; farmer, Pittsfield; July 4, '62, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Pierce, Charles A., 25, S.; carpenter, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Corp.
 Jan. 16, '64; dis. disa., Oct. 22, '64.

 Quimby, Ira B., 33, M.; carpenter, Boston; Aug. 26, '62; dis. Feb. 2,
 '64, for prom. U. S. C. T.

 Rand, William L., 25, S.; farmer, Nahant; June 26, '61; in Twelfth
 Infty.; re-en. Jan. 5, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth; prom. Corp.; k.
 March 31, '65, Hatcher's Run.

 Reynolds, William H. (Mus.), 19, S.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62;
 dis. May 18, '65.

 Riley, James, 33, M.; laborer, Taunton; Aug. 25, '62; trans. to Co. E,
 Ninth V. R. C.; dis. June 26, '65.

 Rocket, James, 19, S.; nailer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa.,
 March 4, '63.

 Rogers, Eugene S., 26, S.; shoemaker, Natick; March 17, '62; in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. 17, '65, ex. of s.

 Russell, Nathan, 28, M.; carpenter, Marlborough; Jan. 2, '64; in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. May 13, '65.

 Shaw, George W., Jr., 22, S.; --, West Brookfield; July 13, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Sherburne, Benjamin F., 20, S.; machinist, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; des.
 July 9, '63.

 Skinner, Fernando C., 21, S.; shovel-maker, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd.
 May 8, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to May 16, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Smith, Edwin H. C., 18, S.; shoemaker, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May
 10, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to March 2, '65; M. O. June 6, '65.

 Smith, George T., 20, S.; farmer, Wayland; July 16, '61; in Thirteenth
 Infty.; re-en. Feb. 17, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. disa., Oct.
 17, '64.

 Smith, James, 38, M.; mechanic, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64, to Oct. 9, '64; dis. May 12, '65.

 Snow, Charles H., 18, S.; farmer, Taunton; Aug. 21, '62; M. O. June 3,
 '65.

 Sproal, Arthur H. (Corp.), 19, S.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; M. O.
 May 18, '65.

 Stall, John M., 40, S.; Aug. 22, '62; farmer, Taunton; wd. May 8, '64;
 dis. Dec. 13, '64.

 Staples, Benjamin F., 22, S.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; ab. sick
 at M. O.; N. F. R.

 Sullivan, Daniel, 23, M.; laborer, Dorchester; Aug. 4, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; though ab. under arrest,
 and as such was carried to the Thirty-second.

 Taylor, George W. (Wagoner), 34, M.; teamster, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62;
 dis. disa., Feb. 1, '64.

 Terry, Apollos P., 22, S.; cooper, Taunton; Aug. 26, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, to Sept. 12, '64; M. O. June 13, '65.

 Thayer, Edgar S. (1st Sergt.), 23, M.; farmer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62;
 dis. Oct. 22, '63, for commission as Captain, Co. H, Seventh U. S. C.
 T.

 Thayer, Henry F., 29, M.; metal-worker, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; trans.
 Feb. 15, '64, Co. H, 1st V. R. C.

 Thomas, Charles, 34, M.; moulder, Taunton; Aug. 12, '62; d. a
 prisoner, Florence, S. C., Oct. --, '64.

 Thomas, Charles S. (Corp.), 23, S.; farmer, Raynham; Aug. 22, '62; M.
 O. June 2, '65.

 Tighe, Terrance, 39, M.; laborer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; trans. Oct.
 27, '63, to Co. A, Twentieth V. R. C.; dis. June 28, '65.

 Tinkham, Herbert, 21, S.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; June 2, '65.

 Tisdale, Samuel L., 24, S.; marine, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; trans. Navy
 May 4, '64; dis. July 15, '65.

 Titus, George L., 20, S.; carpenter, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to May 16, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Townsend, Percival J. (Corp.), 23, S.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62;
 no M. O.

 Turner, George, 37, S.; laborer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa.,
 March 4, '63.

 Walsh, Harold, 19, M.; machinist, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; des. July 9,
 '63.

 Walsh, William, 22, --; --, Charlestown; July 25, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to May 16, '65;
 trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Washburn, Otis (Corp.), 31, M.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Sergt.
 March 2, '63; dis. disa., Oct. 20, '63.

 Washburn, Salmon, Jr. (Corp.), 19, S.; clerk, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62;
 wd. May 10, '64; M. O. May 19, '65.

 Waters, Clark, 28, M.; carpenter, Boston; July 13, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Webster, Charles C. (1st Sergt.), 25, M.; currier, Boston; June 26,
 '61, in Twelfth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 5, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth;
 dis. O. W. D. Sept. 21, '64.

 Wescott, Andrew A., 28, S.; carpenter, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Corp.
 May 6, '63; wd. May 8, '64; d. a prisoner, Richmond, June 1, '64.

 Wheeler, Charles E., 23, S.; machinist, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May
 8, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 White, Albert R., 21, M.; butcher, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa.,
 Dec. 10, '62.

 Whitney, Lorenzo L., 21, M.; teamster, Boston; July 13, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Whitters, Edward, b. 1839, 23, S.; harness-maker, Taunton; Aug. 22,
 '62; M. O. June 2, '65; harness manufacturer; d. Oct. 12, 1913.

 Williams, Reuben B. P., 23, M.; nailer, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; d. June
 26, '63, Washington.

 Wilson, George W., 2d, 22, S.; brickmaker, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; dis.
 disa., June 3, '64.

 Wood, David (Sergt.), 34, M.; Aug. 22, '62; 1st Sergt. Oct. 22, '63;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to April 30, '65; prom. 2d Lieut. June 7, '65; M.
 O. June 2, '65, as 1st Sergt.

 Wood, Jesse, 26, S.; painter, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa., Dec.
 29, '63.

 Woodward, Edward M., 21, S.; machinist, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; Corp.
 Nov. 1, '63; wd. May 10, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Woodward, George T., 20, S.; student, Taunton; Aug. 25, '62; trans. to
 U. S. Signal Corps Aug. 12, '63; served Dept. of Gulf; dis. July 18,
 '65; d. Sept. 17, '65, Taunton.

 Woodward, Matthew, 38, M.; moulder, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; chief mus.
 Nov. 1, '63; vid. F. & S.

 Woodward, Roland P., 23, M.; machinist, Taunton; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May
 8, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.




COMPANY G

Boston and South Shore


CAPTAIN

 Ezra J. Trull, 20, S.; b. Sept. 13, 1842, Boston; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; he had en. as Private in Co.
 A, Thirteenth Infty. and was dis. Aug. 30, '62, for prom. in the
 Thirty-ninth; in the firm of Chase & Trull, he was long a distiller in
 Charlestown; d. Charlestown, April 29, 1886; one of the best drilled
 men in the Regiment, after the war he enlisted as a private in the
 Fifth Regiment, M. V. M.; rose through the grades to its command and
 was at its head in the famous Bunker Hill Centennial Parade; also rose
 to a captaincy in the Ancient and Honorable Artillery.


FIRST LIEUTENANTS

 Charles W. Thompson, --, --; Boston; Aug. 20, '62; on detached service
 nearly his entire term; dis. disa., May 3, '64.

 William G. Sheen, from Co. I; prom. Captain Sept. 8, '64, Co. D, vice
 Spear, res.

 Charles K. Conn, March, '65; detached as Quarter-Master, One Hundred
 and Fourth N. Y. Vols.; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Oct. 3, 1906.


SECOND LIEUTENANT

 Charles Henry Chapman, from Sergt. Major; commissioned Aug. 30, '62;
 mustered Nov. 11, '62; Act. Ass't Inspector Gen'l Fourth Brigade,
 2d Div. 1st A. C. until Brig. was disbanded, July 17, '63; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; prom. 1st Lieut. Sept. 6, '64, not mustered; dis. for
 Captaincy, Forty-first U. S. C. T., April 29, '65; commissioned Sept.
 16, '64; Act. Ass't Adjt. Gen'l 2d Brig. 2d Div. 25th A. C., and Post
 Adjt. Edinburg, Texas, Sept. 2, '65, till disbandment of Brigade;
 M. O. Dec. 10, '65; 1866, manufacturer, Lambertville, N. J.; 1870 to
 '74, Civil Engineer in N. J. and N. E.; in Insurance Business '69 to
 '95, for much of the time officially connected with important fire
 companies; retired, 1895; since then, spending his winters in warm
 climates. The Lieutenant had been first Lieut. and Adjutant in the
 Fifth R. I. H. Arty., beginning Nov. 30, '61; dis. disa., May 14, '62.


ENLISTED MEN

 Adams, Joseph (Corp.), 28, S.; seaman, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; prom.
 Sergt.; Pris. as Color Sergt. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d.

 Bailey, Charles C. (Corp.), 21, S.; clerk, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62;
 "dis. Dec. 23, '63, to en. U. S. Signal Corps," thus the record reads;
 on the contrary, Bailey en. as hospital steward, U. S. A., but on
 account of his excellent penmanship served as clerk in the office of
 the Surgeon General till the fall of 1865.

 Bailey, John W., 19, S.; farmer, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; prom. Sergt.;
 M. O. June 2, '65; dead.

 Bannon, James, 38, M.; boot crimper, Braintree; Sept. 2, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. April 12, '65, Braintree.

 Barney, Horace, 23, --; --, West Cambridge; Aug. 1, '62; des. Aug. --,
 '62.

 Bates, Charles E., 24, S.; boatman, Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64; d. Nov. 2, '64, Baltimore, Md.; dead.

 Bates, Lorenzo, 21, S.; butcher, Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; trans. June
 18, '64, V. R. C.; dis. from One Hundred and Tenth Co., 2d Batt. V. R.
 C., Sept. 2, '65; 1913, Hingham Centre.

 Bird, John, 27, S.; farmer, West Boylston; July 24, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the Thirty-second and M. O.

 Blanding, Daniel W., 30, M.; shoemaker, Warren; July 14, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Breck, Elijah F., 30, M.; lawyer, New Salem; N. H., cr. Westford;
 Sept. 2, '62; M. O. May 30, '65; dead.

 Bright, Willard (Mus.), 19, S.; laborer, Watertown; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. March 29, '65.

 Broderick, James, 35, --; --, Watertown, July 23, '62; des. Aug. --,
 '62.

 Brooks, Albert F., 26, M.; bookkeeper, So. Reading; July 29, '61, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Brown, Charles H. C., 23, M.; upholsterer, Boston; Sept. 2, '62;
 prom. Corp.; dis. Oct. 2, '63, for Commission, U. S. C. T.; 2d Lieut.
 Seventh Colored Infty.; 1st Lieut. and Adjutant Oct. 21, '64; bvt.
 Captain March 13, '65; M. O. Oct. 13, '66; 1913, Brookline.

 Butters, Willie R., 18, S.; farmer, Reading; Dec. 28, '63, Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. March 31, '65, Hatcher's Run;
 trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.; 1913, Plymouth.

 Carlin, Thomas B., 22, S.; printer, Barnard, Vt., cr. Brookline;
 Sept. 25, '63, in Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Chapman, Timothy B., 31, M.; shoemaker, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; M.
 O. June 2, '65; 1913, Ridge Hill.

 Chase, Timothy H., 27, S.; blacksmith, Charlestown; July 8, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Child, Henry, 45, --; --, --; en. July 29, '62; des. Aug. --, '62.

 Chipman, Andrew A. (1st Sergt.), 25, S.; fireworker, Salem; June 26,
 '61, in Twelfth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 5, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth;
 dis. Aug. 23, '64, O. W. D.; later 1st Lieut. Fourth H. Arty.; M. O.
 June 17, '65.

 Chubbuck, Eleazer, 18, M.; shoemaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; dead.

 Churchill, James T., 21, M.; painter, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; d. a
 prisoner June 24, '64, Andersonville; grave 2416.

 Clapp, Caleb W., 22, S.; shoemaker, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 on account of wds. May 8, '64; dead.

 Cochrane, George, 33, M.; oysterman, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; trans.
 Sept. 30, '63, Co. A, Sixth V. R. C.; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Connell, John, 33, M.; farmer, Concord; Sept. 2, '62; trans. Aug. 2,
 '64, V. R. C.; dis. from Co. B, Sixth V. R. C.; July 3, '65; dead.

 Corrigan, Thomas, 27, S.; waiter, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; d. Togus, Me.

 Corthell, John, b. Sept. 15, 1836; 25, M.; carpenter, So. Scituate;
 Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; provision dealer, constable and tree
 warden; 1913, Somerville.

 Cowan, Thomas, 23, M.; clerk, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; dis. disa. Feb.
 28, '63.

 Creswell, John, 29, S.; boat builder, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; had served in Co. I, Fourth M. V. M., 3 mos. term; dead.

 Damon, Andrew J., 19, S.; mason, Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; dis. disa.,
 July 31, '63; dead.

 Danbenmayer, Charles, 20, S.; farrier, West Cambridge; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; supposed to have joined the Rebels
 and afterwards killed.

 Day, Joshua D., 21, M.; shoemaker, Weymouth; June 26, '61, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. March 20, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth; prom.
 Corp.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Dean, Warren F., 25, S.; farmer, Taunton; Sept. 23, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Delany, Jack M., 19, M.; printer, Worcester; Sept. 2, '62; des. July
 9, '63.

 Dodge, William G., 18, --; farmer, Essex; Sept. 2, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, Salem.

 Earle, William H., 37, M.; carpenter, Melrose; Sept. 2, '62; dis. June
 12, '65; had served in the Navy.

 Elliot, Andrew L. (Mus.), 23, S.; shoemaker, Malden; Sept. 2, '62; M.
 O. June 5, '65.

 Elliot, George A., 25, --; --, en. Boston; Aug. 8, '62; deserted.

 Elwell, Daniel R., 22, S.; shoemaker, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to Feb. 24, '65; M. O. July 14, '65.

 Fitzgerald, Michael A., 21, --; bootmaker, Boston; April 4, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to April 25, '65; M. O. May 17,
 '65.

 Fitzgerald, William, 23, M.; shoemaker, Uxbridge; July 16, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. May 7, '64; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Ford, Charles E. H., 22, S.; operative, Blackstone; Sept. 2, '62; M.
 O. June 2, '65.

 Foster, Jacob, 21, --; --, --; Aug. 8, '62; des. Aug. --, '62.

 French, Benjamin W., 18, S.; So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; dis. disa.,
 Nov. 21, '62; 1913, Ridge Hill.

 French, Charles E., 20, S.; shoemaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; d. a
 prisoner May 19, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 French, Henry C. (Corp.), 26, S.; sailmaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62;
 prom. Sergt.; shot by Rebel guard Aug. 26, '64, Belle Isle, Richmond,
 Va.

 Gardner, George D., 34, S.; painter, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; d. Aug. 4,
 '65, City Point, Va.

 Glines, Alvin R., 21, S.; farmer, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; 1913, No. Scituate.

 Goodwin, Thomas, 23, S.; teamster, Bromfield, Me., cr. Charlestown;
 July 17, '63, in Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Gorman, Michael, 22, S.; shoemaker, Lynn; Sept. 2, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; d. Jan. 9, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Hall, Samuel, 28, M.; picture-framer, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; prom.
 Corp.; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Oct. 3, 1912.

 Ham, Henry W. (Sergt.), 27, S.; clerk, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 31, '63; dead.

 Hanson, Franklin K., 32, M.; shoemaker, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; dead.

 Hatch, George C., 19, S.; clerk, West Cambridge; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; 1913, Chicago.

 Hatch, Grafton, 22, S.; carpenter, Mansfield or Marshfield; Sept. 2,
 '62; wd. May 5, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; dead.

 Hayden, Zenas M. (Corp.), 26, M.; mechanic, Randolph; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris., d. Feb. 4, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Hayes, Edmund P., 18, S.; clerk, Westboro; March 24, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. Aug. 18, '64; d. Sept.
 15, '64, a returned prisoner, Annapolis, Md.

 Haynes, Albert S., 20, S.; shoecutter, Hingham; d. of wds. June 11,
 '64, Hingham.

 Hersey, Alfred, 29, M.; teamster, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Hersey, George L., 31, M.; shoemaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; dead.

 Hersey, Henry F., 29, M.; carpenter, Hingham; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to
 March 1, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, Soldiers' Home, Chelsea.

 Hill, John M., 32, S.; bootmaker, Westboro; Feb. 27, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. Feb. 17, '65, ex. of s.

 Hutchins, Samuel W. (Corp.), 21, S.; plumber, Watertown; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to Feb. 24, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; d. May 10,
 1900, Guilford, Me.

 Hyland, Albert (Wagoner), 21, --; --, Watertown; July 24, '62; des.
 Feb. 11, '63.

 Jackson, William H., 25, M.; carpenter, Melrose; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., May 19, '64.

 Jacobs, William H. (Corp.), 31, M.; blacksmith, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62;
 prom. 1st Sergt.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, and escaped while on his way
 from Richmond to Salisbury; M. O. June 6, '65.

 Jones, Charles S., 18, S.; clerk, Melrose; Sept. 2, '62; trans. March
 31, '64, to Fiftieth Co., 2d Batt. V. R. C.; dis. June 24, '65; 1913,
 Chelsea.

 Jones, George W., 22, M.; farmer, Randolph; Feb. 25, '64, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to One Hundred and Seventeenth
 Co., 2d Batt. V. R. C., April 17, '65; dis. Oct. 12, '65.

 Kennedy, John, 21, M.; cooper, Boston; en. July 29, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; trans. May 5, '64, to V. R. C.

 Lawless, Maurice (Mus.), 18, --; --, Malden; Sept. 2, '62; N. F. R.

 Leach, Edmund C., 23, S.; blacksmith, Worcester; July 18, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Leavitt, Henry W., 18, S.; shoemaker, Scituate; Dec. 8, '63; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Lendall, Samuel N., 37, S.; seaman, Manchester; July 10, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. disa., Nov. 29, 64.

 Leroy, Charles, 22, --; --, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 2, '65;
 dead.

 Lewis, James, 18, S.; carpenter, Boston; June 26, '61, in Twelfth
 Infty.; re-en. Jan. 5, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. May 31, '64;
 dis. on account of wds. March 8, '65.

 Lincoln, Benjamin C., 22, S.; bookkeeper, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; prom.
 Corp.; dis. Aug. 25, '63, for commission, U. S. C. T.; Captain Second
 Colored Infty.; Major, July 30, '64; d. Key West, Fla., from wds.
 rec'd March 6, '65, Natural Bridge, Fla.

 McCann, John, 19, --; --, Belmont; Sept. 2, '62; N. F. R.

 McNaughton, Michael, 36, M.; carpenter, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; trans.
 Jan. 5, '64, to V. R. C.; dead.

 Miller, George L., 23, M.; upholsterer, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; d. Feb.
 26, '63, as Corp., Poolesville, Md.

 Miller, Henry F., 21, S.; shoemaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; prom.
 Corp.; d. of wds. May 25, '64, Washington, D. C., dead.

 Minard, Nelson C., 21, S.; clerk, Chelsea; Aug. 1, '62, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; re-en. March 31, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Mordo, John A., 30, M.; clerk, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; trans. to
 Thirty-seventh Co., 2d Batt. V. R. C.; dis. June 28, '65; dead.

 Murdock, George, 19, S.; farmer, Boston; June 26, '61, in Twelfth
 Infty.; re-en. Jan. 1, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Murphy, Thomas, 30, M.; shoemaker, Roxbury; Aug. 5, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; Pris. and d. Jan. 1, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Neal, John S., 30, M.; shoemaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; d. Jan. 16, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Newcomb, Levi, 45, M.; mariner, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; dis. disa.,
 June 11, '63; dead.

 O'Hara, Patrick, 25, --; --, Watertown; June 29, '62; des. Dec. 27,
 '62.

 Ord, John, 33, M.; farmer, Belmont; Sept., '62; trans. March 7, '64,
 to Co. C, Twenty-fourth V. R. C.; dis. June 28, '65; 1913, Ridgebury,
 Conn.

 O'Sullivan, Thomas, 20, S.; seaman, Boston; Oct. 13, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. Aug. 18, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Parsons, John G., 29, S.; painter, Boston; July 25, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Penniman, John M., 19, M.; shoemaker, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62;
 prom. Sergt.; wd. March 31, '65; dis. disa., July 25, '65; dead.

 Pike, Jacob F., 22, S.; farmer, Melrose; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 13,
 '65.

 Pingree, Charles C. (Sergt.), 25, S.; clerk, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; M.
 O. June 2, '65.

 Pomeroy, Alonzo, 26, M.; farmer, Roxbury; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May 5,
 '64; M. O. as Corp. June 2, '65; 1913, Paris, Me.

 Poole, Charles N., 18, S.; shoemaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May
 5, '64; dis. disa., Dec. 17, '64; 1913, Pembroke.

 Prouty, Benjamin W., 34, S.; farmer, So. Scituate; Sept. '62; dis.
 disa., Sept. 12, '64; dead.

 Prouty, Elijah, 26, M.; shoemaker, Weymouth; Sept. 2, '62; d. Dec. 9,
 '63, Washington, D. C.

 Prouty, Isaac, 44, M.; shoemaker, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; trans.
 to Co. D, Twelfth V. R. C., Sept. 7, '63; dis. June 28, '65; dead.

 Prouty, John H. (Sergt.), 23, M.; clicker, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62;
 prom. 2d Lieut. June 7, '65; M. O. as Sergt. June 2, '65; 1913, Ridge
 Hill.

 Prouty, William, Jr., 28, M.; teamster, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; M.
 O. June 2, '65; dead.

 Roby, David F., 28, M.; mechanic, Cambridge; Sept. 2, '62; dis. disa.,
 Jan. 31, '63; dead.

 Russell, Harry H., 21, M.; cook, So. Danvers; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June
 9, '65, Washington, D. C.

 Sanborn, William H., 18, S.; pedler, Boston; June 26, '61, in Twelfth
 Infty.; re-en. Jan. 1, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Shaw, Patrick J., 29, --; blacksmith, Weymouth; Dec. 10, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. as
 Corp. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Sherman, Calvin F., 17, S.; farmer, So. Scituate; Sept. '62; M. O.,
 June 2, '65.

 Short, Thomas G., 18, S.; moulder, Cambridge; Sept. 2, '62; prom.
 Corp.; d. as prisoner, Jan. 9, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Simmons, Thomas, 33, M.; farmer, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; d. March
 3, '64, Washington, D. C.

 Skeele, Milo B., 24, M.; teamster, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; dead.

 Skinner, John B., 40, M.; farmer, Boston; Nov. 5, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to thirty-second and M. O.

 Smith, Stratton V., 34, M.; clerk, Charlestown; July 9, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; d. Nov. 16, '64, a prisoner,
 Salisbury, N. C.

 Spaulding, Charles A. (Mus.), 21, S.; farmer, Boston; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19 '64; M. O. June 13, '65.

 Spear, Edward A. F., 33, M.; shoemaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. Jan. 21, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Sprague, Seth M., 19, S.; farmer, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; 1913, So. Hingham.

 Sprague, Thomas, 35, S.; farmer, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; d. July 5,
 '64, Washington, D. C.

 Stebbins, Thaddeus S., 32, M.; bookbinder, Melrose; Sept. 2, '62; for
 some reason, not stated, trans. to Thirty-second Infty.

 Stetson, Warren, 25, M.; clerk, Braintree; July 17, '63; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. May 18, '65.

 Stockwell, Alonzo G., 22, S.; farmer, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; wd. Aug.
 18, '64; dis. Sept. 1, '65, as of One Hundred and Fifth Co., Second
 Batt., V. R. C.; dead.

 Stone, Henry D. (Corp.), 18, S.; clerk, Melrose; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Sept. 30, '63; later in Co. H, Fifty-ninth Infty.; d. Togus,
 Me., April, 1912.

 Sylvester, John Q. A., 40, M.; farmer, Randolph; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 10, '63; later in Co. H, Second H. Arty.; dead.

 Thayer, Noah W., 31, S.; bootmaker, Weymouth; Dec. 11, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; d. a prisoner, Nov. 16, '64,
 Salisbury, N. C.

 Thomas, Alpheus (Corp.), 25, M.; shoemaker, So. Scituate; Sept. 2,
 '62; prom. Sergt.; Second Lieut. Sept. 15, '64; vide Co. K.; had
 served in Co. I, Fourth M. V. M. three mos. term, 1861; dead.

 Thomas, Orson C., 28; --, --; Watertown; July 15, '62; des. Aug. --,
 '62.

 Thomas, William O., 32, M.; farmer, So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; 1913, Hanson.

 Tisdale, Charles H., 29, M.; shoemaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Nov. 4, '62; dead.

 Torrey, Franklin J., 26, M.; butcher, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May
 8, '64; dis. disa., Dec. '65; dead.

 Van Winkle, Henry M. (1st Sergt.), 22, S.; dentist, Boston; Sept. 2,
 '62; dis. O. W. D., June 11, '63; vide First U. S. C. T.

 Warren, Daniel S., 36, W.; bootmaker, Hopkinton; July 16, '61, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; for some reason, not stated, he evidently had
 to make up time and was trans. to the Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Webster, Samuel D., 16, S.; printer, Martinsburg, Va.; Feb. 28, '62,
 in Thirteenth Infty.; trans. as Mus. to the Thirty-ninth; dis. Feb.
 28, '65, ex. of s.

 Welch, Augustus W., 32, S.; painter, Roxbury; July 9, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Weston, Charles B. (Wagoner), 34, M.; carpenter, East Fairport, Vt.;
 Sept. 2, '62; N. F. R.

 White, George W., 23, M.; shoemaker, Scituate; Dec. 8, '63; wd. May
 12, '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O., 1913, Randolph.

 White, Jeremiah C., 23, S.; bookmaker, Boston; June 26, '61, in
 Twelfth Infty.; his record seems to be irregular, though he was trans.
 to the Thirty-ninth, thence to the Thirty-second and M. O.

 Whiting, Franklin T., 21, S.; teamster, Pembroke; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; 1913, No. Abington.

 Whiting, George W., 22, S.; hostler, Pembroke; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 8, '64; dead.

 Whiting, T. D., en. July --, '62; N. F. R. save "deserted, Aug. --,
 '62."

 Wilder, Albert, 21, S.; shoemaker, Hingham; Sept. 2, '62; d. from wds.
 June 1, '64, Washington, D. C.

 Wilson, John, 2d, 23, --; seaman, Charlestown; July 27, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Woodbury, William H., 28, M.; lawyer, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 9, '63; dead.

 Young, Charles E., 32, M.; shoemaker; So. Scituate; Sept. 2, '62;
 prom. Corp.; wd. May 8, '64; M. O. June 1, '65; dead.




COMPANY H

Dorchester


CAPTAIN

 Charles N. Hunt, 39, M.; stonecutter, Quincy; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.


FIRST LIEUTENANTS

 Robert Rhodes, 46, M.; contractor, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; res.
 disa., Nov. 11, '62.

 Willard C. Kinsley, from Co. E, Nov. 13, '62; prom. Captain, Co. K,
 March 30, '64.

 Luther F. Wyman, from Co. K, March 20, '64; June 16, '64, while on
 detached service, guarding Rebel prisoners, Rock Island, Ill., was
 prom. Captain in Second U. S. Vols., composed of former Confederates,
 Feb. 18, '65; M. O. Nov. 7, 1865; d. "out West," 1892.


SECOND LIEUTENANTS

 Robert Williams, 24, S.; brittania-maker; Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 res. disa., Feb. 2, '63; d. Ashland, Nov. 12, '94.

 Charles W. Hanson, from Sergt. Major, Jan. 25, '63; trans. to Co. E as
 2d Lieut.

 John H. Dusseault, from Co. E, Oct. 20, '63; wd. slightly three
 times at Spottsylvania; severely, Aug. 18, '64, Weldon R. R.; Prom.
 1st Lieut. Sept. 8, '64; not mustered; dis. from wds. Dec. 10, '64;
 sealer of weights and measures, Somerville; 1913, Somerville. Lt. D.'s
 printed account of Co. E used extensively in this book.

 Charles K. Conn, from Sergt. Major Feb. 1, '65; prom. 1st Lieut.
 March, '65.


ENLISTED MEN

 Arris, Herbert, 18, S.; milkman, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May 5,
 '64, Wilderness; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Baker, Frederick, 18, S.; laborer, Roxbury, cr. Dorchester; Feb. 15,
 '64; k Aug. 19, '64.

 Barker, Alfred H., 19, S.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; d. Jan.
 3, '64, Culpepper, Va.

 Barker, George W., 18, S.; junk dealer, Dorchester; Aug. 31, '62;
 trans. Feb. 15, '64, Ninety-sixth Co., 2d Batt. V. R. C.; dis. from
 hospital, Baltimore, Md., Oct. 18, '64; 1913, Dorchester.

 Barrett, William I., b. Sept. 13, 1839; 22, S.; painter, Dorchester;
 Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; house painting; 1913, Lynn.

 Bartoll, William H., 20, S.; painter, Marblehead; July 10, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; d. July 1, '64, Washington, D.
 C.

 Beck, William J., 35, --; carpenter, Lynn; Sept. 2, '62; des. Aug. 28,
 '62, quitting before he was mustered, but such is the record.

 Bergeson, Joseph, 22, S.; farmer, Boston; Dec. 4, '63; wd. May 10,
 '64; dis. disa., Oct. 10, '64.

 Billings, George W., 31, M.; candle maker, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 dis. May 20, '65; 1913, Roxbury.

 Bird, Joel E., 18, S.; cabinet-maker, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; d.
 Dec. 20, '63.

 Blanchard, Brainard P., 18, S.; clerk, Boston; Aug. 18, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Jan 4, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis.
 Aug. 16, '64, for commission in U. S. C. T.; 1st Lieut. One Hundred
 and Sixteenth Colored Infty.; bvt. Captain March 13, '65; M. O. Aug.
 7, '67.

 Blanchard, William F., 23, S.; seaman, Boston; July 16, '61, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis.
 Aug. 16, '64, for commission U. S. C. T.; 2d Lieut. Twenty-seventh U.
 S. Colored Infty.; 1st Lieut. April 6, '65; bvt. Capt. March 13, '65;
 M. O. Sept. 21, '65.

 Bouldry, Welcome W., farmer, Raynham; 37, M.; Sept. 2, '62; d. Jan. 4,
 '64, Alexandria, Va.

 Bowen, Edward J., 20, S.; clerk, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis. Sept.
 10, '64, for commission U. S. C. T.; 1913, Central Falls, R. I.

 Bradshaw, Elbridge, b. April 24, 1831; (Corp.), 31, M.; confectioner,
 Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; prom. Sergt.; 2d Lieut. Jan. 7, '65; M. O.
 as Sergt. June 2, '65; salesman and librarian; 1913, librarian, lower
 hall, Boston Public Library.

 Bronsdon, Frederick H., 24, S.; mechanic, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M.
 O. May 20, '65; d. Dec. 31, 1911.

 Brown, George, 27, S.; laborer, Eastham; July 27, '63; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Brunel, Joseph, 18, S.; laborer, Roxbury; Feb. 9, '64; missing since
 Aug. 19, '64; J. H. Eames says, "Pris. and des."

 Burke, Christopher, 18, S.; laborer, Dedham; July 28, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Carr, Bernard, 26, --; laborer, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; record says,
 "not mustered"; N. F. R.

 Carroll, John, 42, S.; tailor, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis. disa.,
 Dec. 19, '64.

 Carter Calvin, 31, M.; farmer, Petersham; Sept. 22, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; record has, "dis. disa., Dec. 11, '63,"; why is his name
 carried on the rolls of the Thirty-ninth?

 Chase, Andrew J., 26, S.; carpenter, Roxbury; Oct. 3, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.;
 this comrade was an inventor of great distinction, having devised the
 cold blast refrigerator cars, now in general use, enabling meats to be
 transferred over the entire country and across the sea, thus making
 him one of the world's great benefactors; he died in the Chelsea
 Soldiers' Home Jan. 17, 1913.

 Chase, William, 21, S.; seaman, Albany, N. Y., cr. Dennis; July
 25, '63, in Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Childs, Edward J., b. Dec. 7, 1844; 19, S.; curtain fixtures,
 Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to Feb. 27, '65; M. O.
 June 9, '65; shoemaking; 1913, Natick.

 Childs, Francis J., 18, S.; shoemaker, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; 1913, Marlborough.

 Claffey, John, 28, --; carder, Pittsfield; July 14, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. May 15, '65.

 Clark, William H., 16, S.; clerk, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 May 18, '65; real name, Wm. H. Signor, vide letter, W. D., June 9,
 1906; d. about 1900, Danville, Va., while superintendent of National
 Cemetery.

 Collins, Patrick, 39, S.; laborer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; d. a
 prisoner Nov. 18, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Combs, Erastus N., 23, M.; farmer, Boylston; July 13, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; des. July 15, '64.

 Corcoran, George, 22, --; silk dyer, Salem; des. Aug. 29, '62.

 Craig, Charles H., 22, S.; painter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May
 8, '64; M. O. June 2, '64; 1913, Needham.

 Cram, Jesse T., 22, M.; teamster, Milton; Oct. 22, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Co. C, Nineteenth V. R. C.;
 dis. Aug. 3, '65.

 Dailey, Michael, 18, S.; farmer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64, to Feb. 26, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Damon, Charles E., 21, M.; bootmaker, Warren; July 14, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. June 1, '65.

 Dana, Dexter E., 18, S.; student, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; trans.
 Jan. 5, '64, V. R. C.; 1913, Burlington, Wis.

 Davis, John, 45, M.; morocco dresser, Lynn; Sept. 2, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; M. O. May 30, '65.

 Dimond, John, 36, M.; stonecutter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May
 8, '64, Spottsylvania; dis. disa., May 15, '65.

 Doody, John, 32, M.; laborer, Dorchester; Dec. 13, '63; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; d. Nov. 17, '64, Annapolis, Md.

 Driscoll, James, 18, S.; curtain fixtures, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 d. Nov. 14, '64, Ft. Schuyler, N. Y. Harbor.

 Dunn, Charles (Wagoner), 38, M.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 trans. to One Hundred and Twelfth Co., Twelfth Batt., V. R. C.; dis.
 disa., Sept. 10, '64.

 Ellis, Charles J., 24, S.; farmer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 5, '63.

 Farren, James, 25, M.; laborer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May 5,
 '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to Feb. 26, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Farrington, David S., 31, S.; hostler, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd.
 May 8, '64; prom. Corp., Sergt., May 1, '65; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Ferguson, John, 22, --; farmer, Boston; des. Aug. 29, '62.

 Fink, John, 24, S.; bar keeper, Boston, cr. Worcester; July 24, '63,
 in Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second
 and M. O.

 Fish, Isaac H., 38, M.; confectioner, Dorchester; wd. "June 3, '65,"
 so says the roll at State House, but '64 is evidently intended; M. O.
 June 10, '65; 1913, Boston.

 Fisher, Richard H. (1st Sergt.), 28, M.; stonecutter, Dorchester;
 Sept. 2, '62; wd. May 5, '64; prom. 2d Lieut. Sept. 8, '64; not
 mustered; dis. disa., May 21, 1865.

 Fitz, Thomas D., 22, S.; printer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd. June
 22, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Fobes, John H., 23, S.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65; d. Sept. 7, 1913, Neponset.

 Follen, John, 18, S.; farmer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May 12,
 '64; dis. July 8, '65; 1913, Roxbury.

 French, George L., 18, S.; nail maker, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; d.
 Dec. 9, '63, Alexandria, Va.

 Gammon, Randall T., 24, S.; clerk, Abington; Aug. 3, '63; d. a
 prisoner, Nov. 17, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Gardner, Elisha P. F., b. Feb. 12, 1833 (Corp.), 29, M.; expressman,
 Dorchester; Sept. 2, '61; dis. disa., May 4, '63; later, Co. B, Second
 H. Arty.; expressing for many years; met his death, Jan. 28, 1913--the
 funny man of "Poet's Corner," Nantucket.

 Geouggenheimer, Samuel, 21, S.; --, France, cr. Boston; July 21, '63,
 in Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second
 and M. O.

 Gerrish, Timothy, 21, S.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 14, '65.

 Gline, David, 23, S.; farmer, en. Boston, cr. Taunton; Jan. 2, '64;
 trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Goodhue, Manassah C., 40, M.; blacksmith, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 May 18, '65.

 Grover, Jeremiah O., 28, M.; farmer, Wrentham; July 15, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Harris, Sullivan B., 28, M.; carpenter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; k.
 June 23, '64, Petersburg.

 Healey, Stephen C., 21, M.; clerk, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 30, '62.

 Henderson, Oliver F., 23, S.; sailor, Acton; July 20, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Henry, Michael, 36, M.; mason, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis. disa.,
 April 11, '64.

 Hill, Daniel G., 26, M.; confectioner, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Hill, Gilman L., 27, M.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; prom.
 Corp.; wd. May 11, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Hill, Joseph, 23, M.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; trans. Oct.
 25, '63, to V. R. C.; dis. from Forty-sixth Co., Second Batt., Aug.
 25, '65.

 Holmes, George (Corp.), 40, M.; building mover, Dorchester; Sept. 2,
 '62; d. Aug. 6, '64; W. D. letter June 4, '69.

 Holmes, Robert T., 18, M.; farmer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; N. F. R.

 Hunt, Sylvester, 23, S.; teamster, Acton; July 9, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Jenkins, Albert, 26, M.; shoemaker, Stoneham; July 10, '61, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence
 to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Jones, David L., 18, S.; shoemaker, Boston; July 10, '61, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. as Sergt. to
 Thirty-ninth; dis. as supernumerary, July 1, '64; later in Co. G,
 Fourth Cavalry.

 Jones, Llewellyn, 20, S.; painter, Stoneham; July 10, '61,
 in Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. as Corp. to
 Thirty-ninth; dis. as Supernumerary, July 1, '64.

 Johnson, David, 21, S.; farmer, Natick; July 16, '63; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Johnson, William, 1st, 28, S.; seaman, Brighton; July 25, '63; in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Jordan, Thomas W. D., 18, M.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M.
 O. June 2, '65; d. April, 1911, S. H., Chelsea.

 Kelley, Thomas, 22, S.; laborer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to Feb. 24, '65; M. O. June 13, '65; 1913,
 Washington, D. C.

 Keniston, William H., 28, S.; teamster, Lowell; July 9, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Kerr, John, 40, S.; tailor, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; trans. to Co. B,
 Twenty-first Regiment, V. R. C., Sept. 16, '63; dis. July 31, '65.

 Kimball, Charles W., 21, M.; clerk, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; trans.
 to V. R. C. May 5, '64.

 Kimball, Eugene F., 18, M.; milkman, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, to May 1, '65; M. O. July 15, '65.

 Landers, Daniel, 45, M.; laborer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 29, '63.

 Langley, Samuel A., 18, S.; porter, Roxbury; Oct. 21, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. Oct. 21, '64, ex. of s.

 Lines, Daniel, 26, M.; laborer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, No. Billerica.

 Loring, Abraham, 43, M.; carpenter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 29, '62.

 Loring, A. A. (Corp.), 43, M.; carpenter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; no
 M. O.

 Lothrop, Alanson A. (Corp.), 24, M.; curtain fixtures, Dorchester;
 Sept. 2, '62; wd. May 10, '64; M. O. May 31, '65.

 McCarthy, Eugene, 25, S.; hostler, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; dis. May 15, '65.

 McFarland, William, 44, M.; laborer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 29, '63.

 McGaken, Robert T., 22, S.; farmer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; as
 Corp., wd. and missing since March 31, '65.

 Makell, Charles, 32, M.; barber, Dennis; July 28, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. June 6, '65.

 Marty, Jacob, 35, S.; farmer, Taunton; July 27, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Maxwell, James H., 29, M.; farmer, Monterey; July 14, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence as Corp. to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Millett, George C., 34, M.; farmer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; Pris.;
 d. Nov. 15, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Millett, John H., 34, M.; teamster, Boston; Nov. 16, '63; d. a
 prisoner Dec. 1, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Monk, George W., b. Aug. 24, 1843; (Mus.), 19, S.; musician,
 Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. June 10, '65; musician; 1913, Quincy.

 Monk, Robert (Sergt.), 23, S.; stonecutter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to Feb. 26, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; his diary
 useful in compiling this book; d. in Quincy, Aug. 15, 1870; bur. Mt.
 Wollaston Cemetery with Grand Army and Masonic honors and rites.

 Morrison, James H. (Sergt.), 28, M.; carriage-trimmer, Dorchester;
 Sept. 2, '62; prom. 1st Sergt.; 2d Lieut. Dec. 20, '64; not mustered;
 dis. as Sergt., June 13, 1865.

 Murray, Thomas, 19, S.; cooper, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; d. March 27, '65, from injuries rec'd on R. R.

 Newton, Benjamin S. (Sergt.), 28, S.; car-driver, Dorchester; Sept. 2,
 '62; M. O. June, '65; 1913, No. Rumford, Me.

 Norton, Frank F., 28, M.; druggist, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; Pris. d.
 April 14, '64, Andersonville.

 Page, Chester, S. 23, M.; stonecutter, Dorchester; Sept., '62; prom.
 Corp.; Sergt. Feb. 1, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Palmer, William, 18, S.; teamster, Boston; Sept. 2, '62; N. F. R.

 Perry, Oliver H., 39, M.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Patterson, Joseph, 30, S.; mason, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 29, '63.

 Phelps, John, 31, S.; printer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; d. Aug. 28,
 '64, from wds. rec'd May 8, '64.

 Pierce, William L. G., 32, M.; apothecary, Lincoln; July 14, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Prescott, Benjamin F., 30, M.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 prom. Corp.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to March 3, '65; M. O. June 13, '65.

 Preston, John, 25, S.; laborer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis. disa.,
 Jan. 29, '63.

 Richards, Edward D., 30, M.; millwright, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; k.
 May 23, '64.

 Richards, John, 30, M.; sailmaker, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd. May
 10, '64; dis. June 1, '65.

 Richardson, Charles W., 25, S.; mechanic, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 prom. Sergt.; d. March 28, '65.

 Robie, John E., 18, S.; jig sawyer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; k. Aug.
 19, '64.

 Rouse, Stephen N., 21, S.; carpenter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 10, '65; d. Washington, D. C.

 Russell, George S., 23, S.; iceman, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 3, '63; d. about 1909, Pembroke.

 Savil, Samuel O. (Corp.), 22, S.; wheelwright, Dorchester; Sept. 2,
 '62; was a prisoner for a time; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Seaverns, Henry A. (Sergt.), 20, S.; machinist, Dorchester; Sept. 2,
 '62; 2d Lieut. March 30, '64; vide Co. K.

 Shean, Patrick, 27, M.; hostler, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; M. O. May 13, '65.

 Signor, W. H.; vide Wm. H. Clark.

 Smith, Henry W., 27, M.; carpenter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; 1913, Boston.

 Smith, Richard C., 36, M.; turner, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 2, '63.

 Southworth, Dallas, 18, S.; apothecary, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 14, '64, to Feb. 26, '65; no M. O.

 Stanley, Francis A., 32, M.; carpenter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 trans. U. S. Navy April 19, '64; 1913, Holbrook.

 Stone, Andrew C., 22, M.; blacksmith, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; k. May
 5, '64.

 Sumner, Franklin H., 26, M.; teamster, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '65; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. from wds. Feb. 25, '65.

 Sumner, William S., 20, S.; carpenter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; d. Aug. 18, 1910, Jamaica Plain.

 Sweetland, Benjamin E., 33, M.; farmer, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; M.
 O. June 2, '65.

 Thomas, George N. B., 18, S.; confectioner, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64; dis. May 18, '65, O. W. D., Tilton General Hosp.,
 Delaware.

 Tileston, Ebenezer (Corp.), 20, S.; clerk, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 d. March 12, '65, a paroled prisoner, Annapolis, Md.

 Tileston, Lemuel (Corp.), 19, S.; clerk, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62;
 missing after May 8, '64, N. F. R., though it is probable that he d.
 in rebel prison.

 Toombs, Elliott L., 26, S.; boatmaker, Weymouth; des. Aug. 28, '62.

 Veit, Frederick, 32, M.; bootmaker, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; k. May
 10, '64, Spottsylvania.

 Walford, Thomas, 25, S.; carpenter, Seekonk; July 28, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Wares, Franklin, 25, S.; painter, Huntington; July 20, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.;
 also given as M. O. in the Thirty-ninth, June 5, '65.

 Wheeler, Nathaniel J., 24, S.; laborer, Boston; July 13, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.; also said to have been M. O. from the Twelfth.

 Whiley, James, 19, S.; painter, Somerville; Sept. 2, '62; M. O. July
 14, '65.

 Whittier, Leavitt, 21, S.; marketman, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; wd.
 Aug. 18, '64; M. O. May 18, '65.

 Wright, Theodore S., 24, M.; tinner, Pittsfield; July 14, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. disa., Feb. 9, '65.

 Wyman, George, 32, M.; stonecutter, Dorchester; Sept. 2, '62; k. May
 5, '64, Wilderness.




COMPANY I

Natick


CAPTAINS

 Ephraim H. Brigham, 40, M.; Deputy Sheriff, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis.
 disa., Sept. 4, '64; d. Aug. 21, 1877.

 John D. Reed, from 1st Lieut., Sept. 6, '64; M. O. June 2, 1865; was
 born in Taunton, Mar. 15, 1827; in grocery business in Taunton till
 his death, Sept. 16, 1890; a member of the Winslow Congregational
 Church, he was esteemed by all.


FIRST LIEUTENANTS

 Simon Mulligan, 36, M.; trader, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa.,
 Sept. 19, '63; d. Nov. 15, 1905; b. Boston, Mar. 1, 1825, of Irish
 and Scotch ancestry; he was educated in the Boston Schools, going
 thence to Natick and there learning the shoemaker's trade; later as a
 sailor, he was shipwrecked on the Cape Verde Islands; later still,
 he was a Californian Argonaut and, at his death, was a member and
 director in the Society of California Pioneers of "'49"; after the war
 he conducted a prosperous restaurant and billiard saloon; a member of
 the Masonic Order, he was also prominent in the councils of Post 63,
 G. A. R., where his ability in dramatics and recitations was of signal
 service; his form and bearing readily proclaimed him a gentleman of
 the "Old School."

 Wm. G. Sheen, temporarily from Co. D, Oct. '63; thence as 1st Lieut.
 to Co. G.

 John D. Reed, from Co. F, Sept. 20, '63; wd. Aug. 18, '64; prom.
 Captain Co. I.

 William H. Brown, from 2d Lieut.; M. O. June 2, 1865.


SECOND LIEUTENANTS

 William H. Brown, 27, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; 1st Lieut.
 Sept. 8, '64; vide Co. I; had been 1st Sergt., Co. H, Thirteenth
 Massachusetts Volunteers, was dis. to receive promotion in the
 Thirty-ninth.

 Oliver P. Ricker, from Co. B, Sept. 8, '64; M. O. June 6, 1865;
 Adjustant Post 113, Boston.


ENLISTED MEN

 Adams, James C., 21, --; --, Concord; July 16, '63; d. July 14, '64,
 City Point, Va.

 Alexander, Edmund K., 18, S.; Aug. 25, '62; cordwainer, Natick; dis.
 disa., Jan. 20, '63.

 Allen, William L., 24, M.; currier, Sturbridge; July 14, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; paroled
 and captured again March 31, '65; paroled April 3, '65; M. O. June 24,
 '65.

 Babb, Mark, 25, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa., Dec.
 16, '62; d. Dec. 25, 1910, Natick.

 Bacon, Jonathan, 43, M.; stone mason, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d. Dec.
 16, '63, Washington, D. C.

 Balcom, Oscar, 19, S.; farmer, Wayland; Aug. 25, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; Cochituate.

 Bangs, William W., 22, S.; merchant, Worcester; July 13, '73; wd. June
 18, '64, Petersburg; d. City Point, Va., no date given.

 Barnes, Charles H., b. Jan. 28, 1842; 20, S.; clerk, Boston; Aug. 25,
 '62; prom. Corp.; wd. May 8, '64, Alsop's Farm; M. O. June 2, '65; Dry
 goods; 1913, Melrose.

 Beal, Jesse N., 32, M.; shoemaker, Natick; July 16, '63; trans. for
 unexpired time to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Beals, William H., 22, S.; farmer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; d. Feb. 19, Salisbury, N. C.

 Bigelow, Chester O., 18, S.; musician, Dover; Feb. 14, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. Feb. 23, '65, ex. of s.

 Bispham, John D., 28, S.; trader, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; d. Jan. 25, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Blenker, James J., 38, M.; clerk, Attleborough; July 28, '63; d. May
 14, '65, Washington, D. C.

 Boyden, Stephen A., 31, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; prom.
 Corp.; dis. July 7, '63, for commission in U. S. C. T.

 Braithwaik, Thomas, 27, S.; assistant surgeon, West Bridgewater; Aug.
 3, '63; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.; his name does not appear in
 the F. & S.

 Brigham, Alfred M. (Corp.), brother of Capt.; Aug. 25, '62; prom.
 Sergt.; dis. Aug. 14, '63, for commission U. S. C. T.; 2d Lieut.
 Fourth Colored Infty.; k. June 15, '64, Petersburg.

 Brookings, Alphonso W., 21, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 30, '62; later Corp. in Co. I, Thirteenth V. R. C., whence
 he was dis. Nov. 17, '65; d. April 29, 1883, Natick.

 Brooks, William, 44, M.; morocco dresser, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65.

 Brown, Edwin, 21, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; prom. Sergt.;
 Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to March 25, '65; M. O. June 17, '65; d. Nov. 14,
 1911, Nashua, N. H.

 Brummett, John M., 39, M.; farmer, Wayland; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa.,
 Feb. 23, '63; d. March 2, 1900, Natick.

 Bullens, Charles A., 23, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; trans.
 to unassigned Co., 2d Batt. V. R. C.; dis. July 11, '65.

 Bullens, Lowell S., 19, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis.
 disa., Jan. 1, '63; later en. April 8, '64, U. S. Signal Corps; dis.
 Aug. 4, '64.

 Butterfield, Charles B., 18, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62;
 Pris. Aug. 18, '64, to March 1, '65; M. O. July 20, '65; Cochituate.

 Butterfield, John C., 44, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis.
 disa., Feb. 11, '64.

 Carhart, Henry, 18, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; prom. Corp.;
 k. May 8, '64, Alsop's Farm.

 Carhart, Joseph B., 27, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; Corp.
 March 10, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Jan. 1, 1871, Natick.

 Carr, Joseph C., 34, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; des. Sept.
 5, '62.

 Caswell, Perley, 44, M.; carpenter, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65; d. Nov. 15, 1877.

 Chamberlain, Daniel O., 29, M.; Aug. 25, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. a
 prisoner Feb. 27, '65, Richmond, Va.

 Chase, Seth C., 30, M.; mariner, Nantucket; July 13, '64; in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; d. a prisoner April 3, '65, Salisbury,
 N. C.

 Choate, Edward H., 29, --; hostler, Natick; dis. disa., Dec. 17, '62.

 Clough, William H. H., 21, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; wd.
 May 10, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. July 20, '65; 1913, Natick.

 Colbath, Charles E., 18, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '65; d. May
 18, '65, Washington, D. C.

 Colbath, George A., 41, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; trans.
 Sept. 12, '63, V. R. C.; dis. disa., Dec. 18, '63, from Co. A, Sixth
 V. R. C.; he was a brother of Vice-President Henry Wilson; Charles was
 son of G. A. C.

 Cole, Archibald M., 41, M.; tailor, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; d. Jan. 14, '65, Salisbury.

 Collins, William, 22, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; prom.
 Corp.; d. paroled prisoner April 6, '65.

 Conant, Sherman (Corp.), 22, S.; student, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis.
 Aug. 17, '63, for commission U. S. C. T.; Captain Third Colored
 Infty.; Major Sept. 13, '65; M. O. Oct. 31, '65; d. Nov. 21, 1890,
 Natick.

 Cook, Thomas, 26, M.; shoemaker, Beverly; July 10, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. disa., May 26, '65.

 Cooper, Newell, 29, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa.,
 Jan. 2, '63; 1913, Natick.

 Cooper, Thomas, 20, --; --, Taunton; Aug. 3, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Critcherson, Joseph (Corp.), 37, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62;
 trans. Nov. 15, '63, to Fifty-eighth Co., 3d Batt., V. R. C.; dis.
 disa., June 7, '65; d. June 11, 1900, Natick.

 Curran, Edward, 21, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Currier, Charles P. (Sergt.), 26, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25,
 '62; dis. disa., March 10, '65; d. Dec. 19, 1907, Natick.

 Currier, Joseph, 24, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; wd. May 5,
 '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to March 3, '65; dis. disa., June 20, '65; d.
 Feb. 27, 1869, Natick.

 Dakin, Abel F. (Mus.), 29, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d.
 Dec. 20, '63, Washington.

 Davis, Charles A., 35, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62;
 despatch-carrier for General Grant; dis. June 5, '65; d. July 12,
 1897, Natick.

 Davis, Frank E. (Corp.), 21, S.; clerk, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis.
 disa., Dec. 1, '62.

 Drew, Charles F., 24, S.; shoemaker, Stoneham; July 10, '61, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; re-en. Jan. 4, '64; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence
 to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Dutton, Dana F., 29, M.; farmer, Sudbury; July 16, '61, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Echibach, Louis, 25, S.; bookkeeper, Beverly; July 29, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Eckenroth, Charles H., 21, M.; brakeman, Dedham; July 28, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Endicott, Ingersoll B., 23, M.; clerk, Boston; July 23, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Esip, Francis, 21, S.; blacksmith, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; d. 1909, Soldiers' Home, Togus, Me.

 Evans, William, 23, S.; laborer, Brighton; July 22, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty. trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Felch, Henry F., b. March 18, 1839; (Sergt.) 23, S.; clerk, Natick;
 Aug. 25, '62; was Color Sergt. till promotion; prom. 2d Lieut. Oct.
 25, '63; vide Co. F.

 Felch, Ira H., 18, S.; shoemaker, Natick; March 7, '62; in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. March 7, '65, ex. of s.; d. May
 8, 1910, Natick.

 Felch, William F., 35, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; prom.
 Corp.; wd. March 31, '65; M. O. May 18, '65; d. May 7, 1902, Plymouth.

 Finn, James W., 18, S.; farmer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; drowned Nov. 17,
 '62, Chesapeake & Ohio Canal.

 Fiske, John E., 21, S.; hatter, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa., Feb.
 25, '63.

 Fogg, George L., 33, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d. Nov. 23,
 Offutt's Cross Roads, Md.

 Foley, Michael, 26, M.; currier, Stoneham; July 14, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Freeman, Charles F. (Mus.), 18, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62;
 June 2, '65.

 Garfield, William H., b. May 20, 1843; 19, S.; cordwainer, Natick;
 Aug. 25, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; grocery, dry goods; hotel and livery
 keeper; 1913, Harding; rec'd a skin wound, in the face, at the
 Wilderness; at Laurel Hill, he drew his own seven days' rations and
 those of Butterfield as well, carrying them till his comrade showed
 up; after the Weldon R. R. disaster, he was one of the seven men
 who answered "Here" on the 20th of August; after the surrender, he
 traded his hat-cord with a rebel lieut. for a Dutch oven and two camp
 kettles, also securing from the reb. a confession that he was glad
 the war was over, though he wished the shoe were on the other foot;
 on the 25th return of the Weldon day his comrades and friends gave
 him a house warming in his new abode on the eastern slopes of Mt.
 Deliverance, Natick, his home, till 1893, when he moved to Medfield.

 Gourley, Samuel, 30, S.; baker, Boston; July 13, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to March 21, '65; M. O. June 5, '65.

 Green, John T. B., 18, S.; teamster, Boston; July 31, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Griffin, Jonathan F., 39, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis.
 disa., Nov. 21, '63; d. Feb. 7, 1902, Natick.

 Hall, Benning, Jr. (1st Sergt.), 36, M.; expressman, Natick; Aug. 25,
 '62; dis. disa., Feb. 8, '64.

 Hammond, Charles F., 28, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; trans.
 to Sixty-ninth Co., Second Batt., V. R. C., dis. June 29, '65.

 Hancock, Henry, b. April 22, 1839, England; 23, S.; blacksmith,
 Natick; Aug. 25, '62; wd. May 5, '64, Wilderness; dis. disa., Feb. 6,
 '65; blacksmith; 1913, So. Natick.

 Hardy, Simeon, 27, M.; Aug. 25, '62; cordwainer, Natick; Pris. Aug.
 18, '64, to March 1, '65; M. O. July 20, 65; d. 1885, Natick.

 Hayes, Daniel, 44. M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa.,
 Nov. 5, '62; d. Nov. 29, 1902, Natick.

 Hayward, Paul, 34, M.; farmer, Boston; July 11, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. May 3, '65.

 Hazelton, Warren, 30, --; --, Concord; July 14, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; k. Aug. 19, '64.

 Hoey, Michael, 26, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; wd. May 8,
 '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. July 17, 1872, Natick.

 Hoey, Thomas, 36, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; wd. May 12,
 '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '14; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Howe, Ansel L., 18, S.; flagman, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; k. Aug. 18,
 '64, Weldon R. R.

 Jennings, John E., 31, M.; shoemaker, Natick; July 25, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Jennison, Charles W., 30, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; d. May 17, 1902, Natick.

 Jones, Nathan, 34, M.; farmer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa., April
 1, '63; d. June 11, 1884, Natick.

 Kemp, Nathan S., 20, --; shoemaker, Watertown; Aug. 2, '64; d. May 19,
 '65, Watertown, Mass.

 King, Albert F., 22, S.; cordwainer, Boston; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa.,
 June 25, '63; d. Aug. 11, 1898, Seattle, Wash.

 LeBarron, David J., 25, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O.
 June 2, '65; d. June 7, 1904, Natick.

 Lilley, Richard G., 33, S.; shoemaker, Natick; June 26, '61, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.; d. April 13, 1898, Natick.

 Littlefield, George H., 35, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; k.
 Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R.

 Lynch, John, 21, S.; seaman, Raynham; July 26, '63; in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth, thence to the Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 McAuliffe, Samuel, b. Jan. 7, 1841; 21, S.; machinist, Agawam; July
 17, '63, in Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth and thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.; is glad that his change from the Twelfth to
 the Thirty-ninth took him into such excellent company, enjoying his
 new comrades and officers, Capt. Reed and Lieut. Brown, very much;
 selling machinery in this country and abroad; Mercantile Inspector,
 Rochester, N. Y.; fifteen years, chief mustering officer and
 Inspector; two years each, Dept. N. Y. G. A. R. and Inspector General
 for Commander-in-chief John C. Black; 1913, Gates, N. Y.

 McCaffrey, James, 37, M.; bookmaker, West Roxbury; Jan. 14, '64;
 trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 McLain, Charles W., 28, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; prom.
 Sergt. and 1st Sergt.; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Nov. 21, 1910, Natick.

 Mann, Francis E., 20, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d. Nov.
 23, '62, Offutt's Cross Roads, Md.

 Marsh, William W., 30 M.; yeoman, Grafton; July 14, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. Aug. 18, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Mead, Alfred, 30, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; d. July 8, 1911, Newton.

 Merrill, Franklin, 27, M.; expressman, Boston; July 13, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Merrill, Stephen, 36, M.; teamster, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d. from wds.
 March 3, '65.

 Messenger, Charles W., 27, M.; farmer, Wrentham; July 15, '63; in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; d. from wds. Sept. 20, '64.

 Mills, Josiah R., 45, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; wd. Feb.
 7, '65; dis. disa., Sept. 5, '65; d. Mar. 18, 1887, Natick.

 Monahan, Michael, b. May 24, 1841; 21, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug.
 25, '62; Pris. May 8, '64, recaptured by Sheridan on the 9th; wd.
 June 18, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; shoemaking and farming; 1913, So.
 Framingham.

 Morey, Raphael, 20, S.; farmer, Hopkinton; Aug. 2, '64; M. O. June 2,
 '65.

 Moore, Charles H., 32, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; trans.
 May 12, '64, to Co. H, Eighteenth V. R. C.; dis. as Corp. June 24,
 '65; d. Mar. 14, 1905, Natick.

 Morrill, Robert W., 34, S.; yeoman, Worcester; July 11, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.; 1913, West Boylston.

 Morrison, Charles H., 18, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d.
 Nov. 21, '62, Offutt's Cross, Roads, Md.

 Morse, Curtis, 18, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; wd. May 24,
 '64; M. O. May 25, '65; d. 1909, Plymouth.

 Morse, Henry M., 21, M.; blacksmith, Medway; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa.,
 Sept. 12, '63; d.

 Morse, Horace B. (Corp.), 42, M.; farmer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis.
 disa., May 1, '63; d. Nov. 8, 1911, Winstead, Conn.

 Moulton, George W., 33, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; wd. May
 10, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Feb. 8, 1907, Natick.

 Moulton, Otis H., 31, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65; d. April 21, 1883, Natick.

 Murphy, James 19, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; d. Sept. 8, 1910, Cochituate.

 Newhall, Francis E., 37, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d. Nov.
 25, Offutt's Cross Roads, Md.

 O'Brien, Cornelius, 18, S.; carpenter, Boston; Oct. 13, '63; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. Salisbury, N. C., after Feb. 22, '65, at which time
 he was in a dying condition.

 O'Brien, Dennis, 21, S.; shoemaker, Natick; Jan. 7, '64; wd. May 8,
 '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Parlin, William D. (Sergt.), 23, S.; trader, Natick; Aug. 25, '62;
 dis. June 22, '63, for commission U. S. C. T.; Captain First U. S.
 Colored Infty.; dis. disa., March 7, '65.

 Patten, Delavan M., 22, M.; blacksmith, Springfield; July 16, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.; 1913, Plainfield, N. J.

 Perkins, Thomas, 29, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa.,
 Dec. 21, '62.

 Pierson, James M., 21, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; wd. June
 18, '64; dis. disa., Feb. 8, '65; 1913, Haverhill.

 Ragan, Michael, 38, S.; laborer, Boston; Oct. 1, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Reed, Nathan (Sergt.), 43, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62;
 trans. Jan. 5, '64, to V. R. C.; dis. disa., Jan. 15, '65; d. April 3,
 1901, Natick.

 Reynolds, George, 27, M.; bookkeeper, Boston; July 28, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Russell, Levi, 43, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; trans. April
 10, '64, to V. R. C.; dis. July 1, '65; May 22, 1906, Natick.

 Sell, James T., 28, M.; teamster, Cambridge; June 26, '61, in Twelfth
 Infty.; on account of unauthorized absence, he was compelled to
 make up time, hence his trans. to the Thirty-ninth, thence to the
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Sloper, Charles W., 18, S.; hatter, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65.

 Smith, Abial E., 30, M.; cordwainer, Sherborn; Aug. 25, '62; wd. May
 12, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; dis. June 14, '65; d. Aug. 25, 1871,
 Natick.

 Spooner, Lyman A., 21, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; prom.
 Sergt.; 2d Lieut. June 7, '62; M. O. as Sergt. June 2, '65; d. Dec.
 28, 1894, Natick.

 Stearns, Nathan D., 31, --; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d. a
 prisoner Feb. 3, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Stedman, Charles H., 20, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d. from
 wds. July 10, '64, Willett's Point, N. Y.

 Stevens, Leonard S., 21, S.; farmer, Haverhill; Sept. 23, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M.
 O.

 Stewart, Samuel, vide Styner, below.

 Stewart, Sylvanus, 22, S.; hatter, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; prom. Corp.;
 wd. Aug. 18, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. May 16, 1906, Haverhill.

 Stone, Francis C, 24, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d. from
 wds. May 19, '64, Washington, D. C.

 Styner, Samuel, 24, M.; painter, Concord; July 24, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.;
 according to a letter from the W. D., Sept. 27, '90, the man's real
 name was Stewart.

 Sullivan, Thomas, 1st, 22, M.; boatman, Taunton; July 24, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Taylor, George G., 21, M.; shoemaker, Rutland; July 13, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; M. O. May 25, '65, though roll
 also states that he was trans. to Thirty-second.

 Travis, Fayette E., 20, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64, to March 1, '65; M. O. July 20, '65; 1913, Natick.

 Travis, Isaac N. (Corp.); cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; trans.
 Sept. 12, '63, to V. R. C.; dis. Nov. 17, '63; d. June 9, 1905,
 Natick.

 Tyler, Stearns C., 27, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. O.
 W. D. May 30, '65; d. Jan. 5, 1894, Natick.

 Tyrell, George H., 19, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d. Dec.
 18, '62, Offutt's Cross Roads, Md.

 Wallace, J. William, 25, M.; printer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; trans.
 March 31, '64, V. R. C.; dis. Aug. 9, '65.

 Warren, Samuel P. S., 18, S.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; d.
 Dec. 18, '62, Offutt's Cross Roads, Md.

 Washburn, Romanzo M., 23, S.; clerk, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. June
 21, '64, O. W. D.; d. March 22, 1887, Natick.

 Webster, Isaac L., 15, S.; --, Martinsburg, Va.; Feb. 11, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. as mus. to Thirty-ninth and dis. Feb. 10,
 '65, ex. of s.

 Wentworth, George W., 29, M.; hatter, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; prom.
 Sergt.; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, Haverhill.

 West, John, 33, S.; carpenter, Boston; July 24, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Wheeler, Willis M., b. Aug. 11, 1841; 21, M.; mechanic, Northbridge;
 July 14, '63, in Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to
 Thirty-second and M. O.; 1913, Natick.

 Whitney, Constant F., b. Aug. 12, 1836; 26, M.; cordwainer, Sherburn;
 Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa., March 6, '63; expressing, deacon Baptist
 Church nineteen years; 1913, Norwood.

 Whitney, John, 40, M.; farmer, Watertown; Aug. 2, '64; M. O. June 2,
 '65; had been in Co. E, Sixth M. V. M., 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Williams, Charles H., 28, M.; carpenter, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; d. March 19, '65, Wilmington, N. C.

 Woodward, Caleb, 40, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis. disa.,
 Jan. 30, '63.

 Woodward, Heman C, 23, M.; cordwainer, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; dis.
 disa., April 1, '63; d. May 2, 1883.

 Wright, Lewis, 25, M.; expressman, Natick; Aug. 25, '62; M. O. June 2,
 '65; expressing; 1913, Natick.




COMPANY K

Woburn


CAPTAINS

 John I. Richardson, b. July 12, 1818, Woburn; 44, M.; mason, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa., March 29, '64; d. Oct. 1, 1864, Woburn.

 Willard C. Kinsley, from Co. H, Mar. 30, '64; d. April 2, 1865, from
 wds. rec'd Mar. 31, '65.

 Luke R. Tidd, April 3, '65; not mustered; M. O. as 1st Lieut. June
 2, 1865; d. Aug. 15, 1893, Woburn; his body was borne to its burial
 by his fellow soldiers; had been a shoe manufacturer many years; his
 sword, captured Aug. 19, '64, was returned to him by Sergt. Whitaker
 of the Tenth Georgia in 1884 and was received with great rejoicing by
 Co. K.


FIRST LIEUTENANTS

  Luke R. Tidd, b. May 5, 1822, Woburn; 39, S.; shoe manufacturer,
  Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; pris. Aug. 19, '64;
  paroled Feb. 19, '65; Captain, April 3, '65.


SECOND LIEUTENANTS

 Luther F. Wyman, b. Oct. 7, 1833, Woburn; 28, M.; shoemaker, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; 1st Lieut. March 20, '64; vide Co. H.

 Henry A. Seaverns, from Co. H, Mar. 30, '64; wd. Aug. 18, '64; 1st
 Lieut.; not mustered; dis. disa., Jan. 7, '64; d. Sept. 26, 1894, No.
 Scituate.

 Alpheus Thomas, from Co. G, Sept. 15, '64; wd. Mar. 31, '65; M. O. May
 16, 1865; dead.


ENLISTED MEN

 Avery, Michael, b. 1832, Halifax, N. S.; 30, M.; shoemaker, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; k. May 10, '64, Spottsylvania.

 Bacon, Jonas, 19, S.; japaner, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; d. Dec. 30, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Baldwin, Michael B., b. Feb. 2, 1834, Bridgeport, Conn.; 28, M.;
 harness maker, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; dis. disa., May 20, '65; d. July, 1911, Stoneham.

 Bancroft, Albert, b. May 18, 1844, Woburn; 19, S.; farmer, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Sept., 6, 1906.

 Barrett, Albert P., b. July 14, 1844, Woburn; 18, S.; painter, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64; detailed for clerical duty, Div.
 H'quarters from July 27, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. April, 1909; his
 recollections enter largely into the earlier portions of this history.

 Barrett, William T., b. June 26, 1838, Boston; 24, M.; clerk, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; d. Jan. 29, '65, Washington, D. C.

 Boutwell, Asa, b. July 12, 1836, Woburn; 26, M.; butcher, Woburn; dis.
 disa., May 5, '65.

 Bradley, Thomas H., b. 1844, Boston; 18, S.; japaner, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; wd. Mar. 31, '65, Gravelly Run; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Nov. 14,
 1873, Woburn.

 Brannagan, John, b. Dec. 9, 1842, Ireland; 21, S.; blacksmith, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 15, '64; d. Jan. 20, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Brown, Alvin G., b. Aug. 14, '42, Reading; 20, S.; printer, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; M. O. May 18, '65; 1913, Malden.

 Brown, William P. (Sergt.), 21, S. clerk, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62;
 detailed as Division Ordnance Sergt.; M. O. June 2, '65; had served in
 Co. I, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term, 1861; b. Durham, Nova Scotia; Aug.
 20, 1840; grocer before and after the war; 1872-1890, manufacturing;
 clerk, State Board of Health from 1890 to death; Sec. of Thirty-ninth
 Regimental Ass'n and a member of the Com. on Regimental history; d.
 Sept. 10, 1912, Winthrop.

 Bryant, Francis M., b. May 8, 1847, Woburn; 18, S.; laborer, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; d. a prisoner, Jan. 29, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Bush, Charles, b. July 15, 1838, Canada; 25, S.; teamster, Woburn;
 Feb. 27, '64; Pris. May 8, '64; recaptured next day by Sheridan; wd.
 April 1, '65; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.; d. Canada.

 Butler, Moses, b. Mar. 19, 1824, Kentsville, N. S.; 31, M.; currier,
 Woburn; Feb. 25, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. Jan. 17, '65, Salisbury,
 N. C.

 Cady, David, b. May 17, 1837, Bedford, N. H.; 25, S.; farmer, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa., June 18, '63; d. N. H.

 Carpenter, Alonzo D., b. Feb. 17, 1839, St. Albans, Vt.; 32, M.;
 currier, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; wd. April 4, '65, Petersburg; dis.
 disa., June 28, '65; 1913, Woburn.

 Chase, John, b. 1840, Camplin, N. H.; 22, S.; shoemaker, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; trans. Feb. 15, '64, V. R. C.; dis. from Co. I, Second V. R.
 C., July 3, 1865; "Out West."

 Choate, William M., b. July 10, 1844, Lynn; (Mus.) 19, S.;
 photographer, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa., Feb. 12, '63.

 Colby, Freeman E., b. Jan. 3, 1840, Henniker, N. H.; 21, S.; farmer,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; detailed with Q. M. Dep't after the No. Anna;
 M. O. June 2, '65; farming and lumbering; Selectman, 8 years; School
 Com., 3 years; Rep. Legislature, 2 years; Justice of the Peace, 35
 years; 1913, Henniker, N. H.

 Colby, Newton G., b. 1843, Henniker, N. H.; 19, S.; farmer, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa., Dec. 29, '62; d. 1894, Henniker.

 Colgate, Charles H., b. July 31, 1844, Roxbury; 19, S.; currier,
 Woburn; Dec. 15, '63; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to Oct. 9, '64; trans.
 to Thirty-second Infty. and M. O. June 29, '65; leather business
 and maker of extracts; 14 years, agent of Prison Commission; Past
 Commander G. A. R. Post; Sec. of Massachusetts Ass'n Ex-prisoners
 of War; Deacon in Congregational Church, and Sec. of Thirty-ninth
 Regimental Ass'n at time of death; d. Feb. 8, 1913.

 Conn, Charles K., b. Jan. 9, 1842, Charlestown; 20, S.; bookkeeper,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; Corp. March 1, '63; Pris. May 8, '64; Sergt.
 Major, April 28, '64; vid. F. & S.

 Connoly, Hugh, b. 1841, Ireland; 21, S.; currier, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; d. Nov. 25, '62, Offutt's Cross Roads, Md.

 Cronan, Jeremiah, b. 1826, Ireland; 36, M.; shoemaker, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; des. Sept. 2, '62.

 Curry, Robert, b. 1823, Ireland; 39, M.; shoemaker, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; Pris. May 8, '64, recaptured next day; Pris. Aug. 19. '64; d.
 Oct. 20, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Dean, George W., b. Oct. 11, 1842, Wilmington; 22, S.; shoemaker,
 Woburn; Dec. 28, '63; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to Thirty-second
 Infty. and M. O.; had served in Sixth Battery, Light Arty.; d. April,
 1902.

 Dean, Joseph G., b. Jan. 28, 1821, Woburn; 41, M.; butcher, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Hudson.

 Dean, Joshua H., b. Feb. 11, 1843, Woburn; 18, S.; shoemaker, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 14, '64; recaptured same day; wd. Feb. 6,
 '65; N. F. R.; 1913, Syracuse, N. Y.

 Dennett, Geo. H., b. Dec. 22, 1845, Woburn; 18, S.; clerk, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; trans. Feb. 15, '64 to V. R. C.; at his own request
 trans. back Aug. 10, '64; wd. Mar. 31, '65; Sergt. Major, Feb. 1, '65;
 vide F. & S.

 Dennett, Robert M., b. Oct. 5, 1840, Chatham, N. B.; 23, S.; --,
 Woburn; Dec. 21, '63; one of those detailed to bear old colors to
 Boston and receive new ones; as Corp. d. April 12, '65, Washington,
 from wds. received Mar. 31, '65; had served in Co. F, Twenty-second
 Massachusetts Volunteers.

 Doherty, Philip, b. Jan. 1, 1845, Ireland; 18, S.; currier, Woburn;
 wd. and Pris. Aug. 18, '64; paroled Aug. 25, '64; M. O. May 15, '65;
 d. California.

 Doherty, Peter, b. 1842, Ireland; 21, S.; japaner, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; wd. May 10, '64; d. May 19, '64, Washington.

 Doorley, James, b. July 21, 1823, Ireland; 33, S.; teamster, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 8, '64; dis. May 8, '65; d. Woburn.

 Downing, Jonathan P., b. April 20, 1835, Plymouth, N. H.; 27, M.;
 butcher, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d.
 Oct. 16, 1894, Woburn.

 Drown, Samuel H., b. Woburn; (Corp.) 28, M.; japaner, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; dis. disa., April 27, '63; d. Mar. 3, 1871, Woburn.

 Duffy, Patrick, 22, S.; shoemaker, Stoneham; en. July 28, '62, and
 des. same day.

 Earle, Anthony, 22, S.; clerk, Worcester; July 22, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. Jan. 5, '65, for commission as 2d
 Lieut. Sixty-first Infty., also 1st Lieut.; M. O. July 16, '65.

 Eaton, Cyrus A., b. Dec. 13, 1824, Woburn; 38, M.; shoemaker, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64; d. from wds. May 29, '64.

 Eaton, Parker, b. April 28, 1826, Woburn; (Corp.), 35, W.; currier,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Jan. 24, 1912, Woburn.

 Edgecomb, Noah, b. 1818, Saco, Me.; 43, M.; carpenter, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; trans. Sept. 13, '63, to V. R. C.; d. Feb. 27, 1882, Woburn.

 Fairbanks, Amos H., 22, M.; clerk, Roxbury; July 16, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; trans. April 24, '65, to V. R. C.; M.
 O. Aug. 11, '65.

 Finn, Michael, b. Jan. 7, 1846, Boston; 18, S.; baker, Woburn; Dec. 6,
 '63; Pris. May 8, '64; d. Oct. 3, '64, Danville, Va.

 Flint, Thomas W., b. Nov. 28, 1844, Woburn; currier, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, New Haven, Conn.

 Flynn, John, 30, M.; laborer, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; des. Sept. 7, '62.

 Foster, Irving, b. Sept. 3, 1841, Woburn; 20, S.; currier, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; k. June 18, '64; Petersburg; his comrades called him
 "Old Honesty."

 Fowle, George E., b. July 4, 1837, Reading; 25, S.; carpenter, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; prom. Sergt.; pris. and escaped, Aug. 14, '64, Weldon
 R. R.; prom. 2d Lieut., Jan. 15, '65; wd. Feb. 7, '65, Hatcher's Run;
 dis. May 18, '65; carpenter and builder; Rep. in General Court, 1894
 and '95; 1913, Woburn.

 Garfield, Joseph W., b. Mar. 1, 1837, Waltham; (Mus.) 23, S.;
 shoemaker, Lynn; detailed as Brigade Bugler, Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June
 2, '65; d. Oct. 1911, Lynn.

 Garrigan, John, 29, b. 1833, Ireland; 29, M.; currier, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; dis. disa., Oct. 26, '62; re-en. Tenth N. H.; d. Woburn.

 Gilcreast, John, b. July 31, 1833, Andover; (Sergt.); 29, M.; painter,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; 1st Sergt. May 6, '63; wd. May 10, '64; dis. on
 account of wds., Feb. 28, '65; d. Nov. 4, 1911, Woburn.

 Gilligan, James R., 38, --; boot crimper, Weymouth; Dec. 10, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. disa., Dec. 10, '64.

 Gleason, Albert, b. June 1, 1845, Woburn; 18, --; --, Rappahannock
 Station, Va.; Sept. 15, '63; in Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to
 Thirty-ninth in name; he had been wd. June 18, '64, while in the
 Thirteenth and his left arm was amputated; dis. May 16, '65; d. 1900,
 Woburn.

 Harris, Otis S., b. April 12, 1844, Woburn; 18, S.; shoemaker, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Jan. 16, 1896,
 Stoneham.

 Hemmenway, Elbert O., 29, S.; harness maker, Pittsfield; July 14, '63;
 in Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; wd. May 4, '64; Pris. Dec.
 11, '64; d. Jan. 1, '65, Salisbury, N. C.

 Hooper, Samuel T., b. 1838, Athens, Ohio; (Corp.), 24, M.; currier,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '62; escaped about April 12, '65;
 M. O. June 2, '65; d. Aug. 20, 1876, Woburn.

 Hoskins, Edward, b. Nov. 4, 1846; 18, S.; laborer, Woburn; Jan. 1,
 '64; wd. May 10, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to Thirty-second and
 M. O.; stationary engineer; 1913, Woburn.

 Hoskins, William H., b. 1841, St. Johns, N. B.; 21, S.; cabinet maker,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64; d. May 30, '64.

 Houghton, Edward J., b. 1843 Mobile, Ala., 19, S.; mariner, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; trans. to U. S. Navy, April 19, '64; Houghton, from the
 Chicopee, was one of the party of 15 men who destroyed the Rebel Ram,
 Albemarle, Oct. 24, '64, at Plymouth, N. C. Two were drowned, eleven
 captured and Lieut. Cushing and Houghton escaped, though in different
 directions; Congress voted medals of honor to all participating; July
 16, '65, the day before he was to receive his well earned reward, he
 was killed at the Gosport, Va., Navy Yard, while trying to befriend
 a comrade in an altercation. The medal so highly prized is in the
 possession of relatives in East Boston.

 Howard, Henry, b. July 17, 1826, St. Johns, N. B.; 36, M.; shoemaker,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa., July 6, '63; later, Co. B,
 Fifty-ninth Infty.; d. Sept. 3, '64, Long Island, N. Y.

 Hutchins, Samuel M., 21, S.; farmer, Carlisle; July 11, '63, in
 Twelfth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence, March 15, '65, to V.
 R. C.; dis. disa., Feb. 15, '65.

 Ingerson, Nathaniel, b. 1821, Andover; 41, M.; shoemaker, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; dis. disa., Nov. 13, '62; d. July 1899, Reading.

 Jones, William H., 31, M.; shoemaker, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug.
 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Oct. 1, 1876, Woburn.

 Johnson, Charles H., b. Sept. 19, 1843; 18, S.; clerk, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; Corp. May 9, '63; M. O. June 2, '65; currier till 1891, then
 appointed messenger of State Senate by Capt. J. G. B. Adams, and still
 (1913) holds the place; residence, Woburn.

 Kingsbury, Charles H., b. Sept. 14, 1829, Billerica; 33, M.; pedler,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65.

 Lapurve, Alfred, 23, S.; seaman, Taunton; July 27, '63; Pris. Aug. 19,
 '64; escaped April 25, '65; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Le Barron, William H., b. Oct. 4, 1845, Lexington; 19, S.;
 ironfounder, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; d. May 16, 1901,
 Woburn.

 Leslie, Albert S., b. March 3, 1837, Exeter, N. H.; (Sergt.) 24, M.;
 shoemaker, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; 1st Sergt. Feb. 3, '65; M. O. June 2,
 '65; 1913, Los Angeles, Cal.

 Leslie, James Fred, b. Dec. 15, 1841; 21, S.; clerk, Woburn; wd.
 slightly May 8 and 10, '64; severely injured June 18, '64; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '64; paroled Oct. 9, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; watchmaker
 and cabinet-maker in U. S. Navy Yard, Charlestown; Lieut. in State
 Militia; assessor, almoner, Board of Overseers of the Poor; 1913,
 Woburn.

 Libby, James C., b. 1826, Ossipee, N. H.; 36, M.; driver, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; wd. June 19, '64, Petersburg; trans. to V. R. C.; dis. June
 26, '65; d. Lawrence.

 Linscott, Andrew R., b. March 6, 1844; 18, S.; clerk, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; Corp. Nov. 30, '63; M. O. June 2, '65; teacher, alderman, rep. in
 General Court; 1913, Woburn.

 Linscott, Charles F., b. Jan. 17, 1842, Woburn; (Corp.) 20, S.; clerk,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; dis. May 30, '64. for promotion One Hundred and
 Twenty-eighth U. S. C. T.; d. 1912, Illinois.

 Linscott, George W., b. May 9, 1843, Woburn; 19, S.; clerk, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; d. Boston.

 Linscott, Josiah P., b. April 25, 1845, Woburn; 18, S.; mariner,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; trans. Feb. 15, '64, to V. R. C.; dis. July 9,
 '65; d. Fortune Island, Nov. 24, 1876.

 Lombard, Richard, b. July 24, 1828, Ireland; 33, M.; shoemaker,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; paroled March 20, '65; M. O.
 June 2, '65; d. Boston.

 McCarthy, John, b. Aug. 22, 1827, Ireland; 35, M.; shoemaker, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64, and Feb. 7, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; d.
 1901, Togus, Me.

 McCarthy, Thomas, b. Oct. 1, 1839, Boston; 24, M.; shoemaker, Woburn;
 Dec. 26, '63; wd. May 24, '64, No. Anna; trans. to Thirty-second,
 thence to V. R. C. and dis. June 25, '65.

 McDevitt, William, b. Feb. 21, 1843, Woburn; (Sergt.) 19, S.; currier,
 Woburn; wd. May 8, '64; 2d Lieut. Sept. 15, '64, for "gallant and
 soldierly qualities"; vide Co. C.

 McFeeley, Samuel, b. May 25, 1842; 20, S.; carpenter, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; Corp. Feb. 16, '64; Sergt. March 13, '65, for having saved the
 colors at the Weldon R. R. Aug. 19, '64; he was detailed to carry the
 old regimental colors to the State House, Boston, and to receive the
 new ones; M. O. June 2, '65; d. July, 1911, Illinois.

 McGoff, James, b. Dec. 24, 1838, Ireland; 25, M.; currier, Woburn;
 Dec. 28, '63; wd. May 10, '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.; d.
 1900, Woburn.

 McGuire, John, 21, --; shoemaker, Conway; Aug. 4, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; Pris. from Aug. 14, '64, to April 10,
 '65; trans. to Thirty-second and M. O.

 McKenna, William, b. 1819, Ireland; 23, M.; shoemaker, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; des. May 25, '63.

 Mahony, Timothy, b. Feb. 22, Cork, Ireland; (Corp.) 41, M.; shoemaker,
 Woburn; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. 1902, Woburn.

 Marran, Thomas, b. 1840, Ireland; (Wagoner) 24, M.; shoemaker, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. Oct. 24, '64, Annapolis, Md.;
 also given Mason.

 Mason, Thomas, vide Marran.

 Mead, John A., b. July 4, 1842, Portland, Me.; 19, S.; student, Acton;
 Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Oct. 10, '63, to March 18, '64, Raccoon Ford; M.
 O. June 2, '64; d. Jan., 1891, Pearlington, Miss.

 Moore, Rufus C., 25, M.; shoemaker, Natick; Feb. 22, '62, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. Feb. 22, '65, ex. of s.

 Morrill, David W., 20, S.; farmer, Worcester; July 25, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to the Thirty-ninth; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. to
 Thirty-second and M. O.

 Murray, Hugh, 44, S.; farmer, Wilmington; Aug. 22, '62; trans. March
 16, '64, to V. R. C.; dis. July 5, '64; d. Wilmington.

 Murray, Sylvester, b. 1841, Ireland; 21, S.; shoemaker, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; wd. May 8, '64; dis. disa., April 1, '65, from V. R. C.; d.
 Woburn.

 Norris, Wilbur F., 28, M.; shoemaker, Natick; July 16, '61, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to V. R. C. April
 13, '65.

 O'Brien, William, b. June 14, 1832, Ireland; 29, M.; mariner, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64; dis. June 2, '65; d. March 14, '66,
 Woburn.

 O'Connor, Cornelius, b. July 18, 1845, Ireland; 18, S.; currier,
 Woburn; Dec. 29, '63; wd. May 14, '64; trans. to V. R. C.; M. O. Aug
 12, '65.

 O'Donald, Edward, b. Aug., 15 1827, Ireland; 35, M.; laborer, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, to March 20, '65; dis. June 2, '65;
 d. Woburn.

 O'Donald, Owen, 33, M.; teamster, Boston; Aug. 22, '62; des. Sept. 6,
 '62.

 O'Riley, John, b. Ireland; 35, M.; laborer, Woburn; Aug. 2, '62;
 trans. Jan. 9, '64, to V. R. C.; Feb. 19, '64, returned to Co. K;
 Pris. May 8, '64; recaptured next day; wd. June 17, '64, Petersburg;
 wd. April 1, '65, Five Forks; M. O. June 27, '65; d. Dec. 4, 1904.

 Parker, T. Marvin, b. Feb. 25, 1838, Lebanon, Me.; (Corp.) 24, W.;
 clerk, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; trans. to V. R. C.; dis. July 14, '65;
 salesman and bookkeeper; 1913, Woburn.

 Parker, Theodore M., b. Nov. 6, 1841, Woburn; 20, S.; mason, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. Aug. 18, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, Woburn.

 Parks, Charles T., b. 1825, Cambridge; 37, M.; currier, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; dis. disa., May 2, '64; d. June 24, '70, Woburn.

 Parks, Peter, Jr., b. 1829, Marblehead; 33, M.; Aug. 22, '62; Pris.
 Aug. 19, '62; d. Jan. 28, '65; Salisbury, N. C.

 Persons, Herbert J., b. June 29, 1845, Woburn; 18, S.; clerk, Woburn;
 Dec. 23, '63; orderly to General Henry Baxter; trans. to Thirty-second
 and M. O.; also given "Pearsons"; d. Woburn.

 Persons, Oscar, b. Sept. 8, 1838, Woburn; (1st Sergt.) 24, S.;
 silversmith, Woburn; 2d Lieut. Feb. 4, '63; vide Co. D; had been in
 Co. I, Fifth M. V. M., 3 mos. term, 1861.

 Phillips, Charles A., 25, M.; shoemaker, Auburn; July 25, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence, Aug. 6, '64, to V.
 R. C.

 Pollard, George F., b. 1841, Charlestown; 21, S.; clerk, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; Corp.; missing after May 8, '64, Laurel Hill; his friends say
 "killed."

 Poole, Rufus F., b. Feb. 23, 1839, Woburn; 23, S.; shoemaker, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; 1913, Woburn.

 Ramsdell, Julius F., b. Oct. 29, 1845, Lynn; 18, S.; currier, Woburn;
 Dec. 13, '63; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; trans. Thirty-second Infty. and M.
 O.; d. Oct. 1909, Woburn.

 Reddy, George H., b. Nov. 5, 1845; Boston; 18, S.; stiffening-cutter,
 Woburn; Dec. 26, '63; wd. May 10, '64; trans. to Thirty-second Infty.
 and M. O.

 Reed, Moses D., b. Jan. 22, 1834, Burlington; 28, M.; shoemaker,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; d. March 8, '65, Annapolis,
 Md.

 Reger, Henry B., 26, S.; seaman, Boston; Oct. 22, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Richardson, Albert H., b. Aug. 17, 1843, Woburn; 18, S.; diemaker,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64; M. O. June
 2, '65; d. May 12, 1909, Woburn.

 Richardson, Alonzo L., b. Aug. 30, 1846; 18, S.; butcher, Woburn; Dec.
 29, '63; trans. to Thirty-second Infty. and M. O.; d. Nov. 23, 1909,
 Woburn.

 Richardson, Samuel, Jr., b. May 23, 1833, Woburn; 29, M.; carpenter,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; prom. Corp.; detailed July 25, '63, for duty
 at Draft Rendezvous, Gallup's Island, Boston Harbor, till Aug. 13,
 '64; Pris. Aug. 19, '64, Weldon R. R.; d. March 23, '65, Parole Camp,
 Annapolis, Md.

 Rogers, Charles, 24, M.; Oct. 22, '63, in Twelfth Infty.; wd. May 6,
 '64; trans. to Thirty-second Infty. and M. O.

 Roland, Miles, b. 1840, Ireland; 22, S.; coachman, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; wd. June 17, Petersburg; d. a prisoner Dec. 15, '64, Salisbury,
 N. C.; borne in State House as Rowland.

 Sanborn, Orin, b. April 6, 1836, Exeter, N. H.; 26, M.; gaspipe-maker,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; Corp.; May 1, '64; M. O. June 2, '65; d. May,
 17, 1880, Woburn.

 Sawyer, Augustus T., b. 1826, Brooks, Me.; 36, M.; printer, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; k. May 10, '64, Laurel Hill.

 Scott, Charles, b. 1833, Barnet, Vt.; 29, M.; carpenter, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; d. a prisoner Oct. 16, '64, Salisbury, N. C.

 Searles, Loring, b. March 19, 1827, New Ipswich, N. H.; 36, M.;
 (Corp.) shoemaker, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; M. O. June 2, '65; d. May 14,
 1902, Woburn.

 Shaw, William L., 36, M.; mechanic, Lowell; July 15, '63, in Twelfth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and M. O.

 Sheehan, John H., b. Oct. 22, 1845, Boston; 18, S.; teamster, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 10, '64; wd. and Pris. Aug. 19, '64; paroled
 March 20, '65; dis. May 25, 1865; for 45 years brakeman and conductor
 on Erie R. R.; in 1909, chief burgess, Borough of Matamoras, Penn.;
 1913, Matamoras, Penn. Of late the name appears as Sheen.

 Sheehan, Timothy, b. 1818, Ireland; 44. M.; carpenter, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; d. March 10, '64.

 Sheen, J. H., vide Sheehan.

 Silver, Manual, 32, S.; seaman, Yarmouth; Jan. 28, '63, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. disa., Sept. 12, '64.

 Smith, Frederick M., b. Sept. 19, 1839; 23, S.; trader, Woburn; Aug.
 22, '62; dis. disa., Feb. 16, '65; first fifteen years photography,
 later mercantile life; 1913, Portland, Me.

 Spokesfield, Ferdinand, b. April 16, 1844; 18, S.; farmer, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; wd. and pris. Aug. 18, '64; M. O. June 20, '65;
 expressman, Boston, till 1899; City Hall watchman, Worcester, to date;
 1913, Worcester.

 Spontroz, Augustus, 25, S.; tailor, Boston; July 24, '63, in
 Thirteenth Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth, thence to Thirty-second and
 M. O.

 Sprague, George A., b. Dec. 5, 1846; 18, S.; shoecutter, Woburn; Dec.
 23, '63; d. Oct. 26, '64, a prisoner, Salisbury, N. C.

 Staggles, William E., b. Oct. 24, 1844, Johnson, Vt.; 19, S.; barber,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa., May 5, '63.

 Staples, Howard A., 21, --; --, Boston; Feb. 24, '62, in Thirteenth
 Infty.; trans. to Thirty-ninth; dis. Feb. 23, '65.

 Stowers, William C., b. March 26, 1845, Woburn; 18, S.; printer,
 Woburn; Feb. 25, '64; trans. to Thirty-second Infty. and M. O.; d.
 Nov. 13, 1866, Woburn.

 Tabor, Newell Z., b. May 22, 1833, Barton, Vt.; 30, M.; japaner,
 Woburn; Jan. 5, '64; wd. May 10, '64; trans. to Thirty-second and M.
 O.; had been in Co. G, Fifth M. V. M., 9 mos. term, 1862-'63; d. Dec.
 23, 1900, Woburn.

 Thompson, Abijah 2d, b. May 22, 1823; (Corp.) 39, M.; trader, Woburn;
 Aug. 22, '62; was captured at the Weldon R. R. and compelled to throw
 down his gun; luckily for him, he and his captors were taken in by the
 boys in blue; when selecting a gun from the many scattered about, he
 was the first to welcome back his comrade, George Fowle; Sergt. Feb.
 3, '65; M. O. June 2, '65; dry goods and clothing clerk in Boston;
 1913, Woburn, by far the oldest survivor of the Regiment.

 Waite, Silas, b. 1846, Anson, Me.; 26, S.; farmer, Woburn; Aug. 22,
 '62; k. May 8, '64.

 Walker, Lewis M., b. Sept. 30, 1844, Beverly; 19, S.; shoemaker,
 Woburn; Jan. 5, '64; wd. June 18, '64, Petersburg; d. June 30, '64,
 Alexandria, Va.

 Warren, Benjamin F., b. Jan. 18, 1839, Woburn; 23, M.; carpenter,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; d. Dec. 26, '63; Culpepper, Va.

 Warren, William P., b. July 22, 1836, Woburn; 26, M.; shoemaker,
 Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; wd. May 5, '64, Wilderness; Pris. Aug. 19, '64,
 recaptured next day; Corp. Feb. 3, '65; M. O. June 2, 65; never missed
 a whole day with Regiment; 1913, Woburn.

 West, Francis, 22. M.; farmer, Westford; Jan. 21, '64; d. July 25,
 '64, City Point, Va.

 Wilson, Orville A., b. June 15, 1838, Bennington, Vt.; 24, M.;
 shoemaker, Woburn; Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa., Oct. 23, '63.

 Wilson, James, 35, M.; hostler, Charlestown; Aug. 22, '62; dis. disa.,
 March 4, '63; d. Dec. 20, 1890, Togus, Me.

 Wolfe, Adam, 23, S.; cigar-maker, Attleborough; July 24, '63; trans.
 to Thirty-second Infty. and M. O.


UNASSIGNED RECRUITS

 Bate, Wallace H., 23, M.; plumber, Melrose; July 16, '63; drafted man,
 trans. Sept. 27, '64, 102d Co., 2d Batt. V. R. C.; dis. July 14, '65.

 Blanchard, Wm. F., 23, S.; seaman, Boston; trans. from Thirteenth
 Mass. Infty. July 16, '64, in which he had en. Jan. 4, '64; dis. Aug.
 16, '64, for promotion, 2d Lieut. Co. F, Twenty-seventh U. S. C. T.;
 1st Lieut. Co. A of the 27th, April 6, '65; dis. Sept. 21, '65.

 Buhl, Peter, 22, S.; sailor, Boston; July 20, '63; N. F. R.

 Cooley, James, 35, --; cordwainer, Natick; en. Jan. 4, '64; rejected
 recruit, Jan. 17, '64.

 Cooley, Michael, 27, --; cordwainer, Natick; Jan. 7, '64; des. Feb. 7,
 '64.

 Fitzgerald, James, 34, --; tailor, Charlestown; Dec. 2, '63; dis.
 disa., Dec. 20, '63.

 Griffins, George W., 25, --; laborer, Barnstable; Jan. 29, '64;
 rejected recruit, Jan. 31, '64.

 Hersey, Harrison D., 18, --; clerk, Chelsea; Feb. 18, '63; in Twelfth
 Infty.; captured May 5, '64, and held till April 28, '65; in the
 interval he was trans. to the Thirty-ninth; never joined; M. O. Aug.
 2, '65.

 Hyatt, James, 29, --; barber, Medford; Feb. 6, '64; des. April 2, '64.

 Jeffers, George W., 25, M.; shoemaker, Haverhill; July 15, '63; trans.
 from the Twelfth Mass. Infty.; N. F. R.

 Jordan, Frank, H., 18, --; blacksmith, Boston; rejected recruit, Jan.
 31, '64.

 Kelly, Thomas, 21, --; hostler, No. Bridgewater; Aug. 14, '63; trans.
 from 12th Infty.; N. F. R.

 Kling, Caspar, 32, M.; cigar-maker, Weymouth; Aug. 4, '63; trans. from
 the 13th Infty.; N. F. R.

 Murray, George, 18, --; glass-polisher, Woburn; Jan. 5, '64; rejected
 recruit.

 Oakley, Frank, 32, S.; machinist, Truro; July 28, '63; trans. from
 13th Infty.; N. F. R.

 Sawyer, George, 22, S.; farmer, Medford; Feb. 17, '62; trans. from
 13th Infty.; N. F. R.

 Tevlin, Michael, 22, --; glass-cutter, Somerville; Nov. 28, '63;
 rejected recruit, Dec. 17, '63.

 Wall, Richard, 29, --; ship carpenter, Medford; Jan. 14, '64; rejected
 recruit, Jan. 7, '64.

 Williams, John, 1st, 33, S.; carpenter, Groton; July 27, '63; N. F. R.

 Zindel, Adolph, 45, S.; jeweller, Hanson; Aug. 3, '63; trans. from
 Twelfth Infty.; N. F. R.

       *       *       *       *       *

As a fitting postlude to this list of more than fourteen hundred
names, borne by as many soldiers, brave and true, four-fifths of
whom have passed within the veil, and whose final resting-places are
annually remembered by their surviving comrades with loving tributes
of beautiful flowers; after these more than fifty years is it not
eminently fitting to enter here words of the gallant leader of the
Regiment, its beloved Colonel, spoken by him on Memorial Day--

 _The Day of Roses and wreaths, of Laurel and leaves of love and honor
 and happy memories, not of sorrow or sadness or regrets. No colors
 half-mast for them. Glory throws the banner to the breeze. All hail,
 dear Comrades! You left us with a smile; we will join you with the
 same expression, and meanwhile will keep a festival for you and call
 it Memorial Day. You won in the last charge. Duty triumphed. You were
 given that firm faith that knows no fear. Living or dying, you cared
 not which, you offered your all for the Cause. The Cause was the
 succor of your country. You saved it. We will protect it, and with the
 blessing of God upon us both, we will hand it down as a home for the
 world to envy, and to occupy.--C. L. Peirson._




TABLE OF AGGREGATES.

(Taken, in the main, from Higginson's "Massachusetts in the Army and
Navy, 1861-'65.")


  Key:

  A=Whole No. Belonging

  B=Killed or Died of Wds.

  C=Died in Rebel Prisons

  D=Died by Accident or of Disease

  E=Deserted

  F=Missing

                    A     B     C     D     E     F

  F. & S.

  Officers          12     2  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men      13  ....  ....  ....  ....  ....

  Co. A

  Officers           4  ....  ....  .... ....   ....
  Enlisted Men     130     5    10     4    2      1

  Co. B

  Officers           3     1  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men     142     5    11     7     3     3

  Co. C

  Officers           5  ....  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men     133     7    10     7     1     2

  Co. D

  Officers           4  ....  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men     137     4    16    14     2  ....

  Co. E

  Officers           5  ....  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men     140     6    15     6     3     1

  Co. F

  Officers           5     1  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men     132     6     6     3    3   ....

  Co. G

  Officers           3  ....  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men     129     4    11     8     9  ....

  Co. H

  Officers           5  ....  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men     131     9     5    11     5     3

  Co. I

  Officers           4  ....  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men     144     7     7    14     0     1

  Co. K

  Officers           5     1  ....  ....  ....  ....
  Enlisted Men     128     8    11     9     2     1

  Unassigned
  recruits          21  ....  ....  ....     2  ....

                  ----  ----  ----  ----  ----  ----
                  1436    66    102   83    32    12

For the sake of those who may observe that, in the several companies,
there were more commissioned officers than are numbered in the
foregoing list, it should be stated that the same officer frequently
served in more than one company, by transferral or temporary
assignment. The list has the same officer's name only once.




INDEX

The following index is intended to contain the name of every man,
in any way connected with the Regiment; those of others encountered
during the nearly three years of service; also the events and
incidents of individual as well as common experience. Titles in small
capitals indicate heads of the several divisions of the history and,
in enumerating regiments from the different states, full faced type
represents the number of the organization, other the page.


  A BACKWARD MOVE, 110

  Abbot, Emil N. L., 256

  Abbott, J. B., 390

  Abbreviations, 331

  Adams, F. D., 342

  Adams, Geo. E., 354

  Adams, Geo. F., 403

  Adams, J. Q., 15

  Adams, Joseph, 251, 415

  Adams, J. C., 437

  Age Data, 331

  Ahearn, Thos., 379

  Aitken, Sam'l, 342

  Alden, A. M., 379

  Alden, H. A., 379

  Alden, Wm. F., 367

  Alexander, E. K., 437

  Alexander. Wm., 403

  Alexander, Surg., 144

  Alexandria, 31, 157

  Allen, Col. I., Jr., 168

  Allen, J. M., 390

  Allen, Lewis, 12

  Allen, Wm. L., 437

  "All Fools' Day", 64, 156

  Allison, Jos., Jr., 173, 334

  Alsop's Farm, 180, 187

  Alley, C. Q., 367

  Amelia Ct. House, 288

  Ames, John, 343

  Amsden, J. A., 390

  Ammunition Getting, 190

  Anderson, Gen'l. R. H., 163, 178, 187, 210

  Andersonville, 112, 319

  Andrews, Geo. A., 354

  Andrews, Tim., Jr., 343

  Andrew, John A., 7, 8, 9, 10, 25, 231

  Annapolis, 299

  Anniversary, 100

  Anthony, Sylvanus, 403

  Antietam, 36, 37, 84, 86, 87

  Applejack, 266

  Apples from Woburn, 58

  Appomattox Ct. H., 290, 291

  Arlington, 32, 294

  Armstrong, J. L., 379

  Army & Navy Journal, 242

  Army Corps Rearranged, 153

  Army Correspondents sent off, 215

  Arnold, E. L., 354

  Arnold, Wm. Jr., 354

  Arris, Herbert, 426

  Aqueduct Bridge, 35

  AT THE FRONT, 83

  Austin, C. B., 403

  Avery, Michael, 450

  Ayers, Gen'l. R. B., 290


  Babb, Mark, 437

  Babbitt, C. E., 403

  Babbitt, F. S., 403

  Babbitt, G. H., Jr., 403

  Backup, J. B., 354

  Bacon, J. W., 21

  Bacon, Jon., 437

  Bacon, Jonas, 450

  Badger, Ezra, 380

  Badger, Geo. H., 343

  Baggage Wagons get up, 213

  Bailey, C. C., 415

  Bailey, C. T., 380

  Bailey, J. W., 415

  Baker, Fred'k, 245, 426

  Baker, Wm. A., 390

  Balcom, Oscar, 438

  Baldwin, John, 367

  Baldwin, M. B., 450

  Ballou, Chas. H., 367

  Ball's Bluff, 9, 37

  Baltimore, 28, 30

  Bancroft, Maj. A., 324

  Bancroft, Albert, 450

  Bancroft, Geo. W., Jr., 343

  Bangs, Wm. W., 438

  Banks, Gen'l. N. P., 47, 151, 324

  Bannon, Jas., 415

  Barbarity of Men, 103

  Barber, Rev. Mr., 12

  Barden, J. P., 223, 343

  Barker, A. H., 426

  Barker, Geo. A., 379, 380

  Barker, G. W., 426

  Barker, O. A., 324, 337, 340, 366(2), 403

  Barker, Wm. S., 367

  Barnard, D. A., 367

  Barnard, Henry, 343

  Barnes, C. H., 403, 438

  BARNES' STORY, CORP. C. H., 319-322

  Barnes, W. L., 403

  Barrett, A. P., 4, 5, 324, 325, 450

  Barrett, W. I., 426

  Barrett, W. T., 450

  Barnum, G. D., 404

  Barney, Hor., 415

  Barrows, Geo. L., 404

  Barry, Benj., 380

  Barry, P. H., 380

  Bartlett, A. D., 354

  Bartlett, Gen'l., J. J., 290

  Bartlett, J. L., 354

  Bartlett, W. H., 390

  Bartoll, Wm. H., 426

  Barton Square, 247

  Bass Point, 325, 329

  Batchelder, Benj. A., 343

  Batcheller, H. M., 354

  Batcheller preaches, 58

  Bate, W. H., 463

  Bates, C. E., 415

  Bates, H. W., 367

  Battle Losses, 268

  Bates, Loren, 415

  Baxter, Geo. M., 367

  Baxter, Thos., Jr., 380

  Beal, Jesse N., 438

  Beals, Wm. H., 438

  Bealton Station, 93, 114, 125

  Bean, Geo. W., 112, 390

  Bean, Thos., 343

  Beard, A. W., 324

  Beck, J. S., 4, 5, 152, 166, 195, 209, 230, 240, 325, 367

  Becker, Ferd., 380

  Beirne, Jas., 368

  Belcher, John, 343

  Belding, C. H., 390

  Bell, Major, 96

  Bell, Jas. H., 354

  Bellfield, 266

  "Bell Hats", 89, 94

  Belling, J. D., 55, 154

  Bemis, W. S., 343

  Bennett, A. B., 355

  Bennett, H. M., 355

  Benz, August, 390

  Berlin, 88

  Bergeson, Jas., 426

  Bertwhistle, J. F., 380

  Bessom, E. A., 343

  Betagh, Jas., 404

  Bethesda Church, 209

  Betts, C. R., 355

  Bigelow, Chief Jus., 15

  Bigelow, C. O., 438

  Big Muddy Branch, 35

  Bird, Joel E., 427

  Bird, John, 415

  Billings, E. W., 426

  Bills, Walter M., 355

  Birney's Corps, D. B., 42, 168

  Bispham, J. D., 438

  Blackberries, 90, 91

  Blacks and Whites, 293

  Blaisdell, J. O., 343

  Blake, Dan. P., 355

  Blanchard, B. P., 427

  Blanchard, W. F., 427, 463

  Blanchard, Wm. H., 368

  Blanding, D. W., 415

  Blauvelt, Jas., 344

  Bledden, T. G., 390

  Blenker, J. J., 438

  "Bloody Angle", 195

  Bloomer, Jos. N., 344

  Boardman, Alf., 404

  Bodge, Geo. A., 390

  Bodge, Geo. W., 390

  Bolton, J. T., 391

  Boodry, Geo. J., 344

  Booker, Geo. D., 368

  Boonsboro, 84

  Bond, Dudley, 368

  Borden, C. P., 404

  Boston, 19

  Boston Herald, 225

  Boston Journal, 27

  Bottom's Bridge, 215

  Bouldry, W. W., 427

  Bounty, State, 25

  Bounty-jumper Shot, 108, 109

  Boutwell, Asa, 450

  Bowen, E. J., 427

  Bowen, S. C., 368

  Bowker, E. H., 344

  Boxes from Home, 102, 134, 135

  Boxford, 18, 24

  Boxford to Washington, 26

  Boyden, S. A., 438

  Boydton Plank Road, 261, 280

  Boynton, Wm. F., 391

  Brace, Dr., 58

  Brackett, W. P., 380

  Braddock, Wm., 404

  Bradley, Lieut., 141

  Bradley, G. C., 391

  Bradley, T. H., 450

  Bradshaw, Elb., 427

  Bradshaw, Zeb., 326, 427

  Braithwaik, Thos., 438

  Brandy Station, 104

  BRANDY STATION, 124

  Brannagan, John, 450

  Bread, Fresh, 64

  Breathed's Battery, 184

  Breck, E. F., 416

  Brennan, Jas., 344

  Brett, Chas. G., 344

  Brewster, C. W., 404

  Brigade Organized, 44

  Briggs, A. M., 355

  Briggs, B. M., 368

  Briggs, Col. H. S., 82, 83, 84, 94, 95, 96

  Briggs, Preserved, 404

  Brigham, A. M., 438

  Brigham, E. H., 21, 22, 319, 323, 436

  Bright, Wm., 416

  Bristoe Station, 113, 115, 116

  Brizzee, Lorenzo, 404

  Broad Run, 121

  Brock Road, 163, 179

  Broderick, Jas., 416

  Bronsdon, F. H., 427

  Brookings, A. W., 438

  Brooks, A. F., 416

  Brooks, Wm., 438

  Brophy, John, 380

  Brown, Alvin G., 450

  Brown, C. H. C., 416

  Brown, Edwin, 489

  Brown, George, 355

  Brown, Geo., 427

  Brown, F. P., 344

  Brown, Jas., 391

  Brown, John, 82, 84

  Brown, Sam'l, 380

  Brown, Wm. H., 22, 437(2)

  Brown, W. P., 3;
    at Hatcher's Run, 273, 450

  Brotchie, Jas., 391

  Brummitt, J. M., 439

  Brun, John, 404

  Brunel, Jos., 427

  Bryant, F. M., 451

  Bryant, R. L., 355

  Bucknam, 391

  Buford, Gen'l John, 103, 111

  Buhl, Peter, 463

  Bullard, Asahel, 380

  Bull Run, 12, 117

  Bullens, C. A., 439

  Bullens, L. S., 439

  Burk, Walter, 380

  Burke, Carl, 355

  Burke, Chris., 427

  Burkeville, 289, 293

  Burnham, Dan., 344

  Burnham, Eli H., 344

  Burnham, Geo. S., 344

  Burnham, Geo. W., 344

  Burnham, J. H., 187, 344

  Burnham, Wilbur, 344

  Bunker, Benj., Jr., 368

  Burns, Major, 329

  Burns, Jas., 355

  Burns, Wm. H., 381

  Burnside, Gen'l A. E., 163, 167, 193, 236

  Burt, H. A., 404

  Bush, Chas., 451

  Busha, Stephen, 368

  Bushnell, Chas., 381

  Butler, Gen'l. B. F., 143, 219

  Butler, Benj. F., 344

  Butler, Asst. Surg., J. F., 338

  Butler, Moses, 451

  Butterfield, C. B., 439

  Butterfield, J. C., 439

  Butters, W. R., 416

  Byrnes, John, 391


  Cady, David, 451

  Caldwell, C. F., 368

  Camp Davis, 54

  Camp E. M. Stanton, 11, 12, 23, 25

  Camp Grover, 48

  Camp Nordquist, 109

  CAMPAIGN OF MANEUVERS, 113

  "Campaigning with Grant", 283

  Camp-vim, 111

  Campbell, Allen, 381

  Canal Break, 44

  Canfield, J. B., 391

  Cannon, Captured, 171

  Cannon Sent Back, 201

  Canteens of Whiskey, 234

  Capitol, 30

  Captives Come Back, 207

  Carhart, J. B., 439

  Carhart, Henry, 439

  Carleton, Wm., 355

  Carlin, T. B., 416

  Carney, John, 404

  Carpenter, A. D., 451

  Carr, Bernard, 427

  Carr, R. S., 368

  Carr, Wm. M., 391

  Carr, Jas. C., 439

  Carroll, John, 428

  Carter, C. L., 391

  Carter, Calvin, 428

  Carteze, Geo., 381

  Casey, Silas, 31

  Cassidy, John, 356

  Caswell, Porter, 439

  Catoctin Creek, 88

  Cattle Cars, 29

  Cattle Raided, 258

  Cattle Stampede, 169

  Catlett's Station, 115, 122

  Cavalry Active, 158

  Cavalry Raid Down Weldon R. R., 265

  Cedar Mt., 151

  Cedar Run, 151, 158

  Centreville, 116

  Chaffin, J. W., 368

  Chain Bridge March, 73, 78

  Chamberlain, D. O., 439

  Chamberlain, Gen'l. J. L., 278, 291

  Chamberlain, Maj. S. E., 75

  Chambersburg, 41

  Champlin, G. H., 368

  Champney, L. C., 391

  Chancellorsville, 77

  Change to Artillery, 109, 110

  Channel, J. F., 345

  Chapel Dedicated, New, 144, 147

  Chapin, C. H., 356

  Chaplain Preaches, 59

  Chaplain Rejoins Reg't, 88

  Chapman, C. H., 5, 20, 339, 414

  Chapman, T. B., 416

  Charles City Ct. H., 218

  Charlottesville, 151

  Chase, A. J., 428

  Chase, John, 451

  Chase, S. C., 439

  Chase, T. H., 416

  Chase, Wm., 428

  Chattanooga, 129

  Cheatham, J. B., 381

  Chesapeake & Ohio Canal, 37

  Cheeney, Wm., 368

  Cheney, G. W., 225

  Chenery, G. W., 368

  Chessboard of War, 114

  Chickahominy, 212

  Child, Henry, 416

  Childs, E. J., 428

  Childs, F. J., 428

  Childs, Geo., 18, 25, 405

  Childs, J. F., 356

  "Chimneys, The", 258

  Chipman, A. A., 416

  Chipman, Asst. Surg., J. L., 338

  Choate, E. H., 439

  Choate, Edward, 22

  Choate, W. M., 451

  Christian, J. B., 381

  Christmas, '62, 54;
    '63, 135;
    '64, 268

  Chubbuck, Eleazer, 416

  Church-bell, 55

  Churchill, G. A., 369

  Churchill, Jas. T., 416

  Churchill, Thad., 381

  "City of New York", 27

  City Point, 235, 247, 271

  City Point Explosion, 239

  Claffey, John, 428

  Clapp, C. W., 417

  Clapp, Geo. L., 369

  Clapp, M. O., 369

  Clark, G. A., 392

  Clark, Wm. H., 428

  Clarke, T. C., 339, 354, 356, 389

  Clemmens, Jas., 392

  Cleverly, Geo. F., 381

  Clifford, J. A., 345

  Clothing Allowance, 100

  Clough, Wm. H., 439

  Clumsy Christians, 247

  Cochran, Matt., 405

  Cochrane, Geo., 417

  Coffin, P. G., 381

  Colbath, C. E., 439

  Colbath, Geo. A., 440

  Colburn, Wm. E., 381

  Cold Nights, 133

  Cole, C. G., 392

  Cole, Chas. H., 405

  Coles, A. W., 392

  Colby, F. E., 451

  Colby, N. G., 451

  COLD HARBOR, 209

  Cold Harbor Assault, 212

  Cole, A. M., 440

  Cole, Geo. W., 345

  Coleman, Perry, 15, 145, 366

  Colgate, C. H., 452

  Collett, Herbert, 392

  Collier, Geo. W., 381

  Collins, J. J., 369

  Collins, Michael, 381

  Collins, Pat., 428

  Collins, Wm., 440

  Colored Troops, 240

  Colors, Regimental, 252

  Combs, E. N., 428

  Company A, 12

     "    B, 13, 37, 173

     "    C, 14, 26, 37, 59, 91, 130, 132, 139

     "    D, 15, 37

     "    E, 16, 25, 26, 86, 112, 130, 159

     "    F, 17, 25, 39, 59, 132

     "    G, 19, 37, 95

     "    H, 20, 142, 206

     "    I, 21, 48

     "    K, 22, 25, 26, 37, 43, 49, 60, 139, 14

  Conant, Edward, 345

  Conant, Sher., 440

  Conn. C. K., prison item, 317, 324, 339, 414, 426, 452

  Conn. Troops, 1st H. Arty., 257

  Connell, John, 417

  Conner, Thos., 392

  Connoly, Hugh, 48, 452

  Conrad's Ferry, 37, 40, 41, 55

  "Construction Corps", 51

  Converse, C. S., 324

  Conway, Pat., 405

  Cook, Thos., 440

  Cooledge, Chas. H., 369

  Cooley, Jas., 463

  Cooley, Michael, 463

  Cooper, J. J., 17, 18, 281, 324, 401

  Cooper, Newell, 440

  Cooper, Thos., 440

  Cooper Refreshment Rooms, 28

  Corcoran, Geo., 428

  "Corporal, The Little", 267

  Corporal's Prank, The, 74

  Corrigan, Thos., 417

  Corthell, John, 417

  Cotter, E. A., 405

  Cotter, John, 381

  Cottrell, Jeff. J., 187, 345

  Cottrell, J. W., 345

  Coughlin, Owen, 369

  Coulter, Gen'l Rich, 174, 202, 259

  Cowan, Thos., 417

  Cowper, John, 381

  Crafts, Wm. G., 356

  Craig, C. H., 429

  Cramptons Gap, 88

  Crane, J. P., 324

  Crane, J. T., 429

  Crane, Seth, 381

  "Crater", 224, 236

  Crawford, Gen'l S. W., 153, 195, 213, 255, 260

  Creedon, John, 392

  Crockett, E. F., 369

  Creswell, John, 417

  Critcherson, Jos., 440

  Cronan, Dan., 356

  Cronan, Jere., 452

  Crooker, Lucius, 405

  Crosby, Elk., 392

  Crowley, Dan., 392

  Cub Run, 117

  Culpeper Court House, 96, 104, 151, 155

  Culpeper Mine Ford, 128, 129, 155

  Cummings, J. A., 405

  Cummings, Hon. John, 325

  Cunningham, E. B., 345

  Cunningham, Martin, 356

  Curran, Edw., 440

  Curran, John, 345

  Currell, H. G., 369

  Currier, C. P., 440

  Currier, Jos., 440

  Curry, Rob't, 452

  Curtin, Gov. And., 245

  Cushing, H. H., 369

  Cushing, J. M., 369

  Curtis, Albert, 382

  Curtis, Henry, 382

  Curtis, J. M., 145, 356

  Custer, Gen'l, 151, 288

  Cutler, Gen'l L., 195, 199

  Cutter, B. P., 369

  Cutter, Geo., 392


  Dabney's Mills, 272

  Dahlgren, Col., 150

  Dailey, E. W., 392

  Dailey, John, 356

  Dailey, Michael, 429

  Daily Schedule, 103

  Dakin, Abel F., 440

  Daley, Dan., 382

  Daley, Garrett, 382

  Daly, James, 356

  Damon, A. J., 417

  Damon, C. E., 429

  Damon, Edw., Jr., 382

  Dana, D. E., 429

  Danbenmayer, C., 417

  Daniels, G. N., 405

  Daniels, R. S., 13

  Danville, 293

  Darling, E. B., 345

  Darnstown, 66

  Darksville, 41

  Darren, Geo. W., 382

  Davis, Amos F., 392

  Davis, Chas. A., 441

  Davis, Chas. E., 214

  Davis, E. S., 356

  Davis, F. E., 441

  Davis, G. C., 356

  Davis, Isaac, 9

  Davis, Jeff., 237

  Davis, Jeff., at Church, 287

  Davis, John, 429

  Davis, Gen'l J. R., 163

  Davis, Col. P. S., 25, 26, 29, 38, 43, 47, 48, 55, 57, 58, 59, 60,
        63, 64, 66, 70, 89, 95, 96, 98, 100, 109, 112, 134, 137, 144,
        145, 146, 147, 149, 152, 156, 157, 182, 194, 201, 221, 225;
    death of, 229, 232, 234, 270;
    sketch of life, 333

  Davis, Rob't., 149

  Davis's Wife Comes, Col., 61

  Dawsonville, 66

  Day, J. D., 417

  Day, John, 405

  Dean, A. J., 405

  Dean, E. C., 369

  Dean, E. L., 405

  Dean, Geo. W., 452

  Dean, Jos. G., 452

  Dean, Josh. H., 452

  Dean, S. D., 345

  Dean, Wm. E., 405

  Dean, W. F., 417

  Deatonville, 289

  Deep Bottom, 240

  DeForrest, S. D., 382

  Delany, J. M., 417

  Delphin, Jas., Jr., 405

  Dennett, Geo. H., 340, 452

  Dennett, R. M., 452

  Dentistry, 239

  Depot of Supplies, 93

  Derby, Alden, 382

  Derry, B. B., 382

  Deserters Hung, 101

  Devens, Chas., 9

  Devines, D. S., 356

  Dickens, Chas., 164

  Dickerman, C. C., 382

  Digner, Rich., 356

  Digs His Own Grave, 245

  Dimond, John, 429

  Dinwiddie Co. Ct. H., 220, 272, 282

  Dodge, Albert H., 392

  Dodge, H. A., 345

  Dodge, J. P., 345

  Dodge, W. G., 417

  Dodge, Wm. H., 392

  Doherty, Peter, 453

  Doherty, Philip, 453

  Doherty, Wm., 406

  Donley, Jas., 382

  Doody, John, 429

  Dooner, John, 382

  Doorley, Jas., 453

  Dorchester, 20

  Dow, Albert F., 369

  Dow, Benj. H., 130, 214

   "   rides horseback, 234, 370

  Downer's Landing, 322

  Downing, Jon. P., 453

  Doyle, Pat., 357

  Doyle, Thos., 382

  Doyle, Wm. A., 345

  Draper, C. W., 357

  Dress Coats Sent Away, 152

  Dress Parade, First in Dixie, 33, 92

  Drew, C. F., 441

  Drill, Excellent, 70

  Driscoll, Chas., 429

  Drown, Sam'l H., 453

  Drury, Chas. A., 382

  Dudley, Chas., 357

  Duffy, Patrick, 453

  Dunbar, Rob't, 406

  Dunn, Anton, 383

  Dunn, Chas., 429

  Durgin, Jon., 383

  Dushuttle, H. L., 370

  Dusseault, J. H., 4, 117, 125, 169, 188, 189, 193, 210, 216, 229,
        232, 234, 244, 248, 329, 392, 426

  Dutch Reb. Lieut., 300

  Dutton, D. F., 441

  Duty on the Potomac, 53

  Dyer, Chas. E., 370

  Dyer, Jon. C., 392

  Dyer, L. R., 346

  Dyer, S. D., 357


  Eames' Story, Sergt. J. H., 296-299, 323, 325, 370

  Earle, Anthony, 453

  Earle, Wm. H., 417

  Early, Jubal A., 126, 132, 210, 228

  Eaton, Cyrus A., 453

  Eaton, Parker, 453

  Echibach, Louis, 441

  Eckenroth, C. H., 441

  Edgecomb, Noah, 453

  Edlefson, C. E., 393

  Edmands, Thos., 357

  Edward's Ferry, 37, 53

  Egyptian Darkness, 199

  Eighteenth Corps, 209

  Eischman, John, 346

  Ela, E. P. C., 383

  Eldridge, Prince, Jr., 346

  Elktown, 123

  Eleventh Army Corps Goes West, 105

  Elliot, A. L., 418

  Elliot, G. A., 418

  Ellicott's Mills, 30

  Elliott's Salient, 236

  Ellis, Benj. J., 370

  Ellis, C. J., 429

  Ellis, D. W., 346

  Ellis, H. C., 370

  Elms, C. O., 408

  Elwell, D. R., 416

  Ely's Ford, 150, 160

  Emerson, Sam'l, 393

  Emmitsburg, 41

  Endicott, I. B., 441

  Engine on City Point R. R., 258

  Ensminger, John, 406

  Ernest, Anet, 357

  Esip, Francis, 441

  Euderle, Jos. L., 383

  Evans, Wm., 441

  Evans, Wm. S., 346

  Evans' Brigade, 291

  Ewell, Gen'l R. S., 126, 163, 210

  "Eyes & Ears", 184


  F. F. V.'s, 90, 103

  "Fagged Out Men", 199

  Fairbanks, A. H., 453

  Fairchild, W. C., 393

  Falling Waters, 86

  Fannon, John, 346

  Farmville, 293

  Farnham, Col. A. B., 324

  Farrar, G. A., 222, 393

  Farren, Jas., 429

  Farrington, D. S., 429

  Fast Day, '63, '64, 156, 238

  Fauquier Co., 92

  Fay, E. P., 21

  Fay, Walter, 393

  February 29, 150

  Felch, H. F., 5, 145, 341, 389(2), 402, 441

  Felch, Ira H., 441

  Felch, Wm. F., 441

  Felker, S. O., 393

  Fellows, C. C., 393

  Fence-Rail Raid, 46

  Fence-Rails Used, 43

  Ferguson, John, 429

  Ferrero, Gen'l Edw., 240

  Field, Wm., 346

  FIELD AND STAFF, 333

  Fifth Army Corps, 88, 101, 124, 160;
    at Five Forks, 283;
    in pursuit, 287

  "Fight It Out On This Line", 195

  Findell, Adolphus, 406

  Fineran, Pat., 383

  Fink, John, 429

  Finn, J. W., drowns, 48, 441

  Finn, Michael, 454

  Fire in the Wilderness, 176

  FIRST ANNIVERSARY, 102

  First Army Corps, 94, 104, 110, 113, 115, 123

  First Mail, 201

  Fish, H. F., 346

  Fish, I. H., 430

  Fisher, A. J., 357

  Fisher, R. H., 430

  Fishing for Discharge, 60

  Fisk, Marion E., 370

  Fiske, John E., 442

  Fitcham, C. E., 393

  Fitzgerald, Jas., 464

  Fitzgerald, Mat., 418

  Fitz, Thos. D., 430

  Fitzgerald, Wm., 418

  Five Forks, 280, 283

  Fizzell, Jas., 357

  Flag Presentation, 26

  Flanagan, Anthony, 357

  Fletcher, J. M., 370

  Fletcher, T. M., 370

  Flinsky, Leon, 393

  Flint, Jas. F., 346

  Flint, Thos. W., 454

  Flood, Thos., 393

  Flynn, D. B., 346

  Flynn, John, 454

  Fobes, J. H., 430

  Fogg, G. L., 48, 442

  Fogg, Jos., 346

  Foley, Michael, 442

  Follin, John, 430

  Food, Prices of, 99

  "Foot Cavalry", 265

  Foraging, 38

  Forbes, J. E., 383

  Ford, C. E. H., 418

  Fort Albany, 32, 294

  Fort Canahey, 261

  Fort Davis, 234, 238, 240, 262

  Fort Duchesne, 256

  Fort Fisher, 258

  Fort Gaines, 67

  Forts Hell and Damnation, 224, 232, 262

  Fort Howard, 269

  Fort McGilvery, 223

  Fort McRea, 260

  Fort Mahone, 224, 240

  Fort Reno, 67

  Fort Sedgwick, 224, 234, 240, 260

  Fort Steadman, 223, 275, 276

  Fort Stevens, 228

  Fort Tillinghast, 33

  Fort Warren, 228

  Fort Wadsworth, 269

  Forts About Washington, 34

  Foster, Henry, 346

  Foster, Irving, 454

  Foster, Jacob, 418

  Fowle, Geo. E., 5,
    Tells Story of Weldon R. R., 250, 324, 454

  Fowler, T. W., 383

  Fox, Terrance L., 370

  Fox's Book, 203

  Frahm, Louis, 357

  Frederick, B. B., 357

  Frederic Junction, 81

  Fredericksburg Pike, 200

  Fredericksburg (battle), 52, 72

  Freeman, C. F., 442

  Freeman, J. C., 383

  Freeman, W. H., 347

  Freeman's Bridge, 265

  French, B. W., 418

  French, C. E., 418

  French, Chap. E. B., 64, 144, 146, 232, 238, 338

  French, Geo. L., 430

  French, Sergt. H. C., shot, 300, 418

  French, J. T., 383

  French, Gen'l W. H., 113, 127

  Fretchie, Barbara, 81

  Fuller, John E., 393

  Funkstown, 85


  Gage, Geo. W, 371

  Gainesville, 121

  Gallagher, Edw., 358

  Garnett, seized, 152

  Gammon, R. T., 430

  Garfield, Jos. W., 454

  Garfield, Wm. H., 442

  Gardner, E. P., 323, 436

  Gardner, Geo. D., 418

  Garrigan, John, 454

  Garvere, Pat, 383

  Gaston, Wm., 13

  Gavin, Pat. H., 383

  Gay, Abram S., 406

  Gay, Geo. W., 406

  Gen'l ---- and His Pills, 233

  Georgetown College, 67

  Geouggenheimer, S., 430

  Germanna Ford, 127, 160

  Gerrish, Tim, 430

  Gettysburg, 41, 77

  Gibbs, J. K., 149, 347

  Gifford, C. E., 383

  Gilbert, H. E., 371

  Gilcrease, E. H., 394

  Gilcreast, John, 454

  Giles, J. J., 17, 389

  Gill, A. L. B., 371

  Gillard, Thos. H., 371

  Gilligan, J. R., 454

  Girls in Keystone State, 28

  Give and Take, 261

  Gleason, Albert, 454

  Gleason, Edw, 371

  Gline, David, 430

  Glines, A. R., 418

  Glines, Col. Edw., 5, 329

  Glines, Fred. A., 5, 239;
    dies 303, 394

  GLINES' DIARY, CORP. F. A., 299-303

  "Go In", 237

  Goodhue, L. K., 394

  Goodhue, M. C., 430

  "Good Marnin', Kurnel!", 63

  Goodwin, Chas. M., 347

  Goodwin, Thos., 418

  Goose Creek, 91

  Gordon's (J. B.), Corps, 292

  Gordon, H. F., 358

  Gordon, O. S., 371

  Gordon, T., 17

  Gorham, David, 394

  Gorman, Michael, 418

  "Go to Blazes", 247

  Gould, Chas., 347

  Gould, J. F., 383

  Gould, Wm. A., 347

  Gourley, Sam'l, 442

  Graham, W. F. C., 394

  Graham, W. W., 14, 173, 323, 353

  Grand Review, 294

  Graff, Fred'k, 371

  Grant, Edw. L., 394

  Grant, Fred., 155

  Grant, Gen'l, 80, 153, 155, 160, 190, 214, 215, 227, 237, 240, 261;
    gets medal, 275;
    word to Lincoln, 287;
    letter to Lee, 290

  Gravelly Run, 278, 279

  Graves, Austin, 371

  Gray, Dexter, 245, 394

  "Great Eastern", 28

  Great Falls, 48

  Greeley's American Conflict, 168

  Green, J. T. B., 442

  Green, J. W., 358

  Gregg, Gen'l, 103, 257, 259, 265

  Griffin, Gen'l Chas., 170, 199, 290

  Griffins, Geo. W., 464

  Griffin, Jon. F., 442

  Grimmons, Hon. C. A., 329

  Groton, 27

  Grove Church, 124

  Grover, Cuvier, 44, 47

  Grover, H. C., 406

  Grover, J. O., 430

  Groves, Geo. D., 383

  Grumbling, 112

  Guerrillas, 91

  Guilford, J. O., 347

  Guiney, Lt. Col., 15

  Gunning, John, 358

  Guppy, Geo. F., 347

  Gurley House, 277

  Gushee, S. M., 406


  Hadley, E. B., 394

  Hafford, John, 394

  Hagan, Pat., 394

  Hale, E. M., 394

  Haley, Jas. T., 371

  Hall, Benj. J., 406

  Hall, Benning, Jr., 21, 442

  Hall, Eben A., 57, 407

  Hall, Daniel, 406

  Hall, R. W., 57, 188, 403

  Hall, Geo. W., 407

  Hall, Maj. Isaac, Tells of Hatcher's Run, 272

  Hall, Sam'l, 418

  Hall's Hill, 42

  Halleck, Gen'l H. W., 80, 293

  Ham, H. A., 358

  Ham, H. W., 418

  Hamilton, 90

  Hamford, Wm., 407

  Hammond, C. F., 443

  Hampton, Sam'l, 347

  Hampton, Wade, 41

  Hampton's Legion, 42

  Hancock, Henry, 443

  Hancock, Gen'l W. S., 168

  Hanley, J. H., 395

  Hanson, C. W., 339, 347, 366, 389(2), 426

  Hanson, F. K., 419

  Hanson, H. C., 383

  Harburn, W. M., 395

  Harding, Wm., 371

  Harlow, G. R., 395

  Hardy, Isaac, 13

  Hardy, Simon, 443

  Harper's Ferry, 81, 84, 88

  Harris, A. B., 407

  Harris, Otis S., 455

  Harris, S. B., 224, 430

  Harris Farm, 203

  Harrington, John, 384

  Harrison's Island, 37, 42

  Hart, Michael, 371

  Hartshorn, E. B., 371

  Harvey, Hosp. Stew., F., 340

  Harvey, J. A., 323, 325

  Harvey, Wm. F., 407

  Hassam, F. F., 20

  Haskell, A. S., 347

  Haskell, C. F., 371

  Haskell, W. J., 395

  Hatch, E. B., 372

  Hatch, Geo. C., 419

  Hatch, Geo. H., 395

  Hatch, Grafton, 419

  Hathaway, H. R., 372

  Hathaway, J. A., 407

  Hathaway, N. F., 372

  Hathaway, R. C., 372

  Hatcher's Run, 261, 272, 274

  Havre de Grace, 29

  Hayden, J. W., 384

  Hayden, Josiah, Jr., 384

  Hayden, Wm., 384

  Hayden, Z. M., 419

  Haymarket, 120, 121

  Haynes, A. S., 419

  Hayes, E. P., 419

  Hayes, Daniel, 443

  Haynes, J. P., 384

  Hays, Alex., Killed, 166

  Hayward, Paul, 443

  Hazelton, B. L., 384

  Hazelton, Warren, 443

  Healey, S. C., 431

  Heat and Cold, 99

  Heath, A. J., 372

  Hebard, H. J. A., 347

  Hegner, A. P., 347

  Heidenway, D., 52, 358

  Heinzelman, Gen'l, 44, 80

  Hemmenway, E. O., 455

  "Helter-skelter" March, 123

  Henderson, O. F., 431

  Henry, A. R., 347

  Henry, Daniel, 145, 358

  Henry, Michael, 431

  Hersey, Alfred, 419

  Hersey, Geo. L., 419

  Hersey, Geo. W., 384

  Hersey, H. D., 464

  Hepworth, Geo. H., 147

  Hervey, J. A., 372

  Heth, Gen'l. H., 163

  Hewett, J. G., 407

  Hicks, Wm. L., 358

  Higgins, Jesse, 53, 57

  Hill, B., Jr., 22

  Hill, Daniel G., 431

  Hill, Gen'l A. P., 126, 163, 210

  Hill, Gilman L., 431

  Hill, Geo. A., 395

  Hill, J. M., 419

  Hill, John, Jr., 384

  Hill, Joseph, 431

  Hilton, Com. Sergt. L. W., 340

  Hilton, Wm. L., 348

  Hingham, 19

  Hixon, Sergt. L. W., 229

  Hobbs, J. J., 384

  Hodges, Col., 14

  Hoey, Michael, 443

  Hoey, Thos., 443

  Holbrook, F. W. D., 372

  Holbrook, S. P., 358

  Holliday House, 281

  Holloway, I. N., 407

  Holmes, Geo., 431

  Holmes, R. T., 431

  Homeward Bound, 295

  Hooker, Gen'l, 72, 79, 153

  Hooker's Question, 42

  Hooper, S. T., 455

  Horgan, Cornelius, 384

  Horgan, P. D., 395

  Horton, H. B., 407

  Horton, J. E., 5, 238;
    dies, 306, 395

  HORTON'S DIARY, CORP. J. E., 303-306

  Hosea, I. F. R., 15, 366, 389

  Hoskins, Edw., 455

  Hoskins, Wm. H., 455

  Hospital Erected, 143

  Hospital Train, 183

  Houghton, E. J., 455

  House-building, 1864, 139

  Howard, E. F., 358

  Howard, Henry, 455

  Howard, Gen'l O. O., 105

  Howard, W. L., 395

  "How Are You, Boxford?", 55

  "How Are You, Rosey?", 108

  Howe, Henry, 112

  Howland, B. L., 408

  Howley, Thos., 384

  Hoyt, M. C., 372

  Hubbell, J. P., 372

  Huggins, A. H., 358

  Hughes, Jas., 384

  Humphreys, Gen'l, 238, 244

  Hunt, C. N., 21, 425

  Hunter, Gen'l D., 228

  Hunt, Sylvester, 431

  Hunter, Jas., 358

  Hunter, R. L., 358

  Hunter, Rob't, 187

  Hunting, Willard, 348

  Huntress, Elijah, 384

  Huntress, T. H., 384

  Hutchins, John, 15, 99, 112, 323, 365

  Hutchins, S. M., 456

  Hutchins, S. W., 419

  Hutter, John, 395

  Hyatt, Jas., 464

  Hyattstown, 41

  Hyde, J. R., 112

  Hyde, R. J., 395

  Hyde, T. L., 396

  Hyland, Albert, 419


  Illumination, 294

  Ingerson, Nat'l, 456

  Ingraham, Col. T., 24

  IN REBEL PRISONS, 296

  IN THE BEGINNING, 7

  IN VIRGINIA, 89

  Ireland, Edwin, 198, 372

  Ireland, H. A., 198, 372


  Jackson, "Stonewall", 82, 151

  Jackson, Wm. H., 419

  Jacobs, Wm. H., 419

  Jacob's Mills, 127

  Jarratt's Station, 266

  Jeffers, Geo. W., 464

  Jefferson, Thos., 82, 151

  Jenkins, Albert, 431

  Jenkins, Gen'l M., 171

  Jennings, J. E., 443

  Jennison, C. W., 443

  Jepson, S. G., 373

  Jericho Ford, 205

  Jersey City, 28

  Jerusalem Plank Road, 231, 232, 265, 267

  Jetersville, 289

  Jewett, Col. A. B., 57;
    his commission, 65

  Jewett, J. G., 408

  "John Brown Fort", 82

  Johnson, Chas. H., 456

  Johnson, David, 431

  Johnson, Geo., 348

  Johnson, John, 372

  Johnson, Mort., 396

  Johnson, Wm., 432

  Johnson, Mayor, 325

  Johnson's Corps, Col. Ed., 196

  Johnston, "Joe", 171, 274

  Johnston's Surrender, 293

  Joining Potomac Army, 80

  Jones, Asa L., 348

  Jones, Geo. W., 420

  Jones, C. G., 396

  Jones, Chas. S., 420

  Jones, Daniel L., 431

  Jones, Col. E. F., 24, 25

  Jones, Gen'l J. M., 171

  Jones, Llewellyn, 431

  Jones, Nathan, 443

  Jones, Obadiah, 373

  Jones, Wm., 359

  Jones, Wm. H., 408

  Jones, Wm. H., 456

  Jordan, F. H., 464

  Jordan, J. F., 396

  Jordan, T. W. D., 432

  Joyce, Alfred, 373

  Joyce, H. S., 373

  Joyce, S. W., 91, 373

  Joyce, Winslow, 373

  July 4th, '63, 79;
    '64, 227


  Kane, D. S., 408

  Kanily, Daniel, 384

  Kearney, Phil, 42

  Keedysville, 87

  Keep, Wm. J., 385

  Kellar, Balt., 408

  Kelley, John, 359

  Kelley, Thos., 432

  Kelly, Edward, 359

  Kelly, Jas., 385

  Kelly, John, 385

  Kelly, T. P., 396

  Kelly, Thos., 464

  Kelly, Wm., 408

  Kelly, Wm. B., 408

  Kelly's Ford, 112, 113, 124, 129, 133

  Kemp, N. S., 443

  Kendrick, C. C., 373

  Kendrick, David, 396

  Kendrick, E. T., 373

  Kenneston, E. F., 396

  Keniston, Wm. H., 432

  Kennedy, John, 420

  Kennedy, John, 396

  Kenyon, Major, 60

  Kerr, John, 432

  Kettle Run, 121

  Kilby St., 247

  Killduff, Jas., 359

  Killed and Wounded, 264, 274

  Kilpatrick, Gen'l, 103

  Kilpatrick's Raid, 150

  Kimball, C. W., 432

  Kimball, E. F., 432

  King, A. F., 443

  King, Edw., 408

  Kingsbury, C. G., 385

  Kingsbury, C. H., 456

  Kimmings, F. M., 396

  Kinsley, F. R., 17, 145, 159, 231, 254, 262;
    sketch of life, 337, 389

  Kinsley, W. C., 17, 145, 146, 189, 220, 245;
    wounded, 281;
    comes back, 293, 389, 425, 449

  Killridge, J. N., 385

  Kling, Caspar, 464

  Knapp, C. P., 348

  Knapp, Geo. L., 408

  Knapp, L. S., 408

  "Knapsack Drill", 59

  Knapsacks from Arlington, 39;
    from Funkstown, 100

  Kraetzer, J. F., 348


  Ladd, Lieut., 26

  Ladd, Edward, 396

  Lady in Camp, 142

  Landers, Dan., 432

  Land of Desolation, 205

  Landgreve, Geo., 359

  Landrum House, 199

  Lane, H. A., 409

  Lane, Gen'l J. H., 163

  Lange, Jas., 373

  Langley, S. A., 432

  Lapurve, Alfred, 456

  Laurel Hill, 191-193

  Lawler, J. A., 409

  Lawless, Maurice, 420

  Lawrence Light Guard, 14

  Lawrence, Gen'l S. C., 15, 330

  Leach, E. C., 420

  Leach, R. M., 359

  Laahy, Jeremiah, 409

  Leavitt, Maj. A. D., 117, 118, 137, 198

  Leavitt, C. F., 385

  Leavitt, H. W., 420

  LeBarron, D. J., 443

  LeBarron, W. H., 456

  Ledwith, John, 359

  Lee, Edward, 348

  Lee, Fitz Hugh, 41

  Lee, Rob't E., 32, 84, 113;
    letter to wife, 119, 210, 237;
    would interview Grant, 275;
    surrender, 291

  Lee House, R. E., 239

  Leesburg Pike, 37

  Leighton, H. B., 145, 146, 340

  Lendall, S. N., 420

  Leonard, H. F., 409

  Leonard, Col. S. H., 122, 129, 136, 144, 151, 170

  Leonard, W. E., 409

  Leroy, Chas., 420

  Leslie, Albert S., 456

  Leslie, J. F., 43, 116, 324, 456;
    ruse, 318

  LESLIE'S RUSE, J. F., 318

  Levins, Morris, 396

  Lewis, E. H., 5, 359

  Lewis, Jas., 420

  Lewis, Jos., 373

  LEWIS, DIARY, CORP. E. H., 306-308

  Libby, Jas. C., 456

  Libbey Prison, 293

  "Libeller of the Press", 215

  Licking Run, 125

  Life in Camp, 23

  Lilley, R. G., 444

  Lincoln, B. C., 420

  Lincoln, Dan., 409

  Lincoln, Pres., 7, 70, 77, 96, 237, 270;
    reviews Fifth Corps, 277;
    enters Petersburg, 288;
    killed, 293

  Lincoln, Col. W. S., 76

  Lines, Daniel, 149, 432

  Ligontown Ferry, 289

  Linscott, A. R., 324, 457

  Linscott, C. F., 457

  Linscott, G. W., 457

  Litchfield, O. V., 373

  Littlefield, G. H., 444

  Littlefield, H. B., 385

  Livermore, L. D., 348

  Livingston, Rob't, 373

  Locke, John F., 53, 118, 148, 325, 329, 396

  LOCKE'S RECOLLECTIONS, J. F., 308-317

  Lockwood, Gen'l H. H., 209, 213

  Loker, Jas. D., 359

  Lombard, J. P., 457

  Long, John D., 324

  Long Bridge, 31

  Long Bridge on the James, 213, 216

  Longstreet to the West, 103, 163, 166, 172

  Loring, A. A., 432

  Loring, A. M., 432

  Lothrop, A. A., 432

  Lovett, Wash., 112, 397

  Loyalty in Poolesville, 56

  Lunt, Theo. H., 385

  Luzarder, J. M., 385

  Luzarder, Moses, 385

  Lyle, Col. Peter, 94, 96, 100, 168, 170, 213, 215, 217, 255, 263

  Lyman, Col. Theo., 178, 193

  Lynch, John, 444

  Lynnfield, 11, 13, 24, 326, 329

  McArthur, Peter, 349

  Macaulay, 164

  McAuliffe, Sam'l, 444

  McCaffrey, Jas., 444

  McCann, John, 420

  Macarty, E. H., 359

  McCarthy, Eugene, 432

  McCarthy, John, 385

  McCarthy, John, 397

  McCarthy, John, 457

  McCarthy, Thos., 457

  McClearance, Arch., 409

  McCoy, Col. T. F., 156, 201, 232, 255

  McCoy, F. R., 256

  McCoy's Ford, 41

  McDermott, B. E., 373

  McDevitt, Wm., 366(2), 457

  McDonald of "B", 187

  McDonald, Geo., 359

  McDonald, Geo. F., 397

  McDonald, John, 360

  McDowell, Gen'l, 151, 153

  McFarland, S. G., 409

  McFarland, Wm., 433

  McFeeley, Sam., 457
    with the colors, 252

  McGaken, R. T., 433

  McGee, Jas., 374

  McGlone, Michael, 385

  McGoff, Jas., 458

  McGuire, John, 458

  McGurdy, Alex., 397

  McJunkin, Sam'l, 397

  McKenna, Wm., 458

  McKenzie, Alfred, 12

  Mackenzie, Dan., 360

  McLain, C. W., 444

  McLaughlin, Lieut., 16

  McLaughlin, M., 374

  McLean, Wilmer, 291

  McNall, Geo., 397

  McNamara, B., 374

  McNaughton, M., 420

  McNeil, Wm. C., 360

  McNulty, Thos., 360

  McPherson, J. J., 360

  McQuade, John, 397

  Madison, Ct. House, 151

  Mahall, John, 374

  Mahan, Pat., 385

  Mahone, Jas., 385

  Mahone, Gen'l Wm., 163, 236, 253

  Mahony, Tim., 458

  Mail arrival, 39, 43

  Mail-wagon stopped, 66

  Maine Troops, =1= H. Arty., 203, 221, 226;
    =16= Reg't, 33, 94, 96, 108, 117, 137, 155, 158, 175, 195, 238,
        248, 251, 270;
    =23=, 44, 47, 53

  Makell, Chas., 433

  Makepeace, N. G., 409

  Maltese Cross, 246

  Manassas Gap R. R., 120

  Manchester, 293

  Mangohick Church, 208

  Mann, F. E., 48, 444

  Manning, J. A., 374

  Mansfield, W. O., 349

  Marran, Thos., 458

  Marsden, Jos., 385

  Marsh, W. W., 444

  Marshall, J. P., 239

  Marteau, Ludovic, 349

  Martindale, Barracks, 68

  Martindale, John H., 68, 80

  Martinsburg, 41

  Marty, Jacob, 433

  Maryland, 29

  Maryland Farms, 38

  Mason, Thos., 458

  Mason, Wm. W., 409

  Masonic Lodge, 144, 146, 152, 234

  MASONIC LODGE, 145

  Mass. Troops, =1=, 218;
    =2=, 43;
    =4=, 19;
    =5=, 14, 17;
    =8=, 82, 83, 89, 94;
    =12=, 94, 122, 183, 224, 230;
    =13=, 32, 210, 233;
    =15=, 36;
    =18=, 24;
    =19=, 36;
    =20=, 36;
    =34=, 76, 79, 81, 83;
    =35=, 24;
    =37=, 87;
    =38=, 24;
    =48=, 82, 83, 89;
    =51=, 82, 83, 88;
    =9= Batt., 233;
    =10= Batt., 55, 124, 205;
    =11= Batt., 75;
    1ST H. A., 202-3

  Matrimonial prank, 225

  Maxfield, Hiram, 325

  Maxwell, John, 239, 349

  Maxwell, J. H., 433

  May Day, '65, 158, 293

  Mead, Alf., 444

  Mead, J. A., 458

  Meade, Gen'l Geo. G., 85, 100, 113, 126, 127, 159, 167, 278, 293

  Meade, J. K., 112

  Mears, R. E., 349

  Mears, Sam'l, Jr., 349

  Medford, 14, 324, 329

  Meeting House Hill, 20

  Melton, J. L., 360

  Melville Gardens, 322

  Mentzell, Herman, 349

  Mentzer, M. H., 5, 186, 349

  Mentzer, Wm. A., 5, 185, 187, 252, 279, 349;
    at Five Forks, 286

  Merrifield, J. A., 339, 349, 402

  Merrifield, Jos. A., 353, 354, 379

  Merrill, Franklin, 444

  Merrill, Steph., 444

  Merritt, B. F., 374

  Merrett, J. H., 397

  Merritt, J. S., 397

  Messenger, C. W., 445

  Meston, P. D., 374

  Metzger, Mr., 56

  Michigan Cav., 6th, appears, 60

  Middleburg, 90

  Miles, E. P., 349

  Miller, Chas. H., 386

  Miller, Geo. L., 386, 420

  Miller, H. F., 421

  Millett, G. C., 433

  Millett, J. H., 433

  Milliken, Jas., 349

  Milner, T. K., 360

  Mills, Clark, 68

  Mills, Edwin, 323, 339, 342, 397

  Mills, J. R., 445

  Minard, N. C., 421

  Mine Explosion, 236, 238

  MINE RUN, 126

  Mitchell, Edw., Jr., 409

  Mitchell, F. A., 360

  Mitchell, Ass't Surg., H. H., 338

  Mitchell, I. H., 5, 182, 279, 349, 350

  Mitchell, Nathan, 409;
   dies, 35

  Mitchell, S. H., 194, 230, 350

  Mitchell, T. O. H., 374

  Mitchell's Station, 135

  MITCHELL'S STATION, 136

  Mohan, T. P., 360

  Monahan, Mich., 445

  Monk, G. W., 5, 433

  Monk, Rob't, 5, 433

  Monocacy, 41

  Monroe, C. E., 409

  Monroe, Jas., 360

  Monticello, 151

  Moore, C. H., 445

  Moore, H. B., 22

  Moore, R. C., 458

  Moore, Sidney, 360

  Moran, Jas., 397

  Moran, Pat., 386

  Mordo, J. A., 421

  Morgan, E. D., 8

  Morgan, John, 360

  Moriarty, John, 386

  Morey, Raphael, 445

  Morrill, D. W., 458

  Morse, B. G., 350

  Morse, Curtis, 445

  Morse, D. F., 350

  Morse, Hen. M., 445

  Morse, Hor. B., 445

  Morrison, C. H., 48, 445

  Morrison, J. H., 433

  Morrison, I. T., 374

  Morrison, S. H., 386

  Morristown, 123

  Morton, Wm. S., 15

  Morton's Ford, 110, 127

  Moses, Geo. F., 14, 360

  Mott, Gen'l G., 258

  Moulton, G. W., 445

  Moulton, H. W., 13, 337

  Moulton, O. H., 445

  Moulton, Wm. J., 350

  Morrill, R. W., 445

  Moving again, 43

  Moynihan, John, 386

  Muddy Branch, 44

  Mulberry trees, 221

  Mullen, Patrick, 350

  Mulligan, H. C., 5

  Mulligan, Simon, 5, 22, 323, 436

  Murdock, Geo., 421

  Murphy, Jas., 350

  Murphy, Jas., 445

  Murphy, Thos., 360

  Murphy, Thos., 421

  Murray, Geo. H., 386

  Murray, Geo., 464

  Murray, Hugh, 458

  Murray, M. A., 386

  Murray, Pat., 361

  Murray, Syl., 458

  Murray, Thos., 397

  Murray, Thos., 433

  Musket and Shovel, 164

  Myers, Geo., 398

  Myers, Wm., 350


  Namozine, 288

  Nantasket, 325, 329

  Nashville Victory, 268

  Natick, 21, 323, 325, 328, 329

  National Fast, 72

  Naylor, A. C., 410

  Neal, J. S., 421

  Neerwinden, 164

  Nelson, Geo. S., 13, 145, 254, 262, 340

  Nelson, John, 386

  Nelson, Wm., 410

  Newcomb, Capt., 15

  Newcomb, H. A., 386

  Newcomb, H. G. O., 386

  Newcomb, I. T., 386

  Newcomb, Levi, 421

  Newell, J. H., 398

  N. E. Relief, 295

  Newhall, F. E., 48, 445

  New Market, 41

  Newton, B. S., 433

  Newton, Gen'l John, 83, 86, 127, 142, 153, 154

  New Hampshire Troops, =14=, 44, 47, 48, 53, 58, 62, 65, 71, 75, 79

  New Jersey, Through, 28, 295

  New York Troops, =9=, 201, 262;
    =83=, 214;
    =94=, 94, 96, 121;
    =97=, 252;
    =104=, 94, 96, 156, 238;
    =111=, 262;
    =141=, 198, 169, 68;
    =2d=, =3d=, =7th= H. Art,. 203

  Nichols, John, 16

  Nichols, W. G., 350

  Nichols, W. L., 410

  Nightingale, Fred'k, 386

  Nightingale, Sam'l, 386

  Ninth Corps, 167, 169, 193, 206, 236

  Noble, J. A., 361

  Nolan, Patrick, 361

  NON-COMMISSIONED STAFF, 339

  Norris, W. F., 458

  NORTH ANNA RIVER, 204

  Northey, G. A., 398

  Northey, W. H., 374

  Norton, F. F., 434

  Nottaway River, 261, 265

  Nute, Jos., 361

  Nutting, Albion, 350

  Ny River, 199


  Oak cut down by bullets, 196

  Oakley, Frank, 464

  O'Brien, Dan., 398

  O'Brien, Dennis, 446

  O'Brien, Thos., 398

  O'Brien, Tim., 386

  O'Brien, Wm., 459

  O'Connor, Cornelius, 446, 459

  O'Donald, Edw., 459

  O'Donald, Owen, 459

  O'Hara, Pat., 421

  O'Neil, Henry, 398

  O'Riley, John, 459

  O'Sullivan, John, 398

  O'Sullivan, Thos., 421

  Odiorne, Wm., 398

  Offutt, Mr., 49

  Offutt's Cross Roads, 47

  O. & A. R. R., 93, 95, 104, 135

  Oliver, F. J., 112, 398

  Oliver, J. W., 112, 325, 398

  On the March, 34

  Orange Court House, 128, 162

  Ord, John, 421

  Ord, Gen'l E. O. C., 283, 291

  "Order Arms!", 70

  Order of Corps at Cold Harbor, 211

  Order No. 26, 10

  Ordway, L. E., 350

  Osborn, A. W., 374

  Osborne, Dr. Geo., 12

  Osborne, Paul, 350

  Otta, Antone, 398


  Packard, S. C., 350

  Packer, States, 410

  Page, Surg. C. G., 99, 144, 338

  Page, C. S., 434

  Page, T. N., 113;
    Lee's Army, 138, 237;

  Paine, J. T., 398

  Paineville, 289

  Palmer, W. D., 398

  Palmer, Wm., 434

  Pamunkey River, 208

  Paoli's Ford, 129

  Park, J. C., 13

  Parker, J. L., 324

  Parker, T. M., 459

  Parker, Theo. M., 459

  Parkhurst, M. C., 353, 399

  Parlin, Wm. D., 446

  Parks, Chas. T., 459

  Parks, Peter, Jr., 459

  Parrott, Albert, 387

  Parsons, J. G., 421

  Parrott, L. H., 387

  Patterson, Jas., 434

  Patterson, J. R., 351

  Paul, I. D., 18, 57, 122, 402

  Paull, D. S., 410

  Paull, T. W., 410

  Pay, Advance, 26

  Paymaster Comes, 60, 71, 75, 96, 104, 125, 152

  Peabody, Town of, 340

  Peace Commission, 270

  Pearson, C. E., 410

  Peck, Geo. E., 387

  Peck, Gen'l J. J., 69

  Peebles' Farm, 259

  Pegram's Salient, 236

  Peirson, Gen'l C. L., 3, 4, 36, 47, 63, 85, 96, 99, 101, 106, 108,
        131, 132, 137;
    orders church torn down, 140, 147, 148, 149, 170, 171, 174, 178;
    account of May 8, 180-2, 183, 184, 186, 187, 189, 192, 193, 194;
    comes back, 214, 229, 234;
    wounded, 245;
    tells his story, 246, 254, 323, 324, 325, 329;
    sketch of life, 334-335, 465

  Penniman, J. M., 421

  Pennsylvania Troops, =90=, 94, 106, 109, 156, 168, 170, 255, 263;
    =107=, 94, 99, 156, 201, 232, 238, 239, 255;
    =48=, 236

  Percival, G. P., 387

  Perkins, B. C., 12

  Perkins, C. H., 354

  Perkins, C. H., 387

  Perkins, H. S., 361

  Perkins, J. H., 351

  Perkins, Jon., 361

  Perkins, Thos., 446

  Perry, G. W., 399

  Perry, J. J., 21

  Perry, O. H., 434

  Perry, S. N., 387

  Perryville, 29

  Persimmons, 118

  Persons, H. J., 459

  Person's Promotion, Oscar, 62, 379, 459

  Petten, D. M., 446

  Petersburg, 145, 216

  PETERSBURG, 219

  Petersburg Express, 256

  Phelps, John, 434

  Philadelphia, 28

  Phillips, A. W., 399

  Phillips, Chas. A., 460

  Phillips, C. B., 22

  Phillips, D. M., 410

  Picket Duty, 38

  Picket on the Rapidan, 106

  Pickets Captured, 112

  Pierce, C. A., 410

  Pierce, Maj. E. C., 210

  Pierce, Eli, 387

  Pierce, John, Jr., 351

  Pierce, Wm. L. G., 434

  Pierson, J. M., 446

  Pike, J. F., 421

  Pingree, C. C., 421

  Pinkham, H. W., 399

  Pleasants, Col. H., 236

  Plummer, N. F., Jr., 351

  Plympton, Wm. P., 361

  Point Shirley, 325

  Pollard, Geo. F., 460

  Pomeroy, Alonzo, 422

  Pony Mt., 161

  Poole, C. N., 422

  Poole, F., 12

  Poole, R. F., 42, 460

  Poolesville, 36, 41, 51, 52, 143

  Poore, John D., 12

  Pope, Gen'l, 151

  Poplar Springs Church, 259

  Porter, Chas. H., 3, 15, 16, 162, 211, 212, 223;
    tells of Weldon R. R., 248-50, 253, 278;
    Five Forks, 285, 322, 324, 325, 341, 379

  Porter, Gen'l Horace, 283

  Porter, Whitcomb, 15

  PORT WALTHALL, 219

  "Position of a Soldier", 187

  Potomac River, 35, 41

  Potomac Crossed, 31

  Potter, John F., 253

  Powell, David, 351

  Powell, Gen'l Wm. H., 289, 292

  Powers, M. O., 399

  Powers, Robert, 399

  Pratt, J. H., 374

  Presbry, Capt., 17

  Prescott, B. F., 230, 434

  Preston, John, 434

  Prince Edward Ct. House, 289, 290

  Prisoners Recaptured, 188

  Prospect Hill, 17

  Prospect Station, 290

  Prouty, B. W., 422

  Prouty, Elijah, 422

  Prouty, Isaac, 422

  Prouty, J. H., 5, 19, 422

  Prouty, J. L., 374

  Prouty, Wm., Jr., 422

  Providence, 295

  Pryor, Roger A., 253

  Pullen, Gilbert, 45, 136

  Pullen, Sumner, 45, 136

  Purcell, Geo. J., 351

  Purington, W. E., 351

  Putnam, Chas., 374

  Putnam, Israel, 17

  Pyne, Fred'k, 361


  Quarles' Mills, 207

  Quimby, I. B., 410

  Quincy, 15, 324, 325, 328, 329

  Quincy, Josiah, 15


  Ragan, Michael, 446

  Rainy March, A, 65

  Ramsdell, E. W., 375

  Ramsdell, J. F., 324, 460

  Rand, Wm. L., 410

  Randall, Geo. W., 399

  Rapidan, 160

  RAPIDAN, THE, 106

  Rappahannock River, 97, 129

  Rappahannock Station, 95, 124

  Rations Arrive, 218

  Ream's Station, 242, 258

  Reaney, Pat., 361

  Rebel Deserters, 63, 157, 239

  Reb. Fords Potomac, 39

  Rebel Raiders, 51

  Rebels Fed, 292

  Reddy, Geo. H., 460

  Redman, W. S. C., 375

  Reed, J. D., 18, 379, 402, 436, 437

  Reed, M. D., 468

  Reed, Nathan, 446

  Regor, H. B., 460

  REGIMENTAL ROSTER, 330

  REGIMENTAL VETERAN ASSOCIATION, 322-330

  Rendezvous, Points of, 10

  Return from Appomattox, 292

  Reunions, Regimental, 322-330

  Revere Beach, 329

  Reynolds, Gen'l, 153

  Reynolds, Geo., 446

  Reynolds, M., 351

  Reynolds, W. H., 410

  Rhodes, Rob't, 20, 425

  Rice, Gov. Alex. H., 324

  Rice, Gen'l J. C., 192

  Rice's Station, 289

  Rich, Giles H., 361

  Richards, E. D., 434

  Richards, Henry, 399

  Richards, John, 434

  Richardson, A. H., 460

  Richardson, A. L., 324, 460

  Richardson, C. A., 375

  Richardson, F., 375

  Richardson, F. S., 194, 351

  Richardson, H. C., 399

  Richardson, J. I., 23, 25, 449

  Richardson, M. O., 351

  Richardson, W. R., 361

  Richardson, Sam'l, Jr., 460

  Richmond, 208, 293
    on fire, 287

  Ricker, O. P., 361, 437

  Riley, Jas., 410

  Riley, John, 399

  Roach, Maurice, 387

  Roberts, J. S., 399

  Roberts, J. W., 375

  Roberts, M. F., 5, 182, 375

  Robertson, B. H., 41

  Robertson's Tavern, 128, 130

  Robie, J. E., 434

  Robinson, A. J., 362

  Robinson, Gen'l J. C., 83, 102, 105, 109, 141, 143, 153, 157, 168,
        186, 195, 276, 324

  Robinson, J. R., 362

  Rocket, Jas., 410

  Rockville, 66

  Rodgers, H. C., 387

  Rogers, Chas., 460

  Rogers, E. S., 410

  Rogers, Wm. H., 376

  Rohersville, 87

  Roland, Miles, 461

  Roland, Richard, 362

  Rollins, S. P., 48, 399

  Rosemere, Conrad, 362

  Rouse, S. N., 434

  Routine in Camp, 65

  Rowanty Creek, 261, 279

  Roxbury, 13, 325, 328, 329

  Roy, John, 351

  Russell, Edw., 362

  Russell, Geo. A., 387

  Rugg, Geo. J., 376

  Russell, G. S., 434

  Russ, Geo. W., 387

  Russell, H. H., 422

  Russell, Levi, 446

  Russell, Nat., 411

  Ryder, Alvah, 351


  Sailor's Creek, 289

  St. Mary's Church, 217

  St. Patrick's Day, 152

  "Salient", 195

  Salisbury, 150

  Salisbury Prison, Co. A, B, C, 296;
    D, E, F, G, H, 297;
    I, K, 298

  Samson, A. A., 376

  Sanborn, Orin, 461

  Sanborn, W. H., 422

  Sandy Hook, 81

  Sargent, Geo., 387

  Sargent, W. H., 376

  Saunders, Abraham, 362

  Saunders, C. R. P., 351

  Savil, S. O., 434

  Savill, Geo. W., 387

  Sawin, G. L., 22

  Sawyer, Aug. T., 461

  Sawyer, Geo., 464

  "Say, You Yank", 234

  Schaff, Gen'l Morris, 161, 162, 170, 177

  Schaffer, Henry, 362

  Schoen, Fred, 351

  SCHOOL IN CAMP, 146

  School of the Soldier, 39

  Schroeffel, Phil., 362

  Schwartz, Jacob, 351

  Scituate, 19

  Scott, Chas., 461

  Scott, P. F., 362

  Scott's 900, 51, 53, 57, 58, 71

  Searles, Loring, 461

  Seaver, Jas. E., 5

  Seaverns, H. A., 434, 449

  Second Army Corps, 103, 113, 123, 127, 160

  Sedgwick, Gen'l John, 85, 127, 151;
    death of, 189.

  Sell, Jas. T., 446

  Seneca Landing, 43

  Seneca Mills, 36

  Senter, J. H., 376

  Seward, Wm. H., 270

  Sham-battle, 58

  Shavlin, Hugh, 387

  Shaw, Geo. W., 411

  Shaw, Henry, 400

  Shaw, John B., 400

  Shaw, P. J., 422

  Shaw, Thos. T., 400

  Shaw, Wm. G., 461

  Shaw, Zenas, 352

  Shea, P. E., 362

  Shean, Pat., 435

  Shedd, A. A., 362

  Shedd, Geo. V., 362

  Sheehan, J. H., 461

  Sheehan, Jerry, 387

  Sheehan, Tim., 461

  Sheen, J. H., 461

  Sheen, Wm. G., 16, 379 (2), 414, 437

  Shenandoah, 41, 82

  Shenandoah Valley, 237

  Sherburne, B. F., 411

  Sheridan, J. A., 376

  Sheridan, Gen'l, 158, 177, 275, 278, 283

  Sherman, C. F., 422

  Shoes, Private's, 95

  Short, T. G., 422

  Shot in the head, 245

  Shoulder-Scales, 72

  Shrewsbury, Battle of, 164

  Sibley Tents arrive, 33, 43

  Sickles, Dan. E., 80

  Signor, W. H., 435

  Silver, Man., 461

  Silver Springs, 325

  Simonds, Geo. N., 352

  Simonds or Simons, Wm., 388

  Simons, Thos., 422

  Simpson, J. H., 377

  Six Mile House, 243

  Sixteenth Maine and the Thirty-ninth, 271

  Sixth Army Corps, 87, 113, 124, 127, 150, 160, 189;
    leaves Army of Potomac, 228, 289

  Skeele, M. B., 423

  Skehan, John, 400

  Skinner, F. C., 411

  Skinner, Geo. F., 362

  Skinner, J. B., 423

  Slattery, Edw., 388

  Slaughter Mt., 151

  Sleeper, J. H., 63

  Sleeper's Battery, 55, 61, 124

  Slocum, Gen'l H. W., 105

  Sloper, C. W., 446

  Small, Adj. A. R., 197, 270

  Small, Thos. E., 352

  Smalley, Henry, 352

  Smith, A. H., 400

  Smith, Abial E., 447

  Smith, Addison, 400

  Smith, C. D., 352

  Smith, Chas. H., 363

  Smith, E. H. C., 411

  Smith, F. M., 481

  Smith, Geo., 352

  Smith, Geo. T., 411

  Smith, Jas., 411

  Smith, H. R., 363

  Smith, H. W., 435

  Smith, Nath'l, 352

  Smith, Peter, 363

  Smith, R. C., 435

  Smith, S. N., 400

  Smith, S. V., 423

  Smith, Sid., Jr., 363

  Smith, Gen'l W. F., 209

  Smith, W. M., 400

  Smith, Wm. S., 377

  Snow, C. H., 411

  Snow, E. M., 352

  Snow-fall, First, 46

  Snow-storm, Heavy, 59, 61, 63, 64, 153

  Socrates, 26

  "Soft Bread", 122

  Somerby, Frank, 363

  Somerville, 16, 324, 325, 329

  Song, Exchange of, 109

  Sons of Temperance, 71, 74, 76

  So. Danvers, 12, 13, 340

  So. Shore, 19

  Southside, R. R., 260, 289, 293

  Southworth, Dal., 435

  Southworth, W. B., 377

  Spaulding, C. A., 423

  Spear, E. A. F., 423

  Spear, E. A., 15, 16, 378

  Spear, W. T. G., 14, 145, 146, 173, 353

  Spellan, Den., 363

  Spencer, R. J., 352

  "Spoiling for a Fight", 277

  Spokesfield, Ferd., 462

  Spooner, L. A., 230, 447

  Spontroz, Aug., 462

  Sproal, A. H., 411

  Spottswood, Alex., 162

  Spottsylvania, 162, 196

  SPOTTSYLVANIA, 178, 200

  Sprague, Geo. A., 462

  Sprague, Thos., 423

  Staggles, Wm. E., 462

  Stall, J. M., 411

  Stanley, F. A., 435

  Stanton, E. M., 277

  Staples, H. A., 462

  Staples, B. F., 411

  Stearns, N. D., 447

  Stebbins, T. S., 423

  Stedman, C. H., 447

  Stephins, Alex. H., 270

  Stephenson, John, 19

  Stephenson, Luther, 19

  Stepper, Jos., Jr., 363

  Stetson, Warren, 423

  Stevens, C. E., 363

  Stevens, Elb., 352

  Stevens, L. S., 447

  Stevens, Leslie, 400

  Stevens, S. M., 377

  Stevensburg, 112

  Stevenson, Gen'l T. G., 193

  Stewart, Sam'l, 447

  Stewart, Sylvanus, 447

  Stickney, H. C., 400

  STILL IN CAMP, 150

  Stockwell, A. G., 423

  Storm, Severest, 93

  Stone, A. C., 435

  Stone, F. C., 447

  Stone, H. D., 425

  Stoneman, Gen'l, 41

  Story, Asa, 352

  Stowers, Wm. C., 462

  Straight's Tunnel, 156

  Strickland, Wm., 363

  Stringfellow, Dr. J. H., 106

  Strong, Edw. A., 363

  Stuart, Hosp. Stew., Geo. A., 340

  Stuart, k., J. E. B., 183

  Stuart, Thos., 363

  Stuart's Cavalry, 36, 40, 49, 78, 103

  Stuart's Raid, 41

  Sturtevant, H. B., 363

  Styner, Sam'l, 447

  Suffolk, Va., 69

  Sullivan, Dan., 411

  Sullivan, D. O., 364

  Sullivan, Thos., 364

  Sullivan, Thos., 447

  Summers, Geo. M., 352

  Sumner, E. V., 40

  Sumner, F. H., 435

  Sumner, W. S., 435

  "Sunny South," 159

  Sussex Ct. House, 266

  Sutler, Regimental, 45, 105, 136, 240

  Sutton, Eben., 13

  Swain, E. A., 364

  Swain, J. M., 14, 145, 353

  Swan, Chas., 364

  "Swapping" with Rebs, 106

  Sweat, C. W., 364

  Sweet, John, 388

  Sweetland, B. E., 435

  Swinton, Wm., 113, 191, 203

  Sword to Gen'l Meade, 100

  Sylvester, J. Q. A., 423

  Symmes, Alf., 364


  Tabor, N. Z., 462

  Taft, I. D., 364

  Taunton, 17, 18, 324

  Taylor, Geo. C., 447

  Taylor, Geo. W., 411

  Taylor, Marcus, 388

  Tennallytown, 35, 67

  Terry, Gen'l, 219

  Terry, A. P., 411

  Tevlin, Mich., 464

  Thanksgiving Day, '62, 49, 50;
    '63, 126;
    '64, 262

  Thanksgiving for Co. C, 140-1

  Thayer, E. S., 412

  Thayer, H. F., 412

  Thayer, J. J. H., 388

  Thayer, N. W., 423

  Third Army Corps, 113, 123, 124, 127

  Thomas, Alph., 423, 449

  Thomas, Chas., 412

  Thomas, Chas. S., 412

  Thomas, Erasmus, 388

  Thomas, G. N. B., 435

  Thomas, O. C., 424

  Thomas, W. H., 400

  Thomas, W. O., 424

  Thompson, Abijah, 5, 251, 323, 324, 325, 329, 462

  Thompson's Story, 62

  Thompson, C. W., 20, 414

  Thompson, Edw., 377

  Thompson, F. W., 400

  Thompson, Jas., 377

  Thorndike, Surg. Wm., 144, 338

  Thoroughfare Gap, 119, 121

  Tidd, L. R., 23, 25, 252, 323, 324, 449(2)

  Tighe, Terrance, 412

  Tilden, Col. C. W., 155, 324

  Tileston, Eben., 435

  Tileston, Lem., 435

  Tinkham, Herb., 412

  Tisdale, C. H., 424

  Tisdale, S. L., 412

  Titus, Geo. L., 412

  Todd, Capt., 70

  Todd's Tavern, 177, 178, 179, 183

  Toombs, E. L., 435

  Torrey, F. J., 424

  Totopotomy, 210

  TOWARDS THE JAMES RIVER, 215

  TOWARDS WINTER QUARTERS, 133

  Townsend, P. J., 412

  Transports, "General Howard," "Geo. Weems," 218

  Trask, C. H., 377

  Trask, Geo. W., 388

  Travis, F. E., 447

  Travis, I. N., 447

  Tremlett, Lt. Col. H. M., 36, 93, 99, 231, 245, 254;
    wounded, 281;
    dies, 295;
    sketch of life, 336

  Trull, E. J., 20, 95, 414

  Tucker, Aaron, 377

  Tufts, Aug., 377

  Tulley, I. J., 377

  Turner, Chas., 364

  Turner, Geo., 412

  Turner, S. H., 377

  Twelfth Army Corps goes West, 105

  Tyler, S. C., 448

  Tyler, H. H., 377

  Tyree, J. C., 364

  Tyrell, Geo. H., 448


  Ulrich, Lewis, 400

  Upham, J. H., 20

  "Up Hill and Down", 84

  Upton, Gen'l E., 171, 192


  VACATION IDYL, A, 326-329

  Vaeight, Wm., 377

  Van Cliff, J. S., 401

  Van de Sands, Geo., 401

  Van Winkle, H. M., 424

  Varnum, Geo., 352

  Vaughn Road, 257

  Vegetable Rations, 227

  Veit, Fred'k, 435

  Vermont Troops, 10, 35, 44, 47, 48, 51, 53, 57

  Vickery, J. F., 377

  Vicksburg, 80

  Voight, Wm., 378


  Wadsworth, Chas., 364

  Wadsworth, Gen'l J. S., 49, 168

  Wagon Trains, 115

  Waite, Silas, 462

  Waitt's Branch, 35

  Walford, Thos., 435

  Wall, Richard, 464

  Walker, Benj., 378

  Walker, Gen'l F. A., 101, 179, 227, 258

  Walker, Lewis M., 463

  Walker, Wm. A., 378

  Wallace, J. Wm., 448

  Walker, Henry, 15

  Walsh, Harold, 412

  Walsh, Michael, 388

  Walsh, Wm., 412

  Ware, H. A., 388

  Wares, Frank, 436

  Warren, B. F., 463

  Warren, D. S., 424

  Warren, Geo., 364

  Warren, Gen'l G. K., 117, 131, 165, 167, 177, 195, 196, 205, 216,
        222, 227, 232, 233, 254, 265, 282;
    sketch of life, 285;
    superseded, 286, 322, 323, 324, 325

  Warrenton 92, 113

  Warrenton Junction, 92, 94, 114

  Warren, S. P. S., 448

  Warren, Wm. P., 463

  Washburn, E. B., 275

  Washburn, Emory, Jr., 341

  Washburn, Otis, 412

  Washburn, R. M., 448

  Washburn, Salmon, Jr., 412

  Washington, 31, 68

  Washington Artillery, 235

  Washington's Birthday, 61

  Washington's Slave, 45

  Water Scarce, 108

  Waterford, 89

  Waters, Clark, 412

  Watts, Geo. H., 388

  Wayland, H. P., 378

  Weaver, P. Lyle, 264

  Webb, Lemuel, 378

  Webster, C. C., 413

  Webster, H. K., 401

  Webster, I. L., 448

  Webster, S. D., 424

  Weitzel, Gen'l Godfrey, 283;
    enters Richmond, 288

  Welch, A. W., 424

  Welch, Chas., 378

  Weldon R. R., 231, 240-255;
    losses, 254

  Wellman, John H., 388

  Wentworth, A. P., 401

  Wentworth, G. W., 448

  Wescott, A. A., 413

  West, Francis, 463

  West, John, 448

  Weston, C. B., 424

  "Westward Ho!", 257

  "What's Up, Sentry?", 77

  Wheat Harvest, 88

  Wheeler, C. E., 413

  Wheeler, F. J., 436

  Wheeler, Geo., 364

  Wheeler, W. M., 448

  Wheelock, Col. Chas., 252

  Whiley, Jas., 436

  "Whip, Hoe and Sword", 147

  Whipple, Gen'l A. W., 73

  Whipponock, 288

  Whiskey Raid, 57

  Whiskey Smuggled, 49

  Whitcomb, Geo. F., 352

  White, A. R., 413

  White, B. S., 41

  White, Gen'l Daniel, 252

  White, Edw. E., 337

  White, Geo. W., 424

  White, J. C., 424

  White, Wm. H., 365

  White Frost, 114

  White House, 209

  White Oak Road, 280, 281

  White Oak Swamp, 216

  White Plains, 91

  White Sulphur Springs, 113

  White's Guerrillas, Capt., 48

  Whiting, F. T., 424

  Whiting, Geo. W., 424

  Whiting, T. D., 425

  Whiting, W. B., 353

  Whitman, H. B., 365

  Whitmore, J. W., 401

  Whitmore, Jos., 112

  Whitney, C. F., 50, 448

  Whitney, John, 448

  Whitney, Jophanus, 378

  Whitney, L. I., 413

  Whittaker, Chan., 4, 146, 172, 182, 185, 364

  Whittaker, J. L., 378

  Whitters, Edw., 413

  Whittier, John G., 81

  Whittier, Leavitt, 436

  "Why Couldn't We Sleep?", 134

  Wilborg, Wm., 365

  Wilcox, Gen'l C. M., 163

  Wilcox's Wharf, 218

  Wilcutt, W. C., 401

  Wilder, Albert, 425

  Wilder, M. P., 21

  WILDERNESS, THE, 161

  Wilderness, Battle of, by C. W., 172-176

  Wilderness Tavern, 161

  Wiley, Geo. H., 13, 342

  Wiley, Sam'l, 353

  Willett, Geo. A., 388

  Williams, C. H., 448

  Williams, Henry, 365

  Williams, John, 378

  Williams, John, 388

  Williams, John, 401

  Williams, John, 464

  Williams, R. B. P., 413

  Williams, Rob't, 21, 425

  Williams, Wm., 388

  Williamsport, 88

  Wilmington, 29

  Wilson, Geo. W., 413

  Wilson, Col. Henry, 21, 22, 70

  Wilson, Jas., 463

  Wilson, John, 378

  Wilson, John, 425

  Wilson, O. A., 463

  Wilson, Col. Rob't, 59

  Wilson, T. A., 365

  Wilton, Geo. T., 401

  Winch, Leonard, 21

  Winchester, Battle of, 259

  Winter Quarters, 137

  Winters, T. B., 365

  Woburn, 22, 49, 323, 324, 325, 329

  Wofford, Gen'l W. T., 163

  Wolfe, Adam, 463

  Women Leave Camp, 152

  Wood, David, 413

  Wood, Jas., 365

  Wood, Jesse, 413

  Wood, John M., 329

  Wood, Thos., 388

  Woodbury, W. H., 425

  Woodward, Caleb, 448

  Woodward, E. G., 401

  Woodward, E. M., 413

  Woodward, Geo. T., 413

  Woodward, H. C., 448

  Woodward, Prin. Musc. Matt., 340, 413

  Woodward, R. P., 413

  Worcester, 27

  Wright, Carroll D., 71

  Wright, Gen'l H. G., 199;
    sends word to Grant, 287

  Wright, Lewis, 449

  Wright, Rob't, 401

  Wright, Theo. S., 436

  Wyer, E. F., 5

  Wyman, Geo., 436

  Wyman, L. F., 23, 25, 62, 220, 342, 425, 449


  Young, C. E., 425

  Young, Miss H. M., 26

  Young, Wm. J., 389

  Yellow House, 256, 258, 259


  Zeigle, Col. T. A., 255

  Zindel, Adolph, 464




       *       *       *       *       *




Transcriber's note:

Table of Contents was created by Transcriber and placed into the
public domain.

Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
possible, including obsolete and variant spellings, inconsistent
punctuation that does not interfere with meaning, and other
inconsistencies.

Obvious punctuation and spelling errors and minor printer errors
were corrected.

p. 166: Left 'till about 12 m.' as printed, unclear what was intended

p. 263: Changed sidenote to '64 (obvious typo)

Text of handwritten letter (illustration in the chapter
titled 'Regimental Veteran Association') was recorded by transcriber and
placed in the caption text for that illustration. This text is placed
into the public domain.

p.326: Changed A VACATION IDYL to a section heading instead of chapter
heading, due to context

p.450: William T. Barrett's birth date was printed as June 36.
Corrected based on date on his gravestone

p.470: Confusing index entry 'Camp-vim, 111' left as is, unclear what
was intended



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE THIRTY-NINTH REGIMENT
MASSACHUSETTS VOLUNTEERS, 1862-1865***


******* This file should be named 51250.txt or 51250.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/1/2/5/51250


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

