The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Donkey, the Elephant, and the Goat, by
Jack Preston


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions 
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at 
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.




Title: The Donkey, the Elephant, and the Goat
       At a Public Meeting


Author: Jack Preston



Release Date: March 16, 2016  [eBook #51473]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DONKEY, THE ELEPHANT, AND THE
GOAT***


E-text prepared by David Edwards, readbueno, and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net) from page images generously made
available by Internet Archive (https://archive.org)



Note: Images of the original pages are available through
      Internet Archive. See
      https://archive.org/details/donkeyelephantgo00pres


Transcriber's note:

      Text enclosed by underscores is in italics (_italics_).

      Text enclosed by equal signs is in bold face (=bold=).





THE DONKEY, THE ELEPHANT AND THE GOAT

At A Public Meeting

by

J. P. BUSCHLEN







Price Twenty-five Cents


      *      *      *      *      *      *

                             _ANNOUNCEMENT_

This playlet, by virtue of its simple rime, may perhaps claim a small
share of that license granted to poets, in assuming that the Goat may at
this early stage of the game be taken as an emblem of the Farmers' and
Workers' political party, which is unfortunately not as yet quite a
fact, nationally. The right to present this discussion as a play, for
purposes of raising money, may be obtained only by writing to the
author, in care of Box 1625, Great Falls, Montana. The right to present
it free of charge, by way of assisting the farm and labor movement, is
hereby granted everyone who is in possession of a copy of the printed
booklet.

                                                             THE AUTHOR.

Great Falls, Montana, August, 1920.

                       (Price Twenty-Five Cents.)

      *      *      *      *      *      *


Copyright, 1920, by J. P. Buschlen
For Sale at Box 1625, Great Falls, Mont.




  The Donkey, the Elephant

     and the Goat

    _At A Public Meeting_

    By

    J. P. Buschlen


     ELEPHANT

  You see me here, an elephant,
      A symbol of the mighty--


     DONKEY

  The while you listen to his cant
      Remember he is flighty....
  I come to you, a donkey wise,
      With pedigree unlowly--


     ELEPHANT

  Beware this fellow's sleepy eyes
      And manner smooth and holy....
  As Barnum used to say to me
      When oft we strolled together,
  "The people seem to like to be
      Led round upon a tether."
  And so, I see, I've got to speak
      With these unwholesome creatures,
  Since you, dear folks, have been so weak
      As to invite such preachers.


     DONKEY

  If I may but inject a word,
      I think it most plebe'an
  To class me with a goat. Absurd!


      GOAT

      A mule is always mean.


     ELEPHANT

  When P. T. bade me fond adieu,
      Good people, I departed
  To where I could be serving you
      More whole-and-single hearted;
  I packed my grip and trumpeted
      The news of my arrival,
  That you might follow where I led
      And join a great revival.


     DONKEY

  His boastful manner ill becomes
      A thing of such proportions.


     ELEPHANT

  I made this land a world of homes--


      GOAT

      And laws with strange contortions.


     DONKEY

  I do not wish to interpose,
      But, sir, you are addressing
  A body whom we may suppose
      Would call your death a blessing.
  If you could boast a lineage
      Like mine, you might be pardoned
  For occupying all the stage
      And holding views so hardened.


      GOAT

  I'm glad I'm but a simple goat
      With humble beard and frocking;
  My people were of little note--


     ELEPHANT

      I think, sir, I was talking.
  And I would have it understood
      That I will put my prestige
  Against a Southern neighborhood,
      Or aught of Southern vestige.
  Besides, if Noah didn't lie,
      The morning he went arking,
  My wife and family and I
      Were also there, embarking.
  I'd grudge the honor to a goat,
      But this presumptive donkey,
  Although he gets the southern vote,
      Descended from a monkey.


      GOAT

  In view of what I've done to you
      I forego the distinction
  Of being dragged the ages through
      From ape to near-extinction.


     ELEPHANT

  If I would seem, as Mule implies,
      Inclined myself to flatter,
  Is not some credit due to size
      And to a good standpatter?
  Has not the jungle that I rule
      Been growing more efficient?
  Go ask most any knave or fool
      And get you proof sufficient!


     DONKEY

  You seem the fact to quite ignore,
      You tusky, trunky sinner,
  That I have been in power; what's more
      Will be again the winner.


      GOAT

  Come now, we'll get nowhere with this--
      Why not attack the issue,
  And tell the people how it is
      We're made of diff'rent tissue?


     DONKEY

  We are indeed, and that's a fact
      For which I'm truly grateful;


     ELEPHANT

  And so I am, to be exact.
      (Aside to D.) This goat is very hateful.


     DONKEY

  Your challenge, Goat, do I accept.
      I represent a party
  Which never through the years has slept
      And still is hale and hearty.


      GOAT

  How could it sleep when both its eyes
      Were flirting with the bosses?
  May not you later realize
      Your gains were often losses?...


     ELEPHANT

  If I may say a word or two
      About this great Republic:
  The party I have given you
      Has made it's actions public;
  No secret has it e'er denied
      The masses it protected.


      GOAT

  So ably has the rascal lied,
      The ass is quite dejected.


     ELEPHANT

  The best of old New England blood
      Within its veins is flowing;
  Its sons have fought for every good--


      GOAT

      Old grafter in the "showing."


     ELEPHANT

  When donkeys in the cotton states
      Were riding on the niggers
  We cancelled all their riding dates--


      GOAT

      And made them all blind-piggers.


     ELEPHANT

  We built a mighty commonwealth
      Against great opposition,
  Improving faith and moral health--


     DONKEY

      And fostering sedition!
  I think it's time for me to speak,
      In patriotic phrases:
  To sit in silence here were weak,
      The while himself he praises.
  The party that I represent
      And have the voice and manner
  To here so faithfully present,
      Has carried high its banner.
  From fine old Southern gentle stock
      Its stalwarts have arisen--


      GOAT

  To better populate the dock,
      The army and the prison.


     DONKEY

  We would have won the Civil War--


      GOAT

      Had Palmer then existed--


     DONKEY

  But several southerners were for
      The armies that resisted.
  For office we have never run
      A man who lacked in breeding,
  As these Republicans have done,
      Their low traditions heeding.
  And did not we, the Democrats,
      Win out against the German,
  When all the world was dogs and cats--?


      GOAT

      And soldiers fought the vermin?


     ELEPHANT

  Good donkey, we have had enough
      Of your election wheezing;
  Besides, that ancient family-stuff
      Has got the goat, here, sneezing--
  And when a thing's too strong for one
      So strong for Townley jingo,
  I think it time that you had done
      With your disgusting lingo.


      GOAT

  Again I beg to urge you two
      That you confine your phrases
  To what you've done and aim to do
      To earn the people's praises.


     ELEPHANT

  I've done as much as one could wish
      Since Wilson ruled the nation--


     DONKEY

  He shows the judgment of a fish
      In his absurd inflation.


     ELEPHANT

  All eyes are fixed on me, I say,
      Nor will I disappoint them;
  With thanks will I their faith repay--


      GOAT

      And oily words anoint them.


     ELEPHANT

  I'll bring back Lincoln from the grave,
      Converting all the Palmers;
  The world for business will I save--


      GOAT

      And jail the blasted farmers.


     DONKEY

  When I again am called to reign,
      As I will be this autumn,
  I'll show you men of brawn and brain--


      GOAT

      Obeying them who bought 'em.


     DONKEY

  I'll rule with e'en a firmer hand
      Than you have seen me doing,
  And make the alien understand--


      GOAT

      His blood requires blueing....
  Now look here, boys, the audience
      Is patiently awaiting
  A dozen facts, a little sense--
      You've done enough bull-baiting.
  Give them the thing you're standing for--
      They're standing for aplenty!--


     DONKEY

  I'd like to now discuss the war--


     ELEPHANT

      He rambles on like Henty!


     DONKEY

  We showed the flag to every land,
      We swept the boundless ocean,
  And yet we never showed our hand,
      Nor truckled to emotion.
  We made the foreigner behave,
      The mighty and the small; and
  We sent the Kaiser to his grave--


      GOAT

      I thought he was in Holland?


     DONKEY

  We made the pacifists obey
      Our able war-directors,
  And handled things without delay--


      GOAT

      Especially war-objectors.


     ELEPHANT

  We grant you this to brag about,
      But when our party's saddled
  We'll give you ample room for doubt--


      GOAT

      On issues ably straddled.


     ELEPHANT

  I think you'll then admit that while
      You did what you were able,
  You lacked our more successful wile
      In keeping business stable.


      GOAT

  Your windy generalities
      Have left the country gasping--


     DONKEY

  He's started in again to wheeze!


     ELEPHANT

      His voice is very rasping!


      GOAT

  You've camouflaged the issue, boys,
      As people are perceiving,
  With waving flags and vocal noise--


     ELEPHANT

      (To D.) His whiskers are deceiving!


      GOAT

  The cry is for a loaf of bread--
      You offer but a promise;
  The methods you employ are dead--


     DONKEY

      (To E.) He'd take our living from us!


      GOAT

  You're living in a day gone by,
      Oblivious of the present,
  While women weep and children die--


     ELEPHANT

      He's getting most unpleasant!


      GOAT

  The world is full of concrete needs,
      And this land's no exception,
  Of problems that will yield to deeds
      But never to deception.
  I've sat here list'ning to the views
      That you have ventilated:
  Now maybe for the sake of news
      You'll hear =my= doctrine stated?


     DONKEY

  I cannot see how anything
      A billygoat might proffer
  Could any new idea bring?


     ELEPHANT

      'Tis not a legal offer.


     DONKEY

  And while about it might I say,
      I fail of comprehending
  Just why this meeting here today
      Has been so condescending
  As to invite, with you and me,
      Dear tusky friend, this creature
  So lacking in camaraderie
      And so uncouth of feature!


     ELEPHANT

  Indeed I cannot but agree,
      Dear Donkey, with your premise,
  And much I doubt that you should see
      =Me= weeping at his demise.


      GOAT

  Are these the gentlemen we saw
      So recently atussle,
  Inventing words, within the law,
      Each other's goat to hustle?
  How strange that at a word of mine
      They swing around together?
  You will, perhaps, recall a line
      That mentions "birds o' feather."


     DONKEY

  The atmosphere is getting close--
      Will some one draw the curtain?


     ELEPHANT

  (Whispering) I wonder does he just suppose,
      Or does he know for certain?


      GOAT

  If I'm beyond your courtesy,
      I still have vocal powers,
  So lend those mighty ears to me
      For half a dozen hours.
  I know that I am but a goat
      All battered by the weather,
  But in this land I have a vote,
      And I won't sell it, ne'ther!
  I represent a class of men
      And women who have struggled
  Against the tide, while you have been
      "Retained" and dined and--juggled.
  While you and yours have raked the gold
      We've raked the burning stubble;
  While we lay frozen in the cold
      You froze our chances double.
  We went to you for years and years
      In bitter anguish pleading:
  You answered us with silent jeers
      And left us bruised and bleeding.
  As long as mortals could endure
      We stood your joint oppression,
  And then we sought and found a cure--
      Which now is your obsession.


     DONKEY

  A cure, he says, a cure--ha! ha!
      He means to say affliction!


     ELEPHANT

  A goat can only bunt and bah,
      Its wisdom is a fiction!


      GOAT

  You see, you will not challenge me,
      You merely hurl invective;
  You fear the home-made guns that we
      Have turned on our objective.
  Well, be it so, I still can speak,
      As long as ears will listen,
  And give you facts to fill your beak,
      O birds I cannot christen!
  Where I was born we give the farms
      And homes to those who need them;
  We have a method that disarms
      The man who would misdeed them.
  We make the law the advocate
      Of common people, mainly,
  By placing it =beneath= the state,
      Where it can serve humanely.
  We guard the tiller of the soil
      Before the speculator;
  The man who lives on others' toil
      We count a second-rater.
  The state is servant to the mass--
      I don't go much on Nietzsche,
  And so the Elephant and Ass
      Are anxious to impeach me!
  But where, O symbols of the wise
      In statesmanship and honor,
  Were nations ever known to rise
      Who catered to a donor?
  What people ever reached the heights
      Of art and all we cherish,
  By local threats and foreign fights?
      Their fate is but to perish!
  The only thing that made this land
      As great as we have found it,
  Was justice to whatever band
      Saw fit to cluster round it.
  Our fathers met them at the shore,
      The stranger and wayfarer,
  And gave them all they asked, and more--
      Became their burden-bearer.
  But now how different it is!
      The timid voice that raises
  A feeble cry for what is his
      Gets hustled off to Blazes!


     DONKEY

  He very much exaggerates,
      And what atrocious wording!


     ELEPHANT

  He merely bellows, bahs and bleats--
      A habit formed in herding.


      GOAT

  The workers that I represent
      Are not of one vocation,
  But every one who earns a cent
      Has there an invitation.
  The platform that we stand upon
      Is not a sheet of paper,
  A speech about the rosy dawn,
      A song of purple vapor;
  You'll find it in the farmer's home,
      And on the worker's table,
  Where mortgagers would like to come--
      If only they were able.
  You'll find it in the common school,
      The mine, the shop, the kitchen,
  And where the wheat's begun to stool,
      And Hi the Ford is hitchin'.
  You'll find it, Brother Elephant,
      In frigid North Dakota,
  Where "Frazier, Ladd and Townley can't
      Affect us one iota!"
  You'll find it, Donkey, on the flood,
      If you've a will to find it,
  And if your promises are good
      You'll get right in behind it!


     DONKEY

  (To the Elephant) The interview is at an end
      So far as I'm concerned.


     ELEPHANT

  (To the Donkey) And as for me, my dearest friend,
      The meeting is adjourned.
  (Donkey and Elephant shake hands and go
      offstage together.)


      GOAT

  Good citizens, the hour is late,
      And you are doubtless tired;
  I leave you to your bitter fate,
      Since Jack and Jill retired.
  But may I urge before you go:
      Preserve that sense of humor,
  For often it will serve to show
      The folly of a rumor!
  A laugh will often kill a lie,
      Where sermons fail completely;
  So let us laugh until we die--
      And even then smile sweetly.




      *      *      *      *      *      *




Transcriber's note:

The cover image was created by the transcriber and is placed in the
public domain.

Accentuation, punctuation and spelling as per the original text.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE DONKEY, THE ELEPHANT, AND THE
GOAT***


******* This file should be named 51473.txt or 51473.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/5/1/4/7/51473


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org 

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary 
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

