Project Gutenberg's The Little Man Who Wasn't Quite, by William W. Stuart

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license


Title: The Little Man Who Wasn't Quite

Author: William W. Stuart

Release Date: April 8, 2016 [EBook #51698]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE MAN WHO WASN'T QUITE ***




Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net










                    THE LITTLE MAN WHO WASN'T QUITE

                         By WILLIAM W. STUART

                         Illustrated by WALKER

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Galaxy Magazine December 1961.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]




                You could say Jonesy and/or I were not
                all there, but I don't see it that way.
               How much of Stanley was or wasn't there?


Have you ever been clear down there on skid row? Oh, sure, every city
has one and no doubt you have given it one of those look-away-quick
side glances. That isn't what I mean.

What I mean is, have you ever been really _down_ there?

Probably not. And, if you haven't, I could make a suggestion.

Don't go.

Skid row is a far, remote way and there are all kinds of horrors down
there, the seen and the unseen. To each his own, as they say, and
everyone there has his own personal collection. All right. General
opinion is to let them be there and the hell with them, people and
horrors too, if there is a distinction. Unfortunate, but what can you
do? Nothing. Look the other way. That's all right with me. I don't
know anything better to do about the horrors that are, or that may be
on skid row than to hope they will stay there where they belong--and
let me forget them.

That's why I'm writing this. I want to do the story of what I saw,
and what I think I saw or felt, and what I didn't see, to get it off
my mind. Then I am going to do my damnedest not to think of the whole
thing.

Me, I know about skid row because I was there. That's my personal
problem and another story, before this one, and the hell with that,
too. I once had a wife and a couple of kids. I had a lot of problems
and then no wife and no kids and I made it to skid row. It was easy.
For a while I was there, all the way down, where the gutter was
something I could look up to. Well, turned out I had friends who
wouldn't quit. By their efforts plus, as they say, the grace of God, I
came off it; most of the way off it, at least. No credit to me, but not
too many ever manage to make a round trip of it.

Who are the misfits and derelicts on skid row? Anybody; nobody.
Individuals, if they are individuals, come and go. The group, with
few exceptions, is always the same. It is built of the world's
rejects--lost souls, bad dreams; shadowy, indistinct shapes, not a part
of life nor yet quite altogether out of it, either.

I was down there. I left. But I kept passing by every once in a while
to pay a little visit. For that I had two reasons. One, I could
sometimes pick up a lead on something for a Sunday feature for my
paper. The other--just taking another look now and then at where and
what I had been was a sort of insurance for me.

       *       *       *       *       *

So, from time to time I would stop by The Yard for an evening. I would
spring for a jug. I was welcome. Those in the regular group knew me and
they held me in no more than the same contempt they had for each other
and themselves. Being no stranger--or, perhaps, not too much less
strange--I fitted well enough with the misfits of that half-world where
the individual rarely stands out enough to be noticeable.

Wino Jones, though, and his friend Stanley were, each in his own way,
quite noticeable.

I first ran across Wino Jones and Stanley one early spring evening.
It was a Thursday. I was beat. It had been a tough week--a political
scandal, a couple of fires and a big "Missing Kid--Fiend" scare. Turned
out the kid had skipped school to catch a triple-feature horror show
and was scared to go home when she came out late, so she went to hide
out at Grandma's. The suspect fiend was a cockfight sportsman from the
Caribbean colony smuggling home his loser under his leather jacket.

But it had been a rough week with a lot of chasing around and getting
no place that left me in one of those hell-with-it moods. Like, maybe,
I ought to take a week or so off and--and the hell with that. It was
time for me to pay a little remembrance-of-things-not-so-far-past visit
down on the row.

I left the city room, tired, dirty, needing a shave. Where I was
headed, this would put me ahead of the fashion parade, but it would
serve. I stopped for a bowl of chili at Mad Miguel's and then wandered
down to those four blocks on South River Street, known as Bug Alley,
that make up the hard-core skid-row section of our city.

Across from St. Vincent's in Scott Square, called the Yard, by the old
wall, there was a group of six or eight passing the time and a nearly
dead jug. I shambled over and squatted down. Got a hard, bloodshot look
or two, but not because the jug in the public park was against the law.
Even if I was the law, so what? These, they made the jail now and then,
if there were too many complaints, if they made a disturbance. But not
even the jail wanted them. The hard looks wondered only if the jug
should be passed to me or by me.

I lit a cigarette, took a couple of drags and handed it on. Bootnose
Bailey, big, old, bald, with the cast-iron stomach and leather liver,
settled the jug question by handing it to me. I lifted it, letting only
the smallest trickle of the sticky sweet cheap wine past. It is not
for me; no more. It is sickening stuff. But, as always, the effort of
holding back left me shaking. All right; with shaking, I had plenty
of company. The next man looked pleased at the two gulps left in the
bottle and drained it.

"Ed?" Bootnose asked in his hoarse canned-heat whisper. "You gonna
spring for a jug?"

I squatted a minute or so and then stood and started fumbling around
through all my pockets. This is local protocol. Coin by coin, I spread
a dollar and a half in silver out on the flat collection stone in front
of me. A huge, powerful-looking colored man, new to me, hunkered down
against the wall, smiled gently and added a quarter. Bootnose scooped
it up and went to make the run for the jug.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was, I guess, stretching the ground rules a little by the way I
stared at the big fellow. But he surprised me mildly. For one thing,
he looked in good shape; strong, no shakes, no fevered ghosts back of
the bloodshot curtain of the eyes. And, apart from that, you don't find
very many Negroes on skid row, at least in our area. I don't know why.

"Jones," he said, softly, politely, "Wino Jones. You're Ed? Ed, this
here is my friend Stanley." He waved a big hand at a wispy little man
beside him.

Funny I hadn't seen Stanley before, but there he was. That I want to
make clear. Stanley was there; no question about it. Only he was such a
totally remote, insignificant, unobtrusive little man, it is hard for
me to remember him even now. Hard to remember what he _was_ like, that
is. He wasn't colored. He was small. His eyes, his hair, I don't know.
He must have had some or I would have noticed. And he had a sort of
sour, distant, hurt bitterness about him, I recall, and that is about
all I can recall ever seeing in Stanley. Except for the last time I saw
him--he looked mean then.

This time, I smiled and nodded. "Wino Jones, Stanley, welcome to our
city, our little garden spot."

"There now, Stanley," Jones beamed, "he can see you well enough. You're
doing fine, Stanley, getting better all the time. You _do_ see him
plain, don't you, Ed?"

"Huh? Yeah, sure I see him. Why not? Does he think he's invi--"

Jones interrupted me, "Look, there comes Mr. Bailey back already."

Well, it was a little odd. But then, down there the odd is normal, the
normal odd. I didn't think anything of it.

I sat a couple of hours. One jug went and then another. It did seem
to me that Wino Jones missed by a lot on proving out his nickname. At
least he didn't love up the passing bottle as though it might be the
last one in the world--which, as every skid-row pro desperately fears,
it might very well turn out to be.

Stanley's drinking? I didn't notice.

After a while I wandered off. My appreciation of the fact that I was
able to wander off was shored up again and I was glad enough to get
back to work the next day without thinking anything much more about it.

I didn't think about Wino Jones or Stanley again till the first of the
next week. Then I was on early shift at the paper, due in at six A.M.
At quarter to, I yawned my way out of Mad Miguel's after coffee, an egg
and hotcakes. Mig's hotcakes were hot, too; made them with chili. Hard
on the stomach, but they popped the old eyelids open in the morning. As
I stood a minute in the doorway, my watering eyes spotted Wino Jones
coming out of the alley that led around to Mig's kitchen side. He saw
me but, thoughtfully, didn't crack till I gave him a, considering the
time, reasonably bright hello.

"How's it, Ed? You going on early, uh?"

"Yeah, Wino--ah--Jonesy. Mind if I call you Jonesy?" He didn't. "What's
with you? Been washing a dish for the Mig?"

He nodded. Some of the upper-level boys from the row worked off and
on at odd jobs like that. It didn't make Jones unique, but it made him
stand out a little.

"Me and Stanley, we like a little change in our pockets. Right,
Stanley?"

He looked down and a little to one side, just as though he were asking
agreement from someone. Only there wasn't anyone there. There wasn't
anyone in sight on the block but Jones and me.

       *       *       *       *       *

But Jones smiled and nodded warmly at the short vacancy beside him and
then looked back at me. "Stanley here, he come by to meet me after
work. Mr. Mig, he let me fix us a bite of breakfast when I finish up
the night."

I looked again at where Stanley was supposed to be standing and then,
blankly, back at Jones. He shrugged almost unnoticeably and, I thought,
barely shook his head.

"Well-l--" he said, "I expect me and Stanley better drift back on down
to the Yard before some fuzz comes along and fans us down."

"Yeah?" I said. "Yeah. So long, Jonesy--Stanley."

I don't know why I added the "Stanley" but, obscurely, it seemed to
please Jones. He gave me a big smile and then walked off down the
street, chatting companionably to--no one. I didn't get it. Well,
Stanley present or absent rated very low on the list of the problems I
was going to worry about. I went to work.

I ran into Jones every morning during the week I was on early; Jones,
coming off work, with Stanley--who wasn't there. Odd, sure. But if
Jones was stringing a way-out gag or playing with a mild hallucination,
still it was nothing to me.

I did mention it to Mig, who only said, "Si, these one big hombre eat
big. He like two plate eat for breakfast, plate he wash, bueno, what
for I complain?"

So that was all. Nothing.

Toward the end of the next week, I wandered down to the Yard again and
joined the little group of exponents of gracious almost-living by the
wall. Jones wasn't there. But as I was settling down I glanced over
at the Broad Street side of the square and I saw him strolling along
toward us. He was smiling, talking, gesturing. He was alone. I looked
twice. There was no one with Jones.

I settled down, took a drag or two on a smoke and passed it along.
Lifted a jug. Got back the old lost, gone, miserable feel of the thing
again. I looked up then at Jones who was just coming around the mangy
clump of bushes by the path. With him was a sour, whispy, scarcely
noticeable little man. Stanley.

"Evening, Jonesy," I said, "and Stanley. Good to see you again." I
meant it even though, come to think, it didn't really clear anything
up. Jones gave me his smile and Stanley nodded suspiciously.

They moved in and joined the group. Somebody made a run; a couple. The
talk staggered around as usual. Topics: booze; money, yesterday's and
tomorrow's; booze; women--only occasionally and with mild, decayed
interest; booze.

Jones put in a soft word or two from time to time until he finally
stood up, stretched and said he was going up to Mig's. Stanley stayed.
I know he did. I watched him. Afterward, I tried to remember if he said
anything, but that I couldn't recall.

I went on home myself a while after Jones left. Stanley was still
there, though, when I glanced back from Broad Street, I couldn't pick
him out in the dim moon and street light.

Still nothing much, eh?

       *       *       *       *       *

The next week I came on work at ten and I didn't see Jones--or not see
Stanley--all week. Friday, I was back down at the Yard. That was out
of my pattern. Usually one visit in a month or so was plenty. But now,
for whatever reason, I was getting kind of interested in Jones--and
Stanley.

This time Jones was there hunkered down against the wall when I
wandered up. Coaster Joe squatted on one side of him. On the other
side, no one. I looked; I looked close. There was no one there. Still,
when I nodded around, I nodded at the empty space. Noticed that
Bootnose Bailey was missing. A mild surprise. Bootnose and a bottle
were nearly as much Yard fixtures as Gen. Scott in bronze and pigeons.
I settled in. A little time and a jug went by. I still didn't see
Stanley.

My curiosity finally insisted on a remark. "Jonesy, I--haven't seen
Stanley tonight."

Jones smiled, not quite as easy and relaxed as usual. "Stanley isn't
around tonight. He went someplace."

"Oh? Well, that's good." It seemed a safe statement. If Stanley had
been in jail, Jones would have said so. Any other place was bound to be
better. I was being unjustifiably nosy, but curiosity wouldn't let me
drop it. "Where did he go?"

Jones shrugged. Then, seriously, "To tell the truth, Ed, I don't
rightly know. Fact is, I been a mite worried about old Stanley lately."

No one else was paying any attention to us. "So? How's that?"

"Well--" He shrugged again and then made a decision. "You know, Ed,
it's a sort of a odd thing about Stanley. If you have a little time...?"

"Time is what I have."

Jones sighed. "It might turn out to be a problem, I think. Bothers me
some. It would be a kindness if you would let me talk to you about it."

I stood up. Jones, making a gesture that clearly set him apart, put
a quarter on the flat collection stone as he got up to join me. We
strolled off through the dusk in the park, quietly. Jones, even in a
state of some unease, was a comfortable presence. Over on the Broad
Street side of the Yard, we sat down on a bench.

"Don't rightly know how to begin," Jones said, scratching his head with
a fielder's-mitt-sized hand, "but--Ed, I expect you noticed something
funny about Stanley? Or maybe about me?"

"I noticed that sometimes I see Stanley and sometimes I don't. And
that sometimes you act as though you see him when he positively is not
there."

"Um, yes. Makes you kind of unusual too, Ed. Because with Stanley it
is mostly like this--when he is around, I mean. There are people who
see him; a few. But most people, they can't see Stanley at all. With
you, seems like it changes. Uptown you can't see him; down here you
can."

"What?"

"Now me, I see him most all the time. All the time when he's around,
that is; when he hasn't gone off someplace, like tonight. But most
people, what you might call really normal people--no offense, Ed--they
can't ever see Stanley."

       *       *       *       *       *

It sounded silly. But Jones said it with a calm conviction that
carried weight. If I couldn't believe it exactly, I didn't disbelieve
him either. You hear plenty of queer stories on skid row--dreams,
nightmares, nonsense. There used to be one crummy, rummy old bum
around called Gov'nor who used to claim he really had been a governor.
He drank down some office duplicator fluid and died. Police routine
checked. He was an ex-governor. Probabilities eliminate no remote
possibilities; if you flip a coin long enough, someday it will stand on
edge.

"How do you figure that?" I asked Jones.

"I don't want to sound like I think I am a brain," Jones said. "I only
read some. But these men down here--you might say, couldn't you, that
they are maybe men who don't have much of a hold on the world any more?"

"True."

"And the world holds them mighty lightly. They are nothing. Nobody pays
them attention. They are outside of everything. They are pretty much
outside the world, even. Now you, Ed--you are mostly a part of the
normal world. But one time you were all the way on down here, right? So
you--"

"I have a feeling for it? Something like that?"

"Something like that. And so down here you are like the others; you can
see Stanley. Uptown, you couldn't see him."

"Sounds nuts. But how? Why?"

"That goes back, way back. Stanley and me, we were kids together.
Stanley, his people were what down there they call 'trash.' Fourteen,
fifteen kids. Who was whose pa, who would know? Or care? And Stanley,
he was kind of the runt of the whole litter. Nobody paid him any mind.
He never talked much 'cause nobody listened. Got to be a real dopey,
dreamy, moody kid. Not ever sick, but sickly. He was more like nothing
than any kid I ever did see.

"Me, I lived down the road a piece from Stanley. I don't know why, but
he took to following me around. Mostly because everyone else ran him
off, I expect. I don't guess I was real good to poor Stanley, but I let
him tag along. You would hardly know he was there; no trouble. And he
struck me so sort of lost and pitiful, you know? I never had the heart
to chase him. After a while, it got to where he even took to trailing
along after me to school.

"Now that was a funny thing; kind of got me to wondering. There was
a white kid down in that part of the country, running along after a
colored boy to a colored school. You would expect that to attract a
good deal of attention, wouldn't you? Maybe stir up a big storm in the
county. But nobody ever hardly seemed to notice Stanley at all. There
wasn't anything ever said about it.

"Well, you know, Ed, any kid, even Stanley, he wants some attention,
some affection from someone. Stanley, all he ever had was me and I
never more than about put up with him when we were kids. And any kid
likes to feel kind of important sometime. Be noticed. Be king of the
hill at recess. Win a spelling bee. Whup somebody, or even be the kid
that gets made to stay after school the most. He wants to feel like
he is somebody. Only Stanley, he never could. Seemed like the more he
wanted to push out into things, the more he would get shy and not able
to, and he would pull away back inside even more. He never could talk
much hardly, even to me. Got so I would scarcely know he was around
myself."

       *       *       *       *       *

"He lost touch with the world?" I put in. "Well, that happens. There
are oddballs all over, you know."

"Oh, sure--sure there are, Ed," said Jones. "But Stanley wasn't like
that, not exactly; or only. Seemed like it was as much the world lost
touch with Stanley as it was the other way. He always did feel a
resentment about it, too, and I believe it turned him pretty bitter way
down someplace. 'Course he never did say much, but I could tell. I got
the feeling."

"So? How did you come here?"

"Well, my mammy, she passed on and there wasn't anything to hold me
back there around home, so I left. Stanley, he tagged right along after
me. Like a shadow. You might say he was a sort of a shadow's shadow,
huh? We bummed around. I worked here and there. Then I found out--we
found out--that most people couldn't even see Stanley at all any more."

"He got so far out he was really gone?"

"Only it was kind of pitiful the way it made Stanley mad. Me, I got
vagged a few times. Only Stanley, he could be right beside me and spit
in the sheriff's face and they wouldn't touch him. They wouldn't even
know he was there. When I was locked up, he could walk in and out to
visit me. Nobody ever stopped him. Nobody saw him--except, we found out
then, that some of the prisoners could see Stanley plain enough."

"Oh?" I said.

"Yes. And that's the way it has been. Seems like the only people who
can see Stanley are people like, well, like the ones down here around
the Yard. The ones who are--how would you say it?--in the world but not
of it, huh? I read that somewhere. People who are far enough out can
see Stanley; only he is farther out than any of them."

"Hm-m. Well, the world being what it is, maybe Stanley is lucky."

"Ed, you don't really mean that."

He was right, of course. This world positively was not built according
to any specifications of mine, but still it is my world and I guess I
am pretty fond of it at that. Couldn't ever have managed to leave skid
row if I weren't.

"So," Jones said, "poor Stanley, he always has been mighty dependent on
me; more, maybe, since we been moving around. Until just lately."

"Kind of a damn nuisance, huh?"

"It never bothered me too much. Of course it keeps me down around
this part of every town we make and maybe this isn't the kind of life
I would have picked for myself. But Stanley has made me feel sort
of responsible. And some kind of responsibility is good for a man,
wouldn't you say?"

I couldn't argue with it; not me. Anyway, it proved what I had felt
from the start--Wino Jones wasn't a real or a natural skid-row type; he
was forcing himself.

"Well, Ed, Stanley has been trailing me around all the years--only
somehow I don't believe Stanley ever did really like me much. He
followed me because he couldn't do anything else, but he never took
to me. I guess maybe I couldn't ever quite look up to him the way he
wanted. So I suppose he has always been looking for something else.
Well, before we came here, we were stopping in a mission one evening
and I looked around when I finished my soup and I couldn't see Stanley.
It gave me a turn. But after a little while, there he was again. I
asked him where he went. He couldn't or wouldn't ever tell me much,
only that there was someplace he was trying to get to and friends he
wanted to meet.

"'I can almost get there,' Stanley told me. 'There's the border and
over there on the other side, they want me. I can feel they want me.
They understand that I am important to them. They want me to come. If I
could just find the way across to--'

"He never told me who it was wanted him, or where, or what for. But
ever since then, every once in a while I would look around and Stanley
would be gone. First part of this last week he was gone again--and
when he came back, he was changed. He was kind of superior-acting. Not
pleasant. Wherever he was trying to get, he had got there. 'Now,' he
told me, 'I have friends who know I am somebody.' He was real set up
over it. Tonight he went back again."

"Where?" I wanted to know.

       *       *       *       *       *

Jones shook his head. "I told him, 'Stanley, we been together a long
time. You got friends besides me, I'm glad. Only, you know, I kind of
feel responsible. Maybe I ought to meet your friends, huh? Why don't
you take me to meet them?'

"'No,' says Stanley. 'Oh, no.' He wouldn't hear of it. I got to stay
here and wait for him, he tells me."

"Well, sure," I told Jones. "How could you go with a man into his
dream?"

"Yeah--only Stanley did take old Mr. Bootnose Bailey with him."

"_What?_" I exclaimed.

"Uh-huh. Stanley said he was going to prove it to me. He said he would
take somebody along with him to this place and then he would bring one
of his friends back here to visit. He said that would show me, would
show everybody. And you know, Ed, I don't believe I much liked the way
poor Stanley looked when he said that. He looked kind of mean."

"But they went? Both of them? And that's why old Bootnose isn't around?"

Jones nodded. "Yeah. Stanley promised Mr. Bootnose something would
give him a real boot. They went. Stanley, last thing he said before I
watched the two of them just sort of fade out, he said he would be back
tomorrow evening. He wanted me to be sure to wait for him in the Yard.
And fact is, Ed, I'm kind of uneasy about it all," he added.

There it was, Jonesy's story. A nonsense story? Sure. But it left
me feeling a little uneasy too. We talked it back and forth a while
longer, Jones and me, and the more we talked the more uneasy I got.
Foolish or not, Jones himself believed it. He wasn't trying to con me
into anything. There was no other point to it. And--well, maybe it was
simply the fact that Jones was a good deal of man. What he said had a
real conviction to it. Even if the story was hard to believe, still
there was what I had seen--and not seen--of Stanley. And even if there
was nothing that seemed particularly threatening about the business, it
made the two of us uneasy.

There was nothing for us to do about it, though. I went on home to my
apartment after I promised Jones I would be around the next night when
Stanley, alone or with company, was due back. I don't know what Jones
expected. I don't know what I expected. But Stanley's friend, no; we
didn't expect that.

The next day I was filling in on the desk, but my mind must have been
fumbling around with Stanley's other world. I fumbled all day and
finished by crossing up a couple of headlines. So I left the office
with the managing editor's curses ringing in my ears, even though he
had to admit that the "Present Stench--Future Disaster" line from the
sewer gas story did fit very nicely over the item on the mayoralty
campaign.

I was down at the Yard a little after five. Jones came along a few
minutes later. The group was there. It always is, except when there is
a city clean-up. Then it moves over behind the church. Today there was
a tension. Jones was smiling, gentle and friendly as always, but there
were nerves back of it. Probably the others were mostly just suffering
dry nerves. But I was rattled enough so I fumbled a five out and put
it on the rock. That, naturally, meant that Coaster Joe and Feeny, who
moved the quickest, went to make a run and didn't come back. With the
right change for the jug, the wino never skips; with change to bring
back, always.

       *       *       *       *       *

Well, some more silver was painfully dredged up, mostly by Jones, and
somebody else went. The wine went around and I admit that this time I
took a swallow or two on my turn. I noticed Jones did too. Not much;
a little. We were cold sober. Too cold, actually. I needed the little
wine I had in me and a lot more.

That bottle and another went around. So did the talk. I was leaning on
the wall next to Jones. Neither of us had much to say. Finally, it was
just coming on dusk, I asked him, "You're sure he'll come here? Are you
sure he'll show at all?"

"He'll be here. Most any time now, Ed. I can feel it. Can't you?"

I could feel something, but it was only a contagion of tension, I told
myself.

Then Jones said, "Look there," and pointed.

I followed the line of his big, pink-nailed, black finger off along the
path through the park from Broad Street, a little hazy in the summer
evening. There was nothing. Then there was a darker spot in the haze
and then, not more than about twenty feet away, just about to pass back
of the row of bushes along the path, I saw Stanley. Tonight he seemed,
somehow, a more positive presence, even at that distance. There was a
cocky bounce in his walk and a tilt to his chin that announced "Here is
someone to reckon with." Other eyes in our little circle turned his way
as he passed behind the bushes. A couple of seconds more and he came
around the near side and moved in to join us.

"Hello there, Wino," he said to Jones and there was condescension in
it. "Fellows, I want"--proudly--"you should meet a friend of mine."

Around the bushes came a shape, a dark shape; Stanley's friend, from
some other place or world. In our group, Saint Betty, a retired queen,
choked on the jug and handed it to me. I shoved it along to Jones. The
paralyzing effect of Stanley's friend can be measured in the fact that
the jug went three times around that thirsty circle--and no one even
lifted it to his lips till it fell in the dust at my feet.

Stanley's friend was there all right; really there. What did I say he
was like? A dark shape? Yes. But that dark shape and the detail of that
shape came through as clear as a hot blue flame to me.

You weren't ever down that way, right? Not to stay, at least. Well,
one thing people there have in common is the horrors. Not just the
ordinary day-to-day horrors of a hard life but the big horrors. The
D.T.s. How do they go? The detail varies. With everyone, there is
something that really panics him, gives him that sense of unreasoning,
helpless, screaming fear. With a lot of people it is snakes. That's
the traditional. With others, it can be heights, or closed rooms;
rats, maybe. With me, it has always been spiders, ugly, hairy-legged,
bloat-bellied.

The horrors. The height man, when he gets them, will have the sensation
of falling, helplessly, endlessly. Once I had spiders. There were
hordes, millions of great, stickily scrabbling, poisonous spiders
crawling, crawling all over me, over everything--until I woke wrapped
up like an iced tamale in the cold wet sheet that is called "calming
restraint" in psycho wards.

Stanley's friend? Well, it's an ugly thought, but consider those
spiders of mine. And consider people. People, mostly, have religion.
"God made man in his image," they say, except God, of course, is the
infinitely greater. Now suppose that spiders had a god. A spider god.
"God made spiders in his image," the spiders might say, right? So
such a spider god, that almighty apotheosis of spiderdom--_that_ was
Stanley's friend as I saw him.

       *       *       *       *       *

I don't know how I could see a thing like that. Maybe I didn't see it,
exactly. But absolutely, in some way, by whatever means, the positive
perception of such a thing burned itself into my eyes and mind.

The other fellows? No one screamed aloud, although my mind was
screaming. Horrors were not less horrible to us, only less unfamiliar
than to other people. One by one, the others quivered to shaky feet and
they stumbled off through the evening. The jug, three-quarters full
yet, stayed there in the dust of the Yard, forgotten.

How long it was, I don't know. Not long--and then only Jones and I
were left with Stanley and Stanley's friend. The rest of the park was
empty. Across Bug Alley in front of the church an old woman carrying a
sack of rubbish was impelled to look our way. She screeched in a high,
disappearing pitch and crumpled to the walk. The church was dark and
silent.

Jones stood there, big, powerful, leaning against the wall. He smiled
at Stanley, but it was a weak, sick smile. How he managed that much,
I'll never know. Weak, trembling, stomach churning, I dragged myself up.

"Uh--well," I mumbled, "f'you fellows will excuse me--guess I better be
moving along."

Stanley's lip curled. He was irritated. I couldn't help that.

"You see?" It wasn't speech, but the thought came plainly from
Stanley's friend, out of a churning of black, hungry thoughts, "You see
how it is? Even now, not even such as these will welcome us as friends
and equals."

"Yes," snapped Stanley, "I see. I should have known. All right then,
we'll do it your way. We will show them all."

I stumbled a step or two toward the path.

"Wino," said Stanley, "Wino Jones. We are going over to the other side
now. But we will be back, you hear me? You just wait."

"Sure, Stanley," said Jones, still gentle, kind. "Only, Stanley, are
you sure?"

"I'm sure," said Stanley. He turned to his friend. "Come on. Let's go."

They moved together toward the bushes.

Stanley looked back over his shoulder at Jones. "We'll be back," he
said, "we'll be back, Wino. You be looking for us."

Then they were gone. Thank the good Lord, they were gone.

"Well," I quavered at Jones, "you did say you were kind of uneasy about
him, didn't you?"

"Yes," said Jones, "that's right. You going on home now, Ed?"

"You bet!"

"I don't like to impose, but would you mind if I kind of tagged along?
I don't feel too good--after that thing with Stanley, built of all
those thousands of hissing, wiggling snakes."

With Jones, it had been snakes, not spiders. The others--to each his
own? Somehow that made it seem even worse. Jones wanted to come along
with me? I was glad and grateful. I don't know that I could have stood
being alone that night.

       *       *       *       *       *

Up in my apartment, we turned on all the lights. Had a couple
of nightcaps. Sat up all night in my luxurious eight-by-ten
living-dining-kitchen area for modern living. We talked a little, but
not about Stanley and his friend. It was too fresh and we were too
shaken. It seemed safer not to mention it.

I suppose we must have dozed off and on. In the morning, I woke up. I
still had the shakes. No hangover, but the shakes.

"Jonesy," I said. "Jonesy, I guess maybe I ought to be getting along to
work. What are you going to do?"

He woke up, full awake, like that. "I'm not going back," he said. "You
know?"

"Yeah."

"I got a feeling. I got kind of a feeling that maybe I am sort of
Stanley's doorway or gate back here, if you know what I mean. He was
always nearer to me than anyone. You notice he kept telling me to wait
for him? I think maybe he needs to feel around and find me to make his
way back across from wherever he went. So, if I'm not there, if he
can't locate me, could be he won't be able to make his way back--with
his friends. I think I better stay as far away from down there as I
can get. You reckon there might be some kind of job I could do on that
paper you work for?"

"Sure," I said. I knew they needed some men in the circulation
department. "That isn't so very far away, though, is it?" I had a sense
that he was right about Stanley.

"Not miles. Distance, like that, I don't think it makes much difference
where Stanley is. It's the Yard and all that, huh? Seems to be like if
I get a steady job, get to be a real, steady, normal citizen, that's
what would make me hard for Stanley to find."

"Yes," I said, "I see. The more you are a full part of this world, the
farther away you will be from that other one--and Stanley."

"That's it."

"I hope so. Lord, I hope so. You come along down with me this morning.
We'll get you a job if we have to kill someone to make a vacancy ...
Jonesy, that--that thing, spiders, snakes--you are sure it was real? It
was actually here, I mean? And might come back if Stanley can make the
way--in force?"

"Yes, Ed. You didn't really have to ask, did you?"

"No," I said.

And that's it and that's all.

       *       *       *       *       *

Since then--well, Jones is working for the paper. He got to be
assistant circulation manager in less than a year. He is as respectable
and non-skid-row a citizen as there is in town. Has a girl; getting
married next month.

Me? I'm the same, maybe a little better. I go every other week to
visit my kids and Jennie, my ex, has taken to staying around now. We
even talk a little bit and, last time, I took her some flowers and she
blushed like a bride. Something might even come of it--given enough
time.

I have checked back on the Yard a few times but so far, at least,
nothing more than the standard rack-up of ordinary horrors. I am not
going to check any more. What for? Such a thing as Stanley's friend,
you couldn't fight, and I wouldn't know what direction to run. If those
things ever find a way over here, where would they be coming from? I
don't know. From inside, maybe, Jones says. How do you run from that?

Best, I think, forget it. I intend to try. And, so help me, I am
through with skid row. Who wouldn't be?





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Little Man Who Wasn't Quite, by 
William W. Stuart

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LITTLE MAN WHO WASN'T QUITE ***

***** This file should be named 51698.txt or 51698.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/6/9/51698/

Produced by Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org/license

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
