The Project Gutenberg EBook of Hardscrabble, by John Richardson

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Hardscrabble
       The Fall of Chicago: A Tale of Indian Warfare

Author: John Richardson


Release Date: February, 2004 [EBook #5169]
This file was first posted on May 27, 2002
Last Updated: June 23, 2013

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARDSCRABBLE ***




Produced by Gardner Buchanan with help from Charles Franks
and Distributed Proofers








HARDSCRABBLE; OR, THE FALL OF CHICAGO

A TALE OF INDIAN WARFARE

By John Richardson




CHAPTER I.

It was on a beautiful day in the early part of the month of April,
1812, that four persons were met in a rude farm-house, situated on the
Southern Branch of the Chicago river, and about four miles distant from
the fort of that name. They had just risen from their humble mid-day
meal, and three of them were now lingering near the fire-place, filled
with blazing logs, which, at that early season, diffused a warmth by no
means disagreeable, and gave an air of cheerfulness to the interior of
the smoke-discolored building.

He who appeared to be master of the establishment was a tall, good
looking man of about forty-five, who had, evidently, been long a denizen
of the forest, for his bronzed countenance bore traces of care and toil,
while his rugged, yet well-formed hands conveyed the impression of the
unceasing war he had waged against the gigantic trees of this Western
land. He was habited in a hunting-frock of grey homespun, reaching about
half way down to his knee, and trimmed with a full fringe of a somewhat
darker hue. His trowsers were of the same material, and both were girt
around his loins by a common belt of black leather, fastened by a plain
white buckle, into which was thrust a sheath of black leather also,
containing a large knife peculiar to the backwoodsmen of that day. His
feet were encased in moccasins, and on his head, covered with strong
dark hair, was carelessly donned a slouched hat of common black felt,
with several plaited folds of the sweet grass, of the adjoining prairie
for a band. He was seemingly a man of strong muscular power, while his
stern dark eye denoted firmness and daring.

The elder of the two men, to whom this individual stood, evidently,
in the character of a superior, was a short thick-set person of about
fifty, with huge whiskers that, originally black, had been slightly
grizzled by time. His eyebrows were bushy and overhanging, and almost
concealed the small, and twinkling eyes, which it required the beholder
to encounter more than once before he could decide their true color to
be a dark gray. A blanket coat that had once been white, but which
the action of some half dozen winters had changed into a dirty yellow,
enveloped his rather full form, around which it was confined by a coarse
worsted sash of mingled blue and red, thickly studded with minute white
beads. His trowsers, with broad seams, after the fashion of the Indian
legging, were of a dark crimson, approaching to a brick-dust color, and
on his feet he wore the stiff shoe-pack, which, with the bonnet bleu on
his grizzled head, and the other parts of his dress already described,
attested him to be what he was--a French Canadian. Close at his heels,
and moving as he moved, or squatted on his haunches, gazing into the
face of his master when stationary, was a large dog of the mongrel breed
peculiar to the country--evidently with wolf blood in his veins.

His companion was of a different style of figure and costume. He was a
thin, weak-looking man, of middle height, with a complexion that denoted
his Saxon origin. Very thin brows, retrousse nose, and a light gray
eye in which might be traced an expression half simple, half cunning,
completed the picture of this personage, whose lank body was encased in
an old American uniform of faded blue, so scanty in its proportions that
the wrists of the wearer wholly exposed themselves beneath the short,
narrow sleeves, while the skirts only "shadowed not concealed," that
part of the body they had been originally intended to cover. A pair of
blue pantaloons, perfectly in keeping, on the score of scantiness and
age, with the coat, covered the attenuated lower limbs of the wearer,
on whose head, moreover, was stuck a conical cap that had all the
appearance of having been once a portion of the same uniform, and had
only undergone change in the loss of its peak. A small black leather,
narrow ridged stock was clasped around his thin, and scare-crow neck,
and that so tightly that it was the wonder of his companions how
strangulation had so long been avoided. A dirty, and very coarse linen
shirt, showed itself partially between the bottom of the stock, and the
uppermost button of the coat, which was carefully closed, while his feet
were protected from the friction of the stiff, though nearly worn out,
military shoes, by wisps of hay, that supplied the absence of the sock.
This man was about five and thirty.

The last of the little party was a boy. He was a raw-boned lad of about
fourteen years of age, and of fair complexion, with blue eyes, and an
immense head of bushy hair, of the same hue, which seemed never to have
known the use of the comb. His feet were naked, and his trowsers and
shirt, the only articles of dress upon him at the moment, were of a
homespun somewhat resembling in color the hunting frock of his master.
A thick black leather strap was also around his loins--evidently part of
an old bridle rein.

The two men first described, drew near the fire and lighted their pipes.
The ex-militaire thrust a quid of tobacco into his cheek, and taking
up a small piece of pine board that rested against the chimney corner,
split a portion off this with his jack-knife, and commenced whittling.
The boy busied himself in clearing the table, throwing occasionally
scraps of bread and dried venison, which had constituted the chief
portion of the meal, to the dog, which, however, contrary to custom,
paid little attention to these marks of favor, but moved impatiently,
at intervals, to the door, then returning, squatted himself again on his
haunches, at a short distance from his master, and uttering a low sound
betwixt a whine and a growl, looked piteously up into his face.

"Vat the devil is de matter wid you, Loup Garou?" remarked the Canadian
at length, as, removing the pipe from his lips, he stretched his legs,
and poised himself in his low wood-bottomed chair, putting forth his
right hand at the same time to his canine follower. "You not eat, and
you make noise as if you wish me to see one racoon in de tree."

"Loup Garou don't prate about coons I guess," drawled the man in
the faded uniform, without, however, removing his eyes from the very
interesting occupation in which he was engaged. "That dog I take it, Le
Noir, means something else--something more than we human critters know.
By gosh, boss," looking for the first time at him who stood in that
position to the rest of the party--"If WE can't smell the varmint, I
take it Loup Garou does."

At this early period of civilization, in these remote countries, there
was little distinction of rank between the master and the man--the
employer and the employed. Indeed the one was distinguished from the
other only by the instructions given and received, in regard to certain
services to be performed. They labored together--took their meals
together--generally smoked together--drank together--conversed together,
and if they did not absolutely sleep together, often reposed in the same
room. There was, therefore, nothing extraordinary in the familiar tone
in which the ci-devant soldier now addressed him whose hired help he
was. The latter, however, was in an irritable mood, and he answered
sharply.

"What have you got into your foolish head now, Ephraim Giles? You do
nothing but prophesy evil. What varmint do you talk of, and what has
Loup Garou to do with it? Speak, what do you mean?--if you mean anything
at all."

As he uttered this half rebuke, he rose abruptly from his chair, shook
the ashes from his pipe, and drew himself to his full height, with
his back to the fire. There had been nothing very remarkable in the
observation made by the man to whom he had addressed himself, but he was
in a peculiar state of mind, that gave undue importance to every word,
sounding, as it did, a vague presentiment of some coming evil, which the
very singular manner of the dog had created, although he would scarcely
acknowledge this to himself.

The man made no reply, but continued whittling, humming, at the same
time, the air of "Yankee Doodle."

"Answer me, Ephraim Giles," peremptorily resumed his master; "leave
off that eternal whittling of yours, if you can, and explain to me your
meaning."

"Etarnal whittling! do you call it, Boss? I guess it's no such thing. No
man knows better nor you, that, if I can whittle the smallest stick in
creation, I can bring down the stoutest tree as well as ere a fellow
in Michigan. Work is work--play is play. It's only the difference, I
reckon, of the axe and the knife."

"Will you answer my question like a man, and not like a fool, as you
are?" shouted the other, stooping, and extending his left hand, the
fingers of which he insinuated into the stock already described, while,
with a powerful jerk, he both brought the man to his feet, and the blood
into his usually cadaverous cheek.

Ephraim Giles, half-throttled, and writhing with pain, made a movement
as if he would have used the knife in a much less innocent manner
than whittling, but the quick, stern eye of his master, detected the
involuntary act, and his hand, suddenly relinquishing its hold of the
collar, grasped the wrist of the soldier with such a vice-like pressure,
that the fingers immediately opened, and the knife fell upon the hearth.

The violence of his own act, brought Mr. Heywood at once to a sense
of the undue severity he had exercised towards his servant, and he
immediately said, taking his hand:

"Ephraim Giles, forgive me, but it was not intended. Yet, I know not how
it is, the few words you spoke just now made me anxious to know what you
meant, and I could not repress my impatience to hear your explanation."

The soldier had never before remarked so much dignity of manner
about his Boss, as he termed Mr. Heywood, and this fact, added to the
recollection of the severe handling he had just met with, caused him to
be a little more respectful in his address.

"Well, I reckon," he said, picking up his knife, and resuming his
whittling, but in a less absorbed manner, "I meant no harm, but merely
that Loup Garou can nose an Injin better than ere a one of us."

"Nose an Indian better than any one of us! Well, perhaps he can--he sees
them every day, but what has that to do with his whining and growling
just now?"

"Well, I'll tell you, Boss, what I mean, more plain-like. You know that
patch of wood borderin' on the prairie, where you set me to cut, t'other
day?"

"I do. What of that?"

"Well, then, this mornin' I was cuttin' down as big an oak as ever grew
in Michigan, when, as it went thunderin' through the branches, with
noise enough to scare every buffalo within a day's hunt, up started, not
twenty yards from it's tip, ten or a dozen or so of Injins, all gruntin'
like pigs, and looking as fierce as so many red devils. They didn't look
quite pleasant, I calcilate."

"Indeed," remarked Mr. Heywood, musingly; "a party of Pottawattamies I
presume, from the Fort. We all know there is a large encampment of them
in the neighborhood, but they are our friends."

"May-be so," continued Ephraim Giles, "but these varmint didn't look
over friendly, and then I guess the Pottawattamies don't dress in war
paint, 'cept when they dance for liquor."

"And are you quite sure these Indians were in their war paint?" asked
his master, with an ill-concealed look of anxiety.

"No mistake about it," replied Giles, still whittling, "and I could
almost swear, short as the squint was I got of 'em, that they were part
of those who fought us on the Wabash, two years ago."

"How so, den, you are here, Gile. If dey wicked Injin, how you keep your
funny little cap, an' your scalp under de cap?"

This question was asked by the Canadian, who had hitherto, while
puffing his pipe, listened indifferently to the conversation, but
whose attention had now become arrested, from the moment that his
fellow-laborer had spoken of the savages, so strangely disturbed by him.

"Well, I don't exactly know about that, myself," returned the soldier,
slightly raising his cap and scratching his crown, as if in recollection
of some narrowly escaped danger. "I reckon, tho', when I see them slope
up like a covey of red-legged pattridges, my heart was in my mouth, for
I looked for nothin' else but that same operation: but I wur just as
well pleased, when, after talkin' their gibberish, and makin' all sorts
of signs among themselves, they made tracks towards the open prairie."

"And why did you not name this, the instant you got home?" somewhat
sternly questioned Mr. Heywood.

"Where's the use of spilin' a good dinner?" returned the soldier. "It
was all smokin' hot when I came in from choppin', and I thought it best
for every man to tuck it in before I said a word about it. Besides, I
reckon I don't know as they meant any harm, seein' as how they never
carried off my top-knot;--only it was a little queer they were hid in
that way in the woods, and looked so fierce when they first jumped up in
their nasty paint."

"Who knows," remarked Mr. Heywood, taking down his rifle from the side
of the hut opposite to the chimney, and examining the priming, "but
these fellows may have tracked you back, and are even now, lurking near
us. Ephraim Giles, you should have told me of this before."

"And so," replied the soldier, "I was goin' to, when Loup Garou began
with his capers. Then it was I gave a parable like, about his scentin'
the varmint better nor we human critters could."

"Ephraim Giles," said Mr. Heywood, sharply, while he fixed his dark eye
upon him, as if he would have read his inmost soul, "you say that you
have been a soldier, and fought with our army on the Wabash. Why did you
leave the service?"

"Because," drawled the ex-militaire, with a leering expression of
his eye, "my captin was a bad judge of good men when he had 'em, and
reckoned I was shammin' when I fell down rale sick, and was left behind
in a charge made on the Injins at Tippecanoe. I couldn't stand the abuse
he gave me for this, and so I left him."

"Cool, indeed," sneered Mr. Heywood; "now then, Ephraim Giles, hear my
opinion. Your captain thought you were a coward, for he judged you
from your conduct. I, too, judge you from your conduct, and have no
hesitation in pronouncing you to be a rogue or a fool."

"Well, I want to know!" was the only rejoinder of the man, as he went on
unconcernedly with his whittling.

"Le Noir," said his master to the Canadian, who, imitating his example,
had taken down a long duck gun from the same side of the hut, "take your
dog with you and reconnoitre in the neighborhood. You speak Indian, and
if any of these people are to be seen, ascertain who they are and why--"

Here he was interrupted by the gradually approaching sounds of rattling
deer hoofs, so well known as composing one of the lower ornaments of the
Indian war-dress, while, at the same moment, the wild moaning of Loup
Garou, then standing at the front door-way, was renewed even more
plaintively than before.

Mr. Heywood's cheek blanched. It was not with fear, for he was a
man incapable of fear in the common acceptation of the word, but
independently of certain vague apprehensions for others, his mind had
been in a great degree unhinged by an unaccountable presentiment of
evil, which instinctively had come over it that day. It was this, that,
inducing a certain irresoluteness of thought and action, had led him
into a manifestation of peevish contradiction in his address to Ephraim
Giles. There are moments, when, without knowing why, the nerves of
the strongest--the purposes of the wisest, are unstrung--and when it
requires all our tact and self-possession to conceal from others, the
momentary weakness we almost blush to admit to ourselves.

But there was no time for reflection. The approach to the door was
suddenly shaded, and in the next instant the dark forms of three or
four savages, speedily followed by others, amounting in all to twelve,
besides their chief, who was in the advance, crossed the threshold,
and, without uttering a word, either of anger or salutation, squatted
themselves upon the floor. They were stout, athletic warriors, the
perfect symmetry of whose persons could not be concealed even by the
hideous war-paint with which they were thickly streaked--inspiring
anything but confidence in the honesty or friendliness of their
intentions. The head of each was shaved and painted as well as his
person, and only on the extreme crown had been left a tuft of hair,
to which were attached feathers, and small bones, and other fantastic
ornaments peculiar to their race--a few of them carried American
rifles--the majority, the common gun periodically dealt out to the
several tribes, as presents from the British Government, while all
had in addition to their pipe-tomahawks the formidable and polished
war-club.

Such visitors, and so armed, were not of a description to remove the
apprehensions of the little party in the farm-house. Their very silence,
added to their dark and threatening looks, created more than mere
suspicion--a certainty of evil design--and deeply did Mr. Heywood
deplore the folly of Ephraim Giles in failing to apprise him of his
meeting with these people, at the earliest moment after his return.
Had he done so, there might have been a chance, nay, every assurance
of relief, for he knew that a party from the fort, consisting of a
non-commissioned officer and six men, were even now fishing not more
than two miles higher up the river. He was aware that the boy, Wilton,
was an excellent runner, and that within an hour, at least, he could
have reached and brought down that party, who, as was their wont, when
absenting themselves on these fishing excursions, were provided with
their arms. However, it might not yet be too late, and he determined to
make the attempt. To call and speak to the boy aside, would, he was
well aware, excite the suspicions of his unwelcome guests, while it was
possible that, as they did not understand English, (so at least he took
it for granted) a communication made to him boldly in their presence,
would be construed into some domestic order.

"Wilton," he said calmly to the boy, who stood near the doorway with
alarm visibly depicted on his countenance, and looking as if he would
eagerly seize a favorable opportunity of escape, "make all haste to the
fishing party, and tell Corporal Nixon who commands it, to lose no time
in pulling down the stream. You will come back with them. Quick, lose
not a moment."

Delighted at the order, the boy made no answer, but hatless--shoeless as
he was, disappeared round the corner of the house. Strange to say, the
Indians, although they had seemingly listened with attention to Mr.
Heywood while issuing these directions, did not make the slightest
movement to arrest the departure of the boy, or even to remark upon
it--merely turning to their chief, who uttered a sharp and satisfied
"ugh."

During all this time, Mr. Heywood and Le Noir stood at some little
distance from the Indians, and nearly on the spot they had occupied at
their entrance, the one holding his rifle, the other his duck-gun,
the butts of both, resting on the floor. At each moment their anxiety
increased, and it seemed an age before the succor they had sent
for could arrive. How long, moreover, would these taciturn and
forbidding-mannered savages wait before they gave some indication of
overt hostility, and even if nothing were done prior to the arrival of
the fishing party, would these latter be in sufficient force to awe them
into a pacific departure? The Indians were twelve in number, exclusive
of their chief, all fierce and determined. They, with the soldiers,
nine; for neither Mr. Heywood nor Le Noir seemed disposed to count
upon any efficient aid from Ephraim Giles, who, during this dumb
scene, continued whittling before the Indians, apparently as cool and
indifferent to their presence, as if he had conceived them to be the
most peaceably disposed persons in the world. He had, however, listened
attentively to the order given to Wilton by his master, and had not
failed to remark that the Indians had not, in any way, attempted to
impede his departure.

"What do you think of these people, Le Noir," at length asked Mr.
Heywood, without, however removing his gaze from his visitors. "Can they
be friendly Pottawattamies?"

"Friendly Pottawattamies! no, sare," returned the Canadian seriously,
and shrugging up his shoulders. "Dey no dress, no paint like de
Pottawattamie, and I not like der black look--no, sare, dey Winnebago."

He laid a strong emphasis on the last word, and as he expected, a
general "ugh" among the party attested that he had correctly named their
tribe.

While they were thus expressing their conjectures in regard to the
character and intentions of their guests, and inwardly determining to
sell their lives as dearly as possible if attacked. Ephraim Giles had
risen from his seat in the corner of the chimney, and with his eyes
fixed on the stick he was whittling, walked coolly out of the door,
and sauntered down the pathway leading to the river. But if he had
calculated on the same indifference to his actions that the Indians had
manifested towards the boy, he was mistaken. They all watched him keenly
as he slowly sauntered towards the water, and then, when he had
got about half way, the chief suddenly springing to his feet, and
brandishing his tomahawk demanded in broken, but perfectly intelligible
English, where he was going.

"Well, I want to know," exclaimed the soldier, turning round, and in a
tone indicating surprise that he had thus been questioned--"only goin
over thar," he continued, pointing to the haystacks on the opposite side
of the river, around which stood many cattle, "goin I guess to give out
some grub to the beasts, and I'll he back in no time, to give you
out some whisky." Then, resuming his course, he went on whittling as
unconcernedly as before.

The chief turned to his followers, and a low, yet eager conversation
ensued. Whether it was that the seeming indifference of the man, or
his promise of the whisky on his return, or that some other motive
influenced them, they contented themselves with keeping a vigilant watch
upon his movements.

Mr. Heywood and the Frenchman exchanged looks of surprise; they could
not account for the action of Ephraim Giles, for although it was his
office to cross the river daily for the purpose he had named, it had
never been at that period of the day. How the Indians could suffer his
departure, if their intentions were really hostile, it was moreover
impossible for them to comprehend; and in proportion as the hopes of
the one were raised by this circumstance, so were those of the other
depressed.

Mr. Heywood began to think that the suspicions of the Canadian were
unfounded, and that their guests were, after all, but a party of
warriors on their way to the Fort, either for purposes of traffic with
the only merchant residing in its vicinity, or of business with the
officer commanding. It was not likely, he reasoned, that men coming with
hostile designs, would have suffered first the boy to be despatched on
a mission which, obscurely as he had worded his directions, must in
some measure have been understood by the chief; and, secondly, permitted
Ephraim Giles to leave the house in the manner just seen--particularly
when the suspicion entertained by him as well as by Le Noir and himself,
must have been apparent.

But the Canadian drew no such inference from these facts. Although he
could not speak the Winnebago language, he was too conversant with the
customs of the Indians, to perceive, in what they permitted in this
seeming confidence, anything but guile. He felt assured they had allowed
the boy to depart on his errand SOLELY that they might have a greater
number of victims in their power. Nothing was more easy, numerous as
they were, than to despatch THEM, and then, lying in ambush among the
trees that skirted the banks, to shoot down every one in the fishing
boat before a landing could be effected, and preparations made for
defence; while, in the indifference of their conduct in regard to the
departure of Ephraim Giles, he saw but a design to disarm suspicion,
and thus induce them to lay by their arms, the reports of which would
necessarily alarm the party expected, and so far put them on their
guard as to defeat their plans. The very appearance of Giles, moreover,
crossing the water, if seen by the descending boat would, he thought
they imagined, be a means of lulling the party into security, and thus
rendering them a more easy prey.

While the master and the servant were thus indulging their opposite
reflections, without, however, making any intercommunication of them,
Ephraim Giles, who had now thrust his knife and stick into the pocket
of his short skirt, shoved off the only canoe that was to be seen, and
stepping into it, and seizing the paddle, urged it slowly, and without
the slightest appearance of hurry, to the opposite bank, where, within
less than ten minutes, he had again hauled it up. Then, as coolly
ascending the bank, he approached one of the haystacks, and drew from it
a few handfuls of fodder which he spread upon the ground, continuing to
do so, as the cattle assembled around, until he had gained the outermost
haystack bordering immediately upon the wood. This reached, he gave a
loud yell, which was promptly answered by the Indians, who had continued
to watch his movements up to the very moment of his disappearance; and
darting along a narrow path which skirted the wood, ran with all his
speed towards the Fort. His flight had not lasted five minutes, when the
reports of several guns, fired from the direction he had just quitted,
met his ear, and urged him to even greater exertion, until at length,
haggard and breathless, he gained his destination, and made his way
to the commanding officer, to whom he briefly detailed the startling
occurrences he had witnessed.




CHAPTER II.

The Fort of Chicago, at that period, stood upon a portion of the same
ground occupied by its successor, and was, in fact, a very epitome of
a fortress. On the western side, two block-houses constituted its
chief defence, while on the north, a subterranean passage led from the
parade-ground to the river, near the banks of which it had been erected.
The uses of this sally port were two-fold--firstly, to afford the
garrison a supply of water in the event of a siege--secondly, to
facilitate escape, if necessary. The country around, now the seat of
fruitfulness and industry, was at that time a wilderness, tenanted only
by the savage, and by the few daring and adventurous whites who had
devoted their lives to purposes of traffic, yet whose numbers was so
small as to induce them, with a view to their safety, to establish
themselves as near the Fort as possible. Roads, there were none, and
the half formed trail of the Indian furnished the only means of
communication between this distant port, and the less thinly-settled
portions of Michigan. Nor were these journeys of frequent occurrence,
but performed at long intervals, by the enterprising and the robust
men--who feared not to encounter privations and hardships--camping at
night in the woods, or finding a less desirable repose in the squalid
wigwam of the uncertain Indian.

The mouth of the Chicago River was then nearly half a mile more to the
southward than it is now. At a short distance from the lake, which gives
its name to the territory, it soon branched off abruptly to the north,
and then again, taking another turn, pursued its original westernly
coarse, and, passing near the Fort, gave to the latter the appearance of
a slightly elevated peninsula, separated only from the water by a gentle
declivity of no great extent. On the same side of the river was the
Government Agency House, and at about a quarter of a mile from that, a
spot generally used as a place of encampment by the friendly Indians--at
that moment occupied by a numerous band of Pottawattamies. Immediately
opposite to the Fort, stood the residence and trading establishment of
Mr. Mackenzie--a gentleman who had long mixed with the Indians--had
much influence with, and was highly regarded by them; and, close to his
abode, lived with his family, consisting of his wife and her sister,
French Canadians like himself, Ouilmette, one of the most attached of
his people, and enjoying almost equal popularity with the red men. About
a quarter of a mile beyond Ouilmettes, and immediately opposite to the
Pottawattamie encampment, from which it was divided only by the river,
was another small but neat dwelling. This belonged to Mr. Heywood, and
was then inhabited by his wife and daughter, whom he would not permit to
reside at the farm, as well on account of its rudeness of accommodation,
as of the dread of exposing them, in that remote situation, to the very
danger which we have seen he had himself so recently encountered.

Such was the civilian population of that sparsely inhabited country in
1812. Let us now see the strength of its garrison.

For the defence of so distant an outpost, almost cut off, as we have
already shown, from communication with the more inhabited portions of
the States, the American government had not thought it requisite
to provide more than a single company of soldiers, a force utterly
inadequate to contend in a case of emergency, with the hordes of savages
that could be collected around them within a few hours, and WEEKS before
any efficient succor could be obtained. This error, grave at any time,
in those who sought to extend the influence of their name and arms
throughout that fertile region which has now, within little more than
a quarter of a century, become the very head of American commerce and
navigation, was especially so at this particular epoch, when the
Indian spirit, stirred to action by the great chief who had so recently
measured his strength with his hated enemies at Tippecanoe, was likely
to be aroused on all occasions where facility of conquest seemed to
present itself. And, yet, that government well knew that there were,
even at that moment, difficulties existing between themselves and
Great Britain of a character to lead to an interruption of the friendly
intercourse that had hitherto subsisted between the two countries,
and which, if suffered to ripen into hostilities, would necessarily,
associate many of the Indian tribes with the forces of England, drawing
down certain destruction on those remoter posts, whose chief reliance on
immunity from danger, lay, in a great degree, in the array of strength
they could oppose to their subtle and calculating enemy.

This company, consisting, of seventy-five men--many of them married
and with families--was under the command of an officer whose conduct
throughout the eventful and trying scenes about to be recorded, has
often been the subject of much censure--with what justice our readers
must determine.

Captain Headley was one of those officers who, without having acquired
no greater rank at the age of forty than he now possessed, had served
in the army of the United States from his boyhood, and was, in all the
minutiae of the service, a strict disciplinarian. He had, moreover,
acquired habits of deference to authority, which caused him, on all
necessary occasions, to regulate his conduct by the orders of his
superiors, and so strongly was this engrafted on his nature, that
while he possessed mind and energy sufficient to plan the most feasible
measures himself, his dread of that responsibility which circumstances
had now forced upon him, induced the utmost disinclination to depart
from the letter of an instruction once received, and unrevoked.

These, however, were purely faults of his military education. To a
commanding person and dignified manners, Captain Headley united a mind
highly cultivated, and feelings and sentiments which could not fail to
secure the respect even of those who were most ready to condemn that
caution and prudence of character which so eminently distinguished his
career as a subordinate soldier. It was well known and conceded that,
if he erred, the error grew not so much out of his own want of judgment,
but was rather the fruit of the too great deference to authority which
led him, implicitly, to adopt the judgment of others. In the private
relations of life, he was deservedly esteemed, excelling in all those
higher accomplishments that ensure favor with society, and seldom fail
to win for their possessor the approbation of women. Such, indeed, had
been his success in this particular application of the gifts with which
nature had endowed him, that he had, for some years, been the possessor
of the affections and the hand of one of the noblest of her sex, whom,
however, we shall take a later opportunity of introducing to the reader.

The next officer in rank was Lieutenant Elmsley, married also, and about
ten years the junior of Headley. From causes, which will be explained in
the coarse of our narrative, the subaltern did not incline to place that
confidence in the measures and judgment of his captain, which, it has
been shown, the latter almost invariably accorded to HIS superiors, and
hence arose feelings, that, without absolutely alienating them--for, in
their relative military positions this could never be--rendered their
intercourse daily more and more formal, until, in the end, a sentiment
almost of enmity prevailed. In a remote garrison like this such an
evil was the more to be regretted, even while there was the greater
probability, from absence of serious occupation, of its occurrence.

The junior subaltern was Ensign Ronayne, a high-spirited young
Southerner, who had now been three years at the post, and within that
period, had, by his frank demeanor, and handsome person, won the regard
of all--military and civil--there and in the neighborhood. Enterprising,
ardent, fearless, and chivalrous, this young man had passed the first
year of what he, then, considered little short of banishment, in a
restless desire for adventure; but at the end of that period, came a
marked change over him, and the spirit that had panted exclusively for
action, now bent before a gentler and a holier influence.

Last of the officers of this little fort, was the surgeon. Doctor Von
Vottenberg, who as his name would imply, was a descendant from one of
the earlier Dutch settlers in the colonies. There was nothing remarkable
about this gentleman. He was short, stoat, rather of a bilious
temperament--clever in his profession, and much addicted to compounding
whisky punch, which he not only brewed, but drank most satisfactorily.
What other attributes and accomplishments he possessed, the incidents
herein related must develop.

It has been said that, on its Western side, the Fort was protected by
two block-houses, while on the northern a sally port communicated
with the tower. On each side of the sally port were two small stores,
reserved for the ammunition and arms, and for the provisions and spare
clothing of the garrison. On the north and south faces, rose a series of
small low wooden buildings, appropriated to the officers, and capable of
containing thrice the number now occupying them. The southern face, or
that which looks towards the locale of the scene described in our last
chapter, was now the residence of the commanding officer, and of his
senior subordinate, who, with their families and domestics, tenanted the
whole of that range of buildings, with the exception of one large room
in the centre, generally used as a hall of council with the Indians.
In the other range, precisely similar in construction, were quartered
Ensign Ronayne and the surgeon Von Vottenberg, who each, however
occupied but one apartment. The central and largest serving as their
mess-room. The other half of the building was vacant, or rather had been
so, until the doctor obtained the permission of the commanding officer
to use it as a temporary surgery--the hospital being a distinct edifice
between the two block-houses. These latter, capacious for the size
of the fort, accommodated the non-commissioned officers and men--the
company being divided as equally as possible between the two.

Without the whole of these buildings stood a strong stockade, about
twelve feet high, loop-holed for musquetry, with a bastion at each
angle, facing the four principal points of the compass, on each of
which was placed a small gun, that the men had been trained to work. The
entrance to the fort was from the westward, and in the direction of the
agency house, which two of these bastions immediately flanked.

The guard consisted of a non-commissioned officer and nine men--three
sentries being furnished for the necessary duties--one for the stores
already described--another for the commanding officer's quarters--the
mess-room and the surgery, and the third for the, southern bastion,
upon which floated the glorious stars and stripes of the Union. A
fourth sentry at the gate had been dispensed with, in consequence of
the proximity to it of the guard-house. This, was a small building
immediately in front of the hospital, which, with the gate, came
particularly under the surveillance of the non-commissioned officer of
the guard.

With the character for strict attention to discipline, which has been
ascribed to Captain Headley, it will be easily understood that every man
on duty was expected to be as correct in the execution of its details,
as though he had been at the Head Quarters of his regiment, or at
the Seat of Government itself. The utmost regard to dress, and to the
efficiency of arms was moreover enjoined, and so far did their commander
feel indisposed to trust the inspection of them to the non-commissioned
officer of the guard, that, although there were in the Fort, but two
regimental officers besides himself, he had, from the moment of assuming
the command, required them alternately to perform the necessary duties;
superintending the relief of guards, and parading all men off duty and
out of hospital, in full dress, at least once in the twenty-four hours.

At the outset, this had been a source of much discontent with the men,
who conceiving that, in that remote region, the rigor of the service
might be dispensed with, almost openly expressed their desire that
there might be sent to command them, some officer less severe in his
exactions. This had been reported to Captain Headley by his senior
subaltern, from whose manner, while communicating the information, it
was apparent that he did not wholly disapprove of a remonstrance against
measures which involved the sacrifice of his own comfort. His superior
was not slow to remark this, he, however, quietly observed that he was
not, at his years, and in his responsible position, to be told the duty
required to be performed by the troops under his command; and that, if
he perceived any symptoms of insubordination, he would take the proper
means to suppress it. The lieutenant made no reply, but bit his lip, and
withdrew. This was the first manifestation of any thing approaching to
disunion, between these two officers.

Lieutenant Elmsley, although by no means a negligent officer, was no
disciplinarian. He could not but look upon formal guard mountings and
parades, in that isolated quarter, as unnecessary--serving only to
create discontent amongst the men, and to induce them--the unmarried
especially--to desert, whenever an opportunity presented itself; while,
bringing the subject more immediately home to himself, he deemed it to
be a needlessly severe tax upon the only two subalterns of the garrison.
This, he thought might, situated as they were, have been dispensed with,
without the slightest inconvenience to the service; and the duty left to
the superintendence of the non-commissioned part of the force. Hence his
annoyance with his superior.

But Captain Headley was of a different opinion. He thought that the
very remoteness of his post, rendered it the more necessary that no
appearance of carelessness should be remarked by the tribes of Indians,
who were in the vicinity, and who, however amicable their relations
THEN with the United States, might later, from caprice or events yet
unforeseen, take advantage of the slightest negligence, to attempt the
destruction of all.

Better, he thought, that they who received the pay of the Government,
for upholding its interests and dignity, should be subject to a frequent
recurrence of duty--not in itself particularly irksome-than that
an important post--the nucleus of the future prosperity of the
State--should be perilled by the absence of that vigilance which ought
to characterize the soldier. If he allowed to be retrenched, or indeed
left unemployed, any of that military exhibition, which tends to impress
upon the many the moral superiority of the few, where, he argued, would
be their safety in the hour of need; and if those duties were performed
in a slovenly manner, and without due regard to SCENIC effect, the
result would be to induce the wily savage to undervalue that superiority
which discipline chiefly secured to the white warrior. Captain Headley
was discriminating and observant. He had, more than once, remarked the
surprise and admiration created among the Indians who had access within
the stockade, at the promptness and regularity of the system introduced
into it, and this, of itself, was a sufficient motive to cause him to
persevere in the course his judgment had adopted.

Such was the condition of affairs at the moment when Ephraim Giles,
breathless with speed, and fancying the party of Winnebagoes close upon
his heels, made his entry into the Fort. The news he brought was of a
nature to assemble the officers, as well as many of the men and women,
all anxious to hear the details of an occurrence, which now, for
the first time since their arrival at the Fort, had created serious
apprehension. But there was one of the party who manifested more
than ordinary uneasiness. His impatience was great, and, after having
whispered a few words in the ear of Captain Headley, and received an
affirmative reply, coupled with an injunction of caution, he left
the building in haste, and proceeded towards the block-houses, where,
selecting half a dozen men, and ordering them to arm on the instant, he
passed with them through the gate--sprang into a large scow which was
unchained from its moorings, on the bank of the river, and pulled in the
direction of the house already said to have been occupied by the wife
and daughter of Mr. Heywood.

Meanwhile, Captain Headley closely interrogated the fugitive as to the
number and appearance of the Indians who had created all this alarm,
their probable object in visiting the farm in this seemingly hostile
manner, and the number of shots he had heard fired. To all these
questions the soldier, who had now, in some degree, recovered from his
panic, replied in the usual drawling tone, his stick and knife, which
had been drawn forth again from his pocket, in which he had deposited
them in crossing from the farm-house, affording him his usual amusement,
but nothing, of course, was elicited beyond what has already been
related. Whether any one had been killed in the house, or the guns
merely discharged to frighten the fugitive, or that the reports had
proceeded from the fishing party that had been sent for, with a view to
alarm the Indians, and deter them from the commission of outrage,
were surmises that severally occurred to Captain Headley, but without
enabling him to arrive at any definite opinion. That there was cause for
apprehension, there was no doubt. The appearance of a band of strange
Indians in the neighborhood, however small in number, dressed in their
war-paint, gave earnest of coming trouble, not only through their own
acts, but through the influence of example on the many other tribes
whom they had been accustomed to look upon as friends and allies. In the
midst of these reflections arose a feeling of self-gratulation that he
had preserved that discipline and strict attention to duty, which, he
knew, that all must now admit to have been correct, and which, if any
difficulty did occur, could not fail to prove of the utmost importance.

His first consideration now was the safety of the small fishing party,
to which allusion has more than once been made in the preceding pages,
and which it was a source of satisfaction to him to recollect were,
in accordance with an order never departed from on these and similar
excursions, furnished with the necessary arms and ammunition, although
only in their fatigue dress.

"Mr. Elmsley," he said turning to that officer, who stood waiting his
orders, "who commands the fishing party?"

"Corporal Nixon, sir," replied the lieutenant, at once entering into his
motive for the inquiry, "a brave, but discreet soldier, and one who, I
am sure, will evince all necessary resolution, should he see anything of
these Indians. The men who are with him are also fine young fellows, and
among our best shots."

"I am glad to hear this," was the rejoinder, "but still, twelve Indians
firing from the woods upon half their number in an open boat, and taken
by surprise, would, I fear, render the activity, courage, and skill of
these latter but of little avail. My hope is, that Corporal Nixon may
see nothing of them, but that, on the contrary, if he has been apprised
by the boy, as the fellow says he was to be, of their presence at
Heywood's farm, he will make his way back without stopping, or at least,
use every precaution to conceal himself, until he can drop down under
cover of the darkness."

"What, sir," said the lieutenant, with a surprise he could ill conceal,
"would you desire him not to afford the necessary succor to Mr. Heywood,
if, indeed, he should be in time to render any service?"

"Mr. Elmsley," remarked his captain, somewhat sternly, "my sympathy for
the fate of those at the farm, is, perhaps quite as strong as yours, but
I have a higher stake at issue--a higher object than the indulgence of
personal sympathy. I can ill afford, threatening as appearances are at
this moment, to risk the lives of six men, the best you say in the fort,
out of the very small force at my disposal. Nothing must be left undone
to secure their safety. Order a gun to be fired immediately from the
southern bastion. It will be distinctly heard by the party, and if not
already apprised of the existing danger they will at once understand
the signal. Moreover the report may have the effect of alarming the
savages."

Lieutenant Elmsley withdrew to execute the order, and soon after
the dull booming of a cannon was heard reverberating throughout the
surrounding woods, and winding its echoes along the waters of the narrow
and tranquil Chicago. So unusual an event as this excited a good deal
of speculation, not only among the inmates of the Fort, but among the
numerous friendly Indians encamped without, who, wholly unacquainted
with the cause of the alarm, were, by the strict orders of Captain
Headley, kept ignorant of the information of which Ephraim Giles had
been the bearer--

That night there was a more than usual vigilance exercised by the
sentinels, and although the rest of the garrison were exempt from
extraordinary duty, the watchful and anxious commanding officer slept
not until dawn.




CHAPTER III.

At a distance of about two miles above Heywood's farm, and on the
southern branch of the Chicago, which winds its slightly serpentine
course between the wood and the prairie. There was at the period of
which we treat, a small deep bay formed by two adjacent and densely
wooded points of land, in the cool shades of which the pike, the black
bass, and the pickerel loved to lie in the heat of summer, and where, in
early spring, though in less numbers, they were wont to congregate.
This was the customary fishing spot of the garrison--six men and a
non-commissioned officer, repairing there almost daily, with their ample
store of lines and spears, as much, although not avowedly, for their
own amusement, as for the supply of the officer's table. What remained,
after a certain division among these, became the property of the
captors, who, after appropriating to themselves what was necessary for
their next day's meal, distributed the rest among the non-commissioned,
and men of the company. As the season advanced, and the fish became
more plenty, there was little limitation of quantity, for the freight,
nightly brought home, and taken with the line and spear alone, was
sufficient to afford every one abundance. In truth, even in the depth
of winter, there was little privation endured by the garrison--the fat
venison brought in and sold for the veriest trifle by the Indians--the
luscious and ample prairie hen, chiefly shot by the officers, and the
fish we have named, leaving no necessity for consumption of the salt
food with which it was but indifferently stored.

On the day on which our narrative has commenced, the usual fishing party
had ascended the river at an early hour, for the newness of the season
and the shortness of the days rendered it an object that they should be
on the accustomed haunt as soon as possible. They had left the Fort at
daylight, passing Heywood's farm at the moment when, for the purpose of
foddering the cattle on the opposite bank, he, with the boy Wilton, was
crossing to the very canoe in which Ephraim Giles afterwards made his
escape--the latter with the Canadian, being engaged in felling trees
higher up the river.

Arrived at the little bay to which we have just adverted, the boat was
fastened to the gnarled trunk of a tree, which projected over the
deep water at the nearest point, and the party, taking with them their
fishing rods, baits, and haversacks, but leaving their spears and
muskets in the boat, dispersed themselves at short distances along
the curve that formed the bay, which, however, was not more than three
hundred yards in extent, from point to point.

When they first cast their lines into the water, the sun's rays were
clearly visible through the thick wood in their rear. The early morning,
too, had been cold--almost frosty--so much so, that the wild ducks,
which generally evinced a good deal of shyness, NOW, seemingly
emboldened by the briskness of the atmosphere, could be seen gliding
about in considerable numbers, about half a mile below them; while the
fish, on the contrary, as though dissatisfied with the temperature
of their element, refused to do what the men called "the amiable," by
approaching the hook. Their occupation had been continued until long
past mid-day, during which time not more than a dozen fish had been
taken. Vexed at his ill luck, for he had not had even a nibble, one
of the men flung his rod upon the bank, impatiently, and then, seating
himself on the projecting root of a large tree, declared it was all
nonsense to play the fool any longer, and that the most sensible thing
they could do, was to take their dinners--smoke their pipes--and wash
the whole down with a little of the Monongahela.

"I say, Collins," remarked the corporal, good-naturedly, "we shall have
poor fare for the officers' mess, let alone our own, if we all follow
your example, and give up so soon. But, as you say, it's time to have
some grub, and we'll try our luck afterwards."

"Rome wasn't built in a day," said the man who had been fishing next
to Collins, and drawing in his line also, "we've a good many hours left
yet."

Following the recommendation of the corporal, the rest of the party sat
down on the edge of the bank, and, opening their haversacks, produced
each his allowance of corn bread and venison, or salted pork, after
dispatching which, with the aid of their clasp knives, they took
a refreshing "horn" from the general canteen that Collins carried
suspended over his shoulder, and then drew forth and lighted their
pipes.

As the latter puffed away with a vigor that proved either a preoccupied
mind, or extreme gratification with the weed, he cast his eyes
carelessly down the stream, where a large description of duck, called
by the French natives of the country, the cou rouge, from the color of
their necks, were disporting themselves as though nothing in the shape
of a fire arm was near them--now diving--now rising on their feet, and
shaking their outstretched wings, now chasing each other in limited
circles, and altogether so apparently emboldened by their immunity from
interruption, as to come close to the bank, at a distance of little more
than fifty yards from the spot where he sat.

"It's very ridiculous," he at length remarked, pouring forth at the same
time, an unusual volume of smoke, and watching the curling eddies as
they rose far above his head--"it's very ridiculous, I say, the captin's
order that we sha'nt fire. Look at them ducks--how they seem to know all
about it, too!"

"By gosh!" said another, "I've a good notion to fetch my musket, and
have a slap into them. Shall I, corporal?"

"Certainly not, Green," was the answer. "If it was known in the Fort I
had permitted any of the party to fire, I should be broke, if I did'nt
get picketed for my pains, and none of us would ever get out again."

"No great harm in that, either," said the man who had made the novel
observation that Rome had not been built in a day.

The corporal looked sharply at the last speaker, as if not fully
comprehending his meaning.

"Jackson means no great harm if we never got out again," interposed
Collins, "and I think as he does, for I see no fun in rowing four or
five miles to fish, and scarcely getting a sight of one."

"Well, but Collins, that's not always our luck. I'm sure we've had sport
enough before. It must be because the weather's rather cold today, that
the fish won't bite."

"It's of no use his grumbling, Philips," remarked Corporal Nixon, "we're
here, not so much for own sport as on a duty for the garrison. Let me
hear no more of this, Collins."

"Well, corporal that's true enough," said Green, "but dash me if it
isn't temptin' to see them fellows there stealin' upon us, and we
lookin' on, and doin' nothin'."

"What fellows do you mean?" inquired the corporal, suddenly starting to
his feet, and looking down the river.

"Why, them ducks to be sure, see how they come sailin' up to us, as if
they knowed all about the captin's order--no jumpin' or friskin' now,
but all of a heap like."

"Yes, but I say, what's that black looking thing beyond the ducks?"
asked one who had not hitherto spoken, pointing his finger.

"Where, where, Weston?" exclaimed one or two voices, and the speakers
looked in the direction indicated.

"Hang me if it isn't a bear," said Collins in a low, anxious tone;
"that's the chap that has sent the ducks so near us. Do let me have a
crack at him, corporal. He's large enough to supply us all with fresh
meat for three days, and will make up for the bad fishing. Only one shy,
corporal, and I engage not to miss him."

Sure enough, there was, in the centre of the stream, a dark object,
nearly half a mile distant, which all joined in pronouncing to be a
bear. It was swimming vigorously across to their aide of the river.

"I think we might take him as he lands," observed Green. "What say you,
corporal; I reckon you'll let us try THAT, if you won't let us fire?"

"Stay all where you are," was the reply. "I can manage him myself with
a spear, if I can only be in time before he reaches the shore. If not,
it's no matter, for I won't allow a trigger to be pulled."

Corporal Nixon was a tall, active, strong-limbed Virginian. He soon
cleared the space that separated them from the boat, and jumping to the
stern, seized one of the fishing spears, and then moved on through: the
wood that densely skirted the bank. But he had not been five minutes
gone when he again made his appearance, not immediately by the
half-formed path he had previously taken, but by a slight detour to the
rear.

"Hist, hist," he said in an audible whisper, as soon as he saw that
he was perceived, motioning at the same time with his hand to enjoin
silence, and concealment. Then, beckoning to Weston to join him; he
again moved along the path with the light tread of one who fears to
alarm an object unconscious of interruption.

All had the sense to understand that there was some good reason for
the caution of the corporal, and with the exception of Weston, who had
promptly obeyed the signal, busily, but silently resumed their morning's
occupation.

First, a quarter of an hour, and then minute after minute passed slowly
away, yet there was no sign of the return of their companions. What
could be the meaning of this? If the bear had not proved to be too much
for them, they ought to have killed him, and rejoined them before
this. Curiosity, nay, apprehension finally overcame the strong sense
of obedience to orders, which had been literally drilled into them, and
they all, at the suggestion of Green, dropped their rods on the bank,
and moved cautiously in the direction that had been taken by the
corporal and Weston. Great, however, was the surprise of Collins, then a
little in advance, when, on nearing the spot where the boat lay moored,
he beheld, not those of who they were in search, but a naked, and
hideously painted savage, in the very act of untying the rope by which
the skiff was fastened to the knotted and projecting root of the tree.
Sensible that there was impending danger, although he knew not of what
precise kind, inasmuch as there was no Reason to apprehend anything
hostile from the Indians, with--all of whom around the fort, they had
always been on friendly terms, he sprang forward to arrest the movement.
But the distance was several rods, and the savage, alarmed by the
rustling made among the foliage and brushwood in his rear, now put his
shoulder to the boat, and, in the next instant would have had it far
across this stream, had not a hand suddenly protruded from beneath the
hollow clump of earth on which the tree grew, grasped him firmly by the
ankle, even while in the act of springing into the forcibly impelled
skiff. In a moment or two, he grappled tightly with his hands upon the
bow of the boat, but, finding the pressure on his imprisoned limb too
great for resistance, he relinquished his hold, falling upon his face
in the water, from which he was dragged, although without violence, by
Corporal Nixon, who had emerged from his hiding-place.

When the Indian was suffered to rise, there was a threatening expression
on his countenance, which, not even the number of those by whom he was
now surrounded could check, and he made an involuntary motion of his
hand to his scalping knife, the only weapon with which he was armed,
that lay in the sheath dangling from his girdle. Seeing, however, that
there was no hostile disposition manifested by the party, he speedily
relinquished his first impulse, and stood upright before them with a
bold, but calm look.

"What you want with boat?" asked the corporal, almost involuntarily, and
without the slightest expectation that his question would be understood.

"Me want 'em cross," replied the Indian, pointing to the opposite woods.

"But why you come in bear skin?" and, in his turn, the corporal pointed
with his finger in the direction in which the supposed bear had been
seen.

"Ugh!" grunted the savage doggedly, finding that he had been detected in
his disguise.

"What nation you?--Pottawattamie?"

"Wah! Pottawattamie!"

"Curious enough," pursued the corporal, addressing himself to his
comrades. "I don't half like the look of the fellow, but I suppose it's
all right. We musn't offend him. You chief?", he continued, pointing
to a large silver medal suspended over the breast of the athletic and
well-proportioned Indian.

"Yes, me chief. Pottawattamie chief," and he made a sign in the
direction of the Fort, near which the encampment of that tribe lay.

"You friend, then?" remarked the corporal, extending his hand.

"Yes, me friend," he answered promptly, brightening up and taking the
proffered hand; "you give 'em boat?"

"Do you see any thing green in my eye?" asked the Virginian, incapable,
even under the circumstances, of repressing the indulgence of his humor.

But the party questioned, although speaking a little English, was not
sufficiently initiated in its elegancies to comprehend this; so, he
merely answered with a "ugh!" while the greater portion of the men
laughed boisterously, both at the wit of the corporal, and at the
seeming astonishment it excited.

This mirth by no means suited the humor of the Indian. He felt that
it was directed towards himself, and again he stood fierce, and with a
dilating frame before them.

Corporal Nixon at once became sensible of his error. To affront one of
the friendly chiefs would, he knew, not only compromise the interests
of the garrison, but incur the severe displeasure of the commanding
officer, who had always enjoined the most scrupulous abstinence from any
thing offensive to them.

"I only meant to say," he added, as he again extended his hand. "I can't
give 'em boat, White chief," and he pointed in the direction of the Fort,
"no let me."

"Ugh!" exclaimed the Indian, his stern features again brightening up
with a last hope. "'Spose come with Injin?"

For a moment or two, the corporal hesitated whether or not to put the
man across, but when he reflected on the singular manner of his advent,
and other circumstances connected with his appearance among them, his
customary prudence came to his aid, and while avoiding all ground for
offence by his mode of refusal, he gave him peremptorily to understand
that there was an order against his suffering the boat to leave its
present station.

Again the countenance of the Indian fell, even while his quick eye
rolled incessantly from one to the other of the group. "You no give 'em
boat--Injin swim," he at length observed.

"Just as you please," answered corporal Nixon. "By and bye, sogers go to
the Fort--take Injin with 'em."

"Wah! Injin cross here," and as he spoke, he sprang again to the bow
of the boat, and at a single bound cleared the intervening space to the
very stern.

Several heavy splashes in the water.--a muttered curse from the
corporal--some confusion among his men, and the savage was seen nearly
half-way across the river, swimming like an eel to the opposite shore.

"Damn the awkward brute!" exclaimed the former, angrily. "How many
muskets are there overboard, Jackson?"

"Only three--and two cartouch boxes."

"ONLY three indeed! I wish the fellow had been at old Nick, instead
of coming here to create all this confusion. Is the water deep at the
stern?"

"Nearly a fathom I reckon," was the reply.

"Then, my lads, you must look out for other fish to-day. Jackson, can
you see the muskets at the bottom?"

"Not a sign of them, corporal," answered the man, as lying flat on the
boat, he peered intently into the water. "The bottom is covered with
weeds, and I can just see the tails of two large pikes wriggling among
them. By Gemini, I think if I had my rod here, I could take them both!"

"Never mind them," resumed the corporal, again delivering himself of a
little wit; "muskets will be of far more use to us just now than pikes.
We must fish them up--there will be the devil to pay if we go home
without them."

"Then there's no other way than diving for them," said Jackson, still
looking downwards. "Not even the glitter of a barrel can I see. They
must have buried themselves in the weeds. I say, Weston," slightly
raising his head and turning his face to the party named, "You're a good
diver?"

"Yes, and Collins is better than me."

"Well then, here's at it," resumed Jackson, rising and commencing to
strip. "It's only by groping and feeling that we can find the arms, and
when once we've tumbled on 'em, it will be easy enough to get 'em up
with one hand, while we swim with the other. We must plunge here from
the stern," he added, as the men whom he had named jumped on board and
commenced stripping themselves.

"How came the Injin to knock the muskets overboard, Corporal?" inquired
one of the party who had not yet spoken--a fat, portly man, with a long
hooked nose, and a peaked chin.

"I'm dashed," replied Nixon, "if I can tell myself, though I was looking
at him as he jumped from one end of the boat to the other. All I know
is, the firelocks were propped against the stern of the boat as we
placed them, with the backs of the cartouch boxes slung under the
ramrods, and I suppose, for I don't know how else it could be done, that
instead of alighting on the seat, he must have passed it, and putting
his foot on the muzzles, tipped them with the weight of his body, head
over heels into the water."

"Corporal," Ventured Collins, as he removed his last garment, "you asked
that painted chap if he saw anything green in your eye. Now, that's as
it may be, but hang me, if it wasn't a little green to take him for a
Pottawattamie?"

"And how do you know he was'nt a Pottawattamie? Who made you a judge of
Indian flesh?" retorted the corporal, with an air of dissatisfaction.

"Didn't he say he was, and didn't he wear a chiefs medal?"

"Say? Yes, I'll be bound he'd say and wear anything to gull us, but I'm
sure he's no Pottawattamie. I never seen a Pottawattamie of that build.
They are tall, thin, skinny, bony fellows--while this chap was square,
stoat, broad-shouldered, and full of muscle."

Corporal Nixon pondered a little, because half-convinced, but would not
acknowledge that he could have been mistaken. "Are you all ready?" he
at length inquired, anxious, like most men, when driven into a corner on
one topic, to introduce another.

"All ready," answered Jackson, taking the first plunge in the direction
in which he knew the muskets must have fallen.

Before following his example, the others waited for his report. This was
soon made. He had got hold of one of the muskets, and partly lifted it
from its bed, but the net-work of strong weeds above it, opposing too
much resistance, he had been compelled to quit his hold, and came to the
surface of the water for air.

"Here's for another trial," shouted Collins, as he made his plunge in
the same direction. In a few seconds he too, reappeared, bearing in his
right hand, not a firelock, but the two missing cartouch boxes.

"Better luck next time," remarked corporal Nixon. "I think my lads, if
two of you were to separate the weeds with your hands, so as to clear
each musket, the other might easily bring it up."

The suggestion of the corporal was at once acted upon, but it was not,
until after repeated attempts had been made to liberate the arms, from
their Web-like canopy, that two were finally brought up and placed in
the boat. The third they groped for in vain, until at length, the men,
dispirited and tired, declared it was utterly useless to prosecute the
search, and that the other musket must be given up as lost.

This, however, did not suit the views of the correct corporal. He said,
pointedly, that he would almost as soon return without his head as
without his arms, and that the day having been thus far spent without
the accomplishment of the object for which they were there, he was
determined to devote the remainder to the search. Not being a bad diver
himself, although he had not hitherto deemed it necessary to add his
exertions to those of his comrades, he now stripped, desiring those
who had preceded him to throw on their shirts and rest themselves for
another plunge, when he should have succeeded in finding out where the
missing musket had lodged.

"What's that?" exclaimed Jackson, pointing to a small, dark object, of
a nearly circular shape, which was floating about half way between the
surface of the place into which the divers had plunged, and the weeds
below.

His companions turned their eyes in the direction indicated, but, almost
immediately after Jackson had spoken, it had disappeared wholly from
view.

"What did it loot like?" asked the corporal.

"It must have been a mush rat," returned Jackson, "there's plenty of
them about here, and I reckon our diving has disturbed the nest."

Corporal Nixon now took his leap, but some paces farther out from the
shore than his companions had ventured upon theirs. The direction was
the right one. Extending his arms as he reached a space entirely free
from weeds, his right hand encountered the cold barrel of the musket,
but as he sought to glide it along, in order that he might grasp
the butt, and thus drag it endwise up, his hand disturbed some hairy
substance which rested upon the weapon causing it to float slightly
upwards, until it came in contact with his naked breast. Now, the
corporal was a fearless soldier whose nerves were not easily shaken, but
the idea of a nasty mush rat, as they termed it, touching his person in
this manner, produced in him unconquerable disgust, even while it gave
him the desperate energy to clutch the object with a nervous grasp, and
without regard to the chance of being bitten in the act, by the small,
sharp teeth of the animal. His consternation was even greater when, on
enclosing it within his rough palm, he felt the whole to collapse, as
though it had been a heavy air-filled bladder, burst by the compression
of his fingers. A new feeling-a new chain of ideas now took possession
of him, and leaving the musket where it was, he rose near the spot from
which he first started, and still clutching his hairy and undesirable
prize, threw it from him towards the boat, into the bottom of which it
fell, after grazing the cheek of Collins.

"Pooh! pooh! pooh," spluttered the latter, moving as if the action was
necessary to disembarrass him of the unsightly object no longer there.

A new source of curiosity was now created, not only among the swimmers,
but the idlers who were smoking their pipes and looking carelessly
on. All now, without venturing to touch the loathsome looking thing,
gathered around it endeavoring to ascertain really what it was. "What do
you make of the creature?" asked corporal Nixon, who, now ascending the
side of the boat, observed how much the interest of his men had been
excited.

"I'm sure I can't say," answered Jackson. "It looks for all the world
like a rat, only the hair is so long. Dead enough though, for it does
not budge an inch."

"Let's see what it is," said the man with the long hooked nose, and the
peaked chin.

By no means anxious, however, to touch it with his hands, he took up the
spear and turned over and over the clammy and motionless mass.

"Just as I thought," exclaimed the corporal, with a shudder, as the
weapon unfolding the whole to view, disclosed alternately the moistened
hair and thick and bloody skin of a human head.

"Gemini," cried Jackson, "how came this scalp here, it has been freshly
taken--this very day--yet how could it get here?"

"Depend upon't," said Green, "that chief that was here just now, could
tell somethin' about it, if he had a mind."

"Then he must have had it in his breech-cloth," remarked the corporal
seriously, for not a rag besides had he about him. "No, no it couldn't
be him, and yet it's very strange."

"Of course it couldn't be him," maliciously interfered Collins, who had
so far conquered his first disgust, as to take the object of discussion
into his own hands, "for you know he was a Pottawattamie, and therefore
wouldn't scalp for the world."

"But whose can it be?" resumed Jackson, "and how did it get here, I am
sure its that of a boy."

"Could it have floated here from the farm?" half questioned Green
musingly.

"Somethin' struck me like shots from that quarter, about an hour before
the Injin swam across, and dash me, now I recollect it, I'm sure I heard
a cry, just after the corporal left us to go after that bear."

"Nonsense," said the Virginian, "how could it float against the stream,
and as for the shots you think you heard, you most have taken Ephraim
Giles's axe blows for them. Besides, you couldn't hear shots at that
distance. If you did, it most be from some of the hunters."

"But the cry, corporal," urged Jackson, "what say you to the cry Green
says he heard when you left us?"

"All stuff; did anybody else hear it besides Green, you were all sitting
on the bank with him?"

No one answering in the affirmative, Corporal Nixon declared the thing
to be impossible, or he should have heard it too; nor could he see what
connection there was between that cry--supposing there had been one--and
the facts that had come immediately under their own observation.

"Hist," interrupted Collins, placing one hand upon the speaker's
shoulder, and with the other directing his attention to what, now seen
by the whole of the party, was ill calculated to re-assure them.




CHAPTER IV.

Stealthily gliding through the fresh and thinly foliaged wood, that
skirted the opposite shore, yet almost concealed from view, Corporal
Nixon now beheld the crouching forms of several armed Indians, nearly
naked, and evidently in war costume. They were following the serpentine
course necessitated by the interposing trees, and seeking cautiously to
establish themselves behind cover on the very verge of the bank.

"Back men for your lives, there's nothing friendly there," exclaimed the
Virginian the moment that his glance had taken in the scene, "out
with the arms, and divide the dry ammunition. Collins, you are a smart
fellow, do you and Green set to work and light a fire, but out of sight,
and dry the muskets as fast as you can. There are twelve pounds in
each of the five remaining cartouch boxes, these will do for a spell.
Jackson, Philips, tree yourselves, while Cass lies flat in the stern,
and keeps a good look out on the devils, without exposing himself. Now,
my lads, do all this very quietly, and as if you didn't think there was
danger at hand. If they see any signs of fear, they will pitch it into
you directly. As it is, they are only waiting to settle themselves, and
do it at their leisure."

"Pity they don't make a general of you, corporal," remarked Collins, as
he proceeded quietly with Green to the execution of the duty assigned to
them. "I guess Washington himself couldn't better command a little army.
Is your battle order finished, general?"

"None of your nonsense, master Collins, this is no time for jesting.
Go and dry these arms, and when you have them so that they can send
a bullet from their throats, join Jackson and Philips in covering the
boat. Weston and I will take up our first station."

And in less time than we have taken to describe the cause of the alarm,
and the instructions given in consequence, the men had hastened to
execute the several duties assigned to them on shore, while Cass
remained, not only with a view of showing the Indians that the boat
was not wholly unguarded, but to be enabled to inform his comrades, who
could distinctly hear him without rendering any particular elevation
of the voice necessary, of any important movement on the part of the
former. This quietude of arrangement on the part of Corporal Nixon had,
seemingly, been not without effect. It was evident that the Indians
had no suspicion that they had been seen, and even when the men coolly
quitted the boat, they showed no impatience indicative of an impression
that the party were seeking to shield themselves from an impending
danger.

"This silence is strange enough," said the corporal to his companion,
after they had been some minutes secreted in the cavity from which the
departure of the Indian with the boat had been arrested. "I almost wish
they would fire a shot, for that would at once tell us how to act, and
what we are to expect, whether they are friendly Indians or not."

But no shot was fired, and from the moment when the men quitted the
boat, and took up their positions, everything had continued silent as
the grave on the opposite shore, and not the vestige of an Indian could
be seen.

"But for that scalp," again remarked the corporal, "I should take
the party to have been friendly Indians, perhaps just returned from a
buffalo hunt, and come down to the water to drink. They are surely gone
again."

"Look there," said Weston, in a subdued tone, while he placed his
hand on the shoulder of his superior, as both lay crouched in their
hiding-place, "look there, corporal," and he pointed with his finger to
the opposite bank. "Do you see that large, blackish log lying near the
hickory, and with its end towards us?"

"I do--what of it?"

"Well, don't you see something crouching like between the log and the
tree--something close up to both. See! it moves now a little."

Corporal Nixon strained his gaze in the direction indicated, but was
obliged to admit that, although he distinctly enough saw the log and the
tree, he could not discern any between thing them.

"NOW, do you see it?" again eagerly inquired Weston, as, at that moment,
the same animal was seen to turn itself within the very limited space
which had been indicated.

"Yes, I see it now," replied the Virginian, "but it's as likely to be a
hog as a man, for anything I can make of that shape; a hog that has been
filling his skin with hickory nuts, and is but now waking out of his
sleep. Still, as the Injins were there just now, it may be that if
they're gone, they've left a spy behind them. We'll soon know how
matters stand, for it won't do to remain here all night. Cass,"
addressing the man in the boat who was seated low in the stern, only
occasionally taking a sly peep, and immediately withdrawing his head,
"place your cap on the rudder, and lie flat in the bottom. If they are
there, and mean to fire at all, they will try their hands at THAT."

"I hope they are good marksmen, corporal," replied the man, as raising
his right arm, he removed his forage cap and placed it so that the upper
half only could be seen. "I've no great fancy for those rifle bullets,
and give them a wide berth when I can."

"Now are you convinced?" asked Weston, addressing the corporal, as both
distinctly saw the object upon which their attention had been anxiously
fixed, raise his head and shoulders, while he deliberately rested his
rifle against the log on his right.

"Close down, Cass--don't move," enjoined the Virginian; "the bait has
taken, and we shall have a shot presently."

Two almost imperceptible jets of spiral smoke, and crack, crack, went
two rifles, while simultaneously with the report, fell back into the
boat, the perforated forage cap. Both balls had passed through it,
and lodged in the heart of the tree to which the skiff was moored, and
behind which Jackson and Philips had taken their stand.

Evidently believing that they had killed a man, the whole of the band,
hitherto concealed behind logs and trees, now rose to their feet, and
uttered a fierce and triumphant yell.

"Devilish good firin', that," remarked Green, whose face had been
touched by a splinter of bark torn from the tree by one of the balls.

"Don't uncover yourselves, my lads," hastily commanded the corporal;
"all the fellows want now is to see us exposed, that they may have a
crack at us."

"We've dried the muskets after a fashion," said Collins, as he now
approached Jackson and Philips. "Give us a cartridge, and let's see if
we can't match the varmint at that sort of work." Then, having loaded,
he, without asking the corporal's permission, leaned his musket against
the tree, and taking a steady aim at the man who had fired from the
point first noticed by Weston, drew the trigger.

The shot had evidently taken effect, for two other Indians were now
seen going to the assistance of their comrade, whom they raised from the
ground (where all had secreted themselves after the yell), and hurried
to the rear.

A loud cheer burst from the lips of Collins, which was answered
immediately by the whole of the savages, who, from various contiguous
points, sprang again to their feet, and vociferating the war-whoop,
dashed into the river nearly up to their necks, seemingly thirsting to
overcome the only obstacle which prevented them from getting at their
desired victims.

But, at the very moment, when several of them were holding their rifles
aloft with their right hand, securing their powder-horns between their
teeth, while Corporal Nixon issued to his men injunctions, not to
pull another trigger until the savages should begin to swim, to the
astonishment of all, came the sullen and unusual booming of the cannon
from the Fort.

For a moment, the men, taking their eyes off the sights of their
muskets, listened attentively for a repetition of the shot, but no
second report reached their ears.

"That," said Green, "was a warnin' for us."

"It was," observed the corporal. "Had the danger been THERE, they would
have fired again. Depend upon it, my lads, there's more going on about
here than we think. So don't throw away your ammunition. Every bullet
you send must tell!"

"Well, we can but sell our scalps as dearly as possible," interposed
Collins, who had again loaded, and was now in the act of raising and
supporting his, musket against the tree. "But look--see how the fellows
are stealing off?"

"Don't fire, then, don't fire," hastily enjoined the corporal. "If they
will go quietly, let them. We must not lose our time dallying here, but
make our way back to the Fort. That gun was meant to recall us, as well
as to warn us, and luckily it has frightened the Indians, so they won't
care to attack us again."

Meanwhile the band of Winnebagoes, obeying, as it seemed, the command of
their leader, whom Collins swore he could identify from his figure, even
at that distance, to be the man who had attempted to carry off the boat,
quitted the river for the cover of the woods, and, after an earnest
consultation, retreated slowly in the direction of the prairie, without
clamor of any description.

"Well rid of them, if they are gone," exclaimed the corporal, not a
little relieved by their departure. "We must keep a sharp look out
though, and see if they return."

"How many of them are there?" asked Jackson; "can you give a guess,
Collins?"

"About a dozen I should say--indeed I counted as many as they passed
through the small patch of clearing made by Eph. Giles's axe."

"Can they have started for the farm?" observed the corporal musingly;
"if so, my lads, we had better get away as soon as possible, for there
they will find canoes to cross."

"Why, sure they can swim across well enough. The river is not so wide as
to prevent them from doing it on a pinch," remarked Philips.

"Of course they can," answered Collins, "but not without having their
rifles as well soaked as our muskets were a little while ago. I say,
corporal, I understand now the trick of that cunning chief. He jumped
upon the arms purposely to overturn them into the river, when he found
he couldn't get the boat, and all our firelocks over with him."

"Yes, that WAS a trick," remarked Jackson, "but, corporal, you havn't
told us how the dickens that fellow came there, instead of the bear you
went to spear."

"There is no time to talk about it, seriously rejoined the Virginian.
Some night when we are on guard, I will tell you what little I know.
At present let us see to getting back to our post. Collins, you are the
crack shot of the party, are you loaded?"

"I am, corporal," returned the man somewhat self-sufficiently, "have you
got another Injin for me to sink. If so, just point him out, and if this
good barrel of Uncle Sam's don't do his job in no time, I'll give up all
claim to having hit the first fellow."

"Not just yet," answered his superior, "but hear my orders. You'll
follow the path along the bank, and move along carefully, until you
reach Heywood's stacks. Conceal yourself behind one of them, until we
come down with the boat, and keep a sharp lookout on all that you see
passing in and round the farm. Now remember, Collins, not a shot, unless
it be to save your life, or else you will get us all into a scrape."

"Never fear me, General Nixon, and he touched his cap with all the
respect he would have accorded to an officer of that rank. I brought
one of the imps down, and that, I reckon, is nearly as good work for one
day, as filling the old boat with fish, or having a slap at them ducks,
as I wanted this morning. But now I'm off, if I see anything shall I
halloo out, and let you know there's danger?"

"Not by a long chalk," returned the corporal. "All I want you to do is
to keep your tongue in your head and your eyes open. If you see anything
to alarm you, come back quietly and let us know. We shall be moving down
close to the bank of the river; and now start."

Collins threw his musket to the trail, and advanced cautiously, though
fearlessly, along the scarcely perceptible pathway--interrupted, at
every third or fourth step by creeping vines that protruded from the
earth, and rendered it necessary, in order to prevent his tripping,
that he should raise his feet somewhat in the manner of a horse with the
string-halt.

He had not proceeded half a mile, when, at an angle of the ill-defined
path, formed by a point where the river was the narrowest, he was
started at the sight of a human body lying across his course, evidently
on its face, though the head was concealed from view by the trunk of a
large tree that bordered upon the road. His first impulse was to turn
back and acquaint the corporal with what he had discovered; but a few
minutes of reflection satisfying him of the ridicule he should incur in
reporting, without being able to state with accuracy on WHAT, he boldly
advanced. On approaching it, he found that the body was lifeless, while
from the red and scalpless head, previously hidden from his view, were
exuding gouts of thick blood that trickled slowly over the pale features
of a youth of tender age, the expression of which had been worked up
into an intensity of terror, and there remained. At a few paces from the
head, and close upon the edge of the bank, lay a dressed bear skin which
had evidently been saturated with water, but was now fast drying in the
air and what little sunlight was occasionally thrown upon it, through
the dense branches of the forest.

There are situations in which the mind is moved to do that from which in
cooler moments it would shrink with disgust. It chanced that Collins had
retained the scalp so singularly found at the bottom of the river, by
Corporal Nixon, and this circumstance at once determined him.

Instead of hastening by an object so appalling, Collins rested his
musket against a tree, and taking the scalp from between the ramrod and
the stock, where he had introduced it, knelt by the body, and spreading
out the humid skin to its fullest extent, applied it to the bleeding
excavation. As he had suspected, they corresponded exactly, making all
due allowance for the time they had been separated, and he had no longer
a doubt that the mutilated boy was Mr. Heywood's help, Wilton. A much
more important discovery than this, however, resulted from his vain
endeavor to recognise the boy from his features, they were so contracted
by terror, as has already been said, and so covered with blood as to
be indistinguishable. But on turning him upon his back, and passing his
hands over his face, Collins was surprised to find that there was not
that icy chill which he had expected, but on the contrary the faint
warmth that indicates suspended, animation; and deeper yet was the
gratification of the rude soldier, when, on opening the shirt and
placing his hand on the heart of the boy, he felt an occasional
spasmodic pulsation, denoting that life was not utterly extinct.

With an eagerness to preserve life, strongly in contrast with his recent
exultation in destroying it, his anxiety for the recovery of the boy was
almost paternal. Fortunately the latter part of the day had been free
from the chilliness of the morning, so that, although the naked skull
must have been some hours exposed, the comparatively bland state of the
atmosphere gave fair earnest that the brain itself, even if affected,
had not sustained a mortal injury. Spreading wide the scalp in his open
palm, Collins now breathed heavily upon it, until it attained what he
conceived to be the necessary warmth, when gently applying it to the
denuded crown, to which he fitted it as well as he could, he passed his
handkerchief, which he had removed from his throat, over it, and under
the chin of the boy in such a manner as to prevent the chill of the
approaching night from affecting the injured part. This done, he poured
through his closed lips a few drops of whisky from the canteen, and
then raising him gently on his left shoulder, he rose from his stooping
posture, and seizing in his right hand his musket, which he continued at
the trail, pursued his route to the haystacks as directed.

In the meantime, Corporal Nixon, with the remainder of the fishing
party, was slowly descending the river, hugging the eastern shore as
closely as possible, in order that, if attacked suddenly, they might, on
the instant, leap into the river, and covering themselves by the boat,
fight their enemies at less disadvantage. The corporal himself and
Weston kept a vigilant look out, the one at the bow, the other at the
stern, while the four remaining men, Jackson, Philips, Green, and Cass
pulled so noiselessly that the dip of their oars, and their unavoidable
jar in the row-locks, could not be heard at a distance of more than ten
yards. At this slow rate much time was necessarily consumed, so that it
was quite dark when they reached the traverse opposite the farm, where
Ephraim Giles had crossed some hours before, and whither Collins had
been dispatched to make observations.

The patience of the latter had been much tried, for it seemed an age
had elapsed before his comrades made their appearance. The sun was just
setting as he reached the innermost haystack, and his anxiety for his
charge had become intense. Seeing the canoe drawn up on the beach, and
the paddles in it, he had a strong inclination to cross and procure some
efficient relief for the insensible boy, but the silence that reigned
around the dwelling awed him, and he checked the natural impulse. Not
a soul was to be seen, not a voice to be heard, not even the barking of
Loup Garou, the bleating of a sheep, or the lowing of an ox. What could
this mean? and was the fate of the boy connected with that of the other
inmates of the farm? If so, where were they?

Another consideration induced Collins to suppress his first impulse, and
that was the apprehension that his strange charge would be detained
by Mr. Heywood, when his only chance of recovery lay in the speedy
examination, and dressing his injuries by the surgeon of the garrison.
There was no alternative then, but to wait patiently for the arrival
of the boat into which the boy could be placed; and so conveyed to the
fort. Meanwhile, as the night air was becoming chill, and a slight
fog rising from the water, the considerate soldier did all he could to
shield his protege from their pernicious effect. Strewing on the ground
a few armfuls of hay, taken from the nearest of the stacks, around which
the hungry cattle now gathered, eager for their food, he extended on
it the yet inanimate form of the youth, embracing the body in order to
impart to it the benefit of animal heat and in this position, his
head being slightly raised, eagerly endeavored to discern through the
darkness not only what might be seen on the opposite shore, but the
approach of the party in the boat.

The sun had now been down some time, and so dark was it that, in that
narrow space, obscured by the blending shadows of the tall forests on
either shore, it was difficult, at five yards distance, to make out
anything on the water, unaccompanied by light or sound. This silence
was anything but agreeable to Collins, whose imagination, excited by the
later occurrences of the day, was filled with, strange misgivings, as he
looked in vain for the customary lights in the farm-house. The fishing
party had never been out so late, and yet, at the first fall of
darkness, they had been accustomed to see the place exhibiting at least
one light; and the absence of this now caused Collins heartily to wish
himself in the boat, and safely moored under cover of the fort. Not that
the soldier was influenced by the apprehension of personal danger, but
because the deep gloom, the solitude and silence of the scene, coupled
with his newly-awakened interest in the almost corpse that lay in close
contact with his person, impressed him with a sort of superstitious
feeling, not at all lessened by the knowledge that his only companion,
at that moment, belonged rather to the grave than to the upper earth.

At length his anxiety was relieved. The sound of the oars, cautiously
pulled, faintly met his ear, and then the boat could be indistinctly
seen approaching the canoe. To this succeeded a low call uttered by the
corporal. Collins replied in a similar tone, and then bearing the body
of the boy, still enveloped in the bear skin, he in less than a minute,
rejoined his party.

The astonishment of the latter may be conceived on beholding so
unexpected a sight, nor was their feeling of awe diminished when their
comrade had briefly related what had occurred since he left them.

"Strange enough, this," remarked the corporal musingly; "stranger still,
there's no light in the house. It's neither too early nor too late for
that. I'll tell you what, my lads, if any thing has happened we must
know the worst--it will never do to go back to the Fort, without being
able to give some notion of what took place under our very noses."

"What would Mr. Ronayne say, if we did?" added Jackson.

"Yes! and what would that sweet young lady, Miss Heywood, think of us,
if we returned without giving some good news of her father. Why she
never would look upon us kindly again."

"Right, Philips," said Weston, "and I'm sure I'd rather offend the
captain himself, any day, than do anything to displease her. God grant
we bring her no bad news."

"Amen," said the corporal, gravely, for he, like Collins, had some
strong misgivings, arising naturally from the utter darkness and silence
that continued to prevail in and around the farm-house. "Are you all
loaded? Look to your primings, but make no noise. Somebody must take
charge of the beat though. Who volunteers to remain, while the rest
follow me to the house?"

"I do--I'll remain," said Collins, "one of you can take my musket."

"What, Collins, do you shirk the thing," sneered the man with the long
nose and the peaked chin; "have you had enough to-day, or do you fear
the ghost of the fellow you knocked over?"

"I fear neither man or ghost, as you well know, Nutcrackers," warmly
rejoined Collins, "but I take it, there's no great courage in making a
fuss about going where there's no enemy to be found. If there has been
danger in that quarter, I take it, it's passed, and as somebody must
stop in the boat, why 'not me as well as another?"

"Just so," said the corporal. "Cass, this is no time to run your rigs.
You see well enough that Collins wishes to stop behind, on account of
the boy he hopes to bring to life. Little chance of that, I fear, but
if he thinks so, it would be unchristian to disappoint him. And now push
off, but make no noise."

The order was obeyed. In a few minutes the bow of the boat touched
the landing-place, when all but Collins, who was at the helm, slipped
noiselessly ashore. The corporal repeated his instructions--how to act
under emergency and if separated--and moved along the path leading to
the house. Meanwhile Collins pulled back into the stream, and remained
stationary in the centre.




CHAPTER V.

The farm-house was, as we have said, of very rude construction--such a
one as could only spring up in so remote a region, and among so sparse a
population. With the exception of the roof, the frame-work of which had
been covered with raw buffalo hides, it was built wholly of rough logs,
notched at the ends in a sort of dove-tail fashion, and when not lying
closely, filled in with chunks of wood, over which a rude plaster of
mud had been thrown, so that the whole was rendered almost impervious
to water, while it ran little risk from the agency of fire. It had
two rooms on the ground floor--one smaller than the other, used as a
dormitory, and containing all the clothes or "traps," as they designated
them, of the household. The other served as eating-room, parlor, and
kitchen, and extended over, at least, three-fourths of the area. It was
provided with two doors--one facing the river and close to the partition
which divided the rooms--the other occupying a remoter position to the
rear. The windows of this apartment were two in number, and, equidistant
from the doors, were considerably elevated above the floor. These
apertures had been formed by simply sawing a few of the logs, so as to
complete squares, into which were fitted rude sashes, each containing
four small panes of a greenish, and by no means, transparent glass, and
connected by strong leathern hinges. In winter the necessary warmth was
afforded, by shutters put up and barred from within. The southern gable
or dormitory, was provided in the centre with one window of similar size
and construction. The upper floor, a sort of granary and depot for the
provisions of the family, was ascended by means of a ladder, and through
a square aperture just large enough to admit with ease the body of a
man.

There was, in rear of the house, a rather extensive corn-field, and
beyond the northern gable, where the chimney stood, an orchard yet in
its infancy, but promising future abundance, while at the opposite, or
south end of the building, a large but very highly cultivated garden,
was now undergoing the customary spring process of digging and manuring,
and indeed on that very morning, Mr. Heywood had been busily engaged in
this occupation with the boy Wilton, his men being employed, the one in
field labor, the other as we have seen, in chopping wood.

In the rear of the garden, and opposite to the corn-field, from which it
was separated by a road leading to the wood, was a tolerably sized barn,
likewise constructed of rude logs, not, however, filled in. The lower
part of this was used as a stable; the upper or loft, roofed with bark,
contained the preceding year's unhusked crop from the corn-field, while
contiguous to it, and to the rear, was another oblong square building,
constructed in the same manner, but without loft. This, partitioned and
covered simply with unhewn logs, served not only as a pen for sheep and
pigs, but as a roasting-place for the feathered portion of the stock.

The orchard on the one side, and the garden on the other, extended to
the bank of the river--a zig-zag, or snake-fence separating them from
the road, in the centre of which, and at about ten feet from the door
of the dwelling, rose a majestic walnut tree then in early blossom.
Immediately beyond this tree, was a low enclosure which intersected the
road, passing across from the kitchen-garden to the orchard, and forming
the only court or yard upon the premises.

When Corporal Nixon, with his little party, had cautiously advanced
some few paces towards the house, he caused them to separate, Cass
and Jackson leaping the fence which bounded the orchard, and Green and
Philips that of the garden, while he himself, with Weston, pursued
the pathway in front. The better to be prepared for any sudden attack,
bayonets had been quietly fixed, and the firelocks at the full cock,
carried at the trail--this latter precaution after the detached files
had crossed the fences.

The night, as has already been said, was very dark, and each succeeding
minute seemed to increase the obscurity, so that it was rather from
their familiarity with the ground, than from any clear indication of
correctness of course, that the little band were enabled to preserve
their necessary unity. At length the tall shadows of the walnut
tree came suddenly upon the sight of the corporal, but so completely
absorbing was the darkness in the heavier gloom, that, without being
aware of it's proximity, he stumbled against the low and slight
enclosure, which, yielding to the impetus of his motion, feeble even as
that was, caused him to fall forward on his face, his musket dropping
from his grasp without, however, going off.

A low growl from a dog succeeded, and before the Virginian could even
make the attempt to rise, the animal had sprang upon, and fastened his
teeth into his shoulder, shaking him so violently, that it was not until
Weston, who had now crossed the enclosure, came up to his assistance,
guided by the sound of the struggle, that the dog could be made to
relinquish his hold.

"Loup Garou--Loup Garou, old fellow, what's the matter with you," said
the latter coaxingly, as he caressed the neck of the dog, which he had
identified, and now sought to appease.

Evidently recognising a friend in the utterer of his name, the animal
turned suddenly around, licked the hand of Weston, and then sent forth a
long and piteous howl.

"Mercy, what is that?" suddenly exclaimed the corporal, who having
regained his legs and musket, had moved on a pace or two.

"Where! what?" asked Weston, coming up to his side.

In the darkness before them, there was a deeper darkness that bore the
indistinct appearance of a human form, lying in a stooping posture close
to the trunk of the tree.

A vague presentiment of the truth flashed upon the mind of the
Virginian, who enjoining silence on his companion, advanced close to the
object, and laid his hand upon it. There could be no longer a doubt.
The blanket coat, and woollen sash, which he first touched, and then the
shoe pack, told him in unmistakable language that it was Le Noir, the
Canadian owner of the dog. He shook him, and twice, in a low voice
called him by name. But there was no answer, while the body stiff and
motionless, fully revealed the fate of the unfortunate man.

Meanwhile, Loup Garou, which had followed, squatted himself at the head,
which was hanging over the front of what they knew, from its handles and
the peculiar odor, exhaling from it, to be a wheel-barrow filled with
manure, and then commenced licking--moaning at the same time in a low
and broken whine.

"What can the dog mean by that?" whispered Weston.

"Don't you hear him licking his dead master's face, and telling his
sorrow in his own way," answered the corporal as, in order to assure
himself, he dropped his hand to the mouth of the dog; but no sooner had
he done so, than he drew it suddenly back with a shudder of disgust
and hastily wiped it, clammy with the blood that yet trickled from the
scalped head of the murdered man.

A low whistle was here given on the left, and a few yards above, that
startled the Virginian, for it was the signal agreed upon if anything
suspicious, should be noticed by the other parties. He promptly answered
it in a different call, and in another minute Green and Philips had
joined him. "What have you seen?" he inquired, not regarding the
exclamation of surprise of the new comers, at the unexpected sight
before them.

"We've seen nothin' its so dark," answered Green, "but unless the cattle
have got into the garden, there's somethin' else movin' there. Philips
and I listened after we heard the dog howl the first time, for we could
hear as if somethin' like steps were stopped suddenly when he moaned the
second time we listened again, and thought the same thing."

"They couldn't be cattle," added Philips, "for the cattle are all kept
on the other side."

"Only the young stock, and them as ain't used about the farm," remarked
Weston.

"Well, but what kind of steps were they?" eagerly questioned the
corporal, whose imagination was filled not more with the danger that
seemed to be near them, than with the censure of himself he feared he
should incur, on his return to the fort, for having subjected the party
to risk. "Surely you can tell between the tread of cattle and the steps
of men."

"I should say they, weren't the steps of cattle; they were too light for
that. Though they couldn't help crushin' the dry sticks and rubbish they
couldn't help seein' lyin' in the way. Don't you think so Philips?"

"I did, corporal, and so sure did I guess them to be no cattle that it
was me that whistled."

"Then there's no use in going farther," remarked the Virginian gravely.
"Even if we get to the house, we can't see anything in it for the
darkness, and the poor fellow shows plain enough that it's to use
looking out to save Mr. Heywood or Ephraim Giles. Come, my lads, we must
get back to the boat, and down stream as quick and as quiet as we can."

Giving his own low whistle of recall, he was answered from the opposite
direction, and in a few minutes Cass and Jackson made their appearance.

These latter were, briefly questioned whether they had seen anything,
and great was the anxiety of all when it was known that they had also
heard in the orchard but in a fainter manner, what had attracted the
attention of Green and Philips in the garden.

"Why didn't you give the signal then, as directed?"

"Because," answered Cass, "We weren't quite sure about it, and feared
the whistle might tell the Injins, if any were near, our whereabouts."

Scarce had this explanation been given, when the attention of all was
arrested by a loud clear shout of the corporals' name, evidently uttered
by Collins.

"Into the house--into the house," exclaimed the same voice. "The Injins
are creeping up to you."

As these words came ringing upon the silence of the night the dull steps
in rapid advance through the two enclosures were now distinctly heard,
while the flash of a gun fired in their rear, lighted up the forms of
three or four savages, gliding up to them by the pathway by which the
corporal had come.

The danger was imminent, the necessity for securing the important
position imperative, and without waiting for the order of their
superior, or even uttering a word, the whole of the party, acting upon
the caution of Collins, made a rush towards the front entrance of the
house, which they gained at the very moment when the rattling of the
snake-fences, and the total overthrow of the slight enclosure, announced
that their enemies were thus near in pursuit.

Fortunately the door was wide open, so that they had all passed in, when
the Indians on either flank, as though by previous arrangement, poured
in their cross fire, towards that common centre, without, however,
striking anything but the logs.

Terrific and continuous yells succeeded, and well was it that, with cool
promptitude, the corporal had sought, and found behind the door, where
he knew they were usually kept, the strong bars, three in number, that
secured the heavy panels, for as many of the Indians as could find room
to act together, now applied their shoulders to the frame with such
violence, that but for those timely safeguards, it must have yielded.
During more than five minutes they persevered in their efforts, the men
waiting anxiously in attitude of preparation for the result, when all at
once they ceased, and their footsteps were heard cautiously retiring.

"Quick, look to the back-door, two of you," commanded the corporal in
an eager, but low tone, "they are going round; there, if that is not
secured we are lost."

Green and Philips sprang forward towards the point indicated, but the
latter in his excitement stumbled heavily against something, and fell at
his length upon the floor, exclaiming: "I've fallen over a dead man, and
am half drowned in his blood."

His companion who had escaped this obstruction, had scarcely time to
assure the corporal that the back door was already barred, a fact which
he had discovered by dint of feeling, when the latch was first heard
gently tried, then the door violently assaulted. Another loud and angry
yell from the Indians announced their disappointment, then several shots
were fired at the door, and two or three balls could be heard dropping
and rolling upon the floor, after having passed through the heavy
planks.

"Safe enough now for a while, my lads," said the corporal exultingly,
"and we can have, a little breathing time. Who's got the means of
striking a light, that we may see where we are, and what we're about?"

"I have," answered Green, as taking a flint, steel, and tinder from his
pocket, he, with a couple of strokes, ignited the latter, and approached
the hearth, which the faint light from the burning "punk" enabled him
to reach. The fire had long since gone out, but the crisp and blackened
embers, soon grew under the care of the soldier into light sufficient to
render objects in the apartment gradually more and more distinguishable.

While this process was going on, the rest, leaning on their muskets,
were anxiously grouped around the spot where Philips had fallen. At
first, only the outline of a man of large stature and proportions could
be seen lying in a cramped position, as if produced by some strong
convulsive agony, and then when the fire began to kindle and crackle,
the dress could be distinguished, and then as the light grew brighter,
the scalpless head, and then the marked and distorted features of the
murdered master of the house, who lay in a pool of blood that slowly
trickled along the crevices of the floor. His hands were firmly clenched
upon the barrel of a rifle which had been broken off at the stock, that
now lay a few yards beyond, while the features, sternly set in death,
bore a mingled expression of defiance and resolution. A cut, as from a
tomahawk had laid open his left temple, while on several parts of his
body could be seen thick encrustations of blood that had exuded through
the rent clothing, marking the seat of several stabs and gunshot
wounds. It was evident that Mr. Heywood had not lost his life without a
desperate, struggle, for independently of the testimony afforded by his
broken rifle, which he seemed to have used with fierce determination,
the heavy table had been overthrown, and the few articles of necessary
furniture in the room evidently displaced.

"What a tale, this, to carry back," gravely remarked Weston. "I wouldn't
take the corporal's stripes to-morrow, and be the first man to tell Miss
Heywood of it."

"Supposing we get back at all," said Cass. "Though we're safe enough for
the present, I've no notion these devils will let us off go soon."

"There's no great danger now," interrupted the corporal. "I defy them,
if they're not stronger than we saw them this morning, to get into the
house, with six good firelocks to defend it."

"But they may set fire to it, and burn us out," persevered the
apprehensive man with the hooked nose and the peaked chin; "I've heard
of those things before."

"Burn your granny out, Nutcrackers; look at them logs well, and say if
it would'nt take hell-fire itself to burn 'em through in a month, but
corporal, had'nt we better divide the ammunition. We don't know, as Cass
says, what the imps are about, and what trouble they may give us yet."

"Right, Green, there's nothing like being on the sure side, and so, my
lads look to the pouches. Weston, there's a candle in that stone bottle
on the shelf--light it, and put it on the table as soon as you have got
that on its legs again."

The examination was soon made. Each small cartouch box, expressly
made for light excursions, contained, with the exception of the single
cartridge which Collins had fired, the usual allowance of fifteen
rounds. Two of these however--those of Green and Philips--had been
so saturated by long immersion in the water, that they were wholly
unserviceable. They were therefore emptied and dried, and the deficiency
supplied from the pouches of their comrades, thus leaving about a dozen
charges to each man.

"A small stock of ammunition, this, I guess, to stand a long siege on an
empty belly," drawled forth Cass.

"Just like you--always croakin'," sneered Green, "and always thinking of
your belly. Why man, you've more ammunition there, I take it, than ever
you'll fire away in your life."

"And if we haven't enough," said the corporal, going to, and taking down
and shaking a powder horn, which hung suspended from the wall, that had
evidently been overlooked by the Indians, "here are a dozen more charges
at least, and the balls of the cartridges have not, I take it,
lost their power to drill a hole into a fellow because they've been
considerably well ducked. But hark! what noise is that--listen!"

A low, grating sound, as of some heavy body rubbing against the ground,
was now audible at short intervals, to seemed to proceed from the
southern gable--but not a voice was heard. From the moment when they
had uttered their cry of disappointment, on finding the back entrance
secured, the Indians had preserved the utmost silence.

Suddenly a yell, pealed from the direction of the river, caused them
for the first time to revert to the exposed position of the unfortunate
Collins.

"Poor fellow," said Green, dashing away a tear. "I wish he was with us.
Somehow or other, I feel as if we should all have a better chance in a
fight, were that lad in the middle of it."

"We shall never see him more!" gravely observed the Virginian; "That
shot fired just after he warned us, did his business, depend upon it,
and if that one didn't, it is not likely the blood-hounds would let him
off after robbing them of their prey: no, no, poor Collins has lost his
life in saving us."

Again the yell was repeated, and from the same quarter. The corporal
sprang to the ladder which communicated with the loft, and having placed
it under the window on the front, hastily ascended and looked out, for
no one had hitherto thought of closing an opening, from which no danger
was, seemingly, to be apprehended.

The darkness which had been so excessive at the moment of their
entrance, had greatly diminished--so much so, that he could trace the
forms of two or three of the warriors who were stooping low, apparently
engaged with some object lying on the very bank of the river.

"Scalping and mutilating the poor fellow, no doubt," he muttered
fiercely to himself, "but here goes to revenge him!"

Forgetting his usual prudence, he, in the strong excitement of the
moment, drew up the butt of his musket to his shoulder, and as well as
his cramped position would permit, covered one of the savages, but while
in the very act of pulling the trigger, they all fell prostrate, and the
bullet whizzed harmlessly over them. In the next instant a ball, aimed
at himself, and fired from another quarter, passed through the window,
grazing the shoulder slightly bitten by Loup Garou, and lodged in the
opposite logs of the room. A third loud yell followed as the corporal
drew in his head and disappeared from the window. The Indians evidently
thought he had been hit, and thus gave utterance to their triumph.

"There's that grating sound again," remarked Weston.

All now listened, and heard much more distinctly than before the
peculiar sound. Then followed a scratching and bumping of something
heavy against the end of the house.

"I have it," said the Virginian. "They've dragged the ladder from the
barn, and are trying to fix it under the bedroom window. Cass, do you
and Philips go in and see what they're doing. But close the door after
you that they may not pick you off by the light."

The door was cautiously opened and again shut as soon as the men had
entered. They looked up at the window, which, in the darkness that
prevailed around, was distinctly enough visible, but although open,
nothing met their glance of a nature to startle them, nor could any
movement be heard without.

"Hold my firelock," whispered Cass to his companion, "while I try and
get a look out. I know poor Le Noir's bed is directly under the window,
and I don't think THAT is too high, if I stand on the pillow."

He now cautiously groped his way to the bed, on ascending which, being a
tall man, he found the top of his head to be on a level with the sill
of the window. This was not sufficient for his purpose, and he sought
to elevate himself still more. In attempting, with this view, to place
himself on the head-board, he missed his footing, and fell with some
force between the head of the bed, and the rode log wall. To his
dismay, he found that his feet had rested not upon the hard floor of the
apartment, but upon something soft and yielding, which his imagination,
strongly excited by the events of the day, led him unhesitatingly to
conclude, was the flesh of a human body.

"A light corporal--a light!" he shouted, regardless of every thing,
but his desire to release himself from his present situation. "Bring a
light. Here's a fellow, who has got hold of me by the leg!"

"Take your musket then and bayonet him," said Philips, coolly, as he
pushed towards the struggling man the butt end of his firelock, which
at length reached his hands. At the same time, Corporal Nixon, rendered
equally imprudent by the suddenness of the demand for his presence,
entered, followed by Weston, bearing the candle.




CHAPTER VI.

Nothing can, we conceive, be in worse taste in a fictitious narrative,
than the wanton introduction of the ludicrous upon the solemn, but when
in an historical tale these extremes do occur, fidelity forbids the
suppression of the one, lest it should mar the effect of the other. Such
is the necessity under which we find ourselves.

The first act of the corporal, on seeing how matters stood, was to pull
back the bedstead behind which Cass was imprisoned, so as wholly to
uncover him and his assailant, but the surprise of all may be
imagined, when, instead of an Indian, with whom they believed him to be
struggling, they beheld an immense turkey-cock, well known to them all,
which was partly under the foot of the soldier--partly in a boarded
drain or reservoir which passed from the apartment into a large hog
trough, that lay along the wall and daily received the refuse of the
various meals. The bird, furious with pain, was burying its beak into
the leg of the soldier, while he, with the butt end of his musket aloft,
and the bayonet depressed, offered the most burlesque representation of
St. George preparing to give his mortal thrust to the dragon.

In spite of the danger by which they were beset, it was impossible
for the men to restrain the indulgence of their humor at this singular
sight, nor was the disposition at all checked, when they saw the bayonet
descend and actually transfix the intruder to the floor-causing him to
droop his head, and thus free Cass from his furious attacks.

"If that's the way you kill your enemies, Nutcrackers, we promise to eat
them up for you--as many as you like," and as he spoke, Green advanced
and seized the dying bird by the throat; but as he pulled it suddenly
away, a dark human hand was observed to relinquish its hold of the feet,
and rapidly disappear.

The mirth of the men was now succeeded by a seriousness befitting the
occasion, for it was clear to all that this occurrence, absurd as it
was, had been the means of betraying a new plan of the enemy to get into
the house. If the drain was large enough to admit of the passage of the
bird--always remarkable for its size--it was highly possible that some
of the more slightly formed Indians, might force their way through
it also. They had evidently tried to see if it could be done--the
turkey-cock having been put forward as a "feeler," and the necessity of
either closing the avenue, or weakening their strength by keeping a man
constantly on the watch, was now obvious.

"Find something to stop up that hole with Cass," ordered the corporal.

"I can see nothing," replied the other, after a few moments search,
"unless we stop it with the bedding."

"A wise plan that. The Injins would soon set fire to it, and if they
didn't burn us out, they would soon smoke us out. Either would suit
their purpose."

"Let him stuff it with his head, corporal," interposed Green, "I'm sure
that's thick enough for a plug."

"Perhaps there's a head in it already," suggested Philips, "there was a
hand just now--the other may have followed."

"By jingo I'll try," returned Green, "I'd give a week's grog to be able
to prick a feller with this playthin'."

So saying, he knelt upon the floor, and holding his musket in a
horizontal position, a few inches above it, he gave a furious thrust
into the aperture. To his astonishment, for notwithstanding his half
bravado, he had not seriously anticipated such a result, he found the
advance of his weapon slightly arrested by a yielding body, and even
had not a sharp cry of pain from the other extremity of the trough,
satisfied him of the fact, the peculiar sensation he experienced as the
steel overcame the resistance was sufficient to convince Green, little
accustomed even as he had been to bayonet men, that the bayonet had
entered into some soft part of the human body.

To the cry of the wounded man, succeeded a savage and threatening yell
from the united band, and now re-commenced the grating sound which had
two or three times before excited the conjectures of the besieged.

"Ah I yell away you devils; that's all the good you'll get," exclaimed
Green, exulting at his success; "but don't take so tight a grip of my
bayonet. I say, Philips, lend us a hand, if I shan't lose my musket with
that fellow strugglin' like a speared Mascalinga."

Both now pulled at the firelock, with all their strength. Suddenly the
resistance ceased, and they fell sideways on the floor, bringing the
musket with them, but without the bayonet. At the same moment a shot was
fired into the aperture, and the ball whizzing by the ear of Philips,
and passing through Green's right leg, lodged in the partition beyond.

"Stand aside, men," shouted the corporal, "stand from before that hole,
or we shall be marks in this light for the skulking villains."

Jackson, who had been dispatched for one of the small round hickory logs
that lay piled up in a corner near the chimney, now approached with on
that was just large enough to fit tightly in the aperture. All seized
it, and taking the precaution to keep their legs out of danger, jammed
one end into the mouth of the drain, adding afterwards a few heavy blows
from the axes of Le Noir and Ephraim Giles, which had been found in a
corner of the room.

"Now then," said the Virginian, after having examined the small window
of the bed room, and securely fastened the shutter--"we've not much more
to fear. They're two to one its true, but I defy them to do us much harm
before daylight, when, I take it they'll be off, if not sooner."

"Well, then, corporal," suggested Green, "I vote that as we're pretty
safe, and have yet that piece of plunder, we set to work and cook it,
for I'm devilish hungry, and so I think we must all be, seeing as how
we hain't had a regular meal the whole day, besides if we rummage the
place, we may chance to light upon somethin' else. I see the varmint
have carried off the nice row of venison hams that used to hang up round
the chimney, but there may be somethin' in the loft."

"No bad thought that of yours, Green," answered the corporal, "Cass, you
killed the bird, you must pluck it and grill it."

"That's what I call taking it sensibly," said the latter leaning
his musket against the wall, and dragging the heavy turkey to the
kitchen-corner, where seated on the very chair on which poor Mr. Heywood
had smoked his last pipe, he commenced plucking out the feathers by
handfuls. "Let fasting without, and feasting within be the word; but
its mortal dry eating that great he turkey, without something to wash it
down. I say, Philips, you are a good hand at foraging--don't you think
you could find out a little of the Wabash there," and he pointed to the
loft.

Philips approached the ladder with the intention of making a search, but
the Virginian checked him.

"Stop a moment," he said, "until I have had another look out in front."
Thus saying he cautiously ascended to his former position, the view
from which was much less indistinct than before. The obscurity had, in a
great degree, passed away, so much so, that all objects within the area
formed by the enclosures of the garden and the orchard were thrown into
perceptible relief. His first thought was to cast his glance upon the
water, hoping, he scarcely knew why, that something might be seen of the
skiff which had contained the unfortunate Collins. Disappointed in that
quarter, his eye next turned upon the walnut tree, the white blossoms
of which had dropped around and upon the spot, where lay the body of the
ill-fated Le Noir, at whose head was still squatted, as when he had left
him, his faithful dog. There was much in this trait of devotion on the
part of the animal which could not fail to awaken sympathy even in
the roughest heart, and although the corporal was not particularly
sentimental, he could not but be deeply touched by the contrast forced
upon him, between the moaning animal and the wild lust for blood which
reigned in the hearts of their unprovoked assailants. His first impulse
was to call approvingly to the dog, but the next moment's reflection on
the folly of such a proceeding stifled the impulse. Then his attention
was called not only to the perfect immunity from further outrage of the
victim and his follower, but to the profound silence, and absence of
danger which seemed to exist in that quarter. That the Indians had not
departed, although they had not been heard since the yell that followed
the cry produced by the thrust from Green's bayonet, he felt confident,
and it now seemed to him that they must be directing their efforts
against some other part of the building.

No sooner had he admitted this last belief, than he again descended, and
raising the ladder himself, bore it noiselessly to the spot whence it
had been removed, then ordering the candle to be extinguished, and the
embers to be drawn together, so as to deaden the light of the fire, he
with Green and Weston crept up the ladder, Cass being left to complete
the preparation of the turkey the best way he could, while Philips and
Jackson, posted at the back and front doors, listened attentively for
the slightest sound of danger, which being heard, they were at once to
warn the party above.

When the corporal had gained the top of the ladder, Green, who was the
last, having yet his foot on the first step, the former was evidently
startled by some new danger. But just as he was in the act of springing
to the upper floor, the ladder, too frail to sustain their united
weight, snapped suddenly asunder in the middle and fell with some noise,
thus separating him from his companions.

Regardless of this and having secured his own footing, he now moved
cautiously towards the opposite end of the loft, where a small opening,
about two feet in length, and one in height, seemingly intended as
a ventilator, appeared nearly vertical to the window of the bed-room
below. Casting his glance downwards through the opening, he beheld five
or six savages standing grouped together, leaning on their guns, and
apparently watching some object above them. This, naturally, drew the
corporal's attention to the same quarter, when to his dismay he found
that the long ladder usually kept at the barn was now resting against
the gable of the house, not three feet from the right corner of the
aperture, through which he gazed. In an instant it occurred to him that
this had been the work of the Indians, and at once accounted for the
grating sounds that had so often met his ears that night. There could
be no doubt that the plan of the enemy now was to enter the roof, which
could be done by removing part of the raw buffalo hides of which it was
composed. Indeed it was a slight noise made in the direction of that
very angle of the roof where the ladder now stood, that had caught his
attention on first putting his head through the aperture while preceding
his men. This had suddenly ceased at the moment when the ladder broke
and fell, nor had there been a repetition of the sound. Still, satisfied
that some discovery of the true designs of the Indians would result from
his remaining a little longer, he continued at the opening, which was
too small to betray his presence if using precaution, while it enabled
him to observe the movements of the enemy. Soon afterwards he heard them
speaking in earnest but low tones, as if addressing somebody above them,
and then a prolonged yell, which was answered by others from the front
of the house, echoed through the surrounding forests. Even amid the
horrid discord, the quick ear of the Virginian, now painfully on the
stretch, caught the same sound that had first attracted his attention.
It was exactly at the angle of the roof, and only a pace or two from
him. The peculiar noise was not to be mistaken even by an unpractised
ear. It was, evidently, that of a knife, not very sharp, cautiously
cutting through a tough and resisting leather.

The corporal became now more anxious than ever, but this feeling did not
in the slightest degree, disturb his self-possession, or cause him
to waver in the resolution he had from the first adopted. He waited
patiently, until, as he expected, he heard a corner of one of the
buffalo hides turned up, and beheld reflected, against the back-ground
of light, thus suddenly introduced, the upper part of a human being,
whose shorn head, covered on the crown with straight and slightly
streaming feathers, too plainly indicated his purpose. What a target for
the bullet--what an object for the bayonet of the soldier, who, had not
prudence and coolness interposed, had certainly used one or the other.
But the Virginian had hit upon another, and as he conceived, a better
plan to get rid of his enemy, and in his fate, of further probable
annoyance from his ferocious companions. It was not his object to let
himself be seen, or that the Indians should even suspect that they
had been detected in this new device, for he was well aware that if he
fired, or used his bayonet against the man, those below would rush
up the ladder to succeed him, and by their weight prevent the
accomplishment of what he had in view; therefore cut off as he in a
measure was, from his party, it was incumbent on him to adopt the only
sure means of relief from danger, and that without a moment of delay.

While the Indian, who finding, evidently, that the orifice he had made
in the roof was not yet large enough for his purpose, had dropped
the incised portion of the hide, and was again using his knife; the
Virginian, stooping slightly at the off-side of the window, ascertained
that the feet of the former were resting on one of the upper steps of
the ladder. This was what he desired, and all he now wanted was a hard,
flat substance to fasten on the point of his bayonet. After reflecting
vainly for a few moments how this was to be attained, he suddenly
bethought him of his thick-soled ammunition-boots. Removing one of
these without noise, he pierced the inner leather, by pressing it firmly
against the point of the bayonet, so as to secure without allowing it to
pass through. Then, cautiously protruding his musket from the opening,
he slowly advanced it, until the sole of the boot touched the frame of
the ladder, not two feet under the round on which the Indian stood.
Here for a moment he allowed the barrel, concealed by the low depending
eaves, to rest against the jamb of the aperture. His anxiety was now
worked up to the highest possible pitch, for he feared, notwithstanding
his success so far, that something might yet occur to defeat his
purpose, and thus peril not only his own life, but the lives of the
whole of the party below. Three minutes he remained in this trying
position of uncertainty, which seemed to him as so many hours.
Presently, however, the Indian on the roof, having evidently
accomplished his task, and believing from the silence that had for some
time pervaded around, that no one was near him, spoke in a low tone to
his companions, who now cautiously crept towards the ladder.

This was the moment for action. The Virginian, who, although expecting
this, had watched their movements with aching interest, now summoned his
whole strength, and while the first savage below was upon the ladder,
pushed his musket with such violence against the sole, that it carried
it rapidly over the corner of the house, before the Indian could find
presence of mind to throw himself upon the roof--a sudden backward jerk
of the weapon liberated the bayonet, the extreme point of which only
had entered the wood, and as the Virginian withdrew this, he could
distinctly see the unfortunate savages fall headlong from the top of the
ladder, uttering, as both descended, a fearful cry of dismay, which
was responded to by fierce yells from the lips of their companions, who
hastened to their succor.

"Well done, that!" said the corporal, exultingly, and half-aloud
to himself, as he slapped his thigh, in a manner to denote his own
self-approval. "That's what I call doing the business as it should be
done. The attempt," and he smiled at the conceit, "was not a bootless
one to us all, though it has been a BOOT LESS one to ME."

To understand this facetiousness of the Virginian, it must be understood
that on withdrawing his bayonet, the boot which it had only slightly
pierced, had slipped from the weapon and fallen to the ground
simultaneously with the other heavier bodies, whose more marked sound
had absorbed its own. It therefore escaped the notice of the Indians.

"Hilloa there!" he continued in a louder key; "there's no more danger
in this quarter, my lads. Show us a light, and if Cass has that turkey
ready, we'll have some supper. For my part, I'm devilish sharp set.
Here, Green, take my musket, and give me the candle."

Surprised at the corporal's unwonted humor, for they had been led to
apprehend, from the noise made by the falling ladder, and the excitement
evidently prevailing among the Indians, that some new act of treachery
was about to be tried by them, the men gathered underneath the opening,
Green taking his musket from the hands of the Virginian, while in
return, he mounted on one of the low chairs, and extending his arm far
above, handed him the light.

After a few minutes search, the corporal appeared again at the mouth of
the loft, not only with a demijohn half-filled with whisky, but with a
large loaf of brown bread, and part of a shoulder of dried venison, from
which nearly one-half had been chipped away in slices. This, indeed, was
a prize, and the men looked at the articles of necessary supply, as they
were successively handed down, with an earnestness which denoted, that
whatever might be their apprehensions of danger from without, they by
no means coveted fighting on an empty stomach. After having lowered the
treasures he had been so fortunate as to secure, the Virginian swung
himself down by his hands, without difficulty, upon the lower floor.

The fire had been again revived, and having ordered Jackson up into the
loft, to keep watch at the small-window, and apprise him if any attempt
should be made to replace the ladder, the corporal for the first time
lighting his pipe, sat down to ruminate on his position, and consider
the means by which the party were to be taken back to the fort.
Further serious apprehensions in regard to their safety he did not now
entertain, for baulked, as the Indians had been, in all their attempts
to get into the house, he felt persuaded that it was more with a view to
annoy and alarm, than with any hope of eventual success, that they still
lingered in the neighborhood. Had they been in a situation to continue
the siege longer than the morning, the case might have been different.
But it was obvious that in order to secure their own safety, alarmed as
they most know the governor would be at the absence of the party under
his command, they would not remain longer than daylight exposed to the
chances of being themselves closely assailed from without.

Such was the reasoning of the Virginian, whose greatest source of
discomfort now was the apprehension of serious reprimand, if not
something worse, from the austere Captain Headley, whose displeasure, he
was certain, would be so much the greater on account of the loss of the
unfortunate Collins. He looked at his watch, but to his great annoyance,
found that it had stopped, the hour-hand pointing to one o'clock. How
long it had been run down, he could not tell, but from the time which
had elapsed since their abandonment of the boat, and arrival in the
house, he did not think it could be less than four in the morning.

Desirous to satisfy himself by the appearance of the heavens, he arose,
and with the aid of Green, placed the table under the window commanding
a view of the river. This being too low, a chair was placed upon it,
thus affording the corporal the advantage of greater elevation than he
had derived from the use of the ladder itself.

Everything was again quiet. Not a sound broke the stillness, save the
howling of a few wolves, which, probably, attracted by the scent of the
human blood that had been spilt that day, and by the exposed corpse that
was now strewed with white blossoms from the tree beneath which it lay,
were, by the increasing light, indistinctly seen on the opposite shore.
But not their savage cry of hunger alone was heard. Ever and anon, in
reply to their fierce howling was heard the snappish bark of Loup Garou,
as, leaping on the body of his unconscious master, he lashed his tail,
and seemed to bid defiance to those whose errand he seemed so perfectly
to divine.

"Poor dog! you shall never want a master while I can keep you," half
murmured the corporal, as he now turned his gaze upon the water, anxious
to see if any trace could be found there of the skiff and its missing
occupant. Nothing, however, came within his view, but just as he was
preparing to descend from the window, the outline of the boat, for from
its peculiar shape he easily identified it as their own, riveted his
attention as it passed quickly up the river, filled with seven or
eight savages in their war-dress, and having at the bow what had the
appearance of a pole, from the top of which dangled a human scalp.

"Gone at last," he exclaimed, after a moment's pause, "but with poor
Collins' scalp along with them. Cass," he added, as he sprang to the
floor, "if that turkey is fit to eat let's have it directly, and you,
Weston, look about and see if there is any more water to be had. Make
haste, now, for we shall have to tramp it to the fort as soon as it's
daylight. The devils are gone and carried off the boat."

Not less anxious than himself to be once more on their way to the fort,
which some of them, on entering the house that night, had scarcely hoped
to reach alive, the men, leaning their muskets against the side of the
room, assisted in preparing the rude, but grateful meal, of which
they stood so much in need, and which was to sustain them during the
short-approaching march. The table having been placed in the centre
of the room, and on it the demijohn, and bread and venison, Green and
Weston, the latter of whom had been unsuccessful in his search for
water, seized each a leg and a wing of the ample turkey, which now
denuded and disembowelled, Cass had scientifically carved in its raw
state, and held them in the blaze of the fire, waiting patiently until
the blackness of the outside should give promise of corresponding warmth
within. Its slayer held the body of the bird over the fire in a similar
manner, the poker having been thrust into the abdomen. They all sat, or
rather stood in a squatting position with their faces to the fire.

"Well, now, I reckon we shall make six considerable shares of this,"
drawled Cass, looking fondly at the carcass, which was slowly but
temptingly spluttering before him at the fire. "Are you any ways
particular, Green?--what part suits your taste best, Weston--a leg or a
wing? For my part I always stick to the carcass."

"Faith, and I like both, and a slice of the breast to boot. I'm just the
fellow, now the varmints are gone, that could eat all of them."

"Yes, but you know," returned the temporary chef de cuisine, "it must be
share and share alike--there's two legs--two wings and the breast, and
the back slit in two--that just makes six portions, and we're six men in
all."

"Cast lots fiddlestick," said Green, "what portion do you expect,
Nutcrackers? unless it's the neck, and the scaly part of the leg, the
Injin had hold of when you so bravely sent your bayonet through her
feathers."

"Well, only think how cunning of the fellows," remarked Weston, "who'd
ever have thought they would try that fashion to get in, cramming an
old turkey before them to clear the way, and get in his craw the first
bullet that might be sent."

"Yes, and the tight grip the fellow had of him by the leg. Just look,
Green, the mark of the devil's hand may be upon him yet. It was the
right leg, and that's it you have."

"Bosh! what do you expect me to find there but the marks of your dirty
paws while plucking him, I'm too devilish hungry for such nonsense,
Nutcrackers; but show me the Injin that would venture to touch his legs
now. If I wouldn't mark him, then my name's not Seth Green."

Scarcely had he finished speaking, when a dark naked human hand was
slowly protruded over his shoulder, and seized not the leg of the
turkey, which Green now grasped with unconscious and convulsive energy,
but a brand from the fire.

In his terror at that strange and unexpected appearance, he dropped the
body of the bird in the glowing embers, and uttering a faint cry, turned
half round and beheld what filled him with the deepest dismay: his
companions, scarcely less terrified than himself, sprang together to
their feet, with the intention of rushing to their muskets, but all hope
of recovering them was gone. The savage who had snatched the fire was
no longer there then, but half a dozen others in their war-paint stood
between them and their firelocks. It seemed as if they were sensible
that their very silence inspired more awe and apprehension in the bosoms
of their defenceless enemies than could have done the most turbulent
expression of their triumph. They had evidently entered by the back
door, which was now quite open, and grouped around the body of Mr.
Heywood, were apparently more interested in the dead than in the living.
Not a sign was there of the corporal, and Philips stood as if paralyzed,
leaning, musket in hand, against the opposite entrance.




CHAPTER VII.

Leaving the little party in the dismay occasioned by their new position,
and that at a moment when they believed themselves secured from further
interruption or danger, we must now return to the Fort, where their
long-continued absence, coupled with the startling tidings conveyed by
Ephraim Giles, had created equal anxiety and apprehension.

It will be recollected that during the examination of the latter, Ensign
Ronayne had, after communicating with the commanding officer, suddenly
departed across the river, taking with him a few armed men. The
destination of this little party was the cottage occupied by Mrs.
Heywood and her daughter, who, with a woman servant, were the sole
occupants of a dwelling, simple in construction, but decorated, both
within and without, by the hand of good taste. It was a low, one-storied
building, painted white, with green window-blinds and shutters, and a
verandah of trellis work of the same color, that extended a few feet
square round the principal entrance. On either side, rose to the roof,
on parallel lines, and at equal distances, cords of strong twine, on
which already had began to interlace themselves, the various parasites
indigenous to the soil, which winter had robbed of their freshness, but
which a southern sun was now evidently vivifying and re-invigorating.
A small garden of about half-an-acre, surrounded by a similar
trellis-work, extended equally in front, and on the sides of the
house--while the graceful form given to the various beds, and the
selection of the plants and flowers, which, although still in their
dormant state, were yet recognizable--testified the refined taste of
those who had assisted at their culture. The pathway, which was recently
gravelled from the adjacent sand-hills, ran in a straight line from
the verandah, toward the little green gate, opening on the front of the
garden, took a semi-circular sweep on either side, at about one-third
of the distance from the gate. This form had been given to it for the
purpose of affording room for the creation of a mound, on the summit
of which had been placed a small summer-house, octagon in shape, and
constructed of the same description of trellis-work. The sloping sides
of the mound itself, were profusely covered with dahlias, rhododendrons,
geraniums, and other plants of the most select kind--the whole forming,
when in bloom, a circle of floral magnificence. A short and narrow path,
just large enough to admit of the passage of one person at a time, led
to the entrance of the summer-house, which, facing the gate, was also
shaded from the light and heat of the sun's rays, by closely interlacing
vines.

At the bottom of this artificial mound, and near the pathway, a small
spud, such as is used for pruning, was stuck into some earth, newly
drawn round a splendid tiger lily, and on the handle of the spud, were
loosely thrown a white silk jacket, a blue velvet cap, and a light pink
scarf--evidencing that no ordinary gardener had been that day employed
in bringing into new life the gorgeous beauties of the variegated
parterre.

"Little did I think," mused the young officer, as, leaving his party at
the gate, and hastening towards the cottage, his eye fell upon those
articles of dress--"little did I imagine when I threw off these things
a few hours since, to obey a summons to the Fort, that on my return
to them, it would be with this heavy heart, and as the bearer of these
tidings--but I must be cautious in my disclosure. Dear girl, here she
is!"

"Why, Ronayne, what in the name of Heaven is the meaning of all this?
Are you here to take the castle by storm, with all these armed warriors?
A few hours since you were a man of peace, and now I behold in you a
most approved and valiant knight of the true American school. Sword,
cap, feather, epaulet, blue broad-cloth, and silver. Well it must be
confessed that you are not a bad imitation of a soldier, in that garb,
and it is in pity to me, I suppose, that you do not wear it oftener.
But seriously, Harry, do satisfy my curiosity, and tell me the reason of
this unusual--manner of visit!"

The question was asked playfully, but in tones replete with sweetness,
by a tall and elegantly-formed girl, who on turning the further circle
of the walk, in her approach to her favorite flower-bed, had for the
first time, beheld the young officer, and the party stationed at the
gate.

"Nay, dear Maria," returned the youth, deeply grieved at the thought
of casting a gloom over the spirits of her who thus rallied him. "I
am sorry to say my errand is not one of mere parade--I have come to
announce that which will give you pain; and but that I am charged with
the agreeable duty of making you a prisoner, I never should have had the
courage to be the bearer of the intelligence."

Miss Heywood turned very pale, less at the words even than at the manner
of the young officer, who it was evident, felt all the weight of the
task he had undertaken.

"Ronayne," she said, her voice suddenly assuming a rich melancholy of
intonation, in strange contrast with her first address, "there is more
in this than you would acquaint me with. But, tell me," and she fixed
her large dark eyes on his--"tell me all. What pain is it you fear to
occasion me, and how is it connected with my being a prisoner? Ha!" and
she grasped his arm, and betrayed deep agitation--"surely nothing in my
father's conduct--"

"No, no, Maria," returned the youth, quickly, "far from anything of the
kind, and yet it is of your father I would speak. But have you heard
nothing since I left you. Have you seen no one?"

"I have heard nothing--seen not a soul from without," she answered, as
he tenderly pressed the hand he had taken--"But, Ronayne," she pursued,
with melancholy gravity--"a sudden light dawns upon me--my heart
tells me that some misfortune or other has happened, or is about to
happen--you say you would speak about my father. You are the bearer of
ill-news in regard to him. Yes, I know it is so; tell me, Harry," and
she looked imploringly up to him, "am I not right?--my father has been
attacked by Indians, and he has fallen. Oh! you do not deny it!"

"Nay, dearest Maria, I know nothing of the kind, although I will not
conceal from you that there is danger--you have guessed correctly as to
the Indians having been at the farm, but little certain is known as to
the result of their visit. That half idiot Ephraim Giles, has come in
with some wild story, but I daresay he exaggerates."

Miss Heywood shook her head doubtingly. "You deceive me, Ronayne--with
the best intention, but still you deceive me. If you really think the
rumor be exaggerated, why your own restlessness and seriousness of
manner? Harry, this is no time for concealment, for I feel that I can
better bear the truth NOW than LATER. Do not hesitate then to tell me
all you know."

"True, my love, this is no time for concealment since such be the state
of your feelings. I was unwilling to admit my own apprehension on the
subject, fearing that you might be ill-prepared for the disclosure; but
after what you have just urged, the blow can never fall less heavily
than now. You must know, then, that a party of hostile Indians have,
there is too much reason to fear, used violence toward the inmates of
the farm-house, but to what extent we have no means of knowing; though
such is the alarm created by their presence that Headley, who you know
is the very soul of caution, has ordered every white in the neighborhood
of the Fort, to be removed for safety within its walls."

"Would that instead of THAT," remarked Miss Heywood, with solemnity,
"he had despatched those soldiers, whom I see there fully armed, to the
rescue of my poor father. Perhaps he might be saved yet--the house is
strong, and might be defended for some time, even by a couple of men."

"And me at their head. Is it not so, Maria?" inquired the youth.

"Yes, and you at their head, dear Ronayne," repeated Miss Heywood; "to
no one sooner would I be indebted for my father's safety, as no one
would, I am sure, more cheerfully attempt his deliverance."

The young American mused a moment, and then rejoined, despondingly;
"Were these men at my disposal, Maria, how gladly would I hasten to
encounter every difficulty, the removal of which would spare your gentle
bosom those pangs; but you know Headley would never permit it. His
prudence is a mania, and even were he to yield his consent--let me not
sustain you with delusive hopes--I fear it would be too late."

"God's will be done," she ejaculated, as the large tears fell trickling
down her pallid cheeks, "but what will become of my poor and now nearly
death-stricken-mother, when she hears of this?"

"The blow is indeed a fearful one, but act, I pray you, with courage.
Consider, too, your own safety. No one knows the force of the Indians,
or how soon they may be here. Go in, dearest, prepare what you may more
immediately require for a few days, and my men will carry your trunks
down to the scow which is waiting to receive you."

"And if I should consent to go, Ronayne, you know my poor mother cannot
rise from her bed. What do you propose to do with her? To remove her,
and let her know WHY she is removed, would soon finish the work her
debilitating disease has begun."

"I have made every necessary provision," answered the young officer,
glad to find that her thoughts could be diverted from the immediate
source of her sorrow. "Elmsley's wife, to whom I spoke a few hurried
words on leaving, is even now preparing for your temporary reception,
and I have thought of an excuse to be given to your mother. You must for
once in your life use deceit, and say that Van Vottenberg desires her
presence in the fort, because his duties have become so severe that he
can no longer absent himself to bestow upon her that professional care
she so much requires. Nay, look not so incredulous. I am aware that the
pretext is a meagre one, but I cannot at present think of a better; and
in her enfeebled state she will not dwell upon the strangeness of the
plea. Go on then, I entreat you, and desire Catherine to collect what
you will want, while my men carry to the scow such articles of furniture
as will be most useful to you in your new quarters. Quick, dear Maria,
I implore you, there has already been too much time lost, and I expect
every moment an order from Headley to return immediately."

Sensible of a pressing emergency. Miss Heywood, with a beating heart,
regained the cottage, in which so many blissful hours had been passed
within the last two years, undisturbed by a care for the future, while
the young officer joining his men, left one to take care of the arms of
the party, and with the remainder hastened to the house making as little
noise as possible, in order not to disturb the invalid. Having chosen
such articles of furniture as he knew Mrs. Elmsley was most deficient
in, and among these a couch and a couple of easy-chairs (which latter
indeed were the work of his own hands), they were conveyed to the scow
in two trips, and then followed three or four trunks into which had been
thrown, without regard to order, such wearing apparel, and necessaries
of the toilet as the short period allowed for preparation had permitted
the agitated girl to put together. The most delicate part of the burden,
however, yet remained to be removed, and that was the invalid herself.
Desiring his men to remain without, the youth, whose long and close
intimacy with the family rendered such a step by no means objectionable,
entered the apartment of Mrs. Heywood, who had already been prepared
by her daughter for the removal, and with the assistance of Catherine
raised the bed on which she lay, and transferred it to a litter brought
for the occasion. This they carefully bore through the suite of small
and intervening rooms to the front, where two of the men relieved them,
Catherine walking at the side, and unnecessarily enjoining caution at
every step.

"This is, indeed, an unexpected change, Ronayne," said Miss Heywood,
sadly, "but this morning, and I was so happy, and now! These poor
flowers, too (for after having fastened the windows and doors of the
house, they were now directing their course towards the mound), that
parterre which cost us so much labor, yes, such sweet labor, must all be
left to be destroyed by the hand of some ruthless savage. Yet, what do I
say," she pursued, in a tone of deep sorrow, "I lament the flowers; yes,
Ronayne, because they have thriven under your care, and yet, I forget
that my father perhaps no longer lives; that my beloved mother's death
may be the early consequence of this removal. Yet think me not selfish.
Think me not ungrateful. Come what may, you will yet be left to me. No,
Harry," and she looked up to him tearfully, "I shall never be utterly
destitute, while you remain."

"Bless you, thrice bless you for these sweet avowals of your
confidence," exclaimed the youth, suddenly dropping her arm, and
straining her passionately to his heart. "Yes, Maria, I shall yet remain
to love, to cherish, to make you forget every other tie in that of
husband--to blend every relationship in that of one."

"Nay, Ronayne," she quickly returned, while the color mounted vividly to
her cheek, under the earnest ardor of his gaze, "I would not now unsay
what I have said, and yet I did not intend that my words should exactly
bear that interpretation--nor is this a moment--"

"But still you will be my wife--tell me, Maria?" and he looked
imploringly into her own not averted eyes. "You will be the wife, as you
have long been the friend and companion of your Ronayne--answer me. Will
you not?"

Her head sank upon his shoulder, and the heaving of her bosom, as she
gently returned his embrace, alone conveyed the assurance he desired.
She was deeply affected. She knew the ardent, generous nature of her
lover, and she felt that every word that had just fallen from his lips,
tended only to unravel the true emotions of his heart: but soothing as
was his impassioned language, she deemed it almost criminal, at such a
moment, to listen to it.

"Nay, dearest Harry," she said, gently disengaging herself from his
embrace, "we will be seen. They may wonder at our delay, and send
somebody back from the scow. Let us proceed."

"You are right," replied the young officer, again passing her arm
through his own, while they continued their route, "excess of happiness
must not cause me to commit an imprudence so great, as that of suffering
another to divine the extent. Yet one word more, dear Maria! and ah!
think how much depends upon your answer. WHEN shall I call you mine?"

"Oh! speak not now of that, Ronayne--consider the position of my
father--my mother's health."

"It is for that very reason that I do ask it," returned the youth.
"Should Heaven deprive you of the one, as it in some degree threatens
you with the loss of the other, what shall so well console you as the
tenderness of him who is blessed with your love?"

"Hush, Harry," and she fondly pressed his arm--"they will hear you."

They had now approached the scow, into which the men, having previously
deposited the furniture and trunks, were preparing to embark the litter
upon which Mrs. Heywood lay extended, with an expression of resignation
and repose upon her calm features, that touched the hearts of even
these rude men. Her daughter, half-reproaching herself for not
having personally attended to her transport, and only consoled by the
recollection of the endearing explanation with her lover, which had
chanced to result from her absence, now tenderly inquired how she had
borne it, and was deeply gratified to find that the change of air, and
gentle exercise to which she had been subjected, had somewhat restored
her. Here was one source of care partly removed, and she felt, if
possible, increased affection for the youth to whose considerate
attention was owing this favorable change in the condition of a parent,
whom she had ever fondly loved.

It was near sunset when Ronayne, who, with the robust Catherine, had
carefully lifted the invalid into the centre of the scow, reached the
landing-place below the Fort. Here were collected several of the women
of the company, and among them Mrs. Elmsley, who had come down to meet
and welcome those for whose reception she had made every provision the
hurried notice she had received would permit. The young officer had been
the first to step on shore, and after he had whispered something in
her ear, she for a moment communicated with the group of women--then
advanced to meet Miss Heywood, whom her lover was now handing from the
scow. She embraced her with a tenderness so unusually affectionate, that
a vague consciousness of the true cause flashed across the mind of the
anxious girl, recalling back all that inward grief of soul, which the
deep emotion of an engrossing love had for a time absorbed.

In less than half-an-hour the fugitives were installed in the council
hall, and in another small apartment, dividing it from the rooms
occupied by the Elmsleys. The ensign, having seen that all was arranged
in a suitable manner in the former, went out to the parade-ground,
leaving the ladies in charge of their amiable hostess, and of the women
she had summoned to assist in bearing the latter into the Fort.

On his way to his rooms, he met Captain Headley returning from an
inspection of the defences. He saluted him, and was in the act of
addressing him in a friendly and familiar tone, when he was checked by
the sharply-uttered remark:

"So, sir, you are returned at last. It seems to me that you have been
much longer absent than was necessary."

The high spirit of the youth was chafed. "Pardon me, sir," he answered
haughtily, "if I contradict you. No one of the least feeling would have
thought of removing such an invalid as Mrs. Heywood is, without using
every care her condition required. Have you any orders for me, Captain
Headley?" he concluded, in a more respectful manner, for he had become
sensible, the moment after he had spoken, of his error in thus evincing
asperity under the reproof of his superior.

"You are officer of the guard, I believe, Mr. Ronayne?"

"No, sir, Mr. Elmsley relieved me this morning."

At that moment the last-named officer came up, on his way to the
ensign's quarters, when, the same question having been put to him, and
answered in the affirmative, Captain Headley desired that the moment
the fishing-party came in they should be reported to him. "And now,
gentlemen," he concluded, "I expect you both to be particularly on the
alert to-night. The absence of that fishing-party distresses me, and I
would give much that they were back."

"Captain Headley," said the ensign, quickly and almost beseechingly,
"let me pick out a dozen men from the company, and I pledge myself to
restore the party before mid-day to-morrow. Nay, sir," seeing strong
surprise and disapproval on the countenance of the commandant, "I am
ready to forfeit my commission if I fail--"

"Are you mad, Mr. Ronayne, or do you suppose that I am mad enough to
entertain such a proposition, and thus weaken my force still more?
Forfeit your commission if you fail! Why, sir, you would deserve to
forfeit your commission, if you even succeeded in any thing so wholly
at variance with military prudence. Gentlemen, recollect what I have
said--I expect you to use the utmost vigilance to-night, and, Mr.
Elmsley, fail not instantly to report the fishing-boat." Thus enjoining,
he passed slowly on to his quarters.

"D--n your military prudence, and d--n your pompous cold-bloodedness!"
muttered the fiery ensign between his teeth--scarcely waiting until his
captain was out of hearing.

"Hush," interrupted Elmsley in a whisper. "He will hear you. Ha!" he
continued after a short pause, during which they moved on towards the
mess-room, "you begin to find out his amiable military qualities,
do you! But tell me, Ronayne, what the deuce has put this Quixotic
expedition into your head? What great interest do you take in these
fishermen, that you should volunteer to break your shins in the wood,
this dark night, for the purpose of seeking them, and that on the very
day when your ladye faire honors these walls, if I may so dignify
our stockade, with her presence for the first time. Come, come, thank
Headley for his refusal. When you sit down to-morrow morning, as
I intend you shall, to a luxurious breakfast of tea, coffee, fried
venison, and buckwheat-cakes, you will find no reason to complain of his
adherence to military prudence."

"Elmsley," returned his friend, seriously, "I can have no disguise from
you at such a moment. You know my regard for Maria Heywood, although
you cannot divine its depth, and could I but be the means of saving her
father, you can well understand the joy I should feel."

"Certainly, my dear fellow, but you know as well as myself, that
there exists not the shadow of a hope of this. That scarecrow, Giles,
half-witted as he is, tells too straightforward a story."

"Elmsley," persisted his friend, "there is every hope--every reasonable
expectation that he may yet survive. Maria herself first opened my eyes
to the possibility, for, until then, I had thought as you do; and deeply
did her words sink in my heart, when she said, reproachfully, that,
instead of sending a party to escort her, it would have been far better
to dispatch them to the farm, where her father might, at that moment,
be sustaining a siege--the house being strong enough to admit of a
temporary defence, by even a couple of persons."

"And what said you to that?"

"What could I say? I looked like a fool, and felt like a school-boy
under the iron rod of a pedagogue--but I resolved."

"And what did you resolve, my enterprising KNIGHT errant?"

"You have just heard my proposal to the gentleman who piques himself
upon his military prudence." returned the youth, with bitter irony.

"Yes, and he refused you. What then?"

"True, and what then," and he nodded his head impatiently.

"You will sleep upon it, my dear fellow, after we have had a glass of
the Monongahela, and the pipe. Thus refreshed, you will think better of
it in the morning."

"We will have the Monongahela and the pipe, for truly I feel that I
require something to soothe, if not absolutely to exhilarate me; but no
sleep for me this night. Elmsley," he added, more seriously, "you will
pass me out of the gate?"

"Pass you out of what?" exclaimed the other, starting from the chair on
which he had thrown himself only the moment before. "What do you mean,
man?"

"I mean that, as officer of the guard, you alone can pass me through
after dark, and this service you must render me."

"Why! where are you going? Single-handed like Jack the Giant Killer to
deliver, not a beautiful damsel from the fangs of a winged monster, but
a tough old backwoodsman from the dark paws of the savage?"

"Elmsley," again urged the ensign, "you forget that Mr. Heywood is the
father of my future wife."

"Ah! is it come to that at last. Well, I am right glad of it. But,
my dear Ronayne," taking and cordially pressing his hand, "forgive my
levity. I only sought to divert you from your purpose. What I can do for
you, I will do; but tell me what it is you intend."

"Yet, Elmsley, before we enter further into the matter, do you not think
that you will incur the serious displeasure of Military Prudence?"

"If he discovers that you are gone, certainly; and I cannot see how it
can be otherwise; he will be in the fidgets all night, and probably
ask for you; but even if not THEN, he will miss you on parade in the
morning."

"And what will be the consequence to you? Answer me candidly, I
entreat."

"Then, candidly, Ronayne, the captain likes me not well enough to pass
lightly over such a breach of duty. The most peremptory orders have,
since the arrival of this startling news, been given not to allow any
one to leave the fort, and (since you wish me to be sincere) should I
allow you to pass, it will go hard with my commission."

"How foolish of me not to have thought of that before! How utterly
stupid to ask that which I ought to have known myself; but enough,
Elmsley. I abandon the scheme altogether. You shall never incur that
risk for me."

"Yet understand me," resumed the other, "if you really think that there
is a hope of its proving more than a mere wild goose chase, I will
cheerfully incur that risk; but on my honor, Ronayne, I myself feel
convinced that nothing you can do will avail."

"Not another word on the subject," answered his friend; "here is what
will banish all care, at least for the present."

His servant had just entered, and deposited on the mess-table hot and
cold water, sugar, lime-juice, pipes, tobacco, and tumblers; when the
two officers with Von Vottenberg who had just come in from visiting Mr.
Heywood, sat down to indulge their social humors. Whilst the latter,
according to custom, mixed the punch, which when made was pronounced
to be his chef d'oeuvre, Elmsley amused himself with cutting up the
tobacco, and filling the pipes. The ensign, taking advantage of their
occupation, indulged himself in a reverie that lasted until the beverage
had been declared ready.

The presence of the doctor, acting as a check upon the further allusion
by the friends to the topic that had hitherto engrossed their attention,
the little conversation that ensued was of a general nature, neither of
them, however, cared much to contribute to it, so that the doctor
found and pronounced them for that evening anything but entertaining
companions. He, however, consoled himself with copious potations from
the punch-bowl, and filled the room with dense clouds of smoke, that
were in themselves, sufficient to produce the drowsiness that Ronayne
pleaded in excuse of his taciturnity.

After his second glass, Elmsley, reminding the ensign that he expected
him as well as the punch-brewer to breakfast with him in the morning at
eight o'clock precisely, took his departure for the guard room, for the
night.




CHAPTER VIII.

It was about seven o'clock on the morning succeeding the occurrences
detailed in the preceding chapters, that Lieutenant Elmsley waited on
the commanding officer, to relate that the fishing boat was at length in
sight. These tidings were communicated as Captain Headley was preparing
to sit down to breakfast--a refreshment, to which the fatigue of mind
and body he had undergone during the night had not a little disposed
him. True, however, to his character, he stayed not for the meal, but
instantly arose, and taking his telescope accompanied the subaltern to
the flagstaff battery, whence the best view of the river was commanded.

"Any thing to report, Mr. Elmsley; but I presume not, or it scarcely
would have been necessary for me to ask the question?"

"Nothing, sir, of any consequence," replied the lieutenant after a
moment's hesitation, "beyond a slight altercation that took place
between a drunken Pottawattamie and the sergeant of the guard--but it
was of a nature too trivial to disturb you about."

"What was it, Mr. Elmsley?" inquired his superior, abruptly turning to
him.

"The Indian who had probably been lying dead drunk during the day within
the Fort, and had evidently just awakened from his sleep, was anxious
to go to his encampment, but the sergeant, strictly obeying the order
he had received from me, refused to open the gate, which seemed to annoy
the Indian very much. At that moment I came up. I knew well of course
that the order was not meant to extend rigidly to our Indian friends,
the great mass of whom might be offended by the detention of one of
their number, and I desired the sergeant to pass him through. Was I
right, sir?"

"Perfectly, Mr. Elmsley; we must not offend those of the Indian tribes
that are disposed to be friendly toward us, for no one knows how soon
we may require their aid. The official advices I have received not only
from Detroit but from Washington are of a nature to induce apprehension
of hostilities between Great Britain and the United States; therefore,
it would, as you justly observe, and just now particularly, be
extremely bad policy to offend those whom it is so much our interest to
conciliate. Still you ought to have reported the circumstance to me, and
not acted on your own responsibility."

Lieutenant Elmsley bit his lip, and could scarcely control a movement of
impatience. "I am glad, however, sir," he resumed after a pause,
"that you find no fault with my conduct; I confess I had some little
uneasiness on that score, for with you I felt that I had no right to
assume the responsibility, but I knew that you had retired to your
rooms, and I was unwilling to disturb you."

"You ought to have known, Mr. Elmsley, that where duty is concerned I
can never be disturbed. However, no matter. What you did was correctly
done; only in future, fail not to make your report. The slightest
unauthorized step might be a false one, and that, under all the
circumstances, is to be avoided."

Whatever the subaltern thought of the seeming self-sufficiency which had
dictated the concluding part of the lecture of the commanding officer,
he made no further observation, and both in silence pursued the
remainder of their short route to the bastion.

Many of the men, dressed and accoutred for the morning parade, which
usually took place at about nine o'clock, were grouped around, and
anxiously watching the approach of the boat, as of something they had
despaired of ever again beholding. Captain Headley drew his telescope to
the proper focus, and after looking through it a few minutes--remarked--

"Thank Heaven, all is right--they are all there, although it is quite
unaccountable to me how they could have been detained until this
morning. And, oh! it seems they have taken a heavy draught of fish, for,
although I cannot see the bottom of the boat, their feet are raised as
if to prevent crushing or injuring something beneath them. But hold!
there is something wrong, too. I do not see the usual number of muskets
piled in the stern. How can this be, Mr. Elmsley?"

"Perhaps there is not the same number of men," suggested the
lieutenant--"some of them, for causes connected with their detention,
may be coming by land."

"Not at all. There are seven men. I think seven men compose the fishing
party; do they not?"

"Six men, besides the non-commissioned officer; yes, sir."

"I can make out Corporal Nixon, for he is steering and facing me, but
for the others, I do not know them well enough to distinguish. Here, Mr.
Elmsley, take the glass, and try what you can make of them."

The lieutenant gazed through the glass a moment, and then pronounced
name after name, as the men severally came under the range of the lens.
"Yes, sir, as you say, there is Corporal Nixon steering--then, with,
their backs to us, and pulling, are first, Collins, then Green, then
Jackson, then Weston, then Cass, and then Philips. But what they have
in the bottom of the boat, for I now can see that plain enough, is not
fish, sir, but a human body, and a dog crouched at its side. Yes! it is
indeed the Frenchman's dog--Loup Garou."

"Well, I want to know!" exclaimed Ephraim Giles, who had ascended the
bastion, and now stood amid the group of men, "I take it, that if that's
Loup Garou, his master can't be far off. I never knowed them to be
separate."

"Yes, sir, that is certainly a dead body," pursued the
lieutenant--"somebody killed at the farm, no doubt. Have you any orders
for the direction of the party, when they land, sir?" he inquired, as he
handed back the glass to the captain.

"Just desire the drum to beat to parade," was the answer. "It wants only
a few minutes of guard-mounting, and by the time the men have fallen in,
and the roll is called, the boat will be here. Where is Mr. Ronayne?"

"I have not seen him this morning, sir, but believe that he is in his
own rooms. He, however, knows the hour, and doubtless will be here
presently."

"When the men have fallen in, come and report to me," said the captain,
as he descended from the bastion, and proceeded to his own quarters, to
eat his untasted breakfast.

The lieutenant touched his cap in assent, and then, having despatched
a man with orders to the temporary drum-major, crossed over to the
apartments of the ensign, anxious not only to excuse himself for not
being able to receive his friend to his own breakfast, at the hour
he had named, but to prepare him for the reception of the body of Mr.
Heywood, which he doubted not, was that now on its way for interment at
his own house.

On entering the mess-room, in which they had taken their punch, the
previous evening, everything bore evidence of a late debauch. Ashes and
tobacco were liberally strewed upon the table, while around the empty
bowl, were, in some disorder, pipes and glasses--one of each emptied
of all but the ashes and sediment--the other two only half-smoked,
half-full, and standing amid a pool of wet, which had evidently been
spilt by a not very steady hand. The windows were closed, so that the
smoke clung to what little furniture there was in the room, and the
whole scent of the place was an abominable compound of stale tobacco and
strong whisky.

A loud snoring in the room on his right attracted his attention. He knew
that it was Von Vottenberg's, and he entered to see what had kept him
in bed until that late hour. The surgeon, only half-undressed, was fast
asleep, not within, but on the outside of the bed-clothes. Somewhat
disgusted at the sight, for Elmsley was comparatively abstemious, he
shook him not very gently, when the doctor, opening his eyes with a
start, half-rose upon his elbow. "Ha!" he exclaimed, "I know you mean
to say that breakfast is waiting; I had forgotten all about it, old
fellow."

"I mean nothing of the kind," was the reply, "but I recommend you to
lose no time in dressing and turning out. The men are already on parade,
and if Captain Headley, finding that you are absent, tends over here
to inquire the cause, I would not give much for your future chances of
swallowing whisky-punch within the walls of Chicago."

"Eh? what! what!" spluttered the surgeon, as he jumped up, drew on his
boots, dipped his face in a basin of water, and hastily completed his
toilet. In less than five minutes he was on parade.

Meanwhile, Lieutenant Elmsley, after giving this warning, had passed
again through the mess-room, and knocked at Ronayne's door. But there
was no answer.

"Hilloa, Ronayne," he called loudly, as he turned the handle of the
latch, "are YOU in bed too?"

But no Ronayne was there. He looked at the bed--like the doctor's, it
had been laid upon, but no one had been within the clothes.

What was the meaning of this? After a few moments of delay, he flew back
to Von Vottenberg's room, but the latter was already gone. Retracing his
steps, he met Ronayne's servant entering at the mess-room door.

"Where is your master?" he inquired. "How is it that he is not in his
room--has not been in bed?"

"Not been in bed?" repeated the lad, with surprise. "Why, sir, he told
me last night that he was very drowsy and should lie late; and, that
he mightn't be disturbed, he desired me to sleep in one of the
block-houses. I was only to wake him in time for guard-mounting, and as
it wants but ten minutes to that, I am just come to call him."

"Clean out the mess-room directly--open the windows, and pat every thing
in order," said the lieutenant, fearing that Captain Headley might, on
hearing of the absence of the young officer, pay his quarters a visit in
search of some clue to the cause. "I see it all," he mused, as he moved
across the parade-ground. "He would not, generous fellow, get me into a
scrape, by making me privy to his design, and to avoid the difficulty of
the gate, has got over the pickets somewhere--yet, if so, he must have
had a rope, and assistance of some kind, for he never could have crossed
them without. Yet, where can he be gone, and what could he have expected
to result from his mad scheme? Had he waited until now, he would have
known by the arrival of the fishing-party with their sad charge, how
utterly useless was all this risk."

"Well, Mr. Elmsley," said the captain, who now appeared at the front of
his own door, fully dressed for parade, and preparing to issue forth in
all the stateliness of command.

"The parade is formed, sir," remarked the lieutenant, confusedly, "but I
cannot find the officer of the guard."

"Sir!" exclaimed Captain Headley.

"I cannot find Mr. Ronayne, sir--I have myself been over to his
quarters, and looked into his bed-room, but it is clear that he has not
been in bed all night."

"What is the meaning of all this? Send Doctor Von Vottenberg here
immediately."

And lucky was it for that gentleman that the officer who now desired his
attendance on the commandant had roused him from that Lethean slumber in
which he had been, only a few minutes before, so luxuriously indulging.

"Doctor Von Vottenberg," commenced the captain, as soon as that official
made his appearance before him; "you are quartered with Mr. Ronayne.
Have you seen any thing of him last night or this morning--no evasion,
nay," seeing that the doctor's brow began to be overclouded, "I mean no
attempt to shield the young man by a suppression of the truth."

"I certainly saw him last night, Captain Headley, but not at a very
late hour. We took a glass or two of punch, and smoked a couple of pipes
together, but we both went to bed early, and for my part, I know that I
slept so soundly as to have heard nothing--seen nothing, until I got up
this morning."

The doctor spoke truly as to the time of their retirement to rest, for
the ensign had left him early in the night, while he had found his way
to his own bed, early in the morning.

"The boat is nearing the landing-place, sir," reported the sergeant of
the guard, who now came up, and more immediately addressed Lieutenant
Elmsley.

This information, for the moment, banished the subject under discussion.
"Let the men pile their arms," ordered Captain Headley; "and when this
is done, Mr. Elmsley, follow me to the landing-place."

In a few minutes both officers were there. The boat was within fifty
yards, when the subaltern joined his captain; and the oarsmen, evidently
desirous of doing their best in the presence of the commanding officer,
were polling silently and with a vigor that soon brought it to its
accustomed berth.

"What body is that, Corporal Nixon?" inquired the latter, "and how is it
that you are only here this morning?"

"Sir," answered the corporal, removing one of his hands from the
steer-oar, and respectfully touching his cap, "it's poor Le Noir, the
Frenchman, killed by the Injins yesterday, and as for our absence, it
couldn't be helped, sir; but it's a long report I have to make, and
perhaps, captain, you would like to hear it more at leisure than I can
tell it here."

By this time the men had landed from the boat, leaving the Canadian to
be disposed of afterwards as the commanding officer might direct. The
quick eye of the latter immediately detected the slight limping of
Green, whose wound had become stiff from neglect, cold, and the cramped
position in which he had been sitting in the boat.

"What is the matter with this man?" he inquired of the corporal. "What
makes him walk so stiffly?"

"Nothing much the matter, captain," was the indifferent reply. "It's
only a ball he got in his leg in the scrimmage last night."

"Ha! the first gun-shot wound that has come under my treatment during
the three long years I have been stationed here. Quick, my fine fellow,
take yourself to the hospital, and tell the orderly to prepare my
instruments for probing."

"Scrimmage last night; what do you mean, Corporal Nixon--whom had you
the scrimmage with?"

These remarks fell at the same moment from the lips of the commander
and those of the surgeon, the latter rubbing his hands with delightful
anticipation of the treat in store for him.

"With the Indians, captain," replied Nixon; "the Indians that attacked
Mr. Heywood's farm."

"Captain Headley," interrupted the lieutenant, with unusual deference of
manner, for he was anxious that no further reference should be made to
the subject in presence of the invalids and women, who, attracted by
the news of the arrival of the boat, had gathered around, partly from
curiosity, partly for the purpose of getting their expected supply of
fish, "do you not think it better to examine Corporal Nixon first, and
then the others in turn?"

"Very true, Mr. Elmsley, I will examine them separately in the
orderly-room to see how far their statements agree; yet one question
you can answer here, corporal. You say that it is the body of Le Noir,
killed by the Indians. Where is Mr. Heywood, then?"

The generous Elmsley felt faint, absolutely sick at heart on hearing
this question; the very object he had in view in proposing this private
examination was thereby threatened with discomfiture.

"Mr. Heywood has been carried off by the Indians," calmly replied the
corporal, yet perceptibly paling as he spoke.

"Indeed! this is unfortunate. Let the men go to their barracks, and
there remain until I send for them," ordered the commandant. "You,
corporal, will come to me at the orderly-room, in half an hour from
this. That will be sufficient time for you to clean yourself, and take
your breakfast. None of your party, I presume, have had their breakfast
yet?"

"No, your honor," answered Green, who seemed to fancy that his wound
gave him the privilege of a little license in the presence of his chief,
"not unless an old turkey, the grandfather of fifty broods, and as tough
as shoe-leather, can be called a breakfast."

Captain Headley looked at the speaker sternly, but took no other notice
of what he, evidently, deemed a very great liberty, than to demand how
he presumed to disobey the order of the surgeon. Then desiring him to
proceed forthwith to the hospital and have his leg dressed, he himself
withdrew after postponing the parade to one o'clock.

"And are you sure, Nixon, that Mr. Heywood has been carried off by the
Indians," asked Lieutenant Elmsley, the revulsion of whose feelings on
hearing the corporal's answer to the question put by Captain Headley
had been in striking contrast with what he had experienced only a moment
before; "are you quite sure of this?"

The interrogatory was put, immediately after the commanding officer had
retired, doubtingly, in a low tone, and apart from the rest of the men.

"I saw them carry him off myself, sir," again deliberately said the
corporal. "The whole of the party saw it too."

"Enough, enough," pursued the lieutenant, in a friendly tone. "I believe
you, Nixon. But another question. Were you joined last night by any one
of the regiment? recollect yourself."

The corporal declaring that nothing in the shape of an American uniform
had come under his notice, since he departed from the Fort the preceding
evening, the officer next turned his attention to the boat.

"What are you fumbling about there, Collins?" he asked, rather
sharply--"Why do you not go and join your mess?" This was said as the
rest of the party were now in the act of moving off with their muskets
and fishing apparatus.

"Poor fellow!" interposed the corporal, "he is not himself to-day; but
I am sure, Mr. Elmsley, you will not be hard upon him, when I tell
you that, but for him, there wouldn't be a man of us here of the whole
party."

"Indeed!" exclaimed the lieutenant, not a little surprised at the
information; "but we shall hear all about that presently; yet what is he
fidgetting about at the bottom of the bow of the boat?"

"There's another body there, sir, besides Le Noir's. It's that of the
poor boy at Heywood's--an Indian scalped him and left him for dead.
Collins, who put a bullet into the same fellow, not an hour afterwards,
found the boy by accident, while retreating from the place where we had
the first scrimmage with the red devils. He was still breathing, and he
took every pains to recover him, but the cold night air was too much for
him, and he died in the poor fellow's arms."

"Well, this is a strange night's adventure, or rather series of
adventures," remarked the lieutenant half aside to himself. "Then, I
suppose," he resumed, more immediately addressing the corporal, "he has
brought the body of the boy to have him interred with Le Noir?"

"Just so, sir, for he mourns him as if he had been his own child,"
answered Nixon, as the officer departed--"here, Loup Garou, Loup Garou,"
and he whistled to the dog. "Come along, old fellow, and get some
breakfast."

But Loup Garou would not stir at the call of his new master. Sorrow was
the only feast in which he seemed inclined to indulge, and he continued
to crouch near the body of the Canadian as impassible and motionless as
if he was no longer of earth himself.

"Come along, Collins," gently urged the Virginian, approaching the boat,
where the former was still feeling the bosom of the dead boy in the vain
hope of finding that life was not yet extinct. "It's no use thinking
about it; you have done your duty as a soldier, and as a good man, but
you see he is gone, and there is no help for it. By and by, we will bury
them both together; but come along now. The dog will let nobody near
them."

"Dash me, corporal, if I ever felt so queer in my life!" answered
Collins, in a melancholy tone, strongly in contrast with his habitual
brusque gaiety; "but, as you say, it's no use. The poor lad is dead
enough at last, and my only comfort now is to bury him, and sometimes
look at his grave."

The half-hour given by Captain Headley to the men to clean themselves
and eat their breakfasts, afforded his subaltern ample time to take his
own, which had all this time been waiting. When he readied his rooms he
found that he had another ordeal to go through. Mrs. Elmsley was already
at the bead of the table, and pouring out the coffee, with Miss Heywood
seated on her left--the latter very pale, and having evidently passed
a sleepless night. As the officer entered the room, a slight flush
overspread her features, for she looked as if she expected him to be
accompanied by another, but when he hastily unbuckled his sword, and
placed it, with his cap, on a side-table, desiring his wife to lose no
time in pouring out the coffee, as he must be off again immediately, she
felt, she knew not wherefore, very sick at heart, and became even paler
than before. Nor was she at all re-assured by the tone of commiseration
in which, after drawing a chair to her side, and affectionately pressing
her hand, he inquired after her own and her mother's health.

"Why, George," said Mrs. Elmsley, who remarked this change in her
friend, and in some degree divined the cause, "where are Mr. Ronayne and
the doctor? You told me last night they were to breakfast here--and see,
one, two, three, four, five cups (pointing at each with her finger),
I have prepared accordingly. Indeed, I scarcely think this young lady
would have made her appearance at the breakfast-table, had she not
expected to meet--who was it, my dear?" and she turned an arch look upon
her friend--"ah! I know now--Von Vottenberg."

"Nay, I have no more need of disguise from your husband than from
yourself, Margaret," replied Miss Heywood, her coloring cheek in a
measure contradicting her words--"it was Harry Ronayne I expected; but,"
she added, with a faint smile, "do not imagine I am quite so romantic as
not to be able to take my breakfast, because he is not present to
share it; therefore if you please, I also will trouble you for a cup of
coffee."

"All in good time," remarked Mrs. Elmsley. "I dare say, Ronayne is
engaged in some duty which has prevented him from keeping his engagement
as punctually as he could have desired. We shall certainly see him
before the breakfast things are removed."

"It seems to me," said her husband, who was taking his meal with the
appetite of any other than a hungry man, and even with a shade of
vexation on his features, "that you all appear to be very much in the
dark here. Why, Margaret, have you not heard what has occurred during
the night, as well as this morning?"

"How should I have heard any thing, George?" replied Mrs. Elmsley.
"I have seen no one since you went out this morning--who could have
communicated news from without? Surely you ought to know that. Will you
have more coffee?"

"No, thank you--I have no appetite for coffee or for any thing else. I
almost wish I had not come. Dear Maria," he added, impetuously, taking
Miss Heywood's hand in his own; "I know you have a noble--a courageous
heart, and can bear philosophically what I have to tell you."

"I can bear much," was the reply, accompanied by a forced smile, that
was contradicted by the quivering of the compressed lip; "and if I could
not, I find I must begin to learn. Yet what can you have to tell me, my
dear Mr. Elmsley, more than I already divine--my poor father--" and the
tears started from her eyes.

"Ha! there at least, I have comfort for you--although there has been sad
work at the farm--the fishing-party have come in with the bodies of
poor Le Noir and the boy Wilton, but they all say that Mr. Heywood was
carried off a prisoner by the Indians."

"Carried off a prisoner," repeated Miss Heywood, a sudden glow animating
her pale features--"oh! Elmsley, thank you for that. There is still a
hope then?"

"There is indeed a hope; but, dearest Miss Heywood, why must I heal with
one hand and wound with the other. If I give comparative good news of
your father, there is another who ought to be here, and whose absence at
this moment is to me at once a pain and a mystery."

"You mean Harry Ronayne?" she said, hesitatingly, but without
manifesting surprise.

"Where the foolish fellow has gone," he continued, "I do not know, but
he has disappeared from the Fort, nor has he left the slightest clue by
which he may be traced."

"Does Captain Headley know this?" she inquired, recollecting, that part
of the conversation that had passed between them the preceding day, in
reference to the succor that might have been afforded at the farm.

"He does. I made the report of Ronayne's absence to him personally, and
the doctor was summoned to state if he had seen any thing of him. He,
however, was as ignorant as a man, who had been drunk during the night,
and was not yet quite sober in the morning, could well be. The captain
was as much surprised as displeased, but further inquiry was delayed on
the sergeant of the guard coming up and announcing the near approach of
the boat containing the fishing-party."

"Tell me, dear Mr. Elmsley," said Miss Heywood, after a few moments of
seeming reflection; "what is your own opinion of the matter? How do
you account--or have you at all endeavored to account for Ronayne's
absence?"

"I can easily understand the cause," he replied, "but confound me if I
can attempt to divine the means he took to accomplish his object."

He then proceeded to relate the circumstances of his proposal to Captain
Headley--the abrupt refusal he had met with--his subsequent application
to himself to pass him out of the gate, and the final abandonment of his
request when he found that his acquiescence would seriously compromise
him, as officer of the guard.

"Noble Harry!" thought Miss Heywood--"your confusion, your vexation
of yesterday, arose from not being able to follow your own generous
impulses: but now I fully understand the resolve you secretly made--and
all for my sake. Do not think me very romantic," she said aloud to Mr.
Elmsley, "but really, Margaret, I cannot despair that all will yet, and
speedily, be well. The only fear I entertain is that the strict Captain
Headley may rebuke him in terms that will call up all the fire of
his nature, and induce a retort that may prove a source of serious
misunderstanding--unless, indeed, the greatness of the service rendered,
plead his justification."

"Now that we are on the subject, dear Miss Heywood," remarked Elmsley,
"let me once for all disabuse you of an impression which I fear you
entertain--or is it so? Do you think that Ronayne has had an opportunity
of joining the party at the farm?"

"Certainly, I do," she answered, gravely, "or why should he have gone
forth? Pray do not rob me of what little comfort, in expectation, I have
left."

"That he went forth madly and single-handed for the purpose, I can
believe--nay, I am sure of it; but I grieve to add that he has not been
seen there."

"This, indeed, is strange," she returned in faltering tones, and with
ill-disguised emotion, for, hitherto she had been sustained by the
belief that he was merely lingering behind the party, in order to
satisfy himself of facts, the detail of which could not fail to be
satisfactory to her ear. "How know you this?"

"I questioned Corporal Nixon, who commanded the party, and who apprised
me of Mr. Heywood's having been carried off by the Indians, for I
was deeply anxious, as you may presume, to know what had become of my
friend--and this far less even for my own sake than for yours."

"And his answer was?" and there was deep melancholy in the question.

"That no American uniform had come under his notice during his absence
from the Fort, save those of the party he commanded. These, as far as I
can recollect, were his precise words."

"Mr. Elmsley," said a sentry, who now appeared at the door of the
breakfast-parlor, "Captain Headley waits for you in the orderly room."

"Is Corporal Nixon there?" asked the lieutenant.

"He is, sir."

"Good, Dixon, I shall be there immediately."

"God bless you," he continued, to Miss Heywood, when the man had
departed. "We shall, perhaps, elicit from him, something that will throw
light upon the obscure part of this matter. Margaret, do not leave the
dear girl alone, but cheer up her spirits, and make her hope for the
best."

So saying, he shook her hand affectionately, pushed back his chair from
the table, and resuming his cap and sword, left the friends together,
promising to return as soon as the examination of the man should be
concluded.




CHAPTER IX.

Mr. Heywood's history may be told in a few words. He was the son of an
officer who had served in one of the American partizan corps, during the
Revolution, and had been killed at the attack made by General Green upon
the stronghold of Ninety-Six, in the South. At that time he was a mere
youth, and found himself a few years after, and at the age of eighteen,
without fortune, and wholly dependent upon his own resources. The war
being soon ended, his naturally enterprising disposition, added to great
physical strength, induced him to unite himself with one of the many
bands of adventurers that poured into the then, wilds of Kentucky,
where, within five years, and by dint of mere exertion and industry,
he amassed money enough to enable him to repair to Charleston, in South
Carolina, and espouse a lady of considerable landed property, with
whom he had formed a partial engagement, prior to his entering on that
adventurous life. The only fruit of this union was a daughter, and here,
as far as fortune was concerned, they might have enjoyed every comfort
in life, for Mrs. Heywood's property was principally situated in the
neighborhood, but her husband was of too restless a nature to content
himself with a sedentary life. He had at the outset embarked in
commerce--the experience of a few years, however, convincing him that
he was quite unsuited to such pursuits, he had the good sense to
abandon them before his affairs could be involved. He next attempted the
cultivation of the estate, but this failing to afford him the excitement
he craved, he suddenly took leave of his family, and placing every thing
under the control of a manager, once more obeyed the strong impulse,
which urged him again to Kentucky. Here, following as a passion the
occupation of his earlier years, he passed several seasons, scarcely
communicating during that period, with his amiable and gentle wife, for
whom, however, as well as for his daughter--now fifteen years of age,
and growing rapidly into womanhood--he was by no means wanting in
affection. Nor was his return home THEN purely a matter of choice.
Although neither quarrelsome nor dissipated in his habits, he had had
the misfortune to kill, in a duel, a young lawyer of good family who had
accompanied him to Kentucky, and had consequently fled. Great exertions
were made by the relatives of the deceased to have him arrested on the
plea that the duel, the result of a tavern dispute, had been unfair
on the part of the survivor. As there was some slight ground for this
charge, the fact of Mr. Heywood's flight afforded increased presumption
of his guilt, and such was the publicity given to the matter by his
enemies, that the rumor soon reached Charleston, and finally, the ears
of his family.

Revealing, in this extremity, his true position to his wife, Mr. Heywood
declared it to be his intention either to cross the sea, or to
bury himself forever in the remotest civilized portion of their own
continent, leaving her however, to the undisturbed possession of the
property she had brought him, which would of course descend to their
child.

But Mrs. Heywood would not listen to the proposal. Although she had much
to complain of, and to pain her, all recollection of the past faded from
her memory, when she beheld her husband in a position of danger, and
even in some degree of humiliation, for she was not ignorant that even
in the eyes of people not over scrupulous, ineffaceable infamy attaches
to the man, who, in a duel, aims with unfair deliberation at the life
of his opponent; and anxious to satisfy herself that such a stain rested
not on the father of her child, she conjured him to tell her if such
really was the case. He solemnly denied the fact, although he admitted
there were certain appearances against him, which, slight as they were,
his enemies had sought to deepen into proofs--and in the difficulty of
disproving these lay his chief embarrassment.

The tone--the manner--the whole demeanor of Mr. Heywood carried
conviction with his denial, and his wife at once expressed her
determination to renounce for his sake, all those local ties and
associations by which she had been surrounded from childhood, and follow
his fortunes, whithersoever they might lead. This, she persisted, she
was the more ready and willing to do, because her daughter's education
having been some months completed, under the best masters, there was
now no anxiety on her account, other than what might arise from her own
sense of the contemplated change.

Maria Heywood was accordingly summoned to the consultation--made
acquainted with her father's position, and the necessity for his instant
departure from that section of the country--and finally told that with
her it rested to decide, not only whether he should go alone, but if
they accompanied him, whether it should be to Europe, or to the Far
West.

"Rest with me to decide!" exclaimed the warm-hearted girl as she threw
herself into her mother's arms. "Oh, how good of you both thus to
consult me, whose duty it is to obey. But do not think that it is any
privation for me to leave this. I cannot claim the poor merit of the
sacrifice. I have no enjoyment in cities. Give me the solitude of
nature, books, and music, and I will live in a wigwam without regret."

"Dear enthusiast," said Mrs. Heywood, pressing her fondly to her heart;
"I knew well in what spirit would be your answer. You decide then for
the Far West?"

"Oh, yes, dear mamma! the Far West for me--no Europe. Give me the tall,
dense forests of our own noble land! I desire no other home--long have I
pictured to myself the vast lakes--the trackless woods and the boundless
prairies of that region of which I have read so much, and now," she
concluded, with exaltation, "my fondest wishes will be realized, and
I shall pass my life in the midst of them. But, dear papa, to what
particular spot do we go?"

"To Chicago, my noble girl! It is the remotest of our Western
possessions, and quite a new country. There I may hope to pass unheeded,
but how will you, dear Maria, endure being buried alive there, when so
many advantages await you here?"

"Only figuratively, papa," she replied with a pensive smile stealing
over her fine intellectual features. "Have no fear for me on that score,
for depend upon it, with so much natural beauty to interest, it will
be my own fault, if I suffer myself to be buried alive. What think you,
dear mamma?"

"I think with you, my child," replied Mrs. Heywood, looking approvingly
at her daughter, "that it is our duty, as it assuredly will be our
pleasure to accompany your father wherever he may go."

It was now arranged that Mr. Heywood, furnished with a considerable sum
of money in gold, should set out alone on the following night for
their new destination, and make the necessary preparations for their
reception, while his wife, through her agent, should endeavor to dispose
of the estate. As it would require some time for this, and as the
arrangements at Chicago could not well be completed within several
months, it was settled that they should meet at Albany, early in the
following autumn, where they should proceed to take possession of their
new abode. For his better security and freedom from interruption, Mr.
Heywood, while travelling, was to assume a feigned name, but his own was
to be resumed immediately after his arrival at Chicago, for neither he
nor his family could for a moment think of increasing the suspicion of
guilt, by continuing a name that was not their own; and, finally, as a
last measure of precaution, the free servants of the establishment, had,
with the exception of Catharine, whom they were to take with them, been
discharged, while a purchaser having fortunately been found, the slaves,
with the estate, were handed over to a new master, proverbial for his
kindness to that usually oppressed race. By these means they found
themselves provided with funds more than adequate to all their future
wants, the great bulk of the sum arising from the sale of the estate
being vested in two of the most stable banks of the Union.

With the money he took with him, carefully deposited in his saddlebags,
for he performed the whole of the journey on horseback, Mr. Heywood had
caused the cottage already described, to be built and furnished from
Detroit, in what, at that period, and so completely at the ultima thule
of American civilization, was considered a style of great luxury. He
had, however, shortly prior to his setting out for Albany, purchased
several hundred acres of land, about two miles up the Southern branch of
the Chicago, leaving instructions with Le Noir, whom he had engaged for
a long term of service, to erect upon it a log building and outhouses.
This he had been induced to do from that aching desire for physical
exertion which had been familiar to him from boyhood, and which he felt
could never be sufficiently indulged within the limited compass of the
little village itself--subjected as he must be to the observation of the
curious and the impertinent. He returned from Albany after a few months'
absence, in the autumn of 1809, bringing with him his friends who
occupied the cottage, while he himself obtained their assent that he
should inhabit the farm house, completed soon after his return. Here
he cut with his own hands, many a cord of the wood that his servants
floated down in rafts, not only for his own family, but to supply the
far more extensive wants of the garrison, with which, however, he
had little or no intercourse, beyond that resulting from his business
relations.

Such was the condition of things at the period at which our narrative
has opened. Maria Heywood had now been three years an occupant of the
cottage, and within that time solitude and habits of reflection had
greatly matured her mind, as years had given every womanly grace to her
person. The past had also tended much to form her character, upon which
the development of physical beauty so often depends. At her first debut
into society at Charleston, in her fourteenth year--an age that would
have been considered premature, but for the rapidity with which form
and intellect are known to ripen in that precocious climate--she had
received, but listened with indifference to the vapid compliments of men
whose shallowness she was not slow to detect, and whose homage conveyed
rather a fulsome tribute to her mere personal beauty, than a correct
appreciation of her heart and understanding. Not that it is to be
inferred that she prided herself unduly upon this latter, but because it
was by that standard of conduct chiefly, that she was enabled to judge
of the minds of those who evinced so imperfect a knowledge of the female
heart, when, emerging from the gaiety of girlhood, it passes into the
earnestness of womanly feeling.

But although cold--almost repellant to all who had poured their
ephemeral and seldom varying homage in her ear--no woman's heart ever
beat with more kind--more generous--more devoted sentiments, than her
own. Possessed of a vivid imagination, which the general quietude of her
demeanor in a great degree disowned, she had already sketched within her
glowing mind her own beau ideal, whose image was a talisman to deaden
her heart against the influence of these soulless realities.

With such sentiments as these had Maria Heywood cheerfully consented to
accompany her parents to that secluded spot, from which there was little
probability of a speedy return; but solitude, so far from weakening the
strong impressions that had entwined themselves around her heart, from
the moment of her emancipation from childhood, only served to invest
them with new power. The more her feelings repined--the more expanded
her intellect--the stronger became the sense of absence of one who could
enter into, and in some degree, give a direction to all her thoughts
and emotions--sharing with her the rich fruit that springs from the
consciousness of kindred associations of mind. But this was the secret
of her own heart--of the heart of one whose personal attractions were
well suited to the rich and overflowing character of her soul, and
who had now attained that age which gives eloquent expression to every
movement of the ripely moulded form.

Above the middle size, the figure of Maria Heywood was at once
gracefully and nobly formed. Her face, of a chiselled oval, was of
a delicate olive tint, which well harmonized with eyes of a lustrous
hazel, and hair of glossy raven black. A small mouth, bordered by lips
of coral fulness, disclosed, when she smiled, teeth white and even;
while a forehead, high for her sex, combined with a nose, somewhat more
aquiline than Grecian, to give dignity to a countenance that might,
otherwise, have exhibited a character of voluptuous beauty. Yet,
although her features, when lighted up by vivacity or emotion, were
radiant with intelligence; their expression when in repose was of a
pensive cast, that, contrasted with her general appearance, gave to it
a charm, addressed at once to sense and sentiment, of which it is
impossible, by description, to give an adequate idea. A dimpled cheek,
an arm, hand and foot, that might have served the statuary as a model,
completed a person which, without exaggeration, might be deemed almost,
if not wholly faultless.

The habits of Mr. Heywood were of that peculiar nature--his desire of
isolation from every thing that could be called society was so obvious,
that for the first year of the residence of the family at Chicago,
scarcely any intercourse had been maintained between the inmates of the
cottage and the officers' wives; and it was only on the occasion of
the commanding officer giving a party, to celebrate the anniversary of
American Independence on the following year, that the first approach
to an acquaintance had been made. It had been deemed by him a matter of
duty to invite all of the few American families that were settled in the
neighborhood, and of course the Heywoods were of the number. On the same
principle of conventionalism the invitation was accepted, and not slight
was the surprise of the ladies of the garrison, when they found in the
secluded occupants of the cottage, to whom they had assigned a doubtful
position in society, those to whom no effort of their own prejudice
could refuse that correct estimate, which quiet dignity without
ostentation, is ever certain to command.

At the announcement of the names of Mrs. and Miss Heywood, the somewhat
stately Mrs. Headley was disposed to receive with hauteur the inmates of
the cottage, but no sooner had Maria Heywood, accompanied by her gentle
mother, entered the apartment with the easy and composed air of one to
whom the drawing-room is familiar, than all her prejudices vanished, and
with a heart warming towards her, as though she, had been the cherished
sister of her love, she arose, pressed her hand affectionately and
welcomed her to the Fort with the sincerity of a generous and elevated
nature, anxious to repair its own wrong.

From that period, both by the wife of the commandant, and by Mrs.
Elmsley--the only two ladies in the garrison, Maria Heywood was as much
liked and courted, as she had previously been disregarded. To deny that
the noble girl did in some measure exult in this change, would be to
do wrong to the commendable pride of a woman, who feels that the unjust
prejudice which had cast a false shadow over her recent life, has
at last been removed, and that the value, of which she was modestly
conscious, began to be appreciated.

It was at this party that her acquaintance with the young Southerner had
commenced, and it is needless to trace the gradual rise of an attachment
which similarity of tastes had engendered. Naturally of an ardent
disposition, the youth had, as we have remarked on a previous occasion,
hitherto loved to indulge in the excitement of the wild sports of the
forest and the prairie, as the only present means of giving freedom
to that spirit of enterprise, so usually wedded to the generous and
unoccupied mind; but, from the period of his acquaintance with Maria
Heywood, a total change had come over his manner of life. The hunt--the
chase--and the cup that so often succeeded, were now almost wholly
abandoned, and his only delight NOW in excursions was to ride with her
across the prairie, or to pull her in his light skiff either along the
shores of the Michigan, or through the various branches of the river,
contemplating the beautiful Heavens by moonlight, and indulging in
speculations, which were not more the fruit of romantic temperament,
than of the intensity of Love. He had, moreover, four dogs trained
to draw her in a light sledge of his own device and construction, in
winter. In these rambles she was usually accompanied either by Mrs.
Headley, or by the wife of his friend and brother subaltern, and after
the invigorating exercise of the day, his evenings, whenever he could
absent himself from the Fort, were devoted within the cottage to books,
magic, and the far more endearing interchange of the resources of their
gifted minds. In summer there were other employments of a domestic
character, for in addition to their rides, walks, and excursions on the
water, both found ample scope for the indulgence of their partiality for
flowers, in the taste for practical horticulture possessed by Ronayne,
under whose care had grown the luxuriant beauty which every where
pervaded the little garden, and made it to the grateful girl a paradise
in miniature.

Thus had passed nearly two years, and insensibly, without a word of love
having been breathed, each felt all the security which a consciousness
of being beloved alone could yield, and that assurance imparted to their
manner and address when alone a confiding air, the more endearing from
the silence of their lips. But although no word uttered by themselves
proclaimed the existence of the secret and holy compact, not only were
they fully sensible of it themselves, but it was obvious to all--even to
the least observant of the garrison, and many were there, both among the
soldiers and their wives--by all of whom the young ensign was liked for
his openness and manliness of character--who expressed a fervent hope
that the beautiful and amiable Miss Heywood would soon become the bride
of their favorite officer. This it was, which had led the men of the
fishing-party to express in their way, their sorrow for the young lady,
when she should hear of the events at the farm-house, even while passing
their rude encomiums on the sweetness of disposition of her, whom they
already regarded as the wife of their young officer.

It was nearly noon, and Lieutenant Elmsley had not yet made his
appearance with the promised report. Maria Heywood had, after passing an
hour with her mother, returned to the breakfast-room, which it will be
recollected opened immediately upon the barrack-square. Her friend being
engaged with her domestic affairs, which every lady was at that period
in a measure compelled to superintend, she had thrown herself (still in
her morning dishabille) on a couch with a book in her hand, but with a
mind wholly distracted from the subject of its pages. After continuing
some time thus, a prey to nervous anxiety, as much the result of
Elmsley's long absence as of her former fears, the sound of the fifes
and drums fell startlingly, she knew not wherefore, upon her ear and
drew her to the door. The men were falling in, and in the course of a
few minutes the little line was formed a few yards to her left, with its
flanks resting on either range of building, so that the mess-room door,
then open, was distinctly visible in front. At the same moment, Captain
Headley and the lieutenant, followed by Corporal Nixon and the other
men of the fishing-party--Green only excepted--passed out of the orderly
room on her right, moved across, and took up their position in front of
the parade.

"God bless me, Maria, what is that, or is it his ghost!" suddenly and
unguardedly exclaimed Mrs. Elmsley, who had that moment joined her
friend--placing her arm at the same time round her waist.

"What do you mean, Mar--" but before Maria Heywood could complete her
sentence, all power of speech was taken from her in the emotion with
which she regarded what, after a momentary glance, met her view.

It was her lover, fully equipped for parade, and walking towards the
men with a calm and deliberate step, which seemed to evince total
unconsciousness that any thing unusual had happened.

"Here is a chair, my love--you really tremble as if the man was a ghost.
Now then, we shall have a scene between him and our amiable commandant."

"God forbid!" tremulously answered the almost bewildered girl; "I am the
cause of all."

"You! Stuff, Maria. What nonsense you talk, for a sensible girl. How
should you be the cause? but, positively, Ronayne can never have been
away from the Fort."

"Do you think so, Margaret?"

"I am sure of it. Only look at him. He is as spruce as if he had only
just come out of a band-box. But hush, not a word. There, that's a dear.
Lean your head against my shoulder. Don Bombastes speaks!"

"No sign of Mr. Ronayne yet?" demanded Captain Headley, his back turned
to the slowly advancing officer, whose proximity not one of the men
seemed inclined to announce, possibly because they feared rebuke for
insubordination. Mr. Elmsley, he pursued to that officer, who, acting
on a significant half-glance from his friend, was silent also as to his
approach. "Let a formal report of his absence without leave, be made to
me immediately after the parade has been dismissed."

"Nay, sir," said the ensign, in his ordinary voice and close in the ear
of the speaker, "not as having been absent from duty, I trust. I am
not aware that I have ever missed a guard or a parade yet, without your
leave."

At the first sound of his voice, the surprised commandant had turned
quickly round, and there encountered the usual deferential salute of his
subordinate.

"But, Mr. Ronayne, what means this? Where, sir, have you been? and, if
not absent, why thus late? Do you know that the men have already been
paraded, and that when required for your guard, you were not to be
found?"

"The fatigues of the night, Captain Headley," returned the young
officer, with some hesitation of manner; "the incessant watching--surely
there--"

"I knew he had not been out of the Fort. Courage, Maria! was audible to
the men who were nearest to the speaker, from Elmsley's doorway.

"I know what you would urge, Mr. Ronayne," remarked the captain; "you
would offer this in plea for your late appearance. I make all due
allowance in the matter; but, let me tell you, sir, that an officer
who thoroughly understands his duty, and consults the interests of
the service, would make light of these matters, in cases of strong
emergency."

"Poor Ronayne!" sighed Maria, to her friend. "This is terrible to his
proud spirit. In presence of the whole of the men, too!"

"I told you, my dear, there would be a row, but never fear--Elmsley
be there. See, he is looking significantly at us, as if to call our
attention to what is passing."

The lieutenant had been no less astonished than the captain, at the
unexpected appearance of Ronayne--even more so, indeed--because he had
observed, without, however, remarking on it, the cool and unhastened
pace at which he moved along the square, from the direction of the
mess-room. "Now it is coming," he thought, and half-murmured to himself,
as he saw the crimson gathering on his brow, during the last harsh
address of his superior.

"Captain Headley," said the young man, drawing himself up to his full
height, and somewhat elevating his voice, for he had remarked there were
other and dearer eyes upon him, than those immediately around. "I WILL
NOT be spoken to in this manner, before the men. If you think I have
been guilty of a breach of duty or of discipline, I am prepared to meet
your charges before the proper tribunal, but you shall not take the
liberty of thus addressing me in public parade. My sword, sir," and he
unbuckled it, and offered the handle, "is at, your disposal, but I deny
your further right."

"No, no, no!" shouted several men from the ranks

"No, no, no!" repeated almost every man of the fishing-party, in even
more energetic tones, while the commanding officer was glancing his eye
keenly and rapidly along the little line, to detect those who had set
the example of insubordination.

"Ugh! wah! good soger!" came from one of a small party of Indians in the
rear, as the disconcerted captain turned, frowningly, from the men in
front to those who had followed him from the orderly room, and now stood
grouped on the inner flank.

"What is the meaning of all this?" he cried, in a loud and angry voice.

"Am I braved in my own command, and by my own men? Mr. Elmsley, who are
these Indians, and how came they in?"

"They are a part of the encampment without, sir. There was no order
given against their admission this morning, besides it is Winnebeg, and
you have said that the gates of the Fort was to be open to him at all
hours."

"Ah! Winnebeg, my friend, how do you do. I did not know it was you or
your people. You know you are always welcome."

"How do, gubbernor," answered the chief, coming round from the rear of
the line, and taking the proffered hand--"'Spose not very angry now--him
good warrior--him good soger," and he pointed to the young subaltern.

"Ensign Ronayne is, no doubt, very sensible to your good opinion,"
remarked the captain, with evident pique; "but, Winnebeg, as I am sure
you never allow a white man to interfere with you, when you find fault
with your young chiefs, you must let me do the same."

"What find him fault for?" asked the chief, with some surprise; "brave
like a devil!"

"Captain Headley," interposed the ensign, with some impatience, "am I to
surrender my sword, or resume my duty?"

But the captain either could not, or would not give a direct answer.
"Can you give me a good reason, Mr. Ronayne, why I should not receive
your sword? Do you deny that you have been guilty of neglect of duty?"

"In what?" was the brief demand.

"In being absent from the Fort, without leave, sir."

"Indeed! To substantiate that, you must bring proofs, Captain Headley.
Who," and he looked around him, as if challenging his accuser, "pretends
to have seen me beyond these defences?"

The commandant was for some moments at a loss, for he had not
anticipated this difficulty. At length he resumed. "Was it not to be
absent without leave, that, when the guard was all ready to be marched
off, you were not to be found?"

"Had the guard been marched off, or the parade even formed, I should of
course, have come justly under your censure, Captain Headley; but it was
not so--you ordered the parade and guard-mounting for a later hour. I am
here at that hour."

"Hem!" returned the commandant, who was in some degree obliged to admit
the justice of the remark; "you defend yourself more in the spirit of a
lawyer, than of a soldier, Mr. Ronayne, but all this difficulty is soon
set at rest. I require but your simple denial that you have been absent
from the Fort, within the last twenty-four hours. That given, I shall be
satisfied."

"And that, sir," was the firm reply of the youth, "I am not disposed to
give. I am not much versed in military prudence, Captain Headley," he
pursued, after a few moments' pause, and in a tone of slight irony,
which that officer did not seem to perceive, "but at least sufficient to
induce me to reserve what I have to say for my defence. You have charged
me, sir, with having been absent from the Fort without leave; and it is
for you to prove that fact before a competent authority."

"March off your guard, Mr. Ronayne," was the abrupt rejoinder of the
commandant, for he liked not the continuation of a scene in which the
advantage seemed not to rest with him, but with the very party whom he
had sought to chasten; "Mr. Elmsley dismiss the parade. I had intended
promoting on the spot, Corporal Nixon and private Collins for their
conduct yesterday, but the gross insubordination I have just seen, has
caused me to change my mind. Neither shall have the rank intended, until
the guilty parties are named. I give until the hour of parade to-morrow
for their production, and if, by that time, their names are not laid
before me, no such promotion shall take place while I command the
garrison. Dismiss the men, sir. Here, Winnebeg, my good fellow, you have
come at a good moment. I have dispatches to send to Detroit this very
evening, and I know no one I can trust so well as yourself."

"Good," was the answer, "Winnebeg always ready to do him order--no angry
more, gubbernor, with young chief," pointing to the ensign, as he moved
off with his small guard. "Dam good soger--you see dis?" and he touched
his scalping-knife with his left hand, and looked very significantly.

"No, Winnebeg, not angry any more," was the reply; "but how do you know
him to be good soger? What has your scalping-knife to do with it?"

"Winnebeg know all," said the chief gravely, as he laid his heavy hand
upon the shoulder of the commandant, "but can't tell. Young chief say
no, and Winnebeg love young chief."

This remark forcibly struck Captain Headley, and brought back to his
mind, certain recollections. He, however, asked no further question, but
pointed, as they moved in the direction of his own apartments, towards
the sun, showing by his gesture that it was not too early to take the
mid-day dram.

"Where the devil have you been, man, and with what confounded impudence
you got through the scrape," was remarked at a distant part of the same
ground, and at the same moment with the conversation just given.

"How is Maria?" eagerly asked Ronayne. "When shall I see her?"

"Well enough to hear all that passed between you and Military Prudence,"
returned his friend; "but that is no answer to my question."

"There was nothing like braving it," answered the other evasively; "but
I say, Elmsley, I am devilish hungry, that breakfast you invited me to
last night is over long ago, of course." This last sentence was uttered
in a mock piteous tone.

"Just what I was going to speak about, my dear boy. We have had number
ONE, but before half an hour, we shall be seated at number TWO. When
your sergeant has relieved his sentries, come over and you will find a
piping hot breakfast."

"Will it be quite consistent with military prudence to leave my guard
so soon, after the lecture I have had?" remarked the ensign, with a
smile--"but, ah! I had nearly forgotten. Elmsley, I must say a few words
to you before I go in, and a better opportunity cannot be afforded than
while we are walking from this to your place. Just go then, and order
the breakfast as you propose, and return here. I shall have completed
the arrangements of the guard by that time, and all that I have to ask
of you, can be answered as we go along."

"I hope it is no great secret you have to impart," returned the
lieutenant, "for I am a sad hand at the mysterious, and shall be sure to
tell my wife, if I do not tell Maria."

"Not you--you will tell neither, but au revoir."




CHAPTER X.

At the moment when Ensign Ronayne removed his sword, with the intention
of handing it to his commanding officer, in anticipation of the arrest
which he expected, Maria Heywood, little conversant with those military
formalities, and apprehending from the previous high tone of her lover,
that something fearful was about to occur, had not absolutely fainted,
but become so agitated, that Mrs. Elmsley was induced to take her back
to the sofa, on which she had previously been reclining. As she was
leaving her chair, Mrs. Headley, whose attention had also been arrested
by the loud and angry voice of her husband, came from her own door
and joined the little group, anxiously inquiring the cause of the
disturbance without.

In a few brief sentences, and as correctly as she was able, Mrs. Elmsley
explained to her the circumstances, and although her attentive auditor
offered no very pointed remark, it was evident from her manner that
she deeply deplored that strict military punctilio, which had led the
husband whom she both loved and esteemed, to place himself in a false
position with his own force--for that it was a false position in some
degree, to provoke insubordination, and yet be without the power to
punish it, she had too much good sense not to perceive. She felt the
more annoyed, because she had on more than one occasion, observed that
there was not that unanimity between her husband and Lieutenant Elmsley,
which she conceived ought to exist between parties so circumstanced--a
commander of a remote post, and his second in command, on whose mutual
good understanding, not only the personal security of all might depend,
but the existence of those social relations, without which, their
isolated position involved all the unpleasantness of a voluntary
banishment. This had ever been to her a source of regret, and she had on
several occasions, although in the most delicate and unobtrusive manner,
hinted at the fact; but the man who doated upon her, and to whom, in all
other respects, her desire was law, evinced so much inflexibility in all
that appertained to military etiquette, that she had never ventured
to carry her allusions beyond the light commentary induced by casual
reference to the subject.

If then she lamented that unfortunate coolness, if not absolute
estrangement, which existed between Lieutenant Elmsley and her husband,
bow much more acutely did she feel the difficulty of the position now,
when the only other responsible officer of the garrison--and that a
young man of high feeling and accomplishment, whom she had ever liked
and admired--was fast being led into the same antagonism. Nay, what
rendered the matter more painful to her, was the fact of the latter
being the lover, or perhaps the affianced of a girl, whom she regarded
with a fervor not often felt by one woman for another, and for whose
interests she could have made every sacrifice, not affecting those of
her husband.

Such were the women who were now seated on the ottoman, engaged more
in their own reflections, than in conversation, when Lieutenant Elmsley
entered the room, announcing that the truant would shortly be in for
breakfast, which, he requested, might be instantly prepared in the usual
manner, only adding thereto a couple of bottles of claret.

"Ah! pardon me, Mrs. Headley," he added, somewhat stiffly, as his wife
left the room to issue the necessary orders, "I did not see you, or I
should have been rather more ceremonious in my domestic communications."

Mrs. Headley slightly colored. She was sensible that pique towards her
husband, and a belief that she wholly shared his sentiments, had induced
this rather sarcastic speech.

"By no means, Mr. Elmsley. I trust you will not put ME down as a
stranger, whatever your disposition to others."

There was a significance in the manner in which this was said, that
deeply touched the lieutenant, and his tone immediately changed.

"Then, I take you at your word," he said. "It is a long time since I
have had the pleasure of seeing you here, and you must positively join
our second breakfast. I know Captain Headley is engaged with Winnebeg,
whom he purposes sending off this evening with despatches, so that you
will not be missed for at least an hour. There, look at Miss Heywood's
imploring look--she pleads with her eyes in my favor, although there is
no chance, it appears, of getting a word from her lips."

"Nay," remarked the other, who had rallied from her late despondency,
on hearing the object of the breakfast; "you are very unreasonable, Mr.
Elmsley. You do not deserve that I should speak to you to-day, and I am
not quite sure that I shall."

"And pray, fair lady, why not? Wherein have I had the misfortune to
offend?"

"Ah! do you forget? You promised to bring me a certain report of certain
occurrences, and yet instead of that, not a word have you condescended
to address to me until this moment."

"I plead guilty," he answered deprecatingly, "but pray for a suspension
of sentence, until the return of one through whose influence I hope to
obtain your pardon! I go now," he whispered, "to lead him to your feet."

"Well, what is the great question you have to put to me?" said the
lieutenant to his friend, whom he had rejoined, and with whom he now
returned slowly towards the house--"one involving a case of life and
death it might be imagined, from the long face you put on when alluding
to the matter."

"Nay, not exactly that, but still involving a good deal. Tell me
frankly, Elmsley, has Miss Heywood heard any further account of the
events at the farm-house?"

"She has heard the report brought in by Nixon and the rest of the
fishing-party."

"And what was that, I pray you?" eagerly returned the ensign.

"That Mr. Heywood had been carried off by the Indians."

"From whom did she hear it?"

"It was I who told her, on the strength of what the corporal reported,
not only to myself, but to Captain Headley."

"You are a considerate fellow, Elmsley," said his friend, warmly
pressing his hand. "I thank you for that, and now that the great
question, as you term it, is answered, I am quite ready for the promised
breakfast. Did these fellows bring home any fish? I have a great fancy
for fish this morning."

"No; they brought home dead men," and the lieutenant looked searchingly
into the face of his companion, dwelling on every word, moreover, as if
he would convey that he (Ronayne), knew perfectly well what freight the
boat had brought to the Fort.

Further remark was prevented by their arrival at their destination--the
front-door being open, and revealing the little party within. The first
upon, whom the young officer's eye fell, was Mrs. Headley, of whose
intended presence, his friend had not thought of apprising him. Still
smarting under a keen sense of the severity of reproof of his commanding
officer, and falling into the common error of involving the wife in the
unamiability of the husband, Ronayne would have retired, even at the
risk of losing his breakfast, and, what was of far more moment to him,
of delaying his meeting with her to whom his every thought was devoted.
But when Mrs. Headley, who had remarked the movement, came forward to
the door, and gave him her hand with all the warmth and candor of her
noble nature, the pique vanished from his mind, and in an instant,
he, like Elmsley, evinced that devotion and regard for her, which her
fascinating manner could not fail to inspire.

The sense of constraint being thus banished by the only one whose
presence had occasioned it, the party, after a few minutes low
conversation between the lovers, sat down gaily to a meal--half-break
fast, half-luncheon, at which the most conspicuous actor was the lately
reprimanded ensign.

"Really, Mr. Ronayne, you must have met with a perfect chapter of
adventures during your absence last night. You have devoured the last
four fresh eggs, my cook says, there were in the house--three limbs of a
prairie fowl, and nearly the half of a young bear ham. Do, pray, tell
us where you have been to gain such an appetite? Indeed you must--I am
dying to know."

"My dear Mrs. Elmsley," he replied, coloring, "where should I have been
but in the Fort?"

"True! where SHOULD you have been, indeed; but this is not the point,
my hungry gentleman. Where WERE you? If I was, I KNOW WHO," she added,
significantly, "I should have my suspicions, unless, indeed, you have
already confessed within the few minutes you have been in the room."

"Nay, do not imagine I have so much influence over the truant, as to
compel him to the confessional," said Maria Heywood. "I assure you I am
quite as much in the dark as any one present."

"Come, Mr. Ronayne, recount your adventures," added Mrs. Headley.
"Recollect you are not on parade now, or exactly before the sternest
Court of Inquiry in the world, and should therefore, entertain no dread
of punishment on your self-conviction."

"Thus urged and encouraged," said the ensign, during one of the short
pauses of his knife and fork, which, in truth, he had handled as much
to study what he should say, as to satisfy his hunger; "who could resist
such pleading, were there really any thing to communicate; but I am
quite at a loss to conceive why so general an opinion seems to prevail
that I have been out of the Fort, and in quest of adventure. Why not
rather ascribe my tardiness at parade to some less flattering cause--a
head-ache--fatigue from night-watching--indolence, or even a little
entetement, arising from the denial of a very imprudent request I made
to Captain Headley last evening, to allow me the command of a detachment
for a particular purpose. Pardon me, I have made quite a speech, but
indeed you compel me."

"Let us drown this inquisition in a bumper of claret," interposed
Elmsley, coming to the assistance of his friend, whose motive for thus
parrying inquiry into his conduct, he thought he could divine. "I say,
my dear fellow, you may wish yourself a head-ache--fatigue--indolence,
or even a little entetement every morning of your life, if it is to be
cured in this manner. This is some of the most splendid Lafayette that
ever found its way into these western wilds. Look well at it. It is of
the clearest, the purest blood of the grape--taste it again. A bottle of
it will do you no harm if you had twenty guards in charge."

As he had desired and expected, the introduction of his remarks on
the wine proved not only a means of changing the conversation, but of
causing the ladies to withdraw from the table, round which they had been
sitting, rather to keep the young officer company, than to participate
in the repast themselves. Mrs. Headley was the first to move.

"Give me your arm, and see me home," she said carelessly, to Ronayne,
who now having finished his breakfast, had also risen. "Do not be
jealous, my dear Miss Heywood, but you will later know, if you do
not know already, that the wife of the commanding officer always
appropriates to herself, the handsomest unmarried young officer of the
regiment."

Both Ronayne and his betrothed were too quick of apprehension not to
perceive, under this light gaiety, a deep interest, and a desire to
convey to them both, that, if unhappily, there did not exist a cordial
understanding between her husband and the former, in matters purely
military, and in relation to subjects which should have no influence
over private life, she was by no means, a party to the disunion.

"Not very difficult to choose between the handsomest and the cleverest
of the unmarried officers of the garrison of Chicago," replied Maria
Heywood with an effort at cheerfulness; "therefore, Mr. Ronayne, I
advise you not to be too much elated by Mrs. Headley's compliment. After
that caution, I think you may be trusted with her."

"What a noble creature, and what a pity she has so cold and pompous a
husband," remarked Lieutenant Elmsley, as Mrs. Headley disappeared from
the door-way. "I never knew her so well as this morning, and upon my
word, Margaret, were both HE and YOU out of the way, I should be greatly
tempted to fall in love with her."

"You would act wisely if you did, George; I have always thought most
highly of her. She is, it is true, a little reserved in manner, but that
I am sure comes wholly from a certain restraint, imposed upon her by
her husband's formality of character. I say I am sure of this, for there
have been occasions when I have seen her exhibit a warmth of address, as
different from her general demeanor, as light is from shadow."

"Perhaps Headley has systematically drilled her into the particular
bearing that ought to be assumed by the wife of the commandant of a
garrison."

"Nay, George! that is not generous, but I know you are not serious in
what you say. You judge Mrs. Headley better, and that she is not a
woman to be so drilled. She has too much good sense, despite all
her partiality for her husband, to allow herself to be improperly
influenced, where her judgment condemns; and although, as his wife, she
must necessarily act in concert with him, it by no means follows that
she approves unreservedly, all that he does."

"You are a dear, noble creature yourself!" exclaimed the gratified
Elmsley, as he fondly embraced his wife. "There is nothing I love so
much as to see one woman warm in the defence of another--one so seldom
meets with that sort of thing. What, Maria, tears?"

"Yes--tears of pleasure!" she answered earnestly, as she held her
handkerchief to her eyes--"tears of joy to see so much generosity of
feeling among those whom I have so much reason to esteem and admire. You
are right," she pursued, addressing Mrs. Elmsley, "she is indeed a noble
woman. Perhaps I may justly be accused of a little partiality, for I
never can forget the frank and cordial proffers of friendship with which
she received me on the first night of my appearance here."

"Ha! Von Vottenberg to the rescue!" exclaimed Elmsley, with sudden
animation, as the stout figure of the former shaded the door-way. "Well,
doctor, have you passed away in the evaporation produced by fright, the
violent head-ache you were suffering from this morning? If not, try that
claret. It is capital stuff, and a tumbler of it will make up for the
breakfast you have lost."

"Faith, and there is no breakfast lost, that I can perceive," chuckled
the doctor, seating himself unceremoniously at the table, and commencing
upon the remains of the bear ham, and prairie hen.

"I fear the tea and coffee are cold," said Mrs. Elmsley; "let me get
some hot for you?"

"By no means, my dear Mrs. Elmsley, I could not think of such slops with
generous claret at my elbow. Nay, do not look offended. Your tea and
coffee are always of the best, but they do not just now, suit my taste.
Miss Heywood, how do you do this morning? How is your gentle mother?
I have called expressly to see her. Elmsley, where is that runaway,
Ronayne?"

And where indeed was he? They had not walked more than three or four
paces, when Mrs. Headley, after some little hesitation, addressed him
thus:--

"Mr. Ronayne, notwithstanding your evident desire to conceal the fact,
I can plainly see that you were not within the Fort last night. I can
fully comprehend that your motive for absenting yourself, has been
praiseworthy, but you must also admit that the reproof you met with this
morning, was not altogether undeserved. Pray do not start or look grave,
for, believe me, I am speaking to you only as a friend--indeed it was to
have the opportunity of convincing you that I am such, that I asked you
to escort me."

"Really, Mrs. Headley," interrupted the young officer, little divining
to what all this was to tend, and feeling not altogether at his ease,
from the abruptness with which the subject had been introduced, "I feel
as I ought, the interest you profess to take in me, but how is that
connected either with my asserted absence, or the reproof it entailed?"

"It is so far connected with it, that I wish to point out the means by
which any unpleasant result may be avoided!"

"Unpleasant result! Mrs. Headley?"

"Yes, unpleasant result, for I have too good an opinion of you not
to believe that any thing tending to destroy the harmony of our very
limited society, would be considered such by you."

"I am all attention, Madam. Pray, proceed."

"The pithiness of your manner does not afford me much encouragement yet
I will not be diverted from my purpose, even by that. You have had the
Commandant's lecture," she continued, with an attempt at pleasantry,
"and now you must prepare yourself for (pardon the coinage of the term)
that of the Commandantess."

"The plot thickens," said the ensign, somewhat sharply--"both the
husband and the wife. Jupiter Tonans and Juno the Superb in judgment
upon poor me in succession. Ah! that is too bad. But seriously, Mrs.
Headley, I shall receive with all due humility, whatever castigation you
may choose to inflict."

"No castigation I assure you, Ronayne, but wholesome advice from one,
who, recollect, is nearly old enough to be your mother. However, you
shall hear and then decide for yourself."

"Although," she pursued, after a short pause, "we women are supposed to
know nothing of those matters, it would be difficult, in a small place
like this, to be ignorant of what is going on. Hence it is that I have
long since remarked, with pain and sorrow, the little animosity which
exists between Headley and yourself--(I will not introduce Mr. Elmsley's
name, because what I have to say has no immediate reference to him), and
the almost daily widening breach. Now, Ronayne, I would appeal to your
reason. Place yourself for a moment in my husband's position. Consider
his years, nearly double your own--his great responsibility and the
peculiar school of discipline in which he has been brought up. Place
yourself, I repeat, in his position, and decide what would be your
sentiments if, in the conscientious discharge of your duty, you thought
yourself thwarted by those very men--much your juniors both in years and
military experience--on whose co-operation you had every fair reason to
rely."

"You have, my dear Mrs. Headley, put the case forcibly yet simply."
returned the ensign, who had listened with marked deference to the whole
of her remonstrance. "In such a case I should feel no slight annoyance,
but why imagine that I have sought to thwart Captain Headley?"

"Was it not apparently to thwart him--bear in mind I speak to you
dispassionately and as a friend--to refuse in the presence of the whole
garrison this morning to account for your absence of last night, which
might have been easily explained, had you been so disposed?"

"But, my dear Mrs. Headley, why is it persisted in, that I was
absent--and even if such were the case, might not I have had a good
reason for refusing to commit myself by the avowal."

"Admitting this, could you have maintained your position without, in a
measure, setting his authority at defiance--thus encouraging the men to
do the same. Was this right, I ask? Was this officer-like?"

"Well, no, perhaps not. I blush not to make the admission to YOU, for
indeed, there is no resisting so bewitching a master in petticoats. Yet,
what would you have me do?"

"Ah, now, I begin to entertain some hope of you," she replied, in a
gayer tone, placing her hand at the same time familiarly on his shoulder
and looking approvingly in his face. "Ronayne, you are engaged--perhaps
will shortly become the husband of the noble girl, whom I love even as
though she were my own daughter--yes," she repeated energetically, as
she felt his grateful pressure of her hand, "even as though she were
my own daughter--nay, you know I like yourself for your open, although
rather too impetuous character. Do you then think that feeling this it
can be any other than a source of deep pain and vexation to me, to see
those in whom I feel so much interest, alienated from each other--in
some degree even mutually hating and hated?"

"Yet, what would you have me to do, my dear Mrs. Headley? Some
concession I suppose, must be made. Any thing in honor and in reason
will I do for your sake," returned the young officer, deeply touched by
her manner and language.

"This I wish you to do, Ronayne. Take the first favorable opportunity,
either while on guard to-day, or when relieved to-morrow, to see Headley
privately, and by such language as you well know how to use, remove
the unfavorable impression you have left on his mind--depend upon
it, although extremely cold and inflexible when apparently braved, my
husband has a warm and generous--aye, a noble heart, and will freely
grant what is frankly solicited. Bear in mind, moreover, Ronayne, that
it is no humiliation to admit error when conscious of having committed
it; and if this be so in the social relations of life, how much less
derogatory is it in a military sense."

"Say no more, dearest Mrs. Headley, since it is your wish, I will go, no
matter what the reception I encounter; and any further rebuke I may meet
with, I will cheerfully endure for your sake."

"Now then, Ronayne, you are once more yourself, the generous,
high-minded boy, in whom I delighted, even as a mother would delight
in her son, when you first arrived here about three years ago. Yet,
recollect that not only _I_ shall be gratified and benefitted by this,
but YOU and YOURS. Let but this unhappy discord terminate, and we shall
then be what soldiers and those connected with them, ought ever to
be--one undivided family. And now, for the present, farewell."

"God bless you!" fervently exclaimed the ensign, as he took his leave
of the graceful and noble wife of the commanding officer, with emotions
that fully testified the effect produced upon him by her generous
confidence and candor.

From the frequent reference made by Mrs. Headley to her own riper years,
one might have been induced to consider her rather in the decline of
life; but such was not the case. Her splendid and matronly figure might
indeed have impressed the superficial observer with the belief that she
had numbered more than forty summers, but the unchained and luxuriant
hair--the white, even and perfect teeth--the rich, full lip, and
unwrinkled brow, and smooth and brilliant cheek, would not have
permitted the woman most jealous of her charms, could such have been
found, to pronounce her more than six-and-thirty, which was, indeed, her
age. It was a source of gratification to her to consider and represent
herself as older than she really was; and if she had any peculiarity--a
weakness it could not be called--it was that of loving to look upon
those younger persons who claimed a place in her friendship and esteem,
as though she actually stood in the maternal relation to them. This
may have, in some degree, arisen from the fact of her having ever been
childless herself.

As Ronayne approached Elmsley's house on his return, a remarkably
handsome and noble-looking Indian--quite a youth--was leaning against
the frame of the door, and according to the simple habit of his race,
indulging his curiosity by looking at, and admiring all that he beheld
within. Elmsley himself had gone out, but Von Vottenberg, still seated
at the breakfast-table, was discussing, with its remains, the now nearly
finished claret, while Mrs. Elmsley and Maria Heywood were seated on
the sofa opposite to the door, passing their whispered remarks on the
Indian, whose softened dark glances occasionally fell with intense
admiration on the former, when he fancied the act unseen, but as
instantly were withdrawn, when he perceived that it was observed.

Mrs. Elmsley was endeavoring to dissipate the dejection of her friend
by rallying her, as the young officer came to the door, on the evidently
new conquest she had made. The Indian turned to look at the intruder
upon his pleasant musings, when a "wah!" expressive of deep satisfaction
escaped him, and at the same moment, Ronayne grasped, and cordially
shook his hand.

"Ha! there is his formidable rival, and seemingly his friend," whispered
Mrs. Elmsley, in the ear of Maria--"handsome fellows, both of them, so
much so, that were I single, like you, I should have some difficulty in
choosing between them."

As she uttered these words, a sharp and unaccountable pang, sudden and
fleeting as electricity, shot through the frame of her friend. The blood
suddenly receded from her cheek, and then rapidly returning, suffused it
with a burning heat.

"What is the matter, my love? Are you ill, you looked so pale just now?"
tenderly inquired Mrs. Elmsley.

"I cannot account for what I experienced. It was a feeling different
from any I had ever known before--a strange, wild, and inexplicable
dread of I know not what. But it has passed away. Take no notice of it,
dear, before Ronayne."

"Mrs. Elmsley," said the latter, almost using force to induce the
modest-looking young Indian to enter the room, "will you allow me first
to introduce my friend Waunangee to you, and then to give him a glass
of claret? Forgive the liberty I take, but I confess a good deal of
obligation to him, and would fain do the civil in return."

"Indeed! what a set speech for a glass of wine. Give it to him by all
means, if it is only for his beautiful eyes--that is to say, if the
doctor has left any--or stay, I will get another bottle."

"By no means," returned the young officer, "this unconscionable man has
just left about half a tumbler foil, and I do not intend he shall have
more. Waunangee," he pursued, after filling and presenting him with the
glass, "that is the lady of the house," pointing to Mrs. Elmsley, "you
must drink to her health."

"And dis you handsome squaw," remarked the Indian, a moment or two after
having tossed off the wine, which quickly circulated through his veins.
"Dis you wife!" he repeated, throwing his expressive eyes upon Miss
Heywood, while a rich glow lighted up his dark, but finely formed
features.

"Hush!" said Ronayne, making a sign to intimate that he was not to
indulge in such observations.

But even the small quantity of wine he had taken was acting potently on
the fast animating Indian. "Dis no you squaw--dis Waunangee squaw," he
said, with strong excitement of manner. "Waunangee, see him beautiful,
Waunangee got warm heart--love him very much!"

"Tolerably well for a modest youth!" exclaimed the laughing Mrs.
Elmsley. "Who would have thought that one with those soft black eyes,
more fitted for a woman than a man, would hazard so glowing a speech,
after an acquaintance of barely five minutes?"

"Who says Chicago doesn't abound in adventure?" sneered Von Vottenberg,
as he arose and passed into the apartment of his patient. "I shall
certainly write a book about this when I get back into the civilized
world, and entitle it 'The Loves of the Handsome Waunangee, and the
Beautiful American.'"

"You had better write 'The Loves of the Fat Von Vottenberg, and his
Mistress, Whisky Punch,'" remarked Ronayne, peevishly, for in spite of
himself, he felt annoyed at an observation, which he thought delicacy
might have spared. "Come, Waunangee, my good friend, we must go."

But the young Indian was not so easily led. "Waunangee have him first
dis nice squaw," he said, with all that show of dogged obstinacy which
so usually distinguishes his race, when under the influence of liquor,
and bent upon the attainment of a particular object.

"Hear me, Waunangee," replied the other, placing his hand upon
his shoulder, and now, that Mrs. Elmsley only was present with his
affianced, feeling less scruple in explaining to the young savage--"that
is my squaw--my wife."

"Why you no tell him so?" asked the youth, gravely, and with an air of
reproach, while, at the same time, he fixed his soft and melancholy eyes
upon Miss Heywood. "Waunangee love officer's squaw--but Waunangee good
heart. Shake him hand, my friend," he continued, walking up to her, and
tendering his own, while, singular as it seemed to all, a tear dimmed
his eye, and stole down his cheek. "'Spose no Waunangee wife--you
Waunangee's friend?"

The generous but trembling girl, shook cordially the hand that rested
in her own, and assured the youth, in a way easily intelligible to
him, that, as the friend of her husband, and she blushed deeply, as the
moment afterwards she became sensible she had used a word, she could not
but feel to be premature, she would always regard him with friendship
and esteem.

"What a nice little scene we might get up out of this morning's
adventure," said the ever gay Mrs. Elmsley, as Waunangee, after having
shaken hands with herself, departed with Ronayne. "Really, my dear,
he is a fine looking, and certainly a warm-hearted fellow, that
Wau--Wan--what's his name, Maria?"

"Waunangee. I know not how it is, Margaret, or why--I should attach so
much importance to the thing, but if ever those glimpses of the future,
called presentiments, had foundation in truth, that young Indian is
destined to exercise some sort of influence over my fate."

"You do not mean that he is to supplant Ronayne, I hope," returned her
friend, trying to laugh her oat of the serious mood, in which she seemed
so much inclined to indulge.

"How can you speak so, Margaret? No, my presentiment is of a different
character. But it is very foolish and silly to allow the feeling to
weigh with me. I will try to think more rationally. Say nothing of this,
however, and least of all to Ronayne."

"Not a word, dearest. Good bye for the present. I must look after the
dinner. You know who dines with us."

A look expressive of the deep sense she entertained of the consideration
of her friend, was the only commentary of Miss Heywood, as she passed
into her mother's apartment.




CHAPTER XI.

It was now the middle of May. A month had elapsed since the events
detailed in the preceding chapters. The recollection of the outrage at
Heywood's farm, committed early in April was fast dying away, save
in the bosoms of those more immediately interested in the fate of its
proprietor, and apprehensions of a repetition of similar atrocities
had, in a great measure, ceased. A better understanding between the
commanding officer and his subordinates--the result of a long private
interview, which Ensign Ronayne had had with the former, on the morning
after his promise to Mrs. Headley, followed by an apology on parade
that day, had arisen. Corporal Nixon was now Sergeant Nixon--Collins had
succeeded to him, and Le Noir and the boy--Catholic and Protestant--had
been buried in one grave. Ephraim Giles filled the office of factotum
to Von Vottenberg, whose love of whisky punch, was, if possible, on the
increase. Winnebeg, the bearer of confidential despatches, announcing
the hostile disposition and acts of certain of the Winnebagoes, had not
returned, and Waunangee, who, recovered from the fumes of the claret,
had, in an earnest manner, expressed to Ronayne contrition for
the liberty he had taken with Miss Heywood, had departed from the
neighborhood, no one knew whither. Harmony, in a word, had been some
days restored in the Fort, and the only thing that detracted from the
general contentment, was the uncertainty attending the fate of Mr.
Heywood--regretted less, however, for his own sake, than for that of
his amiable daughter, who vainly sought to conceal from her friends,
the anxiety induced by an absence, the duration of which it was utterly
impossible to divine. As for Mrs. Heywood, she was still in ignorance,
so well had things been managed by the Elmsleys, that any of the fearful
scenes had occurred. She still believed her husband to be at the farm.

But, as it was not likely she could much longer remain in ignorance of
what had been the subject of conversation with every one around her,
it was advised by Von Vottenberg, that, as the warmth of spring was now
fully developed, and all dread of the Indians resuming their hostile
visit, at an end, she should be conveyed back to the cottage, the pure
air around which, was much more likely to improve her health, than
the confined atmosphere of the Fort. She had accordingly been removed
thither early in May, accompanied by her daughter and Catherine.

Ronayne, of course, become once more a daily visitor, and soon beneath
his hand, the garden began again to assume the beautiful garb it had
worn at that season, for the last two years. The interviews of the
lovers here, freed from the restraints imposed upon them while in the
Fort, had resumed that fervent character which had marked them on the
afternoon of the day when they so solemnly interchanged their vows of
undying faith. They now no longer merely looked their love. They spoke
of it--drank in the sweet avowal from each others lips, and luxuriated
in the sweet pleasure it imparted. They were as the whole world to each
other, and although language could not convey a warmer expression of
their feelings, than had already gone forth from their lips, still was
the repetition replete with a sweetness that never palled upon the ear.
Like the man who never tires of gazing upon his gold, so did they
never tire of the treasures of the expressed love, that daily grew more
intense in their hearts. And yet, notwithstanding this utter devotedness
of soul--notwithstanding her flattering heart confessed in secret the
fullest realization of those dreams which had filled and sustained her
in early girlhood--albeit the assurance the felt that, in Ronayne, she
had found the impersonation of the imaginings of her maturer life, still
whenever he urged her in glowing language to name the day when she would
become his wife, she evaded an answer, not from caprice, but because she
would not bring to him a heart clouded by the slightest tinge of that
anxiety with which ignorance of her father's fate, could not fail to
shade it. A painful circumstance which happened about that period, at
length, however, brought affairs to a crisis.

It was a lovely evening towards the close of May, and after a somewhat
sultry morning which had been devoted to a ride on horseback along the
lakeshore--Mrs. Headley and Mrs. Elmsley, who had accompanied them,
having returned home, that Ronayne and his betrothed sat in the little
summer-house already described. Mrs. Heywood who had been so far
recovered from her weakness by the change of air, as to take slight
exercise in the garden, supported by her daughter, and the young
officer, had on this occasion expressed a wish to join them, in order
that she might inhale the soft breeze that blew from the south, and
enjoy once more the scenery of the long reach of the river, which wound
its serpentine course from the direction of the farm. To this desire no
other objection was offered, than what was suggested by her companions,
from an apprehension that the fatigue of the ascent would be too great
for her. She, however, persisted in her wish, declaring that she felt
herself quite strong enough--an assertion for which her returning color
gave some evidence. They ceased to oppose her. It was the first time
the invalid had been in the summer-house, since the same period the
preceding spring, and naturally associating the recollection of her
husband, with the familiar objects in the distance, she took her
daughter's hand, and said in a low and husky voice, that proved how much
she had overrated her own strength:

"How is it, Maria, my love, that we have seen nothing of your father,
lately? I have never known him, since we have been in this part of the
country, to be so long absent from us at one time."

"Nay, dear mamma," returned the pained girl, the tears starting to her
eyes, in spite of her efforts to restrain them, "I do not exactly know
what can detain him. Perhaps he is not at the farm," and here her tears
forced their way--"you know, dearest mamma, that he is very fond of long
hunting excursions."

"Yes, but, my child, why do you weep? Surely there is nothing in that to
produce such emotion. He will soon be back again."

"Oh! yes, I hope so. Forgive me, my dear mamma, but I have a very bad
head-ache, and never felt more nervous than I do this evening. Perhaps
it is the effect of my ride in the heat of the sun. Shall we go on. It
is nearly sunset, and I dread your being exposed to the night-air."

"Oh! it is so delicious," softly returned the invalid; "I feel as if I
had not lived for the last twelve months, until now. Only a little
while longer, shall I not, Mr. Ronayne? Perhaps I may never have an
opportunity of ascending to this summer-house again."

During this short conversation, trifling in itself, but conveying, under
the circumstances, so much subject for deep and painful reflections,
the young officer had evinced much restlessness of manner, yet without
interposing any other remark than to join Miss Heywood's entreaties that
her mother would suffer herself to be conducted home, before the dew
should begin to fall. In order, moreover, as much as possible to leave
them uninterrupted in the indulgence of their feelings, he had from the
first risen, and stood with his back to them, within the entrance of the
summer house, and was now, with a view to drown their conversation to
his own ear, whistling to Loup Garou, sitting on his haunches outside
the garden-gate, looking fixedly at him.

Touched by the account he had received of the fidelity of the dog, he,
had, with the consent of Sergeant Nixon, who was glad to secure for his
favorite so kind a protector, become possessed of him from the moment of
his return home; and time, which had in some degree blunted the sorrow
of the animal for the loss of one master, rendered equally keen his
instinct of attachment for the other. Within the month he had been his,
every care had been taken by Ronayne himself, as well as by his servant,
to wean the mourner from the grave of Le Noir, on which, for the first
few days, he had lain, absorbed in grief--refusing all food, until,
yielding at length to the voice of kindness, his memory of the past
seemed to have faded wholly away.

Ronayne, however, from a fear of exciting unpleasant recollections
in those who were not ignorant of the former position of the dog, had
endeavoured as much as possible, to prevent him from crossing the river
during his visits to the cottage; but, within the last four or five
days, Loup Garou would not thus be kept back, and when expelled from the
boat, had swam across, taking up his station at the gate, beyond which,
however, he did not presume to pass, as if sensible that the delicate
parterres within, were interdicted ground, and there generally lay
squatted with his nose resting on the grass, between his outstretched
fore-paws, until his master came forth on his return home.

The unexpected and encouraging whistle of the latter on this occasion,
which had been given in pure unconsciousness, caused him to prick
his ears, and uttering a sharp cry, he sprang over the gate, bounding
rapidly towards the eminence on which his master stood. About half-way
between its base and the summit, there was a beautiful rose-bush which
had been planted by Ronayne, and from which he had plucked two flowers,
for the mother and daughter, during the ascent, and presented with
a hand that was observed by Maria Heywood to tremble, and a cheek
unwontedly pale.

On arriving opposite the rose-tree, the animal suddenly stopped, and
putting his nose to the ground close under it, and sniffing almost
furiously, uttered a prolonged and melancholy howl, while, with his
fore-paws he began to scratch up the loose earth around, regardless of
the voice of his master, who renewed his whistling, and called upon him
almost angrily to desist.

Alarmed at this perseverance of action, the ensign descended to the
spot--laid hands on Loup Garou, and sought to remove him, but the
animal, strong of neck--full in the chest--and on the present occasion,
under the influence of furious impulse, was not to be restrained.

The moaning of the dog--the descent-the corrective voice of his master,
and the seeming struggle of both to attain opposite purposes, naturally
attracted the attention of those above, and they both rose and neared
to the doorway Ronayne had so recently quitted. Their horror may well
be imagined when, on looking down, they found that the dog had
already uncovered a human body, which, though disfigured and partially
decomposed, filial and conjugal affection too clearly distinguished as
the father of the one, the husband of the other!

Uttering a feeble shriek, Mrs. Heywood fell insensible within the
threshold of the summer-house, while her daughter, less overwhelmed, but
with feelings impossible to describe, stooped and chafed her mother's
temples, and notwithstanding a horrid thought, which, despite her own
will, shot through her mind, that the man to whom she had given every
affection of her heart, was in some degree connected with this horrid
spectacle, she called vehemently to him for assistance.

The situation of the perplexed officer was scarcely less painful. On
the one hand, feeling all the necessity of retaining his grasp of Loup
Garou, as the only means of preventing him from further uncovering of
the body--on the other, urged by the summons of her, whom he knew, from
her very manner, to be in possession of this fearful secret, his mind
become a perfect chaos, and large drops of perspiration streamed from
his brow. In this irritating dilemma, a sudden transport of rage took
possession of his heart, and seizing Loup Garou with both his hands, he
so compressed them around his throat, that the dog, already exhausted
with his exertions, was half-strangled before being raised with a
frantic effort, and dashed with violence upon the body he had so
unhappily been instrumental in discovering.

Scarcely had this been done--a low moaning from Loup Garou, as if
reproaching him for the act, alone denoting that he breathed, when the
ensign flew up the steps of the summer-house, and regardless of the
involuntary half-shudder of his betrothed, as he approached, caught the
insensible invalid in his arms, and so carrying her, that her eyes, if
she should open them, could not encounter the horrid spectacle below,
again rapidly descended, and hurried towards the house. Maria Heywood,
on passing the rose-tree so recently prized, but now so abhorrent to her
sight, could not resist a strong impulse to look upon the mysteries so
strangely unveiled, but although the twilight had not yet passed away,
nothing could be seen but the displaced earth, and stretched over the
excavation he himself had made, the motionless body of the dog.

Sick at heart, and with wild and unconnected images floating through her
heated brain, she followed almost mechanically to the cottage.

This was no time for ceremony. When answering the loud ring, Catherine
appeared hurriedly at the door, Ronayne bore his inanimate charge into
her bedroom, and in silence and deep grief, sought, by every means in
his power, to restore her. But all his efforts proving vain, he, in a
state of mind difficult to describe, tore a leaf from his pocket-book,
wrote a few hurried lines to Elmsley, requesting him to allow his
wife to come over immediately with Von Vottenberg, and when they had
departed, to call upon Captain Headley and explain the cause of his
absence. This note he gave to Catherine, with instructions to cross in
the boat which was waiting for himself, and to return with Mrs. Elmsley,
or if she did not come, with the doctor.

When left together, beside the insensible body of Mrs. Heywood, the
lovers experienced for the first time, a feeling of restraint, for in
the hearts of both, were passing thoughts which neither seemed desirous
of imparting. But, Maria Heywood, gentle as she was, was not of a
character long to endure the state of uncertainty under which she
labored. The strange wild apprehensions which had arisen, she knew
not how or why, had so preyed upon her quiet, that suspense became
intolerable, and at length, addressing her lover in a voice, never more
melancholy or touching than at that moment, and looking at him with
an expression of deep sadness, while the large tears trickled down her
cheeks.

"Ronayne, you know--you must have known--your whole conduct throughout
this affair, proves you must have known of my poor father's death, and
of his rude--almost insulting burial in that fatal spot. How he came
hither, you best can tell. Oh! Harry, it is very cruel thus to have
reposed the confidence of the entire soul, and then to have been
disappointed. This cruel discovery will be the means of destroying my
peace forever, unless you give the explanation which alone can restore
our confidence in each other--yet how can I, with these glaring truths
before my eyes, expect that you will?"

"Insulting burial! oh, Maria, I feel that I never loved you more than
now when you would break my heart with this unkindness." He bent his
head upon the same pillow, upon which reclined the unconscious head of
the mother of the woman whom he so ardently loved, and wept tears of
bitterness and sorrow.

"I cannot stand this, Ronayne, dear Ronayne, whatever you be--whatever
you may have done, I love you with all the ardor of the most devoted
soul! But," she continued, more composedly, "forgive me, if my feelings
and my judgment are at issue. One question I must ask, cost what it may,
for I cannot longer endure this agony of suspense--no, for your sake
I cannot endure it. How is it that you have always made a secret--a
mystery even to me, of the motive of your absence on that fatal night
succeeding the massacre at the firm."

"Dear Maria. I can well forgive the question in the excitement which
must have been produced in you by the startling events of this evening."

"Ronayne," she mournfully interrupted--"your sudden interference with
the dog--your struggle with him--nay, your very manner of speaking now,
convince me that you knew my father lay buried beneath that rose-tree.
In candor, answer me. Yes or no."

"And, admitting I had had that knowledge, Maria--can you imagine no good
reason for my forbearing all allusion to the subject?"

"Yet, why conceal the fact from one who had supposed you could have
no concealment from her--and then again, how am I to reconcile the
circumstance of my poor father having been reported to be a prisoner--a
report which, sanctioned by yourself, left me not utterly hopeless--and
the fact of his burial here--evidently with your knowledge."

"Maria," returned Ronayne, impressively, and with an expression of much
pain at the remark, "as I have already said, I can make every allowance,
in recollection of the painful scene of which I have, in some degree,
been the cause, but is it generous--is it quite appreciating my
character and my feelings towards yourself, to doubt that I had intended
from the first, and at a fitting moment, to explain every thing to you?"

Again was the confidence of the generous girl established, and with
almost passionate warmth, she exclaimed. "Oh! Ronayne, forgive--forgive
me, but this melancholy--this harrowing occurrence has made me so far
not myself--that I almost hate myself. Tell me, dear Ronayne, do you
forgive me?"

"Yes, from the bottom of my soul, do I forgive you, and yet, dearest,
there is nothing to forgive, for how could it be otherwise, than that
your poor and sorely tried heart should be subjected to wild imaginings
inexplicable to yourself. The ordeal to which you have been submitted,
is a severe one, but I am sure your oppressed heart will be greatly
lightened when you shall have been in possession of the truth connected
with this most melancholy affair--your regard for me, will if possible,
be even greater than before. Pardon this seeming vanity. I make the
assertion because I know it will not a little console you, under this
terrible infliction."

It was a strange sight, that of these lovers, hitherto so devoted and
now only temporarily half-doubting, talking of the fate of one parent
while leaning over the apparent death-bed of the other.

"Ronayne, dear Ronayne, I am satisfied--fully, wholly satisfied, and
as you observe, the assurance which you have now given me, will form my
chief support under this double affliction," and she pointed, weeping,
to her mother, whose scarcely perceptible breathing alone attested that
she lived.

"Maria," he said tenderly and gravely, as he took her hand in his, over
the invalid--"the hour of your promise is come--the fate of your father
is known--would that it had been less abruptly revealed--and were other
inducement to keep it wanting, is it not to be found here? But at this
moment I will ask nothing which you may feel reluctance in granting.
To-morrow we will speak of this again--to-morrow you shall know how much
I have sought--how much I have risked--to soften the pang which I knew
would, soon or late be inflicted on her whom I so love."

"Generous--kind--considerate Ronayne, I can fully understand you, yet,
ah! what must you think of me, who could for a moment doubt your power
to explain every act of your life, however ambiguous in appearance. But
what is that paper you have taken from your pocket-book?"

"One that I have long designed for your perusal. It was written a few
days after the events at the farm, and I have since then frequently
determined to place it in your hands in order that, in the sacredness of
solitude, you might indulge in the bitter tears its few pages will wring
from you; but too selfish--yes, selfish, and severely am I punished for
it--to suffer the joy of the hour to be broken in upon by sadness, I
have hitherto delayed putting you in possession of that which, if only
communicated a day earlier, would have spared us this painful scene. But
I hear footsteps approaching. They must be those of Mrs. Elmsley and the
doctor, with Catherine. Be not surprised, dearest, if I leave you soon
after they enter, for I have something to do this evening which will
require my presence in the Fort. Early in the morning, however, I shall
be here."

"I understand well what demands your presence elsewhere," she returned
with a look of deep gratitude and love. "Oh! Ronayne, whatever may
happen," and the tears streamed down her pale face, as she pointed to
her mother--"hear me declare that whatever you may ask of me one month
hence, I shall not consider myself justified in refusing."

Scarcely had he time to impress upon her lips his deep but chastened
sense of happiness, when the party expected, entered the room--Von
Vottenberg immediately applying himself to an examination of the
patient, whose condition, it was evident from his unusually grave look,
he conceived to be highly critical.

Dreading to hear his opinion pronounced in the presence of his
betrothed, and the more so, because he had in some degree been its
cause, the young officer, after having warmly shaken hands with Mrs.
Elmsley, whom he thanked for her prompt attention, urged her to do all
in her power to soothe Maria, to whom, at parting, he also offered his
hand, while his eye was eloquent with the feelings he could not well
openly express.

He first directed his course towards the rose-bush, and approached it
with a feeling almost similar to what would have been experienced by
him, had he been the actual murderer of Mr. Heywood. Loup Garou was
sitting crouched near the head and was so far recovered as to growl
rather fiercely at him, as he approached. On hearing the voice of his
master, not in anger but in conciliation, he arose, slightly wagged his
tail, and came forward slowly and crouching, as if in dread of further
punishment, his lip uncurled, showing all his upper teeth, and with a
short, quick sneeze, peculiar to his half-wolf-blooded race.

Calling gently to the animal, he preceded him to the gate, desiring him
to wait there until he returned--an injunction evidently understood by
the dog, which, crouching down in his accustomed posture, ventured not
to move. With the small spud, already alluded to, and then near the
rose-tree, he put back in small quantities the displaced earth, until
the ghastly face, indistinctly seen in the star-light, was again wholly
hidden from view. This done, he approached the bank of the river,
followed by the dog, and gave a shrill whistle, which, without being
answered, speedily brought over the boat in which he now embarked for
the opposite shore.

His first care was to seek Elmsley, who, as officer of the guard, was
up accoutred for duty, and was now looking over an old "Washington
Intelligencer," that had been read at least a dozen times before, while
he smoked his pipe and sipped from a bowl of whisky punch, which Von
Vottenberg had just finished brewing, when so suddenly summoned to the
cottage.

After Ronayne had detailed to his friend the occurrences of the evening,
and communicated his views, they both issued forth to the guard-room,
where Sergeant Nixon happened to be upon duty. With the latter, a brief
conversation was held by Ronayne, ending with an injunction for him to
come to Lieutenant Elmsley's quarters and announce to him (the former),
when certain arrangements which had been agreed upon, were completed.

Returned to the abode of the latter, the young officer required no very
great pressing to induce him to join his superior in the beverage, to
which anxiety of mind not less than fatigue of body had so much disposed
him, yet of which both partook moderately. While so employed, and
awaiting the appearance of the sergeant, Ronayne, who had now no motive
for further mystery or concealment, detailed at the request of his
friend, but in much more succinct terms than he had done in the paper
he had handed to Maria Heywood, the circumstances connected with his
absence from the Fort, on the night of the attack upon the farm, and the
means taken by him to attain the object in which he had been thwarted by
Captain Headley.




CHAPTER XII.

"You dam Yankee, stop Injin when him go wigwam," commenced Ronayne,
rising at the same time and imitating the action of one unsteady from
intoxication. "'Spose tell him gubbernor?"

"Ah! you horrid wretch--I see it all now, yet could I have been so
imposed upon? You then were the pretended drunken Indian I let out that
night? Upon my word, Master Ronayne. I never will forgive you for that
trick."

"Yes you will, old fellow. It was the only way to save you from a
scrape, but I confess I have often since laughed in my sleeve at the
recollection of the manner in which I deceived you."

"Hang me if you didn't play your part to admiration, but the best of the
jest is, that on reporting the circumstance to Headley, on the following
morning, he said I had acted perfectly right; so had you known this when
you had that scene on the parade, you might have pleaded his sanction.
However, all that is over. Now then for your adventure."

"The tale is soon told," began Ronayne. "On the evening when you and
Von Vottenberg were so busy, the one in concocting his whisky-punch--the
other in cutting up the Virginia, I was sacking my brain for a means
to accomplish my desire to reach the farm, where I had a strong
presentiment, from the lateness of the hour, without bringing any
tidings of them, the fishing-party were, with Mr. Heywood and his
people, in a state of siege, and I at length decided on what seemed to
me to be the only available plan. I was not sorry to see you leave
after taking your second glass, for I knew that I should have little
difficulty in sewing up the doctor, whose tumbler I repeatedly
filled, and made him drink off after sundry toasts, while he did not
perceive--or was by no means sorry if he did--that I merely sipped
from my own. When I thought he had swallowed enough to prevent him from
interfering with my project, I bade him good night and left him, knowing
well that in less than ten minutes he would be asleep. Instead, however,
of going to bed, I hastened at once to preliminaries, having first
got rid of my servant whom I did not wish to implicate, by making him
acquainted with my intended absence. But tell me, did you examine my
room at all the next day?"

"I did."

"And found nothing missing?"

"Nothing. I scouted everywhere, and found only yourself wanting--the bed
unrumpled, and everything in perfect bachelor order."

"And that leather dress, my dear fellow, in which I once paid a visit
to the camp of Winnebeg, from whose squaw, indeed, I had bought it. You
know it generally hangs against the wall at the foot of my bed."

"Ah! now I recollect, that was not there certainly, although I did not
notice its absence then--so then, that was the dress you went out in,
and I such a goose as not to remark it."

"Because you know that I had had the precaution to throw a blanket over
it in the most approved Pottawattamie style, while my features were
colored with gambouge and Indian ink."

"Well, say no more about that--I am ashamed to have been so taken in by
a Johnny Raw. We will now suppose you kicked out of the Fort. Did I not
kick you out," he added humorously, "and say, begone, you drunken dog,
and never show your ugly face here again!"

"On the contrary," returned his junior in the same mocking strain,
"you were but too glad to be civil when I threatened you with the
'gubbernor!'"

"Once out of the Fort," he gravely continued, "my course was plain. I
immediately went to the wigwam of Winnebeg, whom I found seated, with
his toes almost in the embers of an expiring fire, and smoking his last
pipe previous to wrapping himself up for the night in his blanket.
You may imagine his surprise, when, after some little difficulty, he
recognized in that garb, and at that hour, particularly after the events
of the day, with which he had been made acquainted by Mr. Frazer, before
the latter, with his family, took refuge in the Fort. Still, true to the
dignified reserve of his race, he concealed as much as possible what
was passing in his mind, and made me sit by his side, near which, I
have omitted to say, was an extremely handsome young Indian, whom he
presented to me as his son, and then bade me tell him the object of my
visit.

"Of course I knew enough of Indian etiquette to be satisfied that
I should gain by not attempting to hurry matters, and I accordingly
suppressed my own impatience while taking a few whiffs from the pipe he
courteously offered to me. Winnebeg then received it back, and while he
sat with his eyes fixed intently on the fire, puffed away in an attitude
of profound attention which encouraged me to proceed.

"When he had heard all I had to say in regard to the fears I entertained
for the absent party--for I did not confine my profession of interest to
ONE--my vain application to the commandant, and my strong reliance
upon him to send a party of his young men with me to the farm, his eye
suddenly kindled--his countenance assumed a more animated expression,
and removing the pipe from his lips, and puffing forth a more than usual
volume of smoke, he cordially shook my hands, saying something in Indian
to his son, who immediately sprang to his feet, and disappeared from the
tent.

"After a lapse of time which seemed to me as an age, the youth
re-appeared with a dozen young warriors, all armed and decked in their
war paint. They remained grouped round the entrance for a few minutes,
while Waunangee changed his own dress, and Winnebeg provided me with a
rifle, tomahawk and scalping-knife. Thus accoutred I took the lead with
the former, and after cautiously creeping through the encampment, passed
along the skirt of the wood that almost overhung the river. We moved off
at a quick walk, but soon our pace increased to a half-run, so anxious
were we all to get to the farm.

"We had not proceeded more than half-way when we saw a small boat, which
I immediately distinguished as that belonging to the fishing-party,
slowly descending the river. The Indians simultaneously, and as if
governed by one common instinct, dropped flat on the ground, as I
supposed to remain unseen until the boat should come opposite to them,
while I, uncertain by whom it was occupied, and anxious to ascertain,
after whispering a few words to Waunangee, moved cautiously in advance
along the shore. When I had crept up about fifty yards, I could
distinctly see that it was one of our men, and I immediately hailed to
know who he was, and where the remainder of the party were.

"Scarcely had he answered 'Collins,' and commenced a few words of
explanation of the cause of his being there and alone, when the forms
of two Indians, which I fancied I had before detected creeping along the
shore, regulating their stealthy progress by that of the boat, started
into full height, and silently bounded towards me--one a little in
advance of the other. The moment was critical. They were not twenty
paces from me, and I have often since wondered at the presence of mind
I preserved. It occurred to me that they would not commit the imprudence
of using firearms so near the Fort, and that steel only would be
resorted to by them. This suggested my own course. Throwing my rifle
upon the beach in order that Collins, who was now pulling for the
shore, might seize and use it as occasion should require, I grasped the
scalping-knife in my left hand, and with my tomahawk in my right, did
not wait for the attack, but rushed upon the foremost Indian, for I knew
that my only chance of success lay in the killing or disabling of one
before his comrade could come up. At the same time, both to apprise
Waunangee of my position, and to daunt my adversaries, I uttered one of
these tremendous yells, you know I so well can imitate, and receiving
the blow of his tomahawk upon my own, thrown up in true military guard,
plunged my knife into his body with such suddenness and force, that
on examining it afterwards, I found that at least half an inch of the
tapering handle had followed the blade. The savage fell dead without
uttering a groan, a sight which, instead of checking the advance of his
companion, rather urged him to revenge his fall. He had now come up
with me, brandishing his tomahawk, when I put myself again on my guard,
purposing to use my knife as I had done before, but at the very moment
when the descent of his weapon was expected by me, he was suddenly
seized from behind, raised from his feet, and thrown upon the ground.
This was the act of Collins, who had gained the shore just after the
first Indian fell, and had flown to my assistance.

"At the same moment, Waunangee, who, with his warriors had started up
on hearing my loud yell of defiance, came quickly to the spot, and
they were not a little astounded to see an Indian, whom they instantly
pronounced to be a Winnebago, lying motionless at my feet, nor was their
respect for me at all lessened, when on handing my scalping-knife from
one to the other, they perceived what a proficient I was in the use of
their own favorite weapon.

"Of course I was not silly enough to detract from my own glory, by
admitting that it was as much the result of accident as of design.
They made signs for me to scalp him, but having no particular desire to
possess this trophy of my successful hand to hand encounter, one of the
young men asked me to waive my right in his favor. This I did, and
the scalp of the Winnebago was soon dangling from his waist. The other
spoils I did not object to, and his rifle, tomahawk, and knife are
now in Winnebago's tent, until there offers a favorable opportunity of
bringing them to my quarters. But to proceed.

"So much time had been passed in the examination of the body of the
slain Winnebago, that his comrade had found ample time to escape. The
Pottawattamies had not seen him, and Collins, after having temporarily
disabled him, had run up to afford me further assistance, on seeing
advancing in the rear, those whom he took to be of the same hostile
party. Thus left unwatched, the savage had managed to creep away into
the wood, and when attention was at length drawn to him, he was not to
be seen.

"When Collins had explained the position of the party at the farm, whose
danger, on finding himself of no service there, he was then on his way
to report, I proposed to Waunangee that half of his warriors should
ascend by land, while the remainder with himself, accompanied me in
the boat. We accordingly separated, and made what haste we could to our
destination--the party on shore regulating their progress by that of the
boat. During the descent my anxiety was very great, for my whole soul
was bent upon the attainment of one object--that of restoring Mr.
Heywood unharmed to his family. But the absence of all sound indicating
conflict was by no means favorable, and I had already begun to fear that
the silence which prevailed, was but the result of victory on the part
of the hostile band who had departed, when suddenly the loud,
fierce yell of disappointment which burst from them, as I have since
understood, when a ladder by which they attempted to enter was thrown
from the roof by Nixon, rang encouragingly upon my ear, and urged me to
increased exertion. Our progress, however, was by no means proportioned
to my anxiety, for somehow or other, only two oars were in the boat,
and, as the Indians did not much care or know how to pull in time, the
task devolved wholly upon Collins and myself. At length, just as the day
was beginning to dawn, we reached the farm-house, about a hundred yards
beyond which we put in and landed, making a detour by the barn, so as
to meet the remainder of our little force in the rear, and thus to place
the enemy, if actually surrounding the house, between two fires.

"After waiting, however, some little time, and finding every thing
quiet, my apprehensions increased, for, although not the sign of a
Winnebago could be seen, so profound was the stillness within, that
I began to think the whole of the party had been either captured or
murdered. Suddenly, however, while hesitating as to the course to be
pursued--for I feared that if the party were all right, and the enemy
departed, they might fire upon us as we approached--I saw a man in
American undress uniform, whom I had no difficulty in recognizing as
Corporal Nixon, issue from the back of the house with a basket in his
hands, and turning the corner with an appearance of much caution, make
hastily for the river. Directing Waunangee, whose two bands had now
joined, and were then lying closely concealed in the barn, to enter the
house as cautiously and noiselessly as possible, I hastened after Nixon,
from whom, after recovering from his first fright at finding himself
unarmed, and in the power of one whom he naturally took for one of his
recent assailants, I received a brief account of all that had occurred.
On entering the house with him, shortly afterwards, what a contrast was
present--on the one hand the ludicrous--the horrible on the other.

"Close within the doorway lay the dead body of Mr. Heywood--"

"The dead body of Mr. Heywood!" exclaimed Elmsley, starting from his
chair in almost dismay at the intelligence. "How comes it, Ronayne, that
you have never spoken of this before?"

"No interruption, Elmsley--hear me to the close--close within the
doorway, I repeat, lay the dead body of Mr. Heywood--his face much
disfigured--and his large frame almost rigid in a pool of clotted blood.
Imagine what a sight this was to me, whose sole object and hope it
had been to restore the father in safety to the daughter, although at
intervals during the route, I had more than once dreaded something of
the sort. Stupefied at the spectacle, I felt my heart to sicken, as the
idea of the grief by which Maria would be overwhelmed when this sad
tale should be revealed to her, rose to my imagination. But even then my
presence of mind did not desert me, and I already determined on what was
to be done. In some degree consoled by this, I raised my glance from the
body to observe what further atrocity had been committed. Three or four
Indians were grouped around, evidently regarding the corpse with deep
interest, for Mr. Heywood had often hunted with them, and given them
refreshments when stopping to rest at his place, while on their way
to the Fort laden with game. Further on the great body of Waunangee's
people were standing leaning on their rifles, and enjoying the mistake
of three of our fellows, who naturally taking them, from the great
resemblance of dress, to be their enemies who had obtained an entrance,
were holding aloft, in an attitude of defiance--one a huge poker thrust
through the carcass of an enormous bird, and two others a blackened leg
and wing, evidently belonging to the same animal, which they ever and
anon brandished over their heads, while their eyes were rivetted on the
dusky forms before them. The wooden partition sustained their muskets,
from which the interposing Indians had cut them off, and against the
front door of the house, which was closed and barred, leaned the only
armed man of the party, deprived, however, of all power of action."

"What a scene for some American Hogarth!" interrupted the lieutenant,
"and how graphically you have described it. I can see the picture before
me now."

"I confess," answered Ronayne, "I could not even, amid all my own
painful feelings, suppress a smile at its extreme absurdity, for the
appearance of three men seeking to defend themselves from what they
believed to be fierce and blood-thirsty enemies, with the burnt carcass
and limbs of an old turkey-cock, was such a burlesque on the chivalrous,
that, knowing as I did how little their supposed enemy was to be
dreaded, I could not suppress thoughts which, while they forced
themselves upon me, I was angry at allowing myself to entertain. To
understand the scene fully, you must have looked on it yourself. Had
I recounted this to you yesterday, or even this morning, I could have
filled up the picture more grotesquely, and yet not less truly. But
now I have too great a weight on my spirits to give more than a simple
sketch.

"At the announcement of my name and purpose, the statue at the door
became suddenly disenchanted--the legs and wings fell--a man dropped
lightly from the loft, musket in hand, and Cass only, with his gaze
intently fixed on the mocking savages before him, of whom he took me
indeed to be one, continued his defensive attitude with the poker, nor
was it until I had advanced and taken his weapon from him, amid the loud
laughter of the young Indians, that he finally came to his senses. And
yet, after all, poor devil, his distrust was but natural.

"No time was to be lost. While some of the men were, according to my
instructions, wrapping in a blanket the body of Mr. Heywood, after
removing from it what blood they could, and the others bore to the
boat the unfortunate Le Noir, whom I had not at first distinguished, so
completely had he been covered over by his dog and walnut blossoms, I
took the corporal aside, and explained to him how important it was that
nothing should be known at the Fort of the fate of Mr. Heywood. On
his asking what he should say if questioned, I desired him (with some
hesitation, I confess, for I knew I was setting a bad example to the
men, which only the peculiar circumstances of the case could justify),
to give an evasive answer, and say that the Indians had carried him off
with them, which indeed would be the fact, as I intended him to be borne
away by the party I had brought. I told him, moreover, that at a fitting
opportunity, I would explain every thing to Captain Headley, and take
all the responsibility upon myself.

"On his promptly saying that he would, I added that the men of his party
should be made acquainted with my wish, and asked if I might depend upon
their secrecy. He replied that there was not a man among them who did
not so love Miss Heywood, as to run the risk of any punishment, rather
than utter one word that could be the means of giving her pain, and that
while on the way down he would take care to warn them.

"Elmsley, I was touched at this--almost to tears--for it was a source
of proud yet tender pleasure to me--much more so than I can express--to
know that Maria was so great a favorite with these rude-hearted fellows.
Assured that every thing was right, I told the corporal to embark his
men immediately, and pull for the Fort, while I, with Waunangee and his
Indians proceeded by land with the body of Mr. Heywood.

"'Don't you think, sir,' said the corporal, hesitatingly, as he prepared
to execute my orders--'don't you think it would be well for the ladies'
sake that they should not be reminded of the name of this place, more
than can be helped?'

"'Undoubtedly, Nixon, but what do you mean?'

"'Why, sir, I mean that as poor Mr. Heywood never can be here again,
it would be better nothing should be left to remind them of the bloody
doings of yesterday.'

"'And what other name would you give it?' I asked.

"'If it was left to me, Mr. Ronayne,' replied the corporal; 'I would
call it HARDSCRABBLE, on account of the hard struggle the fellows must
have had with Mr. Heywood, judging from his wounds and his broken rifle,
before they mastered him.'

"'Then, HARDSCRABBLE be it,' I said, 'not that I can really see it will
make much difference in calling the thing to mind, yet it would scarcely
be fair to deny to you, who have so bravely defended the place, the
privilege of giving it a new name, if the old one is to be abandoned.'

"'Thank you, sir,' returned Nixon, 'but if you hadn't come to our
assistance, I don't know what the upshot might have been, I suspect
that fellow whose comrade you killed, sent them off sooner than they
intended.'

"'No more of that, Nixon--and now do you remember what you are to say
when you get back to the Fort?'

"'I do, sir, and every man shall be told to say as I do--but about the
new name, Mr. Ronayne,' he pursued, returning, after he had gone a few
paces, 'do you think, sir, Mrs. Heywood will consent to it?'

"'My good fellow,' I answered, 'recollect that Mrs. Heywood must know
nothing about it--at least for the present. I will settle all that
later. In the mean time, as you have called it HARDSCRABBLE, so let it
remain.'

"And HARDSCRABBLE that scene of blood is called to this hour.

"I had at first apprehended," pursued Ronayne, "that the Indians would
evince disinclination to carry the body so long a distance, or even at
all, but on Waunangee explaining my desire, they all to my surprise,
expressed even eagerness to meet my wishes, for, as he assured me, the
young men looked upon me as a great warrior who had achieved a deed of
heroism that might procure the distinction of a chief, and entitling me
to their services in all things.

"I certainly thought my honors cheaply enough purchased; however I was
but too glad to appropriate to myself the respect and good-will which
the killing of the Winnebago had entailed--and matters were soon
arranged.

"The body having been removed outside, and the doors secured as well as,
under the circumstances, could be done, one of the warriors cut from a
tree in the adjacent wood, a semi-circular piece of tough and flexible
bark, about six feet in length, and in the hollow of this, the murdered
father of Maria Heywood, already swathed tightly in a blanket, was
placed. A long pole was then passed through the equidistant loops of
cord that encircled the whole, and two of the Indians having, with the
assistance of their companions, raised it upon their shoulders, it was
thus borne--the parties being relieved at intervals--over the two long
miles of road that led to the skirt of the woods near the encampment.
Here the body of Indians stopped, while Waunangee and myself repaired to
the tent of his father, who no sooner had heard detailed by his son the
account of my Winnebago killing practice of the preceding evening, than
he overwhelmed me with congratulations, and looked proudly on the knife,
still stained with a spot or two of blood, which I returned to him, and
which he restored to its usual resting-place on his hip.

"Perceiving that Winnebeg was, like his young men, ready to do any thing
for me. I explained to him my desire to convey the body of Mr. Heywood
across the river, and bury him secretly in his own grounds, but that
it was necessary, in order to do this effectually, that he and his son
should go with me, and by some circuitous route. Entering at once into
my views, he said he would show me a place where we could cross without
being seen either from the Fort or from his own encampment, and then led
the way back to the wood where the party were still waiting.

"The rest is soon told. Dismissing the young men into the encampment.
Winnebeg, with his son, bore the body within the skirt of the wood,
until we reached a bend of the river hidden from observation, where
a canoe with paddles was drawn up on the beach. There we crossed,
and going round to the rear of the cottage, entered the garden, and
proceeded to the upper end, where at the summer house, near a favorite
rose-tree of Maria's, I dug with my own hands a hasty grave, in which
Winnebeg and Waunangee placed the body--its only coffin being the bark
that was swathed around it. Of course I always intended to disinter it
at some future, but not distant period, and bestow upon it the usual
rites of burial.

"This painful task accomplished, and the soil having been carefully
replaced, so as to leave no inequality of surface, I accompanied
my friends back by the same route, and about nine o'clock left the
Pottawattamie encampment with them and a few other warriors of the
tribe for the Fort, which in the crowd I entered without difficulty or
creating suspicion. Watching my opportunity, I stole to the rear of my
bed-room--opened and entered the window--changed my dress, and made my
appearance on parade as you saw."

"All is ready, sir," said Sergeant Nixon, entering just as he had
concluded, and before Elmsley could offer any remark on this singular
adventure--"the coffin is in the scow, and Corporal Collins, Green and
Philips are there also with their shovels, ropes, and picks. If Mr.
Elmsley will give me permission," and he touched his cap to that
officer. "I will go too, sir."

"As sergeant of the guard--no, Nixon, my good fellow, that will never
do. The three men you have named, are, with myself, quite enough. Be
on the look-out though, to let us in on our return. Have you provided a
dark lantern?"

"Yes, sir, Collins has the lantern belonging to the guard house."

"Good. I will follow you in a moment, Elmsley," he continued, rising and
draining off his half-emptied glass, "lend me your prayer-book. I wish
that you could be present at this dismal ceremony, but of course that is
wholly out of the question."

"It is, indeed, my dear fellow. It would never do for us both to be
absent. Not only ourselves but the men would be brought into the scrape,
for you know Headley always sleeps with one eye open."

"I do not like to do any thing clandestinely," remarked the
ensign--"particularly after our reconciliation with him. Moreover, it
is, as you say, in some degree compromising the men and myself with
them. I have a great mind before I start to see and explain every thing
to Headley, and obtain his sanction to my absence."

"Nonsense," returned his friend, "he will never know it; besides it
is possible that he may refuse to let you go before morning, and your
object is, of course, to have every thing finished to-night. Take my
advice; go without speaking to him on the subject, and if your remorse
of conscience," and he smiled archly, "be so great afterwards, as to
deprive you of more rest and appetite than you lost after killing that
poor devil of a Winnebago, go to him as you did before--confess that
you have again been a naughty boy--ask his pardon, and I am sure he will
forgive the crime."

"Well, I believe you are right. Be it so. Adieu, I shall be back within
a couple of hours at the latest."

"If you do, you will in all probability find me still poring over this
old Intelligencer, which is full of rumors of approaching war with the
British."

"I shall be more inclined to hug my pillow," replied the ensign as
he departed, "for I must again cross to the cottage, and be back here
before guard-mounting to-morrow."

Within ten minutes the party--two of them having borne the empty coffin,
and the corporal the necessary implements, stood near the rose-tree in
the garden. The body of Mr. Heywood was disinterred--the bark in which
it lay wound round with many folds of a large sheet, and placed in the
coffin, which after being screwed down, was deposited in a grave dug at
least five feet under the surface. Then commenced the burial service,
which was read by the young officer in a slow and impressive tone, and
by the light of the shaded lantern, which, falling obliquely upon the
forms of the men, discovered them standing around the grave--one foot
resting on the edge--the other drawn back, as they awaited the signal
to lower their almost offensive burden into its last resting-place. At
length the prayers for the dead were ended, and the grave was carefully
filled up, leaving as before, no inequality, but too deep to attract the
scent of Loup Garou. Then after having dug up a few small roots of the
sweet briar, and placed them at intervals on the newly-turned earth.
Ronayne crossed with his little party to the Fort, glad to obtain a few
hours of that repose, for which the harassing events of the day had so
much predisposed him.




CHAPTER XIII.

The fourth of July 1812, was a more than usual gala-day in the little
Fort of Chicago, for in addition to the National Jubilee, there was to
be celebrated one of a private, yet not less interesting nature. On that
evening Ensign Ronayne was to espouse, in the very room in which he had
first been introduced to her the woman he had so long and so ardently
loved, and who, her mother having after a severe struggle become
convalescent, had conformably to her promise, yielded a not reluctant
consent to his proposal that this day of general joy, should be that of
the commencement of their own happiness.

At that remote period, and in the absence of duly ordained clergymen,
it was customary for marriages to be performed by the Governors of
Districts and by commanding officers of distant Forts, and these,
perfectly legal, were subsequently as inclination, or scruple of
conscience induced, celebrated in the usual manner. The early marriages
of British subjects in Canada, soon after its conquest from the French,
as well as many of those of the colonies now known as the United States,
took place in this manner, and the custom had been continued until
increased population provided the means of securing that spiritual
comfort, which it must, of course, have been impossible for one dressed
in a red coat instead of a black one, to impart.

But neither Maria Heywood or Ronayne stood much on this punctilio.
Provided the ceremony was legal, and according to the customs of
the country, it mattered little who married them--the governor of
a district--the commandant of a garrison, or a Gretna Green
blacksmith--had they felt at all disposed to avail themselves of the
services of the latter.

It was a lovely day, and every thing seemed to smile upon the denizens
of that region, from the early dawn until the setting of the sun.
Officers and men were in their brightest uniforms--the women and
children in their holiday dresses. A splendid new Star Spangled
Banner--the work of Maria Heywood's hands--floated in the dazzling rays
of the sun, upon the southern bastion of the Fort. Joy and pride sat on
every brow. They exulted at the recollection of that hardly won freedom
from injustice, which was that day to be celebrated for the thirty-sixth
time.

At noon the cannon thundered forth their bursts of rejoicing. This was
the signal for the numerous Pottawattamies outside, all of whom had
decked themselves for the occasion, to approach nearer to the Fort. On
the glacis they discharged their guns and rifles, and seemed to have
but one spirit with the allies to whom they appeared to have devoted
themselves. Winnebeg, however, though long expected, had not yet
returned, and nothing yet had been seen of Waunangee, since his
departure on the day following the little incident which occurred in
Elmsley's apartments.

Contrary to that unnatural etiquette which enjoins that two betrothed
persons, who are expected to be inseparable after marriage, should never
show themselves together in public immediately before, Ronayne had after
parade ascended the rampart, with Maria Heywood leaning upon his arm,
occasionally glancing at the group of gaily-costumed Indians, who were
amusing themselves on the green, but oftener admiring the lovely
view, softened by distance, which was presented in various points, and
particularly towards the farm--the theatre of events which the otherwise
happy girl, could not at that moment avoid bringing to her recollection.

While gazing in that direction, her eye fell upon the form of a young
Indian who was leaning against the corner of the picketed bastion on her
left, in the shallow, dry, and grass-covered ditch that surrounded
it. At first her glance caught an indistinct human form dressed in the
Indian garb, but as her gaze settled on the object, her surprise was
great to recognise Waunangee, who was even then looking at her with
the same softened and eloquent expression, which had given her so much
anxiety on a former occasion. The impression produced upon her was
exactly what it had been then--indescribable--inexplicable to herself.

"What is the matter, my love?" inquired Ronayne tenderly, and pressing
her arm to his heart--"what fixes your attention below?" then seeing the
Indian himself. "Ah! Waunangee, my friend!" he exclaimed, "where have
you been all this time? Come round to the gate and shake hands with my
wife."

"No, no, no, do not call him up, Ronayne--you cannot think how much the
presence of that Indian troubles me."

"Nay, dearest Maria, you are not yourself. Why continue this strong
dislike against the poor fellow? I thought you had quite forgiven him."

Was it accident--was it modesty, or was it a consciousness that his
presence was not desired by at least one of the parties, that prevented
the young Indian from obeying the summons of the officer. Whatever the
cause, he assumed a serious mein, and playing one of those melancholy
airs which so often, at that time, might be heard proceeding from the
rude flute of their race, walked slowly away.

"I fear you have offended him, Maria. Oh! if you knew--"

"Ronayne--dearest Harry!" interrupted his betrothed--"I have never said
anything of this before to you, because, after all, it is but an
idle fancy, yet I cannot divest myself of the idea that this Indian,
interesting and prepossessing as he is, is somehow or other connected
with my future fate. Nay," as the young officer smiled in playful
mockery, "you may ridicule my presentiment, which is, I confess, so
much at variance with good sense, that I almost blush to introduce the
subject, but still I cannot banish the impression."

"Then, I will assist you in doing so, dearest, even though at the risk
of re-opening a newly-closed wound," remarked her lover, with deep
affection of manner. "In my narrative of those events, hastily thrown
together, which I gave you on that memorable night, when I suffered for
a period, almost the torments of the damned, I did not, it seems to me,
name the young Indian, who, with his father, so greatly aided me on my
return to the farm, and even bore upon his shoulders the sacred charge."

"No, Harry, you did not," quickly rejoined Maria Heywood; "but I know
now whom you mean. It was Waunangee."

"It was," said the ensign--"I know your knowledge of that fact will
change your feelings towards him."

"They are changed--even at this moment, and henceforth I shall be to him
as a sister. Ah! how ungrateful must I have appeared to the poor
fellow. I shall conquer this silly weakness: I have misunderstood my own
impressions, and it must have been that I have mistaken the influence
Waunangee has had for that which is to be. Call him up now, Ronayne, and
I will cheerfully give him my hand, and promise to love him as a brother
in return for the devotion he has evinced, not less for you than for my
poor father."

"Time enough, repentant sinner," returned the young officer, at the
same time casting his glance rapidly over the group of Indians, who were
amusing themselves at various athletic games. "I can see nothing of him.
Your evident displeasure," he added playfully, "has destroyed his peace,
as indeed you might have known from that plaintive ditty. However,
dearest girl, I shall see him soon, and make him promise to be present
this evening at the nuptials of his friend and sister. Nay, if I had not
engaged Elmsley, I should insist on his being my bridesman."

The only notice taken of this sally was a faint smile from his
companion, who now descended with him from the rampart and proceeded to
the apartments of Mrs. Elmsley, where her mother and herself had once
more been visitors for the last few days. Here they separated to meet
again in the evening--Ronayne directing his attention to his various
duties, and looking out at intervals for his young Indian friend.

It was night. No accident had occurred beyond the laceration of two of
Ephraim Giles's fingers, who having that day been presented with a
new suit by the doctor--the fac-simile in fashion of the old--had been
whittling almost in front of one of the guns when discharged, and
lost, with the skin of his finger, both his stick and his knife. The
sultriness of the day had been succeeded by a cool and refreshing air.
Gaiety and content every where prevailed, and many were the voices--male
and female--that exclaimed, as allusion was made to the ceremony all
knew, to be in progress: "God bless them, and make them happy, as they
deserve to be." A large tub of whisky-punch, the gift of the commanding
officer, had been brewed by Von Vottenberg, for their mid-day revel, and
this, all had been unanimous in pronouncing the best medicine the doctor
had ever administered to them; and now in small social messes, seated
round their rude tables, covered with tin goblets, and pitchers of the
same metal--the mothers with their children at their side or upon their
knees, and the fathers and unmarried men puffing clouds of smoke from
their short pipes--which they filled from two others placed on an
elevated settle--one in each block house--which the happy Ronayne had
given them on the occasion.

Even the guard was moderately supplied, and the sentries alone, pacing
to and fro in their limited walk, felt the bitterness of privation, as
they counted the minutes that must elapse before they could join in the
festivities which the loud voice and ringing laugh, occasionally wafted
to their ears, told them were in progress.

In the rooms of the commanding officer there was more than the usual
manifestation of the anniversary. All had dined at an early hour, but
a large side-board that stood in one corner of the council room--always
fitted up on these occasions--was covered with vases containing wines,
liqueurs, juleps, and punches of various kinds--the latter the work
of the indefatigable son of Esculapius, and of these the host and his
guests partook freely, in commemoration of the day. At the opposite end
of the room had been raised a sort of tribune for the orator of the day,
but as it was intended the address should be impromptu, no name had been
mentioned, nor could any one know, until the moment when the majority of
voices should select him on whom the office was to devolve. In the fear
entertained by each that he should be the party selected, the glass, to
impart the necessary courage, was not spared. But he who was not in the
room, or of the number of those devoted to the punch-bowl was the person
chosen. As if by one impulsive consent, Ronayne, who was seated in the
inner room, and discoursing of any thing but politics to his betrothed,
found himself loudly called upon--knew it was in vain to object--and
reluctantly rose in obedience to the summons.

"Come young gentleman," said Captain Headley, entering with an air of
gaiety by no means usual to him, "you are, it appears, in all things,"
and he bowed significantly to Maria Heywood, "the chosen of the
evening--but recollect," he added, as he drew his arm through his own,
and proceeded towards the larger apartment where Ronayne was awaited,
"as you acquit yourself of YOUR duty, so shall I of MINE."

"I shall do my best, sir," replied the youth, in the same light tone,
"but of the two orations, I know which will be the best suited to my own
taste."

The other ladies, with the exception of Mrs. Heywood, had also risen,
and now stood grouped near Captain Headley, who, with Maria Heywood on
his arm, leaned against the door-way separating the two rooms--while
Ronayne, amid cheers and congratulations, made his way to the tribune,
at the farther end of the apartment.

His address was necessarily not long--for independently of the
impatience he could not but entertain at that moment of all subjects but
that nearest his heart, he was by no means ambitious of making a display
of his powers of elocution. Yet, notwithstanding this, he treated
his theme in so masterly a manner, and in such perfectly good taste,
omitting all expressions of that rancor towards Great Britain, which
forms so leading a feature in American orations on this occasion, and
yet reflecting honor on the land of his birth--alluding, moreover,
to the high position even then occupied by the nation, and the future
greatness which he predicted, from its laws, its institutions, and
peculiar form of government, awaited it--that Maria Heywood could not
fail to experience a secret pride in the warm, and evidently sincere
acclamation of the little party present, attesting as they did, their
estimate of the worth of him, who in another hour, would be her own for
life.

As Ronayne descending from the tribune, passed to the other side of the
room, he looked out of the door which had been left open, not more
on account of the heat, than to afford the men and their families an
opportunity of hearing the discourse thus delivered--almost the first
person who came under his glance was Waunangee, for whose admission
he had given orders to the serjeant of the guard, and who now, in
compliance with his pressing entreaty, had attended. He was becomingly
dressed in deer skin, richly embroidered, pliant and of a clear brown
that harmonized well with the snowy whiteness of his linen shirt,
which was fastened with silver brooches, while on the equally decorated
leggins, he wore around the ankle, strings of minute brass bells. On his
head floated the rich plumage of various rare birds, but no paint was
visible beyond the slightest tint of vermilion on the very top of each
cheek-bone, rendering even more striking the expression of his soft dark
eyes.

Beckoning to him, Ronayne drew the young Indian within the door, which
had he not accidentally distinguished him in the crowd, he was quite too
modest to enter alone. Then drawing his arm through his own, he led him,
coloring and embarrassed at the novelty of the scene, to the place where
Captain Headley was still lingering with his charge. The moment they
were near enough, the latter held out her hand to Waunangee, and with
all the warmth of her generous nature, pressed that which he extended.
The young Indian colored more deeply even than before--his hand trembled
in hers--and the look of thankfulness which he bent upon her, in return
for this unmistakable confidence, had all the touching melancholy of
expression which she had remarked in them at their first meeting. Again
a mingled sentiment of confusion and distrust suffused the cheek,
and for a moment oppressed the spirit of Maria Heywood in despite of
herself, and she almost wished Waunangee had not returned. The thought
however, was momentary. She felt the folly, the injustice of her
feelings, and anxious to atone for them, she nervously--almost
convulsively grasped the hand of the Indian, carried it to her lips,
and said in her full, sweet and earnest tones, that he must ever be her
brother as she would ever be his sister.

"And now," said Captain Headley to the young officer, "what reward do
you expect for your maiden oration? What shall it be, Miss Heywood?"

"I will spare her the trouble of an answer," interposed Ronayne, as
he took the arm which had just disengaged itself from that of the
commandant, and placed it within his own, "until you have set your seal
to the priceless gift," and his eyes looked all the intensity of his
feeling; "I part not with it again."

"Every thing is ready is the next room," answered Captain Headley--"go
in. When I have announced that the ceremony is about to take place, I
shall hasten to give you the dear girl for life," and imprinting a kiss
upon her brow, he passed on to those who were paying their homage to the
punch-bowl, and discussing the merits of the oration just delivered.

It was with a flushed cheek, and a beating heart that Maria Heywood was
led by Ronayne, radiant with hope and joy, to the little table covered
with plain, white linen, and illuminated by half a dozen tall candles,
behind which the commanding officer had placed himself on an elevated
estrade.

All of the guests were grouped around, a little in the rear, while
Lieutenant Elmsley stood on the right hand of his friend, and his wife
on the left of the betrothed. Next to her, in an arm chair, which,
provided with rollers, was easily moved, Mrs. Heywood--and with her
beautiful arms reposing on the high back of this, stood Mrs. Headley in
graceful attitude, watching the ceremony with almost maternal interest.
Immediately behind Ronayne, from whom he evidently did not like to be
separated, stood Waunangee, with an air of deep dejection, yet casting
glances rapidly from one to the other of his two friends.

When the young officer, after having formally received the bride from
her mother, whose strength barely permitted her to rise and go through
that part of the ceremony, proceeded to place the ring upon the finger
of his wife, it fell, either from nervousness or accident upon the
matted floor. Quick as thought, Waunangee, who had now his whole
attention bent upon the passing scene, stooped, picked it up, and
attempted to place it on the finger, still extended, for which it was
designed.

"Gently, Waunangee, my good fellow," said the officer, piqued not less
at his own awkwardness at such a moment, than at the outre act of the
youth, from whom he rather unceremoniously took it--"the husband only
does this."

"Wah!" involuntarily exclaimed the other, his cheek becoming brighter,
and his eyes kindling into sudden fierceness, while his hand intuitively
clutched the handle of his knife--yet the moment afterwards relinquished
it. The motion had been so quick, indeed, that only Mr. Headley and the
bride herself had noticed it.

Still fascinated as it were by the novel scene, Waunangee moved not
away, but the expression of his eyes had wholly changed. There was no
longer to be remarked there the great melancholy of the past--but the
wild restless, flashing glance that told of strong excitement within.

When immediately afterwards they knelt, and had their hands joined by
Captain Headley, Waunangee bent eagerly forward, as if apprehensive of
losing the slightest part of the ceremonial, but when at the conclusion,
Ronayne saluted his wife in the usual manner, his cheek became suddenly
pale as its native hue would permit, and with folded arms and proud
attitude he withdrew slowly from the place he had hitherto occupied, to
mingle more with the crowd behind.

When Ronayne, who, remembering the little incident of the ring, and the
possible pique Waunangee might feel, turned to look for him, that he
might again present his bride in her new character, he was no where
to be seen, nor was he ever again beheld within the precincts of that
stockade.

And under those singular and somewhat ominous circumstances, were the
long-delayed nuptials of Harry Ronayne and Maria Heywood--the great
favorites of the garrison--celebrated to the joy of all within the Fort
of Chicago.


END








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Hardscrabble, by John Richardson

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HARDSCRABBLE ***

***** This file should be named 5169.txt or 5169.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/1/6/5169/

Produced by Gardner Buchanan with help from Charles Franks
and Distributed Proofers


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

