                      SONGS OF THE GLENS OF ANTRIM




This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license. If you are not located in the United
States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you are
located before using this ebook.



Title: Songs of the Glens of Antrim
Author: Moira O'Neill
Release Date: September 17, 2016 [EBook #53075]
Language: English
Character set encoding: US-ASCII


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF THE GLENS OF ANTRIM
***




Produced by Al Haines.





                               *Songs of
                          The Glens of Antrim*


                                   BY

                             MOIRA O'NEILL

                 AUTHOR OF 'THE ELF ERRANT,' ETC., ETC.



                          ELEVENTH IMPRESSION



                                NEW YORK
                         THE MACMILLAN COMPANY
                                 MCMIV

                         _All Rights reserved_




                                  _TO_
                               _W. C. S._




                               *PREFACE.*


These Songs of the Glens of Antrim were written by a Glenswoman in the
dialect of the Glens, and chiefly for the pleasure of other
Glens-people.

By the courtesy of the Editors of 'Blackwood' and the 'Spectator' they
are republished here.

MOIRA O'NEILL.




                              *CONTENTS.*


THE SONG OF GLEN DUN
CORRYMEELA
MARRIAGE
SEA WRACK
A BROKEN SONG
THE FAIRY LOUGH
A SONG OF GLENANN
"FORGETTIN'"
DENNY'S DAUGHTER
LOST
"CUTTIN' RUSHES"
"THE OULD LAD"
THE RACHRAY MAN
BIRDS
JOHNEEN
"BEAUTY'S A FLOWER"
THE BOY FROM BALLYTEARIM
I MIND THE DAY
GRACE FOR LIGHT
THE GRAND MATCH
THE SAILOR MAN
AT SEA
"LOOKIN' BACK"
THE NORTH-WEST--CANADA
BACK TO IRELAND




                        *THE SONG OF GLEN DUN.*


    Sure this is blessed Erin an' this the same glen,
    The gold is on the whin-bush, the wather sings again,
    The Fairy Thorn's in flower,--an' what ails my heart then?
      Flower o' the May,
      Flower o' the May,
    What about the May time, an' he far away!

    Summer loves the green glen, the white bird loves the sea,
    An' the wind must kiss the heather top, an' the red bell hides a
            bee;
    As the bee is dear to the honey-flower, so one is dear to me.
      Flower o' the rose,
      Flower o' the rose,
    A thorn pricked me one day, but nobody knows.

    The bracken up the braeside has rusted in the air,
    Three birches lean together, so silver limbed an' fair,
    Och! golden leaves are flyin' fast, but the scarlet roan is
            rare.
      Berry o' the roan,
      Berry o' the roan,
    The wind sighs among the trees, but I sigh alone.

    I knit beside the turf fire, I spin upon the wheel,
    Winter nights for thinkin' long, round runs the reel....
    But he never knew, he never knew that here for him I'd kneel.
      Sparkle o' the fire,
      Sparkle o' the fire,
    Mother Mary, keep my love, an' send me my desire!




                             *CORRYMEELA.*


    Over here in England I'm helpin' wi' the hay,
    An' I wisht I was in Ireland the livelong day;
    Weary on the English hay, an' sorra take the wheat!
    _Och!  Corrymeela an' the blue sky over it._

    There' a deep dumb river flowin' by beyont the heavy trees,
    This livin' air is moithered wi' the bummin' o' the bees;
    I wisht I'd hear the Claddagh burn go runnin' through the heat
    _Past Corrymeela, wi' the blue sky over it._

    The people that's in England is richer nor the Jews,
    There' not the smallest young gossoon but thravels in his shoes!
    I'd give the pipe between me teeth to see a barefut child,
    _Och!  Corrymeela an' the low south wind._

    Here's hands so full o' money an' hearts so full o' care,
    By the luck o' love!  I'd still go light for all I did go bare.
    "God save ye, _colleen dhas_," I said: the girl she thought me
            wild.
    _Far Corrymeela, an' the low south wind._

    D'ye mind me now, the song at night is mortial hard to raise,
    The girls are heavy goin' here, the boys are ill to plase;
    When one'st I'm out this workin' hive, 'tis I'll be back again--
    _Ay, Corrymeela, in the same soft rain._

    The puff o' smoke from one ould roof before an English town!
    For a shaugh wid Andy Feelan here I'd give a silver crown,
    For a curl o' hair like Mollie's ye'll ask the like in vain,
    _Sweet Corrymeela, an' the same soft rain._




    I med an' ould _caillach_ I knowed right well on the brow
        o' Carnashee:
    "The top o' the mornin'!" I says to her.  "God save ye!"
        she says to me:
      "An' och! if it's you,
      Tell me true,
      When are ye goin' to marry?"
    "I'm here," says I, "to be married to-morrow,
    Wi' the man to find an' the money to borrow."

    "As sure as ye're young an' fair," says she, "one day ye'll
        be ugly an' ould.
    If ye haven't a husband, who'll care," says she, "to call ye
        in out o' the could?
      Left to yerself,
      Laid on the shelf,--
      Now is yer time to marry.
    Musha! don't tell _me_ ye'll be married to-morrow,
    Wi' the man to find an' the money to borrow."

    "I may be dead ere I'm ould," says I, "for nobody knows their
            day.
    I never was fear'd o' the could," says I, "but I'm fear'd
        to give up me way.
      Good or bad,
      Sorry or glad,
      'Tis mine no more when I marry.
    So here stand I, to be married to-morrow,
    Wi' the man to find an' the money to borrow."

    The poor ould _caillach_ went down the hill shakin' her finger
            at me.
    "'Tis on top o' the world ye think yerself still, an' that's
        what it is," says she.
      But _thon_ was the day
      Dan MacIlray
      Had me promise to marry.
    So here stand I, to be married to-morrow,--
    The man he is found, but the money's to borrow.




                              *SEA WRACK.*


    The wrack was dark an' shiny where it floated in the sea,
    There was no one in the brown boat but only him an' me;
    Him to cut the sea wrack, me to mind the boat,
    An' not a word between us the hours we were afloat.
      The wet wrack,
      The sea wrack,
      The wrack was strong to cut.

    We laid it on the grey rocks to wither in the sun,
    An' what should call my lad then, to sail from Cushendun?
    With a low moon, a full tide, a swell upon the deep,
    Him to sail the old boat, me to fall asleep.
      The dry wrack,
      The sea wrack,
      The wrack was dead so soon.

    There' a fire low upon the rocks to burn the wrack to kelp,
    There' a boat gone down upon the Moyle, an' sorra one to help!
    Him beneath the salt sea, me upon the shore,
    By sunlight or moonlight we'll lift the wrack no more.
      The dark wrack,
      The sea wrack,
      The wrack may drift ashore.




                            *A BROKEN SONG.*


    '_Where am I from?_'  From the green hills of Erin.
    '_Have I no song then?_'  My songs are all sung.
    '_What o' my love?_'  'Tis alone I am farin'.
    Old grows my heart, an' my voice yet is young.

    '_If she was tall?_'  Like a king's own daughter.
    '_If she was fair?_'  Like a mornin' o' May.
    When she'd come laughin' 'twas the runnin' wather,
    When she'd come blushin' 'twas the break o' day.

    '_Where did she dwell?_'  Where one'st I had my dwellin'.
    '_Who loved her best?_'  There' no one now will know.
    '_Where is she gone?_'  Och, why would I be tellin'!
    Where she is gone there I can never go.




                           *THE FAIRY LOUGH.*


    Loughareema!  Loughareema
      Lies so high among the heather;
    A little lough, a dark lough,
      The wather's black an' deep.
    Ould herons go a-fishin' there
      An' sea-gulls all together
    Float roun' the one green island
      On the fairy lough asleep.

    Loughareema, Loughareema;
      When the sun goes down at seven,
    When the hills are dark an' _airy_,
      'Tis a curlew whistles sweet!
    Then somethin' rustles all the reeds
      That stand so thick an' even;
    A little wave runs up the shore
      An' flees, as if on feet.

    Loughareema, Loughareema!
      Stars come out, an' stars are hidin';
    The wather whispers on the stones,
      The flittherin' moths are free
    One'st before the mornin' light
      The Horsemen will come ridin'
    Roun' an' roun' the fairy lough,
      An' no one there to see.




                          *A SONG OF GLENANN.*


    Och, when we lived in ould Glenann
      Meself could lift a song!
    An' ne'er an hour by day or dark
      Would I be thinkin' long.

    The weary wind might take the roof,
      The rain might lay the corn;
    We'd up an' look for betther luck
      About the morrow's morn.

    But since we come away from there
      An' far across the say,
    I still have wrought, an' still have thought
      The way I'm doin' the day.

    An' now we're quarely betther fixed,
      In troth! there' nothin' wrong:
    But me an' mine, by rain an' shine
      We do be thinkin' long.




                            *"FORGETTIN'."*


    The night when last I saw my lad
      His eyes were bright an' wet.
    He took my two hands in his own,
      "'Tis well," says he, "we're met.
    _Asthore machree!_ the likes o' me
      I bid ye now forget."

    Ah, sure the same's a thriflin' thing,
      'Tis more I'd do for him!
    I mind the night I promised well,
      Away on Ballindim.--
    An' every little while or so
      I thry forgettin' Jim.

    It shouldn't take that long to do,
      An' him not very tall:
    'Tis quare the way I'll hear his voice,
      A boy that's out o' call,--
    An' whiles I'll see him stand as plain
      As e'er a six-fut wall.

    Och, never fear, my jewel!
      I'd forget ye now this minute,
    If I only had a notion
      O' the way I should begin it;
    But first an' last it isn't known
      The heap o' throuble's in it.

    Meself began the night ye went
      An' hasn't done it yet;
    I'm nearly fit to give it up,
      For where's the use to fret?--
    An' the memory's fairly spoilt on me
      Wid mindin' to forget.




                          *DENNY'S DAUGHTER.*


    Denny's daughter stood a minute in the field I be to pass,
      All as quiet as her shadow lyin' by her on the grass;
    In her hand a switch o' hazel from the nut tree's crooked root,
      Well I mind the crown o' clover crumpled undher one bare foot.
        For the look of her,
        The look of her
        Comes back on me to-day,--
        Wi' the eyes of her,
        The eyes of her
        That took me on the way.

    Though I seen poor Denny's daughter white an' stiff upon her
            bed,
      Yet I be to think there's sunlight fallin' somewhere on her
              head:
    She'll be singin' _Ave Mary_ where the flowers never wilt,
      She, the girl my own hands covered wi' the narrow
              daisy-quilt....
        For the love of her,
        The love of her
        That would not be my wife:
        An' the loss of her,
        The loss of her
        Has left me lone for life.




                                *LOST.*


    Listen, oh my jewel, I would say,--
      Only wait to' I can get the word:
    Sure I thought I had it sweet an' gay
      Like the bravest song o' summer bird.
    Faith!  I knew it well an' very well
      When this hour the rain begun to fall,
    Now the sorra one o' me can tell
      What about it was at all, at all.

    Listen, oh my jewel, I was wrong,--
      Never, never lived a word so sad;
    Not the heavy sea that drives along
      Bears such weighty throuble as it had.
    _Och anee!_ wi' ne'er a voice to cry,
      Like the weary cloud or drownin' moon
    So it sank, or so was carried by:
      Never told is all forgot so soon.




                          *"CUTTIN' RUSHES."*


    Oh maybe it was yesterday, or fifty years ago!
      Meself was risin' early on a day for cuttin' rushes.
    Walkin' up the Brabla' burn, still the sun was low.
      Now I'd hear the burn run an' then I'd hear the thrushes.

    _Young, still young!_--an' drenchin' wet the grass,
      Wet the golden honeysuckle hangin' sweetly down;
    _Here, lad, here!_ will ye follow where I pass,
      An' find me cuttin' rushes on the mountain.

    Then was it only yesterday, or fifty years or so?
      _Rippin'_ round the bog pools high among the heather,
    The hook it made me hand sore, I had to leave it go,
      'Twas he that cut the rushes then for me to bind together.
    _Come, dear, come!_--an' back along the burn
      See the darlin' honeysuckle hangin' like a crown.
    _Quick, one kiss_,--sure, there' some one at the turn!
      "Oh, we're afther cuttin' rushes on the mountain."

    Yesterday, yesterday, or fifty years ago....
      I waken out o' dreams when I hear the summer thrushes.
    Oh, that's the Brabla' burn, I can hear it sing an' flow,
      For all that's fair, I'd sooner see a bunch o' green rushes.
    _Run, burn, run!_ can ye mind when we were young?
      The honeysuckle hangs above, the pool is dark an' brown:
    _Sing, burn, sing!_ can ye mind the song ye sung
      The day we cut the rushes on the mountain?




                           *"THE OULD LAD."*


    I mind meself a wee boy wi' no plain talk,
      An' standin' not the height o' two peats;
    There was things meself consated 'or the time that I could walk,
      An' who's to tell when wit an' childer meets?
        'Twas the daisies down in the low grass,
          The stars high up in the skies,
        The first I knowed of a mother's face
          Wi' the kind love in her eyes,
              Och, och!
            The kind love in her eyes.

    I went the way of other lads that's neither good nor bad,
      An' still, d'ye see, a lad has far to go;
    But the things meself consated when I wasn't sick nor sad,
      They're aisy told, an' little use to know.
        'Twas whiles a boat on the say beyont,
          An' whiles a girl on the shore,
        An' whiles a scrape o' the fiddle-strings,
          Or maybe an odd thing more
              In troth!
            Maybe an odd thing more.

    A man, they say, in spite of all, is betther for a wife,
      In-undher this ould roof I live me lone;
    I never seen the woman yet I wanted all me life,
      An' I never made me pillow on a stone.
        'Tis "fancy buys the ribbon" an' all,
          An' fancy sticks to the young;
        But a man of his years can do wi' a pipe
          Can smoke an' hould his tongue,
              D'ye mind,
            Smoke an' hould his tongue.

    Ye see me now an ould man, his work near done,
      Sure the hair upon me head's gone white;
    But the things meself consated 'or the time that I could run,
      They're the nearest to me heart this night.
        Just the daisies down in the low grass,
          The stars high up in the skies,
        The first I knowed of a mother's face
          Wi' the kind love in her eyes,
              Och, och!
            The kind love in her eyes.




                           *THE RACHRAY MAN.*


    Och, what was it got me at all that time
    To promise I'd marry a Rachray man?
    An' now he'll not listen to rason or rhyme,
    He's strivin' to hurry me all that he can.
      "Come on, an' ye _be_ to come on!" says he,
      "Ye're bound for the Island, to live wi' me."

    See Rachray Island beyont in the bay,
    An' the dear knows what they be doin' out there
    But fishin' an' fightin' an' tearin' away,
    An' who's to hindher, an' what do they care?
      The goodness can tell what 'ud happen to me
      When Rachray 'ud have me, _anee, anee!_

    I might have took Pether from over the hill,
    A dacent poacher, the kind poor boy:
    Could I keep the ould places about me still
    I'd never set foot out o' sweet Ballyvoy.
      My sorra on Rachray, the could sea-caves,
      An' blackneck divers, an' weary ould waves!

    I'll never win back now, whatever may fall,
    So give me good luck, for ye'll see me no more;
    Sure an Island man is the mischief an' all--
    An' me that never was married before!
      Oh think o' my fate when ye dance at a fair,
      In Rachray there' no Christianity there.




                                *BIRDS.*


    Sure maybe ye've heard the storm-thrush
      Whistlin' bould in March,
    Before there' a primrose peepin' out,
      Or a wee red cone on the larch;
    Whistlin' the sun to come out o' the cloud,
      An' the wind to come over the sea,
    But for all he can whistle so clear an' loud,
      He's never the bird for me.

    Sure maybe ye've seen the song-thrush
      After an April rain
    Slip from in-undher the drippin' leaves,
      Wishful to sing again;
    An' low wi' love when he's near the nest,
      An' loud from the top o' the tree,
    But for all he can flutter the heart in your breast,
      He's never the bird for me.

    Sure maybe ye've heard the cushadoo
      Callin' his mate in May,
    When one sweet thought is the whole of his life,
      An' he tells it the one sweet way.
    But my heart is sore at the cushadoo
      Filled wid his own soft glee,
    Over an' over his "me an' you!"
      He's never the bird for me.

    Sure maybe ye've heard the red-breast
      Singin' his lone on a thorn,
    Mindin' himself o' the dear days lost,
      Brave wid his heart forlorn.
    The time is in dark November,
      An' no spring hopes has he:
    "Remember," he sings, "remember!"
      Ay, _thon's_ the wee bird for me.




                               *JOHNEEN.*


    Sure he's five months old, an' he's two foot long,
      Baby Johneen;
    Watch yerself now, for he's terrible sthrong,
      Baby Johneen.
    An' his fists 'ill be up if ye make any slips,
    He has finger-ends like the daisy-tips,
    But he'll have ye attend to the words of his lips,
      Will Johneen.

    There' nobody can rightly tell the colour of his eyes,
      This Johneen;
    For they're partly o' the earth an' still they're partly o' the
            skies,
      Like Johneen.
    So far as he's thravelled he's been laughin' all the way,
    For the little soul is quare an' wise, the little heart is gay;
    An' he likes the merry daffodils, he thinks they'd do to play
      With Johneen.

    He'll sail a boat yet, if he only has his luck,
      Young Johneen,
    For he takes to the wather like any little duck,
      Boy Johneen;
    Sure them are the hands now to pull on a rope,
    An' nate feet for walkin' the deck on a slope,
    But the ship she must wait a wee while yet, I hope,
      For Johneen.

    For we couldn't do wantin' him, not just yet,
      Och, Johneen;
    'Tis you that are the daisy, an' you that are the pet,
      Wee Johneen.
    Here's to your health, an' we'll dhrink it to-night
    _Slainte gal, avic machree!_ live an' do right,
    _Slainte gal avourneen!_ may your days be bright,
      Johneen!




                         *"BEAUTY'S A FLOWER."*


    _Youth's for an hour,_
    _Beauty's a flower,_
    _But love is the jewel that wins the world._

    Youth's for an hour, an' the taste o' life is sweet,
    Ailes was a girl that stepped on two bare feet;
    In all my days I never seen the one as fair as she,
    I'd have lost my life for Ailes, an' she never cared for me.

    Beauty's a flower, an' the days o' life are long,
    There' little knowin' who may live to sing another song;
    For Ailes was the fairest, but another is my wife,
    An' Mary--God be good to her!--is all I love in life.

    _Youth's for an hour,_
    _Beauty's a flower,_
    _But love is the jewel that wins the world._




                      *THE BOY FROM BALLYTEARIM.*


    He was born in Ballytearim, where there' little work to do,
    An' the longer he was livin' there the poorer still he grew;
    Says he till all belongin' him, "Now happy may ye be!
    But I'm off to find me fortune," sure he says, says he.

    "All the gold in Ballytearim is what's stickin' to the whin;
    All the crows in Ballytearim has a way o' gettin' thin."
    So the people did be praisin' him the year he wint away,--
    "Troth, I'll hould ye can do it," sure they says, says they.

    Och, the boy 'ud still be thinkin' long, an' he across the foam,
    An' the two ould hearts be thinkin' long that waited for him
            home:
    But a girl that sat her lone an' whiles, her head upon her knee,
    Would be sighin' low for sorra, not a word says she.

    He won home to Ballytearim, an' the two were livin' yet,
    When he heard where she was lyin' now the eyes of him were wet;
    "Faith, here's me two fists full o' gold, an' little good to me
    When I'll never meet an' kiss her," sure he says, says he.

    Then the boy from Ballytearim set his face another road,
    An' whatever luck has followed him was never rightly knowed:
    But still it's truth I'm tellin' ye--or may I never sin!--
    All the gold in Ballytearim is what's stickin' to the whin.




                           *I MIND THE DAY.*


    I mind the day I'd wish I was a say-gull flyin' far,
      For then I'd fly an' find you in the West;
    An' I'd wish I was a little rose as sweet as roses are,
      For then you'd maybe wear it on your breast,
        _Achray!_
      You'd maybe take an' wear it on your breast.

    I'd wish I could be living near, to love you day an' night,
      To let no throuble touch you or annoy;
    I'd wish I could be dyin' here to rise a spirit light,
      If Them above 'ud let me bring you joy,
        _Achray!_
      If Them above 'ud let me win you joy.

    An' now I wish no wishes, nor ever fall a tear,
      Nor take a thought beyont the way I'm led:
    I mind the day that's over-by, an' bless the day that's here,
      There be to come a day when we'll be dead,
        _Achray!_
      A longer, lighter day when we'll be dead.




                           *GRACE FOR LIGHT.*


    When we were little childer we had a quare wee house,
      Away up in the heather by the head o' Brabla' burn;
    The hares we'd see them scootin', an' we'd hear the crowin'
            grouse,
      An' when we'd all be in at night ye'd not get room to turn.

    The youngest two She'd put to bed, their faces to the wall,
      An' the lave of us could sit aroun', just anywhere we might;
    Herself 'ud take the rush-dip an' light it for us all,
      An' "_God be thanked!_" she would say,--"_now we have a
              light_."

    Then we be to quet the laughin' an' pushin' on the floor,
      An' think on One who called us to come and be forgiven;
    Himself 'ud put his pipe down, an' say the good word more,
      "_May the Lamb o' God lead us all to the Light o' Heaven!_"

    There' a wheen things that used to be an' now has had their day,
      The nine Glens of Antrim can show ye many a sight;
    But not the quare wee house where we lived up Brabla' way,
      Nor a child in all the nine Glens that knows the grace for
              light.




                           *THE GRAND MATCH.*


    Dennis was hearty when Dennis was young,
    High was his step in the jig that he sprung,
    _He_ had the looks an' the sootherin' tongue,--
      An' he wanted a girl wid a fortune.

    Nannie was grey-eyed an' Nannie was tall,
    Fair was the face hid in-undher her shawl,
    Troth! an' he liked her the best o' them all,--
      But she'd not a _traneen_ to her fortune.

    He be to look out for a likelier match,
    So he married a girl that was counted a catch,
    An' as ugly as need be, the dark little patch,--
      But that was a thrifle, he tould her.

    She brought him her good-lookin' gold to admire,
    She brought him her good-lookin' cows to his byre,
    But far from good-lookin' she sat by his fire,--
      An' paid him that "thrifle" he tould her.

    He met pretty Nan when a month had gone by,
    An' he thought like a fool to get round her he'd try;
    Wid a smile on her lip an' a spark in her eye,
      She said, "How is the woman that owns ye?"

    Och, never be tellin' the life that he's led!
    Sure many's the night that he'll wish himself dead,
    For the sake o' two eyes in a pretty girl's head,--
      An' the tongue o' the woman that owns him.




                           *THE SAILOR MAN.*


    Sure a terrible time I was out o' the way,
      Over the sea, over the sea,
    Till I come back to Ireland one sunny day,--
      Betther for me, betther for me
    The first time me foot got the feel o' the ground
      I was sthrollin' along in an Irish city,
    That hasn't its aquil the world around
      For the air that is sweet an' the girls that are pretty.

    Light on their feet now they passed me an' sped,
      Give you me word, give you me word,
    Every girl wid a turn o' the head
      Just like a bird, just like a bird;
    An' the lashes so thick round their beautiful eyes
      Shinin' to tell you it's fair time o' day wid them,
    Back in me heart wid a kind o' surprise
      I think how the Irish girls has the way wid them!

    Och man alive! but it's little ye know
      That never was there, never was there.
    Look where ye like for them, long may ye go,--
      What do I care? what do I care?
    Plenty as blackberries where will ye find
      Rare pretty girls not by two nor by three o' them?
    Only just there where they grow, d'ye mind
      Still like the blackberries, more than ye see o' them.

    Long, long away, an' no matther how far,
      'Tis the girls that I miss, the girls that I miss:
    Women are round ye wherever ye are
      Not worth a kiss, not worth a kiss.
    Over in Ireland many's the one,--
      Well do I know, that has nothing to say wid them,--
    Sweeter than anythin' undher the sun,
      Och, 'tis the Irish girls has the way wid them!




                               *AT SEA.*


    'Tis the long blue Head o' Garron
      From the sea,
    Och, we're sailin' past the Garron
      On the sea.
    Now Glen Ariff lies behind,
    Where the waters fall an' wind
    By the willows o' Glen Ariff to the sea.

    Ould Luirgedan rises green
      By the sea,
    Ay, he stands between the Glens
      An' the sea.
    Now we're past the darklin' caves,
    Where the breakin' summer waves
    Wandher in wi' their trouble from the sea.

    But Cushendun lies nearer
      To the sea,
    An' _thon's_ a shore is dearer
      Still to me,
    For the land that I am leavin'
    Sure the heart I have is grievin',
    But the ship has set her sails for the sea.

    Och, what's this is deeper
      Than the sea?
    An' what's this is stronger
      Nor the sea?
    When the call is "all or none,"
    An' the answer "all for one,"
    Then we be to sail away across the sea.




                           *"LOOKIN' BACK."*


    Wathers o' Moyle an' the white gulls flyin',
    Since I was near ye what have I seen?
    Deep great seas, an' a sthrong wind sighin'
    Night an' day where the waves are green.
    _Struth na Moile_, the wind goes sighin'
    Over a waste o' wathers green.

    Slemish an' Trostan, dark wi' heather,
    High are the Rockies, airy-blue;
    Sure ye have snows in the winter weather,
    Here they're lyin' the long year through.
    Snows are fair in the summer weather,
    Och, an' the shadows between are blue!

    Lone Glen Dun an' the wild glen flowers,
    Little ye know if the prairie is sweet.
    Roses for miles, an' redder than ours
    Spring here undher the horses' feet,
    Ay, an' the black-eyed gold sunflowers,
    Not as the glen flowers small an' sweet.

    Wathers o' Moyle, I hear ye callin'
    Clearer for half o' the world between,
    Antrim hills an' the wet rain fallin'
    Whiles ye are nearer than snow-tops keen:
    Dreams o' the night an' a night wind callin'--
    What is the half o' the world between?




                       *THE NORTH-WEST--CANADA.*


    Oh would ye hear, and would ye hear
      Of the windy, wide North-West?
    Faith! 'tis a land as green as the sea,
    That rolls as far and rolls as free,
    With drifts of flowers, so many there be,
      Where the cattle roam and rest.

    Oh could ye see, and could ye see
      The great gold skies so clear,
    The rivers that race through the pine-shade dark,
    The mountainous snows that take no mark,
    Sun-lit and high on the Rockies stark,
      So far they seem as near.

    Then could ye feel, and could ye feel
      How fresh is a Western night!
    When the long land-breezes rise and pass
    And sigh in the rustling prairie grass,
    When the dark-blue skies are clear as glass,
      And the same old stars are bright.

    But could ye know, and for ever know
      The word of the young North-West!
    A word she breathes to the true and bold,
    A word misknown to the false and cold,
    A word that never was spoken or sold,
      But the one that knows is blest.




                           *BACK TO IRELAND.*


    Oh tell me, will I ever win to Ireland again,
      _Astore!_ from the far North-West?
    Have we given all the rainbows, an' green woods an' rain,
      For the suns an' the snows o' the West?
    "Them that goes to Ireland must thravel night an' day,
    An' them that goes to Ireland must sail across the say,
    For the len'th of here to Ireland is half the world away--
    An' you'll lave your heart behind you in the West.
        Set your face for Ireland,
        Kiss your friends in Ireland,
        But lave your heart behind you in the West."

    On a dim an' shiny mornin' the ship she comes to land,
      Early, oh early in the mornin',
    The silver wathers o' the Foyle go slidin' to the strand,
      Whisperin', "Ye're welcome in the mornin'."
    There's darkness on the holy hills I know are close aroun',
    But the stars are shinin' up the sky, the stars are shinin'
            down,
    They make a golden cross above, they make a golden crown,
    An' meself could tell ye why,--in the mornin'.
        Sure an' this is Ireland,
        Thank God for Ireland!
        I'm comin' back to Ireland the mornin'.




                 PRINTED BY WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS.






*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SONGS OF THE GLENS OF ANTRIM ***




A Word from Project Gutenberg


We will update this book if we find any errors.

This book can be found under: http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/53075

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works, so
the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright royalties.
Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this
license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works to protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) concept and
trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be
used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific
permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook,
complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly
any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances
and research.  They may be modified and printed and given away - you may
do practically _anything_ in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.



The Full Project Gutenberg License


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1. General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works


*1.A.* By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the
terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all
copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in your possession. If
you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

*1.B.* "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things
that you can do with most Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works even
without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph
1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works. See paragraph 1.E below.

*1.C.* The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of
Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works. Nearly all the individual works
in the collection are in the public domain in the United States. If an
individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and
you are located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent
you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating
derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project
Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the
Project Gutenberg(tm) mission of promoting free access to electronic
works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg(tm) works in compliance with
the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg(tm) name
associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this
agreement by keeping this work in the same format with its attached full
Project Gutenberg(tm) License when you share it without charge with
others.


*1.D.* The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg(tm) work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

*1.E.* Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

*1.E.1.* The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United
    States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with
    almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away
    or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License
    included with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org .
    If you are not located in the United States, you'll have to
    check the laws of the country where you are located before using
    this ebook.

*1.E.2.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain
a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the copyright
holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the United
States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or
providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"
associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with
the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission
for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark as set
forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.3.* If an individual Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic work is
posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and
distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and
any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg(tm) License for all works posted
with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of
this work.

*1.E.4.* Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project
Gutenberg(tm) License terms from this work, or any files containing a
part of this work or any other work associated with Project
Gutenberg(tm).

*1.E.5.* Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) License.

*1.E.6.* You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg(tm) work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg(tm) web site
(http://www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or
expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a
means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include
the full Project Gutenberg(tm) License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

*1.E.7.* Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg(tm) works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

*1.E.8.* You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works
provided that

  - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
    the use of Project Gutenberg(tm) works calculated using the method
    you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
    to the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm) trademark, but he has
    agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
    within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
    legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
    payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
    Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
    Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
    Literary Archive Foundation."

  - You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
    you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
    does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg(tm)
    License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
    copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
    all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg(tm)
    works.

  - You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
    any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
    electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
    receipt of the work.

  - You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
    distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) works.


*1.E.9.* If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3. below.

*1.F.*

*1.F.1.* Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg(tm) collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg(tm)
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your
equipment.

*1.F.2.* LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg(tm) trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg(tm) electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees.
YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY,
BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN
PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND
ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR
ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES
EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

*1.F.3.* LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund. If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

*1.F.4.* Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS,' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

*1.F.5.* Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

*1.F.6.* INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg(tm)
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg(tm) work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg(tm)


Project Gutenberg(tm) is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg(tm)'s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg(tm) collection will remain
freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and
permanent future for Project Gutenberg(tm) and future generations. To
learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and
how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the
Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org .


Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state
of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue
Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is
64-6221541. Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf . Contributions to the
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the
full extent permitted by U.S.  federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its volunteers
and employees are scattered throughout numerous locations. Its business
office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116,
(801) 596-1887, email business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation


Project Gutenberg(tm) depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where
we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any
statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside
the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways
including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate,
please visit: http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg(tm) electronic
works.


Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg(tm)
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone. For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg(tm) eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg(tm) eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's eBook
number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected _editions_ of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number. The replaced older file is renamed.
_Versions_ based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

    http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg(tm),
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
