The Project Gutenberg EBook of Pinocchio in Africa, by Cherubini

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: Pinocchio in Africa

Author: Cherubini

Release Date: July 1, 2002 [EBook #5327]
Last Updated: August 24, 2014

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PINOCCHIO IN AFRICA ***




Produced by Walter Moore, James Linden and James Nugen




PINOCCHIO IN AFRICA

Translated from the Italian
of Cherubini by
Angelo Patri
Principal of Public School No. 4
Borough of Bronx
New York City

Original Drawings by
Charles Copeland

Ginn and Company
Boston . New York . Chicago . London

Copyright, 1911, by Angelo Patri
All Rights Reserved
811.4

The Athenaum Press
Ginn and Company Proprietors
Boston . U.S.A.

CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I Why Pinocchio Did Not Go To School
II Pinocchio Assists In Welcoming The Circus
III Pinocchio Among The Wild Animals
IV Pinocchio Makes Friends With The Wild Animals
V Pinocchio Determines To Go To Africa
VI Pinocchio In Doubt
VII He Bids Good-By To The Animals
VIII Pinocchio Does Not Sleep
IX Pinocchio Eats Dates
X Pinocchio Lands On A Rock
XI The First Night In Africa
XII Pinocchio Is Well Received
XIII Pinocchio Is Arrested
XIV Pinocchio's Father
XV Pinocchio Sells Drinking Water
XVI A Ride On A Dog's Back
XVII The Cave
XVIII The Caravan
XIX The Baby Pulls His Nose
XX Pinocchio Travels With The Caravan
XXI He Is Offered For Sale
XXII The Bird In The Forest
XXIII His Adventure With A Lion
XXIV Pinocchio Is Brought Before The King
XXV The Monkeys Stone The Marionette
XXVI Pinocchio Dreams Again
XXVII Pinocchio Is Carried Away In An Eggshell
XXVIII Pinocchio Escapes Again
XXIX Pinocchio Is Swallowed By A Crocodile
XXX Pinocchio Is Made Emperor
XXXI His First Night As Emperor
XXXII He Sends For The Royal Doctor
XXXIII An Old Story
XXXIV His Duties As Emperor
XXXV Pinocchio Makes His First Address
XXXVI The Emperor Becomes As Black As A Crow
XXXVII The Hippopotamus Hunt
XXXVIII The Emperor Surprises His Subjects By His Wisdom
XXXIX Pinocchio Travels Through The Empire
XL Pinocchio Is Placed In A Cage
XLI Pinocchio Performs For The Public
XLII Pinocchio Breaks The Cage And Makes His Escape

PREFACE

Collodi's "Pinocchio" tells the story of a wooden marionette and of his
efforts to become a real boy. Although he was kindly treated by the old
woodcutter, Geppetto, who had fashioned him out of a piece of kindling
wood, he was continually getting into trouble and disgrace. Even
Fatina, the Fairy with the Blue Hair, could not at once change an idle,
selfish marionette into a studious and reliable boy. His adventures,
including his brief transformation into a donkey, give the author an
opportunity to teach a needed and wholesome lesson without disagreeable
moralizing.

Pinocchio immediately leaped into favor as the hero of Italian juvenile
romance. The wooden marionette became a popular subject for the
artist's pencil and the storyteller's invention. Brought across the
seas, he was welcomed by American children and now appears in a new
volume which sets forth his travels in Africa. The lessons underlying
his fantastic experiences are clear to the youngest readers but are
never allowed to become obtrusive. The amusing illustrations of the
original are fully equaled in the present edition, while the whimsical
nonsense which delights Italian children has been reproduced as closely
as a translation permits.

CHAPTER I
WHY PINOCCHIO DID NOT GO TO SCHOOL

One morning Pinocchio slipped out of bed before daybreak. He got up
with a great desire to study, a feeling, it must be confessed, which
did not often take hold of him. He dipped his wooden head into the
cool, refreshing water, puffed very hard, dried himself, jumped up and
down to stretch his legs, and in a few moments was seated at his small
worktable.

There was his home work for the day,--twelve sums, four pages of
penmanship, and the fable of "The Dog and the Rabbit" to learn by
heart. He began with the fable, reciting it in a loud voice, like the
hero in the play: "'A dog was roaming about the fields, when from
behind a little hill jumped a rabbit, which had been nibbling the
tender grass.'

"Roaming, nibbling.--The teacher says this is beautiful language. Maybe
it is; I have nothing to say about that. Well, one more.

"'A dog was roaming about the fields--when he saw--run out--a rabbit
which--which--' I don't know it; let's begin again. 'A dog was running
about eating, eating--' But eating what? Surely he did not eat grass!

"This fable is very hard; I cannot learn it. Well, I never did have
much luck with dogs and rabbits! Let me try the sums. Eight and seven,
seventeen; and three, nineteen; and six, twenty-three, put down two and
carry three. Nine and three, eleven; and four, fourteen; put down the
whole number--one, four; total, four hundred thirteen.

"Ah! good! very good! I do not wish to boast, but I have always had a
great liking for arithmetic. Now to prove the answer: eight and seven,
sixteen; and three, twenty-one; and six, twenty-four; put down four--
why! it's wrong! Eight and seven, fourteen; and three, nineteen; and
six--wrong again!

"I know what the trouble is; the wind is not in the right quarter
to-day for sums. Perhaps it would be better to take a walk in the open."

No sooner said than done. Pinocchio went out into the street and filled
his lungs with the fresh morning air.

"Ah! here, at least, one can breathe. It is a pity that I am beginning
to feel hungry! Strange how things go wrong sometimes! Take the
lessons--" he went on.

Listen! A noise of creaking wheels, of bells ringing, the voices of
people, the cries of animals! Pinocchio stopped short. What could it
all mean?

Down the street came a huge wagon drawn by three big mules. Behind it
was a long train of men and women dressed in the strangest fashion.
Some were on foot, some on horseback, some sat or lay on other wagons
larger and heavier than the first. Two Moors, their scarlet turbans
blazing in the sun, brought up the rear. With spears at rest and with
shields held before them, they rode along, mounted on two snow-white
horses.

Pinocchio stood with his mouth open. Only after the two Moors had
passed did he discover the fact that he had legs, and that these were
following on behind the procession. And he walked, walked, walked,
until the carriages and all the people stopped in the big town square.
A man with a deep voice began to give orders. In a short time there
arose an immense tent, which hid from Pinocchio and the many others who
had gathered in the square all those wonderful wagons, horses, mules,
and strange people.

It may seem odd, but it is a fact that the school bell began to ring
and Pinocchio never heard it!

CHAPTER II
PINOCCHIO ASSISTS IN WELCOMING THE CIRCUS

That day the school bell rang longer and louder perhaps than it was
wont to ring on other days. What of that? From the tent came the loud
clanging of hammers, the sounds of instruments, the neighing of horses,
the roaring of lions and tigers and panthers, the howling of wolves,
the bleating of camels, the screeching of monkeys! Wonderful noises!
Who cared for the school bell? Pinocchio? No, not he.

Suddenly there was a loud command. All was still.

The two Moors raised the tent folds with their spears. Out came a crowd
of men dressed in all sorts of fine clothes, and women in coats of mail
and beautiful cloaks of silk, with splendid diadems on their heads.
They were all mounted upon horses covered with rich trappings of red
and white.

Out they marched, and behind them came a golden carriage drawn by four
white ponies. In it was the big man with the deep voice. There he sat
in the beautiful carriage with his dazzling high hat and his tall white
collar. He wore a black suit with a pair of high boots. As he rode on
he waved his white gloves and bowed right and left. The band with its
trumpets and drums and cymbals struck up a stirring march, and a parade
such as the townsfolk had never seen before passed out among the crowds
that now filled the square.

The marionette could not believe his eyes. He rubbed them to see if he
was really awake. He forgot all about his hunger. What did he care for
that? The wonders of the whole world were before him.

The parade soon reentered the tent. The two Moors, mounted upon their
snow-white horses, again stood at the entrance. Then the director, the
man with the loud voice, came out, hat in hand, and began to address
the people.

CHAPTER III
PINOCCHIO AMONG THE WILD ANIMALS

"Ladies and gentlemen! kind and gentle people! citizens of a great
town! officers and soldiers! I wish you all peace, health, and plenty.

"Ladies and gentlemen, first of all, let me make a brief explanation. I
am not here for gain. Far be it from me to think of such a thing as
money. I travel the world over with my menagerie, which is made up of
rare animals brought by me from the heart of Africa. I perform only in
large cities. But to-day one of the monkeys in the troupe is fallen
seriously ill. It is therefore necessary to make a short stop in order
that we may consult with some well-known doctor in this town.

"Profit, therefore, by this chance, ladies and gentlemen, to see
wonders which you have never seen before, and which you may never see
again. I labor to spread learning, and I work to teach the masses, for
I love the common people. Come forward, and I shall be glad to open my
menagerie to you. Forward, forward, ladies and gentlemen! two small
francs will admit you. Children one franc, yes, only one franc."

Pinocchio, who stood in the front row, and who was ready to take
advantage of the kind invitation, felt a sudden shock on hearing these
last words. He looked at the director in a dazed fashion, as if to say
to him, "What are you talking about? Did you not say that you traveled
around the world for--"

Then, as he saw one of the spectators put down a two-franc piece and
walk inside, he hung his head and suffered in silence.

Having passed two or three minutes in painful thinking, the forlorn
marionette put his hands into his pockets, hoping to find in them a
forgotten coin. He found nothing but a few buttons.

He racked his brains to think of some plan whereby he could get the
money that was needed. He glanced at his clothes, which he would
cheerfully have sold could he have found a buyer. Not knowing what else
to do, he walked around the tent like a wolf prowling about the
sheepfold.

Around and around he went till he found himself near an old wall which
hid him from view. He came nearer the tent and to his joy discovered a
tiny hole in the canvas. Here was his chance! He thrust in his thin
wooden finger, but seized with a sudden fear lest some hungry lion
should see it and bite it off, he hastily tried to pull it out again.
In doing this, somehow "r-r-rip" went the canvas, and there was a tear
a yard wide. Pinocchio shook with fear. But fear or no fear, there was
the hole and beyond--were the wonders of Africa!

First an arm, then his head, and then his whole body went into the cage
of wild animals! He could not see them, but he heard them, and he was
filled with awe. The beasts had seen him. He felt himself grasped at
once by the shoulders and by the end of his nose. Two or three voices
shouted in his ears, "Who goes there?"

"For pity's sake, Mr. Elephant!" said poor Pinocchio.

"There are no elephants here."

"Pardon, Sir Lion."

"There are no lions here."

"Excuse me, Mr. Tiger."

"There are no tigers."

"Mr. Monkey?"

"No Monkeys.

"Men?"

"There are neither men nor women here; there are only Africans from
Africa, who imitate wild beasts for two francs and a half a day."

"But the elephants, where are they?"

"In Africa."

"And the lions?"

"In Africa."

"And the tigers and the monkeys?"

"In Africa. And you, where do you come from? What are you doing in the
cage of the wild beasts? Didn't you see what is written over the door?
NO ONE ALLOWED TO ENTER."

"I cannot read in the dark," replied Pinocchio, trembling from head to
foot; "I am no cat."

At these words everybody began to laugh. Pinocchio felt a little
encouraged and murmured to himself, "They seem to be kind people, these
wild beasts."

He wanted to say something pleasant to them, but just then the director
of the company began to shout at the top of his voice.

CHAPTER IV
PINOCCHIO MAKES FRIENDS WITH THE WILD ANIMALS

"Come forward, come forward, ladies and gentlemen! The cost is small
and the pleasure is great. The show will last an hour, only one hour.
Come forward! See the battle between the terrible lion Zumbo and his
wife, the ferocious lioness Zumba. Behold the tiger that wrestles with
the polar bear, and the elephant that lifts the whole weight of the
tent with his powerful trunk. See the animals feed. Ladies and
gentlemen, come forward! Only two francs!"

At these words the men in the cages of the wild animals put horns, sea
shells, and whistles to their mouths, and the next moment there came
wild roarings and howls and shrieks. It was enough to make one shudder
with fear.

Again the director raised his voice: "Come forward, come forward,
ladies and gentlemen! two francs; children only one franc."

The music started: Boom! Boom! Boom! Par-ap'-ap'-pa! Boom! Boom! Boom!
Par-ap' ap' ap' pa! parap' ap' ap' pa!

One surprise seemed to follow another. Pinocchio longed to enjoy the
sights, but how was he to get out of the cage? At length, taking his
courage in both hands, he said politely, "Excuse me, gentlemen, but if
you have no commands to give me--"

"Not a command!" roughly answered the bearded man who played the lion.
"If you do not go away quickly, I will have you eaten up by that large
ape behind you."

"But I should be hard to digest," said the marionette.

"Boy, be careful how you talk," exclaimed the same voice.

"I said that your ape would have indigestion if he ate me," replied
Pinocchio. "Do you think that I am joking? No, I am in earnest. He
really would. I came in here by chance while returning from a walk, and
if you will permit me, I will go home to my father who is waiting for
me. As you have no orders to give me, many thanks, good-by, and good
luck to you."

"Listen, boy," said the large man who took the part of the elephant; "I
am very thirsty, and I will give you a fine new penny if you will fill
this bucket at the fountain and bring it to me."

"What!" replied Pinocchio, greatly offended; "I am no servant! However
this time, merely to please you, I will go." And crawling through the
hole by which he had entered, he went out to the fountain and returned
in a very short time with the bucket full of water.

"Good boy, good marionette!" said the men as they passed the bucket
from one to another.

Pinocchio was happy. Never had he felt so happy as at that moment.
"What good people!" he said to himself. "I would gladly stay with
them." In the meantime the bucket was emptied, and there were still
some who had not had a drink. "I will go and refill it," said the
marionette promptly. And without waiting to be asked, he took the
bucket and flew to the fountain.

When he returned they flattered him so cleverly with praise and thanks
that a strong friendship sprang up between Pinocchio and the wild
beasts.

Being a woodenhead he forgot about his father and did not go away as he
had intended to do. In fact, he was curious to know something of the
history of these people, who were forced to play at being wild animals.

After a moment's silence he turned to the one who had asked him to go
for the water and said, "You are from Africa?"

"Yes, I am an African, and all my companions are African."

"How interesting! but pardon me, is Africa a beautiful country?"

"I should say so! A country, my dear boy, full of plenty, where
everything is given away free! A country in which at any moment the
strangest things may happen. A servant may become a master; a plain
citizen may become a king. There are trees, taller than church
steeples, with branches touching the ground, so that one may gather
sweet fruit without the least trouble. My boy, Africa is a country full
of enchanted forests, where the game allows itself to be killed,
quartered, and hung; where riches--"

No one knows how far this description would have gone, if at that
moment the voice of the director had not been heard. The music had
stopped, and the director was talking to the people, who did not seem
very willing to part with their money.

CHAPTER V
PINOCCHIO DETERMINES TO GO TO AFRICA

Pinocchio had already resolved to go to Africa to eat of the fruit and
to gather riches. He was eager to learn more, and impatient of
interruption.

"And the director is an African also?"

"Certainly he is an African."

"And is he very rich?"

"Is he rich? Take my word for it that if he would, he could buy up this
whole country."

Pinocchio was struck dumb. Still he wanted to make the men believe that
what he had heard was not altogether new to him. "Oh, I know that
Africa is a very beautiful country, and I have often planned to go
there,--and--if I were sure that it would not be too much trouble I would
willingly go with you."

"With us? We are not going to Africa."

"What a pity! I thought I could make the journey in your company."

"Are you in earnest?" asked the bearded man. "Do you believe that there
is any Africa outside this tent?"

"Tent or no tent, I have decided to go to Africa, and I shall go,"
boldly replied the marionette.

"I like that youngster," said the man who played the part of a
crocodile. "That boy will make his fortune someday."

"Of course I shall!" continued Pinocchio. "I ought to have fifty
thousand francs, because I must get a new jacket for my father, who
sold his old one to buy me a spelling book. If there is so much gold
and silver in Africa, I will fill up a thousand vessels. Is it true
that there is a great deal of gold and silver?"

"Did we not tell you so?" replied another voice. "Why, if I had not
lost all that I had put in my pockets before leaving Africa, by this
time I should have become a prince. And now were it not for the fact
that I have promised to stay with these people, to be a panther at two
francs and a half a day, I would gladly go along with you."

"Thank you; thank you for your good intentions," answered the
marionette. "In case you decide to go with me, I start to-morrow
morning at dawn."

"On what steamship?"

"What did you say?" asked Pinocchio.

"On what steamship do you sail?"

"Sail! I am going on foot."

At these words everybody laughed.

"There is little to laugh at, my dear people. If you knew how many
miles I have traveled on these legs by day and by night, over land and
sea, you would not laugh. What! do you think Fairyland, the country of
the Blockheads, and the Island of the Bees are reached in a single
stride? I go to Africa, and I go on foot."

"But it is necessary to cross the Mediterranean Sea."

"It will be crossed."

"On foot?"

"Either on foot or on horseback, it matters little. But pardon me,
after crossing the Mediterranean Sea, do you reach Africa?"

"Certainly, unless you wish to go by way of the Red Sea."

"The Red Sea? No, truly!"

"Perhaps the route over the Red Sea would be better."

"I do not wish to go near the Red Sea."

"And why?" asked the wolf man, who up to this time had not opened his
mouth.

"Why? Why? Because I do not wish to get my clothes dyed; do you
understand?"

More laughter greeted these words. Pinocchio's wooden cheeks got very
red, and he sputtered: "This is no way to treat a gentleman. I shall do
as I please, and I do not please to enter the Red Sea. That is enough.
Now I shall leave you," and he started off.

"Farewell, farewell, marionette!"

"Farewell, you impolite beasts!" Pinocchio wanted to call out, but he
did not.

"Come back!" cried the bearded man; "here is the bucket; please fill it
once more, for I am still thirsty."

CHAPTER VI
PINOCCHIO IN DOUBT

Pinocchio went away very angry, vowing that he would avenge himself on
all who had laughed at him.

"To begin with," said he, "I intend to make them all die of thirst. If
they wait to drink of the water that I bring, they will certainly die."
With these thoughts in his mind the marionette started homeward,
carrying the bucket on his head.

"The bucket will repay me for all the work I have had put upon me. How
unlucky we children are! Wherever we go, there is always something for
us to do. To-day I thought I would simply enjoy myself; instead, I have
had to carry water for a company of strangers. How absurd! two trips,
one after the other, to give drink to people I do not know! And how
they drink! they seem to be sponges. For my part they can be thirsty as
long as they like. I feel now as if I would never again move a finger
for them. I am not going to be laughed at."

As he finished these remarks Pinocchio arrived at the fountain. It was
delightful to see the clear water rushing out, but he could not help
thinking of those poor creatures who were waiting for him. He had to
stop.

"Shall I or shall I not?" he asked himself. "After all, they are good
people, who are forced to imitate wild animals; and besides, they have
treated me with some kindness. I may as well carry some water to them;
a trip more or less makes no difference to me."

He approached the fountain, filled the bucket, and ran down the road.

"Hello within there!" he said in a low voice. "Here is the bucket of
water; come and take it, for I am not going in."

"Good marionette," said the beasts, "thank you!"

"Don't mention it," replied Pinocchio, very happy.

"Why will you not come in?"

"It is impossible, thank you. I must go to school."

"Then you are not going to Africa?"

"Who told you that! I am returning to school to bid farewell to my
teacher, and to ask him to excuse me for a few days. Then I wish to see
my father and ask his permission to go, so that he will not be anxious
while I am away."

"Excellent marionette, you will become famous."

"What agreeable people!" thought Pinocchio. "I am sorry to leave them."

"So you really will not come in?"

"No, I have said so before. I must go to school first, and then--"

"But it seems to me rather late for school," said the crocodile man.

"That is true; it is too late for school," replied Pinocchio.

"Well, then, stay a little longer with us, and later you can go home to
your father."

Pinocchio thrust his head through the hole and leaped into the tent.
The naughty marionette had not the least desire to go to school, and
was only too glad of an excuse to watch these strange people.

CHAPTER VII
HE BIDS GOOD-BY TO THE ANIMALS

The show had begun. The director was explaining to the people the
wonders of his menagerie.

"Ladies and gentlemen, observe the beauty and the wildness of all these
animals, which I have brought from Central Africa. Here they are,
inclosed in these many cages, but hidden from your view. Why are they
hidden? Because, ladies and gentlemen, you would be frightened at the
sight of them, and your peace and health greatly concern me. The first
animal which I have the pleasure to present to you is the elephant.
Observe, ladies and gentlemen, that small affair which hangs under his
nose. With that he builds houses, tills the soil, writes letters,
carries trunks, and picks flowers. You can see that the animal was
painted from life and placed in this beautiful frame."

The people began to look at one another.

"Now, ladies and gentlemen, let us go on to the next one."

A roar of laughter and jeers arose on all sides. The director saw the
unfortunate state of things and began to shout: "Have respect, ladies,
for the poor sick monkey I told you of. At this moment she is pressing
to her breast for the last time her friendless child."

But not even this was sufficient to calm the crowd, which presently
became an infuriated mob. Men and women rushed about the tent, making
fierce gestures and heaping abuse upon the director. What an uproar!

In the cage where Pinocchio was, there was no confusion, and the
conversation between the marionette and the wild beasts went on without
stopping.

"When do you leave for Africa?" Pinocchio was asked.

"Have I not told you? To-morrow morning at daybreak, even if it rains."

"Excellent! But you must carry with you several things which you may
need."

"And those are--?"

"First of all you will need plenty of money."

"That is not lacking," said Pinocchio in his usual airy way.

"Good! Then you should get a rifle."

"What for?"

"To defend yourself against the wild animals."

"Come, come! You don't want me to believe that! I have seen what the
wild animals of Africa are!"

"Be careful, marionette. Take a good rifle with you, for one never
knows what will happen in Africa."

"But I do not know how to load one."

"Well, then, stay at home. It is folly for you to begin such an
undertaking without arms and without knowing how to use them."

"It is you who are foolish. Do not make me angry. When I have decided
upon a thing no one can stop me from carrying it out."

"Take care, marionette; you may be sorry."

"Nevertheless I shall go."

"You may find things very unpleasant."

"It is for that very reason that I am going."

"You may never return."

"The good Fairy will protect me."

"Who is the Fairy?"

"How many things you want to know! If you are in need of nothing else,
I will bid you all good-by!"

"Farewell, marionette."

"Till we meet again."

"Good-by, blockhead."

"Don't be rude! said Pinocchio, greatly vexed, and out he went.

CHAPTER VIII
PINOCCHIO DOES NOT SLEEP

When Pinocchio arrived at his home he found his father already in bed.
Old Geppetto did not earn enough to provide a supper for two. He used
to say that he was not hungry, and go to bed. But there was always
plenty for Pinocchio. An onion, some beans moistened in water, and a
piece of bread which had been left over from the morning, were never
missing.

That night Pinocchio found a better meal than usual.

His good father, not having seen his son at the regular dinner hour,
knew that the boy would be very hungry. There would have to be
something out of the ordinary. He therefore added to the fare some
dried fish and a delicious morsel of orange peel. "He will even have
fruit," the good man had said to himself, smiling at the joy his dear
Pinocchio would feel on seeing himself treated like a man of the world.

The marionette ate his supper with relish, and having finished his
meal, went over to his sleeping father and kissed him as a reward for
the fish and the orange peel. Pinocchio, to say the least, had a good
heart, and would have done anything for his father except study and
work.

That night he slept little. Lions, elephants, tigers, panthers,
beautiful women dressed in silk and mounted on butterflies as large as
eagles, men, in large boots, armed with knives and guns, palaces of
silver and gold! All these and a great many more strange sights floated
before his dreaming eyes, while he could hear animals roaring, howling,
and whistling to the sound of trumpets and drums.

At length the night ended and Pinocchio arose. First of all he went to
bid farewell to his friends in the circus, but they were no longer to
be found. During the night the director had quietly stolen away with
his company.

"A pleasant journey to you!" said Pinocchio, and he began to search the
ground for a forgotten piece of gold, or some precious stone which
might have fallen from a lady's diadem; but he found nothing.

"What shall I do now? Shall I go to Africa or to school? It might be
better to go to school, for the teacher says that I am a little behind
in reading, writing, composition, history, geography, and arithmetic.
In other subjects I am not so dull. Yes, yes; it will certainly do me
more good to go to school. Then I shall be a dunce no longer."

Having made this sensible decision, the marionette started for home
with the idea of studying his lessons and of going to school.

CHAPTER IX
PINOCCHIO EATS DATES

Soon he met a man in a paper hat and a white apron. He was pushing a
cart filled with a kind of fruit that Pinocchio had never seen before.

"Dates! dates! fresh dates! sweet dates! real African dates!" came the
cry.

"Even he speaks of Africa!" thought Pinocchio. "Africa seems to follow
me. But what has Africa to do with dates, and what are these dates? I
have never heard of them." The man stopped; Pinocchio stopped also. A
lady bought some of the dates, and it happened that one of them fell on
the ground. The marionette picked it up and handed it to her.

"Thank you," she said with a smile. "Keep it yourself; you have earned
it."

The man with the cart went on, "Dates! dates! fresh dates! sweet dates!
real African dates!"

Pinocchio looked after him for a time and then put the date into his
mouth. Great Caesar! How delicious! Never before had he tasted anything
so sweet. The orange peel was nothing compared with this! What the
circus people had told him, then, was really true!

"To Africa I go," he said, "even if I break a leg. What do I care about
the Red Sea, the Yellow Sea, the Green, or any other sea? I will go!"

And the rascal, forgetting his home and his father, who at that very
moment was waiting to give him his breakfast, set out toward the sea.

As he neared the water he heard a voice call, "Pinocchio! Pinocchio!"

The marionette stopped and looked around, but seeing no one, he went
on.

"Pinocchio! Pinocchio! Be careful! You know not what you do!"

"Farewell and many thanks," answered the stubborn marionette, and
forthwith stepped into the sea.

"The water is like ice this morning. No wonder it makes me feel cold;
but I know how to get rid of a chill. A good swim, and I am as warm as
ever." Out shot his arms and he plunged into the water. The journey to
Africa had begun.

At noon he still swam on. It grew dark and on he swam. Later the moon
arose and grinned at him. He kept on swimming, without a sign of
fatigue, of hunger, or of sleepiness. A marionette can do things that
would tire a real boy, and to Pinocchio swimming was no task at all.

CHAPTER X
PINOCCHIO LANDS ON A ROCK

The moon grinned again and disappeared behind a cloud. The night grew
dark. Pinocchio continued to swim through the black waters. He could
see nothing ahead. He swam, swam, swam into the dark. Suddenly he felt
something scrape his body, and he gave a start.

"Who goes there?" he cried. No one answered. "Perhaps it is my old
friend the shark, who has recognized me," thought he; and he rapidly
swam on to get away from the spot which reminded him of that terrible
monster.

He had not gone more than fifty yards when his head ran against
something rough and hard. "Oh!" cried the marionette, and he raised his
hand to the injured part.

Then, as he noticed a large rock standing out of the water, he cried
joyously; "I have arrived! I am in Africa!"

He got up on his feet and began to feel of himself all over,--his ribs,
his stomach, his legs. Everything was in order.

"Nothing broken!" he said. "The rocks on the way have been very kind.
However, I hope that day will break soon, for I have no matches, and it
seems to me that I am very hungry."

Then he began to move on carefully. First he put down one foot and then
the other, and thus crept along till he found a comfortable spot. "I
seem to be very tired and sleepy also," he said.

With that, he lay down and went off in to a deep slumber.

When he awoke it was daylight. The sun shone red and hot. There was
nothing to be seen but rocks and water.

"Is this Africa?" said the marionette, greatly troubled. "Even at dawn
it seems to be very warm. When the sun gets a little higher I am likely
to be baked." And he wiped the sweat from his brow on his coat sleeve.
Presently clouds began to rise out of the water. They grew darker and
darker, and the day, instead of being bright, gradually became gloomy
and overcast.

The sun disappeared.

"This is funny!" said Pinocchio. "What jokes the sun plays in these
parts! It shines for a while and then disappears."

Poor marionette! It did not occur to him at first that he had slept the
whole day, and that instead of the rising he saw the setting of the
sun.

CHAPTER XI
THE FIRST NIGHT IN AFRICA

"And now I must pass another night here alone on these bare rocks!" he
thought.

The unhappy marionette began to tremble. He tried to walk, but the
night was so dark that it was impossible to see where to go. The tears
rolled down his wooden cheeks. He thought of his disobedience and of
his stubbornness. He remembered the warnings his father had given him,
the advice of his teacher, and the kindly words of the good Fairy. He
remembered the promises he had made to be good, obedient, and studious.
How happy he had been! He recalled the day when his father's face
beamed with pleasure at his progress. He saw the happy smile with which
his protecting Fairy greeted him. His tears fell fast, and sobs rent
his heart.

"If I should die, here in this gloomy place! If I should die of
weariness, of hunger, of fear! To die a marionette without having had
the happiness of becoming a real boy!"

He wept bitterly, and yet his troubles had scarcely begun. Even while
his tears were flowing down his cheeks and into the dark water, he
heard prolonged howls. At the same time he saw lights moving to and
fro, as if driven by the wind.

"What in the world is this? Who is carrying those lanterns?" asked
Pinocchio, continuing to sob.

As if in answer to his questions, two lights came down the rocky coast
and drew nearer to him.

Along with the lights came the howls, which sounded like those he had
heard at the circus, only more natural and terrible.

"I hope this will end well," the marionette said to himself, "but I
have some doubt about it."

He threw himself on the ground and tried to hide between the rocks. A
minute later and he felt a warm breath on his face. There stood the
shadowy form of a hyena, its open mouth ready to devour the marionette
at one gulp.

"I am done for!" and Pinocchio shut his eyes and gave a last thought to
his dear father and his beloved Fatina. But the beast, after sniffing
at him once or twice from head to foot, burst into a loud, howling
laugh and walked away. He had no appetite for wooden boys.

"May you never return!" said Pinocchio, raising his head a little and
straining his eyes to pierce the darkness about him. "Oh, if there were
only a tree, or a wall, or anything to climb up on!"

The marionette was right in wishing for something to keep him far above
the ground. During the whole night these visitors were coming and
going. They came around him howling, sniffing, laughing, mocking. As
each one ran off, Pinocchio would say, "May you never return!" He lay
there shivering in the agony of his terror. If the night had continued
much longer, the poor fellow would have died of fright. But the dawn
came at last. All these strange night visitors disappeared. Pinocchio
tried to get up. He could not move. His legs and arms were stiff. A
terrible weakness had seized him, and the world swam around him. Hunger
overpowered him. The poor marionette felt that he should surely die.
"How terrible," he thought, "to die of hunger! What would I not eat!
Dry beans and cherry stems would be delicious." He looked eagerly
around, but there was not even a cricket or a snail in sight. There was
nothing, nothing but rocks.

Suddenly, however, a faint cry came from his parched throat. Was it
possible? A few feet from him there was something between the rocks
which looked like food. The marionette did not know what it was. He
dragged himself along on hands and knees, and commenced to eat it. His
nose wished to have nothing to do with it, and would even have drawn
back, but the marionette said; "It is necessary to accustom yourself to
all things, my friends. One must have patience. Don't be afraid; if I
find any roses, I promise to gather them for you."

The nose became quiet, the mouth ate, the hunger was satisfied, and
when the meal was finished Pinocchio jumped to his feet and shouted
joyously; "I have had my first meal in Africa. Now I must begin my
search for wealth." He forgot the night, his father, and Fatina. His
only thought was to get farther away from home.

What an easy thing life is to a wooden marionette!

CHAPTER XII
PINOCCHIO IS WELL RECEIVED

"First of all," he said, "I must go to the nearest castle I can find.
The master will not refuse me shelter and food. Some soup, a leg of
roast chicken, and a glass of milk will put me in fine spirits."

The journey across the rocks was full of difficulties, but the
marionette overcame them readily, leaping from rock to rock like a
goat. He walked, walked, walked! The rocks seemed to have no ending,
and the castle, which he imagined he saw in the distance, appeared to
be always farther and farther away. As the marionette drew nearer, the
towers began to disappear and the walls to crumble. He walked on
broken-hearted. Finally he sat down in despair and put his head in his
hands. "Farewell, castle! good-by, roast chicken and soup!" He was
about to weep again when he saw in the distance a village of great
beauty lying at the foot of a gentle slope.

At the sight he gave a cry of joy and without a moment's delay set out
in that direction. He leaped over the rocks and bushes, putting to
flight several flocks of birds in his haste. Of course only a
marionette could go as fast as he did. "How beautiful Africa is!" said
he. "If I had known this I would have come here long ago."

In a short time he reached the main square of the town. Men, women, and
children were lounging about, gossiping, buying, and selling. When they
saw the marionette they gathered around him, and many began to shout:
"It is Pinocchio! Look, here is Pinocchio! Pinocchio! Pinocchio!"

"Well, this is strange!" said the marionette to himself. "I am known
even in Africa. Surely I am a great person."

Like most great men, Pinocchio was annoyed at his noisy reception. In
some anger he made his way through the crowd, pushing people right and
left with his elbows. He ran down a side street and finally stopped
before a restaurant, over which was the sign printed in huge letters:

MARIONETTES SERVED HERE.

"This is what I have been looking for," said Pinocchio, and he went in.

CHAPTER XIII
PINOCCHIO IS ARRESTED

Pinocchio found himself facing a man of about fifty years of age. He
was stout and good-natured, and like all good hosts, asked what the
gentleman would have to eat. Pinocchio, hearing himself called
"gentleman," swelled with pride, and very gravely gave his order. He
was served promptly, and devoured everything before him in a way known
only to hungry marionettes.

In the meantime the innkeeper eyed his customer from head to foot. He
addressed Pinocchio in a very respectful manner, but the marionette
gave only short answers. Persons of rank ate here, and to appear like
one of them he could not allow himself to waste words on common folk.

Having finished his meal, the marionette asked for something to drink.

"What is this drink called?" he asked, as he put down the glass and
thrust his thumb into his vest pocket after the manner of a gentleman.

"Nectar, your excellency."

Upon hearing himself called "excellency" Pinocchio fairly lost his
head. He felt a strange lightness in his feet; indeed, he found it hard
work to resist the temptation to get up and dance. "I knew that in
Africa I should make my fortune," he thought, and called for a box of
cigarettes.

Having smoked one of these, the brave Pinocchio arose to go out, when
the host handed him a sheet of paper on which was written a row of
figures.

"What is this?" asked the marionette.

"The bill, your excellency; the amount of your debt for the dinner."

Pinocchio stroked his wooden chin and looked at the innkeeper in
surprise.

"Is there anything astonishing about that, your excellence? Is it not
usual in your country to pay for what you eat?"

"It is amazing! I do not know what you mean! What strange custom is
this that you speak of?"

"In these parts, your excellency," remarked the innkeeper, "when one
eats, one must pay. However, if your lordship has no money, and intends
to live at the expense of others, I have a very good remedy. One
minute!"

So saying, the man stepped out of the door, uttered a curious sound,
and then returned.

Pinocchio lost his courage. He broke down and began to weep. He begged
the man to have patience. The first piece of gold he found would pay
for the meal. The innkeeper smiled as he said, "I am sorry, but the
thing is done."

"What is done?" asked the marionette.

"I have sent for the police."

"The police!" cried the marionette, shaking with fear. "The police!
Even in Africa there are policemen? Please, sir, send them back! I do
not want to go to prison."

All this was useless talk. Two black policemen were already there.
Straight toward the marionette they went and asked his name.

"Pinocchio," he answered in a faint voice.

"What is your business?"

"I am a marionette."

"Why have you come to Africa?"

"I will tell you," replied Pinocchio, "You gentlemen must know that my
poor father sold his coat to buy me a spelling book, and as I have
heard that there is plenty of gold and silver in Africa, I have come
here."

"What kind of talk is this?" asked the elder of the two policemen. "No
nonsense! Show us your papers."

"What papers! I left all I had at school."

The policemen cut short the marionette's words by taking out their
handcuffs and preparing to lead him away to prison. But the innkeeper
was a good-hearted man, and he was sorry for the poor blockhead. He
begged them to leave Pinocchio in his charge.

"So long as you are satisfied, we are satisfied," said the policemen.
"If you wish to give away your food, that is your own affair;" and they
went off without saying another word.

CHAPTER XIV
PINOCCHIO'S FATHER

Pinocchio blushed with shame.

"Then you are the marionette Pinocchio?"

Upon hearing himself addressed in this familiar way, Pinocchio felt a
little annoyed, but recalling the unsettled account, he thought it best
to answer politely that he was Pinocchio.

"I am pleased," continued the man; "I am very much pleased, because I
knew your father."

"You knew my father?" exclaimed the marionette.

"Certainly I knew him! I was a servant in his house before you were
born."

"In my house as a servant? When has father Geppetto had servants?"
asked the marionette, his eyes wide with surprise.

"But who said Geppetto? Geppetto is not your father's name."

"Oh, indeed! Well, then, what is his name?"

"Your father's name is not Geppetto, but Collodi. A wonderful man, my
boy."

Pinocchio understood less and less. It was strange, he thought, to have
come to Africa to learn the story of his family. He listened with
astonishment to all that the innkeeper said.

"Remember, however, that even if you are not really the son of the good
Geppetto, it does not follow that you should forget the care he has
given you. What gratitude have you shown him? You ran away from home
without even telling him. Who knows how unhappy the poor old man may
be! You never will understand what suffering you cause your parents.
Such blockheads as you are not fit to have parents. They work from
morning till night so that you may want for nothing, and may grow up to
be good and wise men, useful to yourselves, to your family, and to your
country. What do you do? Nothing! You are worthless!"

Pinocchio listened very thoughtfully. He had never expected that in
Africa he was to hear so many disagreeable truths, and he was on the
verge of weeping.

"For your father's sake you have been let off easily. From now on you
may regard this as your home. I am not very rich, and I need a boy to
help me. You will do. You may as well begin to work at once." And he
handed the marionette a large broom.

Pinocchio was vexed at this, but the thought of the black policemen and
the unsettled bill cooled his anger, and he swept as well as he knew
how. "From a gentleman to a sweeper! What fine progress I have made!"
he thought, as the tears rolled down his cheeks.

"If my father were to see me now, or my good Fairy, or my companions at
school! What a fine picture I should make!" And he continued to sweep
and dust.

CHAPTER XV
PINOCCHIO SELLS DRINKING WATER

The time passed quickly. At the dinner hour Pinocchio had a great
appetite and ate with much enjoyment. The master praised him highly for
the tidy appearance of the store and urged him to keep up his good
work.

"At the end of twenty years," he said, "You will have put aside enough
to return home, and a little extra money to spend on poor old Geppetto.
Now that you have eaten, take this leather bag and fill it with water,
which you are to sell about the city. When you return we shall know how
much you have made."

The bag was soon strapped on his shoulders and the marionette was shown
the door. "Remember," said his master, "a cent a glass!"

Pinocchio set out down the narrow street. He walked on, little caring
where he went. His wooden brains were far away. He was grieved. Had the
master known just how the marionette felt he would have run after him
and at least regained his leather bag.

Pinocchio walked on. He was soon among a hurrying crowd of people. "Can
this be Egypt in Africa? I have read about it often."

A man, wrapped in a white cloak, touched him on the shoulder. Pinocchio
did not understand, and started to go on about his business, but the
man took him roughly by the nose. Pinocchio shrieked. The crowd
stopped. At last, he discovered that the man wanted water. Pinocchio
placed the bag on the ground. Then he poured the water into a glass.
The man drank, paid, and went his way.

"What a thirst for water Africans have!" thought the marionette, as he
remembered his companions of the circus. "I like ices better, and I am
going to try to get one with this penny." At once he started off,
leaving the leather bag behind.

CHAPTER XVI
A RIDE ON A DOG'S BACK

A crowd of boys had by this time gathered in the street. They began,
after the manner of boys in nearly every part of the world, to annoy
one who was clearly a stranger. They did not know Pinocchio, however,
nor the force of his feet and elbows. There came a shower of kicks and
punches, and the boys scattered. Away flew Pinocchio. The people were
astonished to see those tiny legs fly like the wind. They shouted and
ran after him. Pinocchio resolved not to be caught. He turned into a
side street that led into the open country. A large dog, stretched out
upon the ground, was in his way. Pinocchio measured the distance and
leaped.

At that very moment the dog sprang up, and hardly knowing how it
happened, Pinocchio found himself astride his back. Barking furiously,
the animal shot along like a cannon ball. The poor boy felt sure that
he was going to break his neck and prayed for safety. On they rushed.
The dog jumped over rocks and ditches as if he had done nothing in all
his life but carry marionettes on his back.

"Is it possible that he is a horse-dog?" thought Pinocchio. "If he is,
I shall ride him always, and when I return home, I shall present him to
my father. My companions will die of envy when they see me riding to
school like a gentleman. I shall make him a saddle like those I saw on
the circus horses, and a pair of silver stirrups. A saddle is really
necessary, because it is very uncomfortable to ride in this way."

The came to a deep gully and the dog prepared to make the leap.
Pinocchio muttered to himself: "This is the end. If I cross this in
safety, I will surely return home and go to school."

There was a leap, and a plunge into the black, empty air. When he
opened his eyes, he found himself lying at the bottom of a precipice in
total darkness. How long had he been in the air? The marionette did not
know. He remembered only that while flying down he had heard a familiar
voice call, "Pinocchio! Pinocchio! Pinocchio!"

"Farewell to the world and to Africa," said the marionette. "Wooden
marionettes will never learn. Here I shall stay forever. It serves me
right."

CHAPTER XVII
THE CAVE

"If I get out of this prison alive, it will be the greatest wonder I
have ever known." Pinocchio sat in the spot where he had fallen. He now
began to suffer from thirst. There had been a great deal of excitement,
and his throat was parched. He would have given anything for a sip of
the water he had so carelessly left in the middle of the street only a
little while before.

"I don't want to die here," he said. "I must get up and walk."

So saying, he moved slowly about, groping with his hands and feet as if
he were playing blindman's buff. The ground was soft, and the air
seemed fresh. In fact, it was not so bad as he had at first thought.
Only four things worried him,--darkness, hunger, thirst, and fear. Aside
from these he was safe and sound.

He had gone but a short distance through the darkness when suddenly he
thought he heard a faint murmur. He saw a gleam of light. The blood
rushed through his veins. He walked on. The sound became clearer, and
the light grew brighter. At length Pinocchio found himself in a cave
lighted by soft rays. The murmuring sound was caused by a small stream
of water coming out from a high rock and forming a little waterfall.
Pinocchio rushed toward the rocks, opened his mouth wide like a funnel,
and drank his fill.

"I shall not die of thirst," said the marionette. "Unfortunately, I am
still hungry. What a fate is mine! Why can we not live without eating?
Some day I am going to find a way. If I succeed, I shall teach the poor
people to live without food as I do. How happy they will be!" Meanwhile
he looked about for a means of escape. Soon he discovered the hole that
lighted the cave, and walked out once more under the open sky.

CHAPTER XVIII
THE CARAVAN

He saw nothing but rocks and sand; rocks that shone like mirrors, and
sand that burned like fire. He walked on very sadly, without knowing
where. Presently he found himself upon a hill, from which he could see
a vast plain crossed by a wide highway. A long line of people and
camels were on the march, but how strange they looked! They were going
along with heads down and feet up. At first the marionette was filled
with a strong desire to laugh; then he became frightened and rubbed his
eyes, doubting what they told him.

"Am I dreaming?" he said to himself.

The line continued its march, and he distinctly heard the people laugh
and joke as they all sat upside down on the backs of the inverted
camels.

"I was not prepared for this! What a strange way of traveling they have
in Africa! Maybe I too am walking on my head!" and he touched himself
to make sure that his head was in its proper place.

Meanwhile the caravan passed on, and Pinocchio stood still, his eyes
fixed upon the camels as they disappeared at the turning of the road.
The only thing left for him to do was to follow them.

"Either on my head or on my feet I shall surely arrive somewhere! I do
not believe that all those people will walk on air forever. Sometime or
other they will stop to eat. I shall be there to help them."

As he spoke the marionette started forward, walking rapidly in the hot
sun.

CHAPTER XIX
THE BABY PULLS HIS NOSE

In half an hour he had caught up with the topsy-turvy caravan. It had
stopped at a large well, which was filled with clear, cool water. The
people were laughing and talking as if they were at home. They were all
as happy as they could be.

Pinocchio could not understand it. Had these people really stood on
their heads? What had happened to them? There was something wrong. He
had certainly seen them traveling in that strange fashion. However, a
marionette who is hungry and thirsty does not worry long about things
he cannot explain. He was there, and the people were eating and
drinking.

"What a fool I am! If their heads were upside down, they could neither
eat nor drink. Surely they will not refuse me a little water, and
perhaps as they are familiar with Africa, I may discover in talking
with them where the mines of gold and precious stones are to be found."

So saying, Pinocchio moved toward an old man who was sitting with a
pipe in his mouth. He had finished his meal and was enjoying a smoke.
The marionette took off his hat and said, "Pardon me, sir; what time is
it?"

The old man's answer came in a volume of smoke.

"Ask the sun, my boy. He will tell you."

"Thank you!" said Pinocchio, a little taken aback by this reception,
and he moved on toward a woman with a baby on her shoulders.

"Madam, will you please tell me if I am on the right road to--"

"The world is wide," broke in the woman.

"And long too," thought the marionette. "How polite these Africans
are!"

Of course, the marionette was a stupid fellow. He was a little ashamed
to beg for food, and had only asked these questions so that the people
might notice him and perhaps offer him food and water. An ordinary boy
would have asked for what he wanted, but the blockhead was too proud.

He was about to go on when the baby began to wave its arms, and to
shout, "I want it! I want it!"

Can you guess what it wanted? Pinocchio's nose! The child reached out
its hands, and cried and kicked in trying to get hold of it.

The whole caravan looked toward the spot. A group of children gathered
about them. Even the camels lifted their heads to see what was the
matter.

The mother was distressed because the child's screams and kicks
continued. She asked Pinocchio to let it touch his nose. His pride was
hurt, but thinking it best to humor the child, he went closer and
allowed his nose to be touched and squeezed and pulled until the baby
was perfectly happy and satisfied. The good woman laughed, and thanked
Pinocchio by offering him some bread and milk.

Pinocchio buried his face in the milk and ate the bread. There was no
doubt of his hunger. The others offered him fruit and cake. He was
pleased. Africa, after all, was a country where one could live. His
hunger satisfied, he did what marionettes usually do,--talked about
himself. In a short time all the people knew who he was and why he had
come to Africa. The old man with the pipe asked him, "Who told you that
here in Africa there is so much gold?"

"Who told me? He who knows told me!"

"But are you sure that he did not wish to deceive you?"

"Deceive me?" replied the marionette, "My dear sire, to deceive me one
must have a good--" and he touched his forehead with his forefinger as
much as to say that within lay a great brain. "Before leaving home I
studied so much that the teacher feared I should ruin my health."

"Very well," replied the old man, "let us travel together, for we also
are in search of gold and precious stones."

Pinocchio's heart beat fast with hope. At last there was some one to
help him in his search. He could scarcely control himself enough to
say: "Willingly, most willingly! I have no objections. Suit
yourselves."

CHAPTER XX
PINOCCHIO TRAVELS WITH THE CARAVAN

The camels, refreshed by the large amount of water they had taken,
stood up, proud of their loads. Even the donkey brayed. Yes, there was
a donkey! And this fact displeased Pinocchio. He had for a long time
felt a great dislike for these animals. In fact, he had once been a
donkey, and his dislike was a natural one.

The donkey did not carry any load, and for that reason the marionette
was asked to ride on its back. He hesitated. It was stupid to ride a
donkey, and he would have preferred to walk, but he did not like to
seem rude to the good people, and up he mounted.

They traveled all day along the narrow road which gradually wound
around the slope of a mountain. The old man rode by the side of
Pinocchio, asking him many questions about the studies he had taken up
to prepare himself for this trip to Africa.

The marionette talked a great deal, and as might have been expected,
made many blunders. He began to think that his companions were very
simple, and that in Africa one could tell any kind of lie without being
discovered. He even went so far as to assure the old man that he knew
the very spot where they could find gold and diamonds, and ended by
saying that within a week they should all be men of great wealth.

"You must walk straight ahead," the saucy marionette was saying, "then
to the right, and you will arrive at the bottom of a valley, through
which flows a beautiful brook of yellow water. By the side of this
brook is a tree, and beneath the tree there is gold in plenty."

The old man was amazed to hear the tales he told. Pinocchio himself
felt ashamed of all these lies. He was afraid his nose would grow as it
had done one day at home. But no, it was still its natural size!

"Well!" he thought, "if it has not grown longer this time, it will
never grow again, no matter how many lies I tell."

CHAPTER XXI
HE IS OFFERED FOR SALE

They went on until they met a second caravan resting at a well. Every
one admired Pinocchio, and the old man who had him in charge treated
him as if he were his own son.

Pinocchio was greatly pleased. Yet to tell the truth he was worried.
Suppose they discovered that he had lied, and that he knew nothing
about Africa, or the gold, or the diamonds! What would happen then?

The old man was talking to three or four men of the new caravan.
Pinocchio did not like their faces. Now and then they looked toward the
marionette with open eyes of astonishment.

Pinocchio pricked up his ears to listen to the good things the old man
was saying about him. He felt highly flattered on hearing himself
praised for his character, his intelligence, and his ability to eat and
drink.

Then the men lowered their voices, and the marionette only now and then
caught some stray words.

"How much do you want?"

"Come!" replied the good old man, "between us there should not be so
much talk. I cannot give him to you unless you give me twenty yards of
English calico, thirty yards of iron wire, and four strings of glass
beads."

"It is too much. It is too much," replied one.

"They are bargaining for the donkey," said Pinocchio, and he felt sorry
for the poor beast.

"I am sorry for you," he went on, addressing the donkey, "because you
have made me quite comfortable. Now I must give you up and walk."

"It is too much. It is too much," the men were saying.

"Yes, yes, all you say is very true," spoke one in a high voice, "but,
after all, he is made of wood."

"Of wood? Who is made of wood? The donkey?" thought Pinocchio, looking
at the animal, which stood still, its ears erect as if it also were
listening.

"Here!" put in one of the men, "the bargain is made if you will give
him up for an elephant's tooth; if not, let us talk no more of it."

The old man was silent. He looked at the marionette, and then with a
sigh which came from his heart he said: "You drive a hard bargain! Add
at least the horn of a rhinoceros and let us be done with it."

"Put in the horn!" replied the man, and they shook hands. "You have
done well, my friends," the old man said. "That fellow there,"--and this
time pointed directly at Pinocchio,--"that fellow there has some great
ideas in his head. He knows a thing or two! He says he knows the exact
spot where one may find gold and diamonds."

Pinocchio was thunderstruck! It was he and not the donkey that had been
sold.

"Dogs!" he cried, "farewell. I go from you forever." And away he leaped
as fast as the north wind. They did not even try to follow him. Who
could have caught him.

CHAPTER XXII
THE BIRD IN THE FOREST

After two hours of hard running, Pinocchio, still angry at the
treatment he had received, came to a forest. "It's better to be a bird
in the bushes than a bird in a cage!" he thought.

Although the walk in the forest was refreshing, he began, as usual, to
be hungry. The place was very beautiful, but beauty could not satisfy a
marionette's appetite. He looked here and there in the hope that he
might see trees loaded with the fruit about which the elephant man had
spoken. He saw nothing but branches and leaves, leaves and branches. On
he walked. Both the forest and his hunger seemed without end.

Fortunately Pinocchio was very strong. Being made of wood, he could
endure a great many hardships. He was sure that his good Fairy would
come to help him, so he kept on bravely. He had walked a long way
before he saw a large tree, bearing fruit that resembled oranges.

"At last!" he cried aloud. The birds flew away at the sound. Pinocchio
climbed over the rocks and up the tree as fast as he could.

"I will eat enough to last for a week!" he said, as he thought of the
orange peel his father Geppetto had given him for supper.

He picked the largest of the fruit and put it into his mouth. It was as
hard as ivory. He pulled out his penknife, with which he used to
sharpen his pencil at school. With great difficulty he cut the fruit in
two, to find within only a soft, bitter pulp. Then he tried another and
another. All were like the first one, and he gave up trying because he
was at length convinced that none of the fruit was fit to eat.

Tired and unhappy, with bowed head and dangling arms, he pushed on
slowly, stumbling over rocks, and becoming entangled again and again in
the briers. He thought sadly of the disappointments he had met with in
Africa.

"It is settled. I am to die of hunger. Where are the delicious fruits
and the precious stones? Should I not do better to go home and leave
the gold and silver to those who want them?"

As he went along, thinking over these things, he noticed ahead of him a
bird about the size of a canary, which looked at him as if it longed to
console him in his misery.

It went on before Pinocchio, flying from one branch to another,
stopping when the marionette stopped, and moving every time the
marionette moved. Pinocchio said to himself: "Does this dear little
bird wish to be eaten? I'll pluck its feathers, stick a twig through
it, put it in the sun, and in half an hour it will be cooked and ready
to eat."

While the hungry marionette was giving himself up to this thought, the
bird began to sing,

"Pinocchio, my dear,
If you would honey eat,
Come closer to me here,
And you will find a treat."

Imagine Pinocchio's surprise! He approached the little songster and
looked up. Sure enough, there on a branch of a great tree was a
beehive.

One would think that Pinocchio would at least stop to thank the bird,
but not he! Up the tree he went like a squirrel, while the bees buzzed
about him angrily. The marionette laughed.

"Sting away! sting away, brave bees! I am a marionette and made of
wood. You may sting me as much as you please." He thrust his hand into
the hive and drew out a handful of sweet honey.

"This time at least I shall not die of hunger."

CHAPTER XXIII
HIS ADVENTURE WITH A LION

The marionette was on the point of filling his mouth a second time,
when he heard a frightful roar directly under his feet. The shock
almost tumbled him down headfirst. Had he fallen, how unfortunate it
would have been! He would have gone straight into the deep mouth of an
African lion which was ready to devour him at one gulp.

"Oh, mercy!" cried the marionette. And the lion gave another dreadful
roar which seemed to say: "Mercy indeed! I have you now, you little
thief."

"Dear lion," pleaded Pinocchio, "have pity on a poor orphan lad who is
nearly starving!"

The lion roared still louder. "Who has given you permission to take
what belongs to another without having earned it by useful and honest
work? In this world he who does not work must starve."

"You are right, my dear lion, you are right. I am ready to pay to the
last cent for all the honey I eat, but please don't seem so angry or I
shall die of fear."

Then the lion stopped roaring, and sitting down upon the ground, he
looked at the marionette as if to say: "Well, what are you going to do
about it? Are you coming down or not?"

"Listen, my dear lion," answered Pinocchio; "so long as you stay there,
I shall not come down. If you want me to go away and leave the honey,
remove yourself a hundred miles or so, and then I will obey you."

The lion did not move.

For almost an hour Pinocchio sat glued to the tree, not daring to eat
the honey or to come down to the waiting lion. The hot rays of the sun
beat upon him. He felt that he must die, for hunger, fear, and heat
seemed ready to destroy him.

"Surely there must be away out of this," he thought. "That lion must
have in him some spark of kindness. He has made up his mind to keep me
company, and perhaps it is my duty to thank him."

Then the marionette raised his hand to ask permission to speak. It
would have been better had he kept still.

At this gesture the lion uttered a roar so loud that it shook the whole
forest. He began to lash the ground with his tail, sending up a cloud
of dust that nearly choked the marionette, and repeating all the while
in lion language, "If you move hand or foot, you will die!"

Pinocchio sat still. Another hour passed in silence. Pinocchio still
suffered from the heat and from hunger. Both honey and shade were
within easy reach, and he could enjoy neither.

"What an obstinate beast!" he muttered. "How stupid he is to wait
there! There is enough room in the forest for us both."

But the lion did not move, and Pinocchio's suffering was great. He was
sure now that he was going to die, and he looked sadly at those wooden
legs which had carried him through so many adventures. There was the
shade, but he could not reach it. There was the honey that must not be
touched.

"Eat! eat!" said the honey. "Come! come!" said the shade.

Fortunately a new character now arrived on the scene. A magnificent
giraffe came along through the bushes, eating the tender shoots as it
approached the spot.

Pinocchio saw the giraffe and recognized it at once from a picture of
one he had seen in school. The lion saw it also. What should he do?
Continue to watch the marionette, or attack and carry off the giraffe?
He decided to take the giraffe. As the animal raised its head to bite
off the leaves from a tall acacia, the lion leaped at its throat and
killed it. Seizing the body in his powerful jaws, the lion disappeared
through the forest, and Pinocchio was left behind to have his fill of
honey. He ate as he had never eaten before.

When he could eat no longer he came down from the tree, but how strange
he felt! His eyes were dim, and his head began to swim, while his legs
went here and there in every direction. He could not even talk clearly.

"African honey plays jokes upon those who eat too much of it!" he
seemed to hear some one say. He turned to see who it was that had
spoken to him, but no one was there. The next moment he fell heavily to
the ground as if he had been knocked down with a club.

"That is what happens to greedy boys!" continued the voice of the
little bird who had shown him the honey, but Pinocchio lay fast asleep.

CHAPTER XXIV
PINOCCHIO IS BROUGHT BEFORE THE KING

Pinocchio had slept for hours when he was aroused by strange sounds.
Were these the voices of human beings.

"Yah! Yah! Hoi! Hoi! Uff! Uff!"

What could it possibly be? The marionette opened an eye, but quickly
shut it again when he saw a number of coal-black faces turned toward
him.

"What do these ugly people want of me?" he asked himself, as he lay
there perfectly still.

When Pinocchio next opened his eyes he saw to his great surprise that
the men had formed a circle about him. At their chief's command they
began to dance. It was all so funny that Pinocchio could hardly keep
from laughing. Then the chief made a sign, at which the savages
advanced toward the marionette, took him up by his arms and legs, and
started away with him.

"This is not so bad," thought the marionette.

After a time his bearers laid him gently upon the ground and commenced
to examine him. Pinocchio decided to make believe he was dead.

For that reason he kept his eyes shut tightly and lay still.

Suddenly there was a great noise. He was startled. Opening one eye, he
saw approaching a chief followed by a crowd of attendants. Judging from
the manner in which the new arrivals were received, they were persons
of high rank. At their approach the savages knelt down, raised their
hands high in the air, and bent their foreheads to the ground.

A man stepped out from the ranks and came toward Pinocchio. He examined
the marionette from head to foot, while all the others looked on in
silence.

When the examination was over the marionette hoped to be left in peace,
but another approached him and went through the same performance. Then
came a third, a fourth, a fifth, and so on.

Pinocchio was somewhat tired of this. As the last one came up he
muttered, "Now I shall see what they are going to do with me."

The man who had first examined Pinocchio now approached him again, and
calling the bearers, said, in a tongue which, curiously enough, the
marionette understood, "Turn the little animal over!"

Upon hearing himself called an animal, Pinocchio was seized with a mad
desire to give his tormentor a kick, but he thought better of it.

The bearers advanced, took the marionette by the shoulders, and rolled
him over.

"Easy! easy! this bed is not too soft," Pinocchio said to himself.

A second examination followed, and then another command, "Roll him over
again!"

"What do you take me for,--a top?" muttered the marionette in a burst of
rage. But he pricked up his ears when the man who had been rolling him
over turned to another and said, "Your majesty!"

"Indeed!" thought Pinocchio, "we are not dealing with ordinary persons!
We are beginning to know great people. Let me hear what he has to say
about me to his black majesty," and the marionette listened with the
deepest attention.

"Your majesty, my knowledge of the noble art of cooking assures me that
this creature"--and he gave Pinocchio a kick--"is an animal of an extinct
race. It has been turned into wood, carried by the water to the beach,
and then brought here by the wind."

"Not so bad for a cook," thought Pinocchio. He felt half inclined to
strike out and hit the nose of the wise savage, who had again knelt
down to examine him.

"Your majesty," continued the cook, "this little animal is dead,
because if it were not dead--"

"It would be alive," Pinocchio muttered. "What a beast! How stupid!"

"Because if it were not dead, it would not be so hard. To conclude, had
it not been made of wood, I could have cooked it for your majesty's
dinner."

Pinocchio said to himself: "Listen to this black rascal! Eaten alive!
What kind of country have I fallen into? What vulgar people! It's lucky
for me that I am made of wood!"

His majesty then commanded that as the animal was not good to eat it
should be buried.

Immediately three or four of the men began to dig a hole, while the
unfortunate marionette, half dead with fright, tried to form some plan
of escape. The time passed. The hole was dug, and the poor fellow could
not think of any plan. Run away! But how? And if they found out that he
was alive would he not be cooked and eaten? The marionette did not know
what to do.

In the meantime two men had raised him from the ground and stood ready
to throw him into the hole. Then in spite of himself, the marionette
began to shout at the top of his lungs: "Stop! Stop! I will not be
buried alive! Help! Help! My good Fatina!--Fatina!--my Fatina! Help!"

At the first shout the two men who were holding him let him fall to the
ground and started off in a great fright. All the others followed their
example.

"What funny people!" said Pinocchio. "If I had known that they would
all run away like this, I should not have been so uneasy. However, I
really do not know why I have come here. If I only knew where to find
diamonds and gold, it would not be so hard. I might return home to my
father, for who knows how much he is suffering because I am not there!"

At that moment he would have given up the whole trip, but he was too
stupid to keep an idea in his head for more than a few seconds. Another
thought flashed across his mind, and he forgot his poor father.

"If these people run away, it means that they are afraid, and if they
are afraid, it means that they have no courage. Now then, I, being very
brave, may in a short time come to rule over everything in Africa.
Perhaps--who knows!--I may become a king or an emperor!"

Pinocchio, you lazy dreamer, are you never going to learn wisdom? Only
a blockhead like you could be so foolish. A wooden emperor, indeed!

CHAPTER XXV
THE MONKEYS STONE THE MARIONETTE

Filled with these hopes and forgetting his fright, Pinocchio set boldly
forth without the least alarm at the difficulties of the journey. He
was going merrily along, dreaming of all the great things he would do
as emperor of Africa, when at a turn in the road there came flying
after him a volley of stones. Had any struck him he would have been
killed. Astonished and frightened at this strange turn of affairs, he
glanced around, but saw no one. He looked up at the trees, and then
from right to left, but nobody was in sight.

"This is pleasant!" exclaimed the marionette. "Have those pebbles
fallen from the sky?" And he started to go on his way.

He had taken only a few steps, when a second discharge drove him to the
shelter of a large tree. Thence he looked carefully in the direction
from which the stones continued to come. To his surprise he discovered
among the bushes and twigs a large number of monkeys.

"Well! What is this?" cried the marionette. "Those rogues must not be
allowed to play such mean tricks. I had better be on my guard."

He picked up a stout stick lying on the ground near by. To his
amazement, the monkeys threw away the stones and began to pick up
sticks likewise.

"I hope I shall get through this safely!" thought Pinocchio. He raised
his stick and threatened the whole army of monkeys.

The monkeys, as if obeying his command, raised their sticks and held
them erect, imitating exactly the action of the marionette. Then
Pinocchio lowered his stick, and the monkeys lowered theirs. Again
Pinocchio lifted his stick as high as he could, and the monkeys raised
theirs, holding them stiffly like soldiers on drill.

"Arms rest!" cried Pinocchio.

All the monkeys, imitating the marionette, lowered their sticks in
perfect order, just as soldiers do at the officer's command.

"That's a good idea," thought Pinocchio, "I might become the leader of
the monkeys, and within a month conquer all Africa." And he laughed at
the joke.

The monkeys looked straight at him, standing erect and in line waiting
for further orders.

"Ah! you wish to follow me!" said the marionette. "This might suit your
taste, but not mine, thank you! I will give you marching orders. Then I
shall be left in peace."

Accordingly Pinocchio, who was determined to get away from these
annoying beasts, moved two steps forward. The monkeys advanced two
steps also. Then he took three steps to the rear, and the monkeys went
back three steps.

"At--tention!" and facing about quickly, he started to run. All the
monkeys also turned, and began to run in the direction opposite to that
taken by the marionette. Pinocchio, laughing at his own cunning, went
his way, only now and then turning to watch the dark forms as they
disappeared in the distance.

"They all run away in this country," he said to himself, and he too ran
on, fearing that the worthy beasts would return for further orders.

CHAPTER XXVI
PINOCCHIO DREAMS AGAIN

"If these people are such cowards that they run at the sound of my
voice, in a few days I shall be master of all Africa. I shall be a
great man. However, this is a country of hunger and thirst and fatigue.
I must find a place where I can rest a little before I begin my career
of conquest."

Fortune now seemed to favor Pinocchio. Not far off he thought he saw a
group of huts at the foot of a hill. He felt that besides getting rest
and shelter, he might also find something to eat. Greedy marionette!

As he approached he was struck by the strangeness of these buildings.
They looked like little towers topped with domes. He went along
wondering what race of people lived in houses built without windows or
doors. He saw no one, and he was filled with a sort of fear.

"Shall I go on or not?" he mused. "Perhaps it would be best to call
out, Some one will show me where to go for food and shelter."

"Hello there!" he said in a low voice. No one answered.

"Hello there!" repeated the marionette a little louder. But there was
no answer.

"They are deaf, or asleep, or dead!" concluded the marionette, after
calling out at the top of his voice again and again.

Then he thought it might be a deserted village, and he entered bravely
between the towers. There was no one to be seen. As he stretched out
his tired limbs on the ground he murmured. "Since it is useless to
think of eating, I may at least rest." And in a few minutes he was
sound asleep.

He dreamed that he was being pulled along by an army of small insects
that resembled ants. It seemed to him that he was making every effort
to stop them, but he could not succeed. They dragged and rolled him
down a slope toward a frightful precipice, over which he must fall. It
even seemed as if they had entered his mouth by hundreds, busying
themselves in tearing out his tongue. It served him right, too, because
his tongue had made many false promises and caused everybody much
suffering.

"You will never tell any more lies!" the ants seemed to say.

Then the marionette awoke with a struggle and a cry of fear. His dream
was a reality. He was covered with ants. He brushed them off his face,
his arms, his legs,--in short, his whole body. They had tortured him for
four or five hours, and only the fact that he was made of very hard
wood had saved his life.

"Thanks to my strong constitution." thought the marionette, "I am as
good as new."

CHAPTER XXVII
PINOCCHIO IS CARRIED AWAY IN AN EGGSHELL

Pinocchio now found himself in a dense growth of shrubbery which made
his progress difficult. He pushed on among the thorny plants. They
would have stopped any one but a wooden marionette. His clothes were
torn, to be sure, but he did not mind that.

"Soon I shall have a suit that will make me look like a prince. Goods
of the best quality, and tailoring that has never been equaled! The
gold, the silver, and the diamonds must be found." And he went on at a
brisk gait as if he had been on the highway.

Trees, shrubs, underbrush,--nothing else! The scene would have grown
tiresome had it not been for a swarm of butterflies of the most
beautiful and brilliant colors. They flew here and there, now letting
themselves be carried by the wind, now hovering about in search of the
flowers hidden in the thick foliage.

From time to time a hare would run between Pinocchio's feet, and after
a few bounds would turn sharply around to stare at him with curious
eyes, as much as to say that a marionette was a comical sight. Young
monkeys peeped through the leaves, laughed at him, and then scampered
away.

Pinocchio walked along fearlessly, caring little for what went on
around him, and thinking only of the treasures for which he was
seeking.

On and on he walked until at length he found himself at the edge of a
vast plain. He gave a great sigh of relief. The long march through the
woods had tired him. However, he kept his eyes open, now and then
looking down at his feet to see if any precious stones were lying
about. Presently his attention was drawn to a great hole or nest, in
which he saw some white objects shaped like hen's eggs, but
considerably larger than his head.

Curious to see whether or not he could lift one, Pinocchio approached
the nest. Just then he heard a frightful noise behind him.

Turning quickly, the marionette saw a huge bird running toward him. The
next moment a powerful push sent him head over heels upon one of the
eggs! As he fell he heard a loud crash, and at almost the same instant
found himself carried through the air. What had befallen him?

Of course, the hole was the nest of an ostrich. Enraged at the sight of
the broken egg, the fierce bird had seized in its powerful beak that
part of the shell into which the unfortunate marionette had fallen, and
was now rushing across the plain with the swiftness of an express
train.

The marionette screamed in terror, and with the stick which he still
held in his hand rained blows upon the bird's long neck. But the blows
had no effect whatever. The furious creature ran and ran and ran.
Pinocchio, gasping for breath, was certain that his end was near.

The mad race lasted for hours. Suddenly the marionette was thrown into
a muddy pool, in which he sank up to his neck like a frog. Having no
desire to be suffocated in the mud, he raised his head a little,
although he did not try to climb out. What he saw surprised him beyond
measure.

CHAPTER XXVIII
PINOCCHIO ESCAPES AGAIN

His ostrich was no longer alone. There stood another. The new arrival,
somewhat smaller, but uglier and even more ferocious than the first,
moved cautiously, ready for fight. Suddenly Pinocchio saw the gleam of
a knife, and an instant later the ostrich that had carried him thus far
fell to the ground, wounded to death. The marionette could not
understand how it was possible for a bird to carry a knife hidden
beneath its wings and to make use of it. Yet the thing had happened
right before his eyes; there was no doubt about it.

While seeking an explanation for this very strange incident, he saw the
victorious ostrich draw first one arm, then the other, from beneath its
feathers, and finally take off its beak and place it upon the ground.
The second ostrich was a man.

Pinocchio now began to understand what had happened, and to hate the
trickster who had put on the feathers of an ostrich, in order to attack
and kill the poor creature that lay there breathing its last.

The man approached the dying ostrich and tried to lift the huge bird to
his shoulders, but in spite of his great strength he failed. Then
looking about in search of help, he saw the marionette, whose head was
out of the water, and signaled to him to come ashore. Pinocchio would
have refused, but there was the knife lying on the ground, and there
was the man. He decided to obey.

He came out of the pond as best he could, and the ugly black man began
to laugh. He laughed and laughed until he was able to stand no longer,
and could only throw himself upon the ground, where he lay, breathless
and weak. The marionette, seeing this, said to himself: "If I do not
escape now, it will be my own fault. My dear legs, it is no dishonor to
run when you must!" and he went on at a gallop toward a hill which
could be seen a short distance away.

"May you die of laughing, you villain!" he cried as he ran.

Presently he was somewhat alarmed to discover that the man was running
after him. Feeling sure, however, that he could easily outrun his
pursuer, he halted a moment, as if waiting for him. The man was
hurrying on, thinking that the boy could go no farther, when the saucy
marionette, putting his hand to his mouth, shouted "Cuckoo!" Then at a
pace swifter than the wind he set off once more, pausing now and again
to call out, "Cuckoo! Cuckoo!"

Pinocchio had nearly reached the top of the hill, and the man was
halfway up, when a loud roar made them both stop. Turning around, they
saw that a lion was carrying off the dead ostrich. At that, the hunter
thrust his fingers into his curly hair, and without paying further
attention to the marionette, started off to regain the knife, which was
still lying where it had fallen.

"Tit for tat," Pinocchio shouted after him, and went on up the hill.

CHAPTER XXIX
PINOCCHIO IS SWALLOWED BY A CROCODILE

When Pinocchio reached the top of the hill he looked around for a place
where he could rest. He thought of the lion that had carried off the
ostrich, and he did not like the idea of meeting him. Fortunately there
were no signs of life, but neither was there any place where he could
sit down in comfort. Sand and rocks, rocks and sand were everywhere. In
the distance he saw water.

"At any rate," he said, "I shall at least be able to wash myself;" and
he turned his footsteps toward the water.

He arrived before long at the water's edge. How fresh and clean it was!
He was so dusty and tired that there was only one thing to do,--take a
bath! When Pinocchio decided upon a course of action he did not
hesitate. In an instant he was undressed.

As he started toward the water a voice cried, "Pinocchio! Pinocchio!"

"Oh, let Pinocchio alone!" the marionette said, and leaped into the
air.

Horrors! As he came flying down, a green mass rose to the surface of
the river. It was a crocodile! Pinocchio saw it and shuddered, but
there was no time to cry out. Down, down he went into that open mouth!
But wooden marionettes are always fortunate. The crocodile's throat was
so wide that Pinocchio slipped into the stomach of the creature with
great ease. Not even a scratch! As he was accustomed to being under
water and inside the bodies of animals, he was not at all frightened.
In fact, when he noticed that he was being carried down to the bottom
of the river, where it was cool and refreshing, he uttered no word of
complaint, but rather enjoyed the experience.

The crocodile crawled in to a cave, and prepared to digest the
marionette at its leisure. Pinocchio was naturally annoyed at this and
began to kick and squirm about.

At first this did not seem to cause any ill effects, but Pinocchio
kicked and struggled until the poor reptile could not help wondering
what the trouble was, and began to twist and shake its whole body.
Pinocchio did not stop. Presently the crocodile decided to return to
the surface and deposit the marionette upon the bank. Pinocchio desired
nothing better. As soon as he saw a ray of light he became very quiet.
The crocodile, now that the trouble seemed over, was about to return to
its cave, but it had made this plan without consulting our wooden
marionette.

"Suppose I let the beast carry me a short distance! I can make it throw
me upon the bank later as well as now! It may carry me to some place
where--enough, I am going to try it! A green ship, without sails,
without engines, and without a crew, is not to be found every day. Boo!
boo! boo!" muttered the marionette.

The crocodile, frightened at the strange noises inside its body, began
to swim with all its strength. It swam and swam and swam! When it
slowed up the marionette continued, "Boo! boo! boo!" and the crocodile
went on faster than ever.

The poor creature became thoroughly exhausted, and fairly wept with
anger and fright, but the strange voice went on without ceasing.

At last, growing desperate, the crocodile stopped, opened its huge
jaws, and with a great effort sent the marionette flying through the
air to the bank of the river; then it disappeared in the deep water.

"Pleasant trip home! Remember me to everybody!" cried Pinocchio as he
leaped about joyously.

CHAPTER XXX
PINOCCHIO IS MADE EMPEROR

Finding himself without any clothes, the marionette began to think of
his condition. To go back and search for his suit was out of the
question. To go about in that state did not seem proper, although he
knew that the Africans in general were dressed in the same fashion.

Finally he decided to make himself a suit of leaves. There were some
beautiful ones near by that were just suited to the purpose. He knew
how to go to work, for at home he had often made clothes out of
shavings and twigs. He set about his task at once and in a short time
had made a garment that reached from his waist down to his knees. He
was busy selecting the leaves for a coat when he happened to raise his
eyes, and saw a crowd of men and women rushing about as if either very
happy or frantic with terror.

"Lunatics!" he murmured, and went on with his work, for he disliked to
be seen half-dressed. All at once the marionette heard a hissing,
humming sound. A cloud of arrows fell around him. He was amazed and
terrified, not by the arrows,--for what harm could arrows do to him?--but
by the idea that this meant more trouble for Pinocchio.

"So long as they shoot, I fear nothing; but if they try to capture me,
I may have to jump into the river and take to my green ship."

The arrows continued to fall like hailstones on his shoulders, on his
breast, on his arms and legs; but of course they dropped to the ground
without doing any harm. The natives were astonished. They looked at one
another in blank surprise.

Pinocchio, weary of the game, turned in anger toward them and shouted:
"Give up shooting, stupid ones! Do you not see that you are wasting
your time?"

They had already perceived that this was true, and they stopped
shooting. A group braver than the rest now approached the marionette
and surrounded him. One of them shouted, "Hoi! Hoi! Hoi!"

"Pinocchio!" answered the marionette.

"Yah! Yah! Yah!"

"Pinocchio!" the boy repeated. "Are you deaf?"

Then they began to shout in chorus: "Yah! Yah! Hoi! Hoi! Uff! Uff!
Uff!"

And Pinocchio replied: "Yah! Yah! Hoi! Hoi! Uff! Uff! Uff!"

This conversation soon began to be wearisome, and Pinocchio tried to
escape. It was too late. The Africans, quick as a flash, closed in
about him and, seizing him by the legs, raised him from the ground,
shouting: "Long live our emperor, Pinocchio the First! Long live our
emperor, Pinocchio!"

Pinocchio had never dreamed of such a welcome.

"Long live Pinocchio!"

"Ah! at last! I knew that in Africa my greatness would be recognized.
Now I shall be revenged on you, my dear restaurant-keeper, and on you,
dear policemen, who wanted to arrest me. Old man, you who wanted to
sell me for a rhinoceros horn, now it is my turn!" Thus thought
Pinocchio.

This was his first triumph. Flocking like ravens, his African subjects
came to render homage to the new emperor, who was carried aloft on
willing shoulders. As he passed, all bowed to the ground and then
followed in his train. Such a multitude joined the procession that it
looked, from a distance, like a vast blot of ink. They went along
singing the praises of Pinocchio the First, Emperor and King of all the
African kings, sent from heaven to earth to replace the late emperor,
who had died the preceding day.

As they marched a great chorus chanted: "He was to come forth from the
mouth of a crocodile! He was to remain unharmed by poisoned arrows! He
was to have a wooden head! Long live our emperor, Pinocchio the First!
Hurrah! hurrah! hurrah!"

"They shot poisoned arrows at me!" thought the marionette. "That is the
way they treated their future king. Lucky for me that I am made of
wood,--very hard wood too! How fortunate that I came to Africa as a
marionette! If I had been a real boy, there would be little to say
about Pinocchio now."

CHAPTER XXXI
HIS FIRST NIGHT AS EMPEROR

Pinocchio, his heart filled with joy, entered the capital of his new
empire amid the shouts of the people who crowded the streets. The
children, rolling on the ground in glee, raised such a dust that one
could hardly see.

Forward, forward, they marched through the streets until the main
square was reached. The city was not a large city. Pinocchio was a
little disappointed. The houses were only huts plastered with mud. The
streets and even the main square were dirty.

"I will change all that," Pinocchio gravely said to himself. "I will
build a new city." To the marionette such a task appeared to be an easy
matter.

In a corner of the square stood a hut somewhat larger than the others.
This was the royal palace. Pinocchio was not pleased. The king of all
Africa should have something far better than this. However, he thought
it would not do, just at this time, to utter any words of complaint.

In the huts about the palace lived the people of the court. These were
the advisers and the leaders, who stood ready to carry out the commands
of his majesty.

Like many another in such a situation, Pinocchio did nothing but bow
his head in agreement with everything that was said to him. This
greatly pleased the people of the court and gained for him their
admiration and applause. They called him Pinocchio the Wise!

Night came and all the people withdrew. The emperor was left alone with
his servant, a gigantic African, who invited his majesty to pass into
the royal bedchamber.

The furniture was as simple as the palace itself. A string, stretched
across the room, served as a clothes-hanger. The bed was a leopard's
skin that swung from four poles. Having displayed with pride these
equipments, the servant pointed to a frying pan, which was to be struck
with a wooden mallet in case his majesty desired to call the
attendants. He then withdrew from the chamber, bowing as he went out.

"Apparently they do not eat here," said the marionette. "Maybe these
people think that an emperor is never hungry! However, night passes
quickly." Then he undressed himself and lay down. He was quite tired
out, and he felt sure that in a few moments he should be fast asleep.
But soon he began to roll and toss about uneasily. The bed was hard and
uncomfortable. He opened his eyes. There was a spider crawling over
him, and he shivered. Other spiders, as large as crabs, were creeping
quietly over the ground and the walls as if this was their home and not
the king's!

There was one spider twice as large as the others. Surely he was the
head of that large family. He fixed his fiery eyes upon the marionette
and spoke in the voice of the Talking Cricket: "Where have you come
from--fool that you are? What do you think you have gained by becoming
the emperor of these people? Return to your home, and be content to be
a boy like the rest, and to learn a trade by which you may help your
father and be happy yourself."

Upon hearing these familiar words the marionette wanted to beat the pan
and call for help, but, he reflected, this would show that he lacked
courage and might lower him in the eyes of his subjects. So he endured
his fate, thinking: "A night soon passes. To-morrow night I will have a
sentinel on guard." And he drew himself up, mallet in hand, ready to
fight the spiders if they came too near him. All was still, and
Pinocchio tried a second time to close his eyes to sleep.

"Buzz! buzz! buzz!"

The place swarmed with flies.

"Zz! zz! Zeeee, zeeee, zmm, zmmm!"

Out in the night frogs croaked, birds cried, wild animals howled.

"What a place to sleep in!" whined the poor emperor, flinging himself
about on his hard bed.

Then he thought of his own small cot, neat and clean, in which he had
so often peacefully slept and dreamed pleasant dreams. It will not seem
strange that Pinocchio wished that he were at home again, instead of
being a king in Africa.

Pinocchio the First, Emperor and King of all the African kings, passed
a very wretched night. He felt hot and feverish, and he was afraid that
he was going to die before morning came.

CHAPTER XXXII
HE SENDS FOR THE ROYAL DOCTOR

Pinocchio presently became very anxious about his health. He was sure
that the night's troubles had brought on a high fever, and this, of
course, would keep him from attending to affairs of state. At dawn,
therefore, Pinocchio the First rapped the pan and sent for the doctor
of the court. He was an old man, with a long white beard. Having
listened to the emperor's lament, the doctor drew out a string of beads
from his breast, threw them on the floor, and examined them closely,
all the time murmuring strange words. Then he began to count the beads.
At the end of a quarter of an hour he said that his royal majesty was
in excellent health and need not worry.

The marionette's rage knew no bounds, but it would not do to complain
at the very beginning of his career. He thanked the worthy doctor
therefore, and dismissed him with a polite nod of the head. Then he
again rapped furiously on the pan. There promptly appeared eight or ten
servants, who first knelt down at the foot of the imperial bed, and
then advancing with every sign of respect, raised his majesty gently,
and placed him upon a panther's skin that was stretched upon the floor.

Pinocchio allowed them to proceed, until they began to cover his body
with oil. At this, he asked why they anointed him in such a manner.

"To make you clean, your majesty," answered the servants, very
respectfully.

"Fine cleaning!" thought the marionette. "How are my face and hands to
get washed this morning? Never mind. Let us see what comes next."

This first operation ended, Pinocchio the First was made to sit
cross-legged to have his hair combed. His attendants covered his hair
with a purple cream and then sprinkled over it a golden powder.

Pinocchio's joy upon seeing that glittering substance knew no bounds,
but he overheard one of the servants say in a melancholy undertone:
"What a pity his majesty has not a black complexion such as we have!
What a pity! What a pity!"

The marionette was moved to the bottom of his heart, and he was about
to say, "You may be sure, my dear subjects, I shall do the best I can
to become black," when he heard footsteps approach.

CHAPTER XXXIII
AN OLD STORY

The grand chamberlain was announced.

This grave person had come to inquire about his majesty's health, and
at the same time to notify him that the council had fixed the day for
the coronation.

Pinocchio the First listened and approved. The grand chamberlain, very
much pleased with his reception, made a deep bow, and was apparently
about to retire, when, as if he had forgotten something important, he
approached the emperor again and said with great respect, "Your
majesty, in the name of the council I must announce to you that
to-morrow the lessons begin."

"What lessons?" said the marionette, feeling a chill creep down his
back.

"Ah! I will explain," the chamberlain replied meekly. "The things that
your majesty must do to straighten out the affairs of state are very
simple. Only two words are needed, 'Yes' and 'No!' But to say 'Yes' or
'No' at the proper time requires at least one month of instruction. To
make sure that you learn, there will be, twice each day, a punishment
of ten lashes of the whip, to be given your majesty on whatever part of
the body you may desire. However, in view of the present wisdom of your
majesty, the council has agreed that the lessons and the lashings may
be delayed till the end of the month, if your majesty so decides."

Pinocchio had listened gloomily until he heard the last words, and then
he came near laughing outright. He kept his face very serious, however,
and bowed his head as if in deep thought. After a long silence he said,
"I have decided to leave the lessons till the end of the month."

The grand chamberlain made a profound bow and went out.

The servants went away also, and Pinocchio, finding himself alone,
jumped about in great glee.

"Compulsory fiddlesticks! What blockheads they were to think that I was
going to start to-day! At the end of the month, perhaps! There are
still thirty days, and in thirty days what may not happen!" And he
looked about quite satisfied with himself. He was sure that everything
would go well during his stay in Africa.

"If they sprinkled my hair with gold, they will fill my pockets with
money," he thought. And then to his surprise he found that the suit
they had put on him had no pockets.

"I shall make pockets as soon as I have time," he said, and striking
the pan, ordered the servants to bring in his breakfast.

CHAPTER XXXIV
HIS DUTIES AS EMPEROR

Pinocchio was served with a piece of elephant's nose, cooked in a
highly seasoned sauce. How he twisted his face and ground his teeth!
Evidently the meal was not to his liking. He would have preferred some
fish, some grapes, and a dozen figs, but he was ashamed to ask for
these dainties. He gulped down the food as best he could, and drank
from a gourd a great deal of water; then he felt more comfortable.

His ministers had been waiting some time, and Pinocchio did not think
it wise to prolong his first meal. With a truly stately stride he
entered the audience chamber.

Pinocchio the First, Emperor and King of all Africa, felt it to be his
first duty to express his gratitude for the magnificent reception that
had been given to him. The ministers made an equally polite response.

Persons of rank now came to pay homage to the new king. Among them were
great chiefs of tribes, princes, and kings of the neighboring states.
Pinocchio received them all with much pomp. This sort of thing was at
first very pleasing to him. But day after day the visitors and the
feasts continued. As Pinocchio was the host, he had to eat with all
these newcomers. He became very stout, and his jaws ached from so much
chewing. Eating was becoming a burden to him. He even longed for the
days when he had gone hungry. However, one must take things as they
come and be ready to suffer for the good of one's country.

One day there came to the court three kings, the most powerful within a
range of a thousand miles. The first was clad in a white skirt, and a
military coat which he had bought from an English captain. He came with
his head uncovered and a high hat in his hand. The second wore an old
helmet on the back of his head. The third carried a clumsy sword in one
hand and in the other a broken umbrella.

They bowed to the ground very respectfully, and then each in turn
slapped Pinocchio in the face.

The marionette, who did not expect this sort of greeting, was about to
express his anger, when the master of ceremonies whispered in his ear
that such a greeting was given only to great people.

"When in Rome, do as the Romans do," thought Pinocchio, and he smiled
at the visitors.

Dinner was then announced. Pinocchio felt sick at the thought of eating
again. It was the fifth time that day, and the sun was still high in
the sky, but of course it was not proper to dismiss three kings without
having feasted them.

They went out to the dining room, which was under a tree. Beneath the
branches were more than a thousand people. They all sat on the ground,
and were waited upon by tall young men, who carried around large plates
of meat.

The three kings gave themselves up to the joys of eating. They took
their food in their hands and swallowed it without even stopping to
chew it. Each man ate enough to satisfy a score of ordinary people, for
African kings are great eaters. The poor marionette tried to eat as
much as the others did. He felt that his reputation depended upon it.
How he suffered!

At sunset, when all had satisfied their hunger, there was placed before
them a strange-looking affair with a long tube fastened to it. A
disagreeable smoke came out of it.

"What new thing is this?" thought the marionette, but he did not say a
word, for by this time he had learned that an emperor must appear to
know everything.

The matter, however, was quickly made clear. The outfit was a huge
pipe, with a long mouthpiece. The master of ceremonies presented the
mouthpiece to the emperor and asked him to have the kindness to smoke.

"What blockheads!" the marionette muttered to himself. "I never smoke
anything but the finest cigars!"

Still, he considered it wise to make no objections. He puffed twice on
the pipe stem, and then passed it to the king that sat at his right
hand.

The king drew a mouthful and then passed the pipe to his next neighbor.
Thus the pipe moved along in regular order until it came back to
Pinocchio. Poor Pinocchio! he was already feeling a little queer after
his first attempt, and did not enjoy the idea of smoking again; but he
knew that he must live up to the reputation of a great emperor.
Accordingly he bravely took the pipe and puffed half a dozen times.

Alas! It would have been better for him had he not tried it again! He
was wretchedly sick. His head swam dizzily, and the sweat stood out on
his forehead. He tried to hide his feelings by talking, but what he
said was sheer nonsense.

"When I was king in my own country, the Talking Cricket told me--because
my feet burned--that the alphabet had been swallowed by the cat--that was
hung to a tree by a dog--that was owned by the director of the circus."

He gazed around him, frightened at his own words, but he saw the
flushed faces of the people and heard them whisper: "The sea talks--"
"The sun is filled with stars--" "The tiger laughs--" "The summer is red--
" and similar phrases equally sensible.

"What is the matter with everybody?" thought the marionette, as he
looked about, and saw one of the kings asleep on the ground beside him.
Other forms were stretched out around them. Even as he looked,
Pinocchio the First, Emperor and King of all Africa, fell over on his
wooden nose, and he too was soon fast asleep.

CHAPTER XXXV
PINOCCHIO MAKES HIS FIRST ADDRESS

The next day was a splendid one. The sky was a clear blue, the earth
was green and fresh. Thousands upon thousands shouted with joy.
Pinocchio was to be crowned king and emperor.

He had carefully prepared the royal address, and came proudly forward
mounted upon a large elephant, towering above his people. The trumpets
sounded, the drums beat, the children rolled on the ground. At a signal
from the master of ceremonies all was still. Even the birds ceased to
sing. A troop of monkeys, leaping about in the trees, paused to listen.
The emperor spoke as follows:

"Ministers of Africa, officers of the army, chiefs and underchiefs,
servants and slaves, men, women, and children, all, beloved subjects,
listen to the voice of your emperor!"--and Pinocchio looked around at
the multitude.

"We, Pinocchio the First, speak to you, and bring to you the word of
peace and of love. A new day is about to open to you. Rejoice, O
people! We have concluded to bring happiness to every heart and riches
to every home. We shall not reveal all the plans which, in time, we
hope to see carried out. We shall begin very modestly. Our first gift
to you, O people, is Time. Time is very valuable. We have a great deal
of it in store. Our kingdom is rich in Time; therefore we have decreed
to give each of you as much Time as you want. How can we be more
generous!

"Behold the bright sun in the clear blue sky! There is not its equal
anywhere else in the world. Kings are proud of it. We, your emperor and
ruler, have decreed that every one of you, our faithful subjects, may
enjoy the sunlight free of any charge, without tax or duty. Can we be
more unselfish?

"You hear the song of the birds, the voices of the animals, the
rustling of the leaves in the wind! These also we give you to enjoy at
your leisure, and without expense.

"There is one thing, however, that needs our special notice, and this
we shall now bring to your attention. Remember, we shall enforce with
all our power this law we are about to propose."

Here Pinocchio placed his hand upon his breast and looked toward the
sky.

"We will never introduce into our kingdom that shameful system which
brings sorrow to many countries known to us. We speak of the horrible
scheme called Compulsory Education! What a disgrace it is, beloved
subjects, to see so many bright, intelligent children seated for hours
and hours before books which ruin their eyesight! The eye is a precious
jewel, and it is improved, not by books, but by looking here and there,
above and below, everywhere and anywhere, as the butterflies and the
birds do. Let us teach our children as nature teaches us. Let us burn
our books and our schools. Do not drive our dear little ones to silly
words and cruel numbers. It makes our heart bleed to see parents call
their children from some pleasant game and shut them up in ugly
schoolrooms."

At this point Pinocchio was so moved that he had to stop. He looked
around at the many mothers, and saw them wipe the tears from their
eyes. Proud of the impression his words had made on these kind hearts,
he went on in a tone so pathetic that it touched even the elephant
which carried him.

"These are gentle tears, dear subjects, and they show how noble are
your hearts. You love your children. We ourselves will never see them
suffer. No, a thousand times no! We are not so cruel as to tear you
away from your dear ones. They may continue to roll upon the grass,
free as the birds that fly. They are free to hunt for crickets, to
steal birds' nests, to bite and to kick each other, to run and play in
the fields and woods with the monkeys.

"We consider these exercises very necessary, and whenever the grave
affairs of the state will permit we will visit you and encourage these
sports. You perceive that in this matter you owe much to your emperor,
who was made to go to school, and who saw the evils of education. Alas!
too many of his young companions were completely ruined so far as their
eyes and brains were concerned.

"Officers and soldiers, ministers of the crown, beloved subjects, we,
Pinocchio the First, Emperor and King, ask you to shout with all the
breath in your lungs: 'Down with Compulsory Education! Down with the
school!' "

A deafening roar, louder than thunder, arose from the people: "Down
with Compulsory Education! Down with the school!"

This speech was followed by a review of the troops, which lasted till
night.

Emperor Pinocchio, tired but satisfied, then returned in state to the
royal palace.

CHAPTER XXXVI
THE EMPEROR BECOMES AS BLACK AS A CROW

It was no easy matter to be an emperor. There was a great deal of work
to be done, and work was always tiresome to Pinocchio. Each day he must
get out of bed at a fixed hour, and allow himself to be washed and
oiled. Then came breakfast, and after that the ministers with the
affairs of state.

True, his work did not seem hard. He had only to say "Yes" or "No." But
in the task of deciding whether it should be "Yes" or "No" lay the real
difficulty.

Sometimes he would be left with only a few servants, among them some
boys to entertain him or to drive away the flies with big feather
dusters, which tickled his nose and made him sneeze. These were
pleasant moments in his life, but he was often bored, and being a
cunning rogue he thought out a plan by which once in a while he could
be freed from care.

Among the boys at the court was one who resembled him in all things
except in the color of his skin. What had Pinocchio planned?

One day, while strolling through the woods near the capital, he called
the boy to him and taking his arm, said to him in a gentle voice, "Do
you love your emperor?"

"Is it necessary to ask, your majesty?" replied the boy, moved to tears
at such an honor.

"And should you like to do your emperor a favor?"

"Your majesty, to do you a service I would go at once, with only my
feather duster to protect me, and pinch a boa constrictor's tongue!"

"Good!" replied Pinocchio. "You are a fine lad, and you will become a
great man. But let us put aside boa constrictors for the time. I have
often been sad because I am not like my subjects. I should like to
color my skin so that it would be like a native's, dear Marameho,--like
yours. You know how pleased the ministers would be."

"Your majesty, it would be the brightest day of our lives!"

"Good boy!" exclaimed the marionette. "If you always answer so well, I
promise you the place of keeper of the king's treasures."

The boy's eyes shone.

"Well, can it be done?" asked the marionette.

"Nothing more simple, your majesty," replied Marameho. "I know of a
plant, the fruit of which will serve our purpose."

"When can we get this wonderful dye?"

"To-day, if your majesty will permit me to absent myself for a short
time," replied Marameho with great respect.

"Go, go at once," ordered the marionette, greatly delighted. "But wait;
there is something more. We are alone and may drop our titles. Your
majesty, your highness, weary me to death. Call me plain Pinocchio, and
I will call you my dear Marameho."

The poor boy was overcome with all this kindness, and planting a kiss
upon the point of his emperor's nose, he vanished through the trees.

The next day a proclamation was made throughout the empire. His royal
and imperial highness had become as black as the blackest of his
subjects.

The ministers were joyous, and they celebrated this happy event with a
great feast. That day they did nothing but eat and dance.

As a rule the emperor, of course, could not take part in such
amusements. It was his business to sit upon the throne while the
ministers and the people danced and played before him. This time,
however, the ancient law was broken. Pinocchio danced like a madman the
entire night, while the faithful Marameho, clothed in the emperor's
garments, sat upon the throne. No one even dreamed of the exchange.

CHAPTER XXXVII
THE HIPPOPOTAMUS HUNT

The next day was set aside for a hunt in honor of the young emperor,
Pinocchio the First. He would have been content to stay home, but this
would have been taken as a grave insult to the people.

A herd of hippopotamuses had been discovered a few miles from the
capital. His ministers agreed that the emperor must go. There was
nothing else for him to do.

Besides, the hunt was for scientific purposes. As Pinocchio had made
known his views on schools, he could do no less than encourage this
expedition, which was the only educational training allowed in the
country.

The hunters, in fact, were persons of high rank, who spent their time
in searching for traces of wild animals. It seemed strange to Pinocchio
that these learned hunters did not study how to protect their animals,
instead of trying to kill them.

"I suppose it is the custom of the country," thought the marionette.

Two hours before sunrise the leaders in the hunt, armed with bows,
arrows, and javelins, stood before the royal palace waiting for the
emperor. He was to ride on the back of a bull, which the prime minister
held by a rope.

They were not kept waiting long. Pinocchio the First came forth with a
pleasant smile upon his lips. Inwardly, he was very angry, but little
did his faithful subjects suspect how he felt.

"A fine time for a king to rise!" he thought. "Am I or am I not
emperor? If I am emperor, I should sleep as long as I wish, eat what I
please, and do anything I like. It seems to me that I am the slave of
my people rather than their ruler. Wait, my dear subjects; I will soon
prove to you what stuff I am made of."

The people waited. The ministers explained to the emperor that he was
to ride on the bull.

"My dear subjects, have you lost your senses?" thought the marionette.
"I certainly will not ride on a bull. How long have bulls been used as
horses? This beast will hurl me into the first ditch we come to. A fine
regard you have for your emperor! I almost begin to believe that you
want to get rid of me and have another king."

However, there was no way of escape, and he decided to do as he was
told. He leaped squarely upon the bull, and calmly sat there. The bull,
fortunately, did not move.

"Good beast!" said Pinocchio, somewhat encouraged, as he gave the
signal to depart.

The sun was already up when they reached the river where the hunt was
to take place.

Hippopotamus hunting is a very dangerous sport, but it was one that the
people dearly loved.

Scouts were sent on ahead while the hunters crawled like snakes through
the high, thick grass. As they neared the river, they became very
careful. With their eyes fixed, their ears wide open, their spears
firmly grasped, they were ready to attack at any moment.

Pinocchio pretended that he was suffering with a pain in the left foot,
and slowly dropped behind the others. He had never had any great liking
for the hunt. He felt annoyed that he should always have to do things
that he did not enjoy. He would have stayed where he was, but the prime
minister came along in search of him.

Tired of the insolence of this man, the marionette thrust back his hat
with a bold sweep of his hand, as if to say, "Now I shall show you who
I am, and who I was." Pinocchio then hastened toward the river,
reaching the bank at the very moment when the hunters had started a
large hippopotamus out of the weeds.

The huge animal tried to get away and made for the river.

"Some one must jump into the water and kill it with the javelin," said
the prime minister. Nobody stirred.

Suddenly a loud voice rang through the stillness:

"I will go."

And Pinocchio, amid shouts of admiration and terror from his subjects,
dived into the river and swam toward the animal.

The hippopotamus scented the enemy and turned upon him, but the nimble
marionette, swimming around the great creature, grasped it by its
short, thick tail.

When the beast felt itself gently pulled in this manner it began to
turn round and round like a dog chasing a troublesome fly.

This performance, which was both funny and terrible, lasted for fully
five minutes. During all that time Pinocchio did nothing but laugh. He
did not seem to realize what would happen to him if he were clutched by
those terrible jaws.

At length the animal, blind with rage, plunged below the surface of the
water, leaving the marionette and the others dumbfounded.

This adventure increased tenfold the admiration of the black hunters
for their emperor, although it was not wholly satisfactory to the chief
cook of the royal household, who had already planned a great dinner.
But Pinocchio quickly consoled him, assuring him that when it came to
eating the tongue and feet of a hippopotamus, the emperor would
cheerfully forego the pleasure.

CHAPTER XXXVIII
THE EMPEROR SURPRISES HIS SUBJECTS BY HIS WISDOM

Pinocchio's power grew greater and greater. The courage shown by him in
the hand-to-hand fight with the hippopotamus had made a great
impression on the ministers.

The grand council, for instance, had assembled the high court of
justice, which was to try a large number of important cases. The very
next morning the wise and brave Pinocchio was urged to pass judgment
upon the cases to be presented that day.

Pinocchio thought of playing the usual trick upon his ministers by
placing Marameho in his seat; but this was an important affair, and
must be attended to in person.

"Dignitaries! chamberlains! ministers! royal judges! guards! To the
court!"

The persons called came forward and knelt down to kiss the earth before
his majesty; then, rising, they all moved on to the court of justice.

Beneath a canopy of ostrich feathers, held aloft by a stately African,
walked Pinocchio the First, Emperor and King of all the African kings.
He was wrapped in a large green and red cloak covered with precious
stones,--that is to say, with bits of broken glass of all colors, and
shining pebbles collected with great labor from the rich mines of the
country.

The court was to sit in the open air. This greatly pleased Pinocchio,
for the day was very beautiful. When his majesty arrived all the great
crowd of people knelt and buried their heads in their hands. They did
not rise till the judges were comfortably seated on the bare ground.

At a signal from the emperor the first case was called. There appeared
two men, each with his head completely covered by a large bag which had
in it holes for eyes and mouth. The men bowed again and again to his
highness and to the court, scraping their noses along the ground. At
last they stood stiff and erect like posts.

The grand chamberlain made a sign to Pinocchio, and his majesty,
turning to one of the men, asked, "What brings you before the emperor's
court?"

The person addressed twisted his whole body and sprinkled sand over his
head. Finally he said, "There was once--"

"A king!" thought Pinocchio, "Is he going to tell a story? I, for one,
should be pleased. African stories must be amusing."

"There was once an old man--a kind old man--blacker than I am, who had
many sons, and I was one of them. For this reason, the old man, being
my father--"

"He was his son. He reasons well," thought the marionette, but he did
not move an eyelash, pretending to be all attention.

"For this reason, the old man, my father, sent me to tend his flocks.
One night I arrived at the brink of the river to water the flock. There
I discovered that a sheep was missing. I was heartbroken over this,
and, not wishing to return home without my little sheep, I searched
everywhere, but in vain. The sheep could not be found. I sat down and
began to weep. Behind me was a thick cane field. Upon a rock within the
field was that man, with a sheep between his knees. I rushed to the
spot and shouted out to him, 'Why have you stolen my sheep?' He
appeared not to hear me. 'Why have you stolen my sheep?' It was like
talking to a stone. Blinded by anger, I drew nearer. When he saw me
approach he arose and ran away. I hastened to my sheep and raised it
from the ground, and then I saw--it horrifies me to tell it--that what I
held in my hand was only the sheep's coat. The robber had eaten the
rest. My sheep! My poor little sheep! I shall never see it again!"

Pinocchio was greatly touched by this pitiful tale. He had just opened
his mouth to pronounce a terrible sentence upon the thief, who was
standing motionless as a statue, when the minister whispered to him to
listen to the other side of the story. With an angry look Pinocchio
ordered the accused man to speak.

He started as if he had been roused from deep thought, gazed around,
and then said in a grave, slow voice, "The sun shines--"

"What kind of speech is he going to make?" thought Pinocchio. "Is it
necessary for him to say that the sun shines?"

And as the rogue went on to speak of starry skies, blue waters, and
things of that sort, the marionette lost his patience and shouted, "But
did you or did you not eat the sheep?"

"Your majesty," replied the man, "certainly I ate the sheep! Ask,
however, who, on the day before, ate three fingers from my left hand!"

"Your majesty, I was hungry--" groaned the shepherd. "I was very
hungry."

Pinocchio shuddered. "What kind of people are these? What sort of place
have I fallen into? Fortunately for me I am made of wood."

Meanwhile the two had lowered their heads, waiting for their sentence.
Pinocchio was too much shocked to say a word.

The grand chamberlain came to his aid and whispered something in his
ear.

"Speak!" replied the marionette, "I bid you speak, for whatever you do
is well done."

The minister was pleased at the faith his majesty had in him. He turned
his dark face toward the two offenders and said, "One sheep and three
fingers! You shall both be hanged."

Pinocchio, half-dazed, watched the minister.

Case followed case, and at the end of each one Pinocchio said to the
minister, "Act. I bid you act. What you do is always well done."

The minister knew so well how to act that on this one day there were
sentences amounting to five hundred years of imprisonment, and two
hundred years at hard labor, while a thousand prisoners were to be
lashed, and one hundred were condemned to die.

Justice had been done. The emperor Pinocchio was led back to the royal
palace amid the shouts of the people. He was declared to be the
mildest, the wisest, and the most just of all kings, past, present, and
future.

CHAPTER XXXIX
PINOCCHIO TRAVELS THROUGH THE EMPIRE

In order that his faithful subjects might behold their new sovereign,
Pinocchio the First resolved to make a tour of the villages of his vast
empire and see with his own eyes the needs of his people.

The arrangements were made by the ministers of state. Messages were
sent to all the governors to make preparations for the event, to select
committees to meet the emperor, to provide entertainment, in short, to
have everything in readiness.

It was a big task. The emperor, however, did not trouble himself about
it. He amused himself watching the crickets and the birds, laughing at
the antics of some little monkeys, and playing with his boy pages.

Sometimes he spoke of his past. He told his pages about his travels,
his struggles, his suffering. He told them how he had struggled with
the waves of a stormy sea, and about the fish from whose stomach he had
rescued his father Geppetto. He recalled his dear Fatina, that gentle
and beautiful lady with the blue hair, and, placing his hand upon his
breast, took an oath, as emperor and king, that he would have her come
to Africa. That thought made him happy, and he went on to describe the
feast they would have on her arrival. He had resolved to make her queen
of one of his states.

Marameho shared the joy of his emperor, but a cloud of sadness came
over his face when he heard him build these castles in the air, and
make such plans for the future. The poor boy had already seen too many
changes to believe that anything in the world would last long. He was
aware that his emperor was in grave danger, but he did not dare to warn
him.

However, events quickly ran their course. The preparations were
completed, and on a bright, sunny day, Pinocchio the First, Emperor and
King of all the African kings, took his place upon a litter made of
branches, which was borne aloft by four robust men. Following these
came all the ministers, and the day's march was begun.

Wherever they went, there was loud applause for the emperor. The
mothers were pleased because their ruler had promised to stop
compulsory instruction. They expressed their thanks in flattering
words, some of which reached the emperor's ears.

"How fine is that wooden head!" said one. "It is easy to see that he is
a king of great endurance! They say he can jump wonderfully--just like a
marionette!"

Toward evening the tents were erected. In the largest of these
Pinocchio gave a supper to all the ministers,--a splendid supper which
lasted till late that night. A blazing fire protected the court against
the attacks of wild animals and the cold of the night.

The ministers retired about midnight. Pinocchio, left alone, began to
walk up and down in his tent, with his hands behind him and his head
lowered. He had seen at school a picture of the great Napoleon in the
same attitude.

He thought of his stay in Africa, and of the strange things which had
befallen him. He thought of the treasures he had not yet found. While
pondering on all these things he approached the entrance of the tent,
and in the faint light of the dying fire, he saw a group of men huddled
together. Drawing nearer, he heard them talking.

"If things go well, as I hope they will, we shall gather many
presents," the prime minister was saying. "It cannot be denied that he
is attractive, and I am sure that all our people will vie with each
other in making gifts. Therefore, I entreat you to be patient. When the
visit is ended we will share what has been gathered."

After a long silence, interrupted only by the roar of a lion prowling
about, the prime minister continued: "As for him, we will dispatch him
in the quickest way. If he were not of wood," he added in a deep voice,
"he would be good roasted, but--"

Then some one threw an armful of branches on the fire. The flames lit
up the tent, but Pinocchio saw and heard no more, for he had vanished
out of sight.

At dawn, notices were sent throughout the whole country that the
emperor had disappeared, and that there was no trace of him to be
found!

The confusion was terrible. The people everywhere were aroused,--charges
were brought against the government. The matter became so serious that
the ministers were forced to flee.

Among those who escaped was the prime minister. He went into the
forests determined to find the emperor. Having strong legs and a keen
nose, he was well fitted to track any kind of animal, including a
marionette.

In fact, after many hours of hard work, he beheld the emperor
scampering away from a herd of wild beasts. They evidently wanted to
make a meal of him. The court gentleman knew that these animals would
soon give up the chase, and was content to follow at a distance. After
a while daylight drove the beasts away, and the poor, tired emperor
threw himself flat upon the ground to regain his breath. Scarcely had
he done so when a roaring more terrible than that of wild beasts caused
him to spring to his feet in the vain hope of making his escape.

CHAPTER XL
PINOCCHIO IS PLACED IN A CAGE

Alas! there was the prime minister. He had caught hold of the
marionette and tied a rope around his neck.

It would be impossible to describe the wrath of the poor emperor. He
wanted to say a few things and to do even more, but the cruel minister
struck him with a whip.

This kind of argument convinced the emperor that it was best to remain
quiet.

"That is how I like to see you," said the minister, pushing Pinocchio
forward, and holding him by the rope as the farmers do their donkeys on
returning from market.

Thus they walked a great distance, until they came to the top of a hill
from which could be seen a large tract of country covered with huts.
The minister turned toward Pinocchio and spoke as follows: "My dear
emperor, we must decide upon some plan of action, if we do not wish to
starve. You see to what a miserable state we are reduced. We have no
money, nor have we any food; in short, if we do not earn something
before night, we shall not only be compelled to sleep in the open, but
we shall go to bed supperless. If you were not made of wood, things
would not be so hopeless, because I could eat you up and you would last
some time. But since this is impossible, I have resolved to carry you
around the village and place you on exhibition before the public. You
will make money, do you understand? Now be good enough to give me your
aid. Help me to put together a cage from the bark of these trees. We
shall make money,--much money!" And the minister rubbed his hands
gleefully.

The marionette did not share in his joy. In fact, he was on the point
of showering bitter reproaches upon this unfaithful servant, who was
now going to exhibit him in the public squares, but he decided to wait
for a better opportunity. Accordingly, he began to strip the bark from
the trees without making any objection.

When the cage was completed, the minister turned to the marionette and
said: "Enter. From now on, there shall be no more talk of emperor. I am
your master, and you are my faithful slave.--Forward, march!"

The command had been given in a way which made its repetition
unnecessary, and Pinocchio knew that he must obey.

CHAPTER XLI
PINOCCHIO PERFORMS FOR THE PUBLIC

With the cage on his head the ex-minister walked into the village,
whistling as he went to attract the attention of the people.

"P-r-r-p, p-r-r-p, p-r-r-p!"

It was a holiday, and the people flocked around him. Everybody wanted
to see, everybody wanted to admire the rare animal in the cage. Shouts
of wonder burst forth on all sides.

It is easy to fancy how Pinocchio felt! He longed to be a cricket, or a
mouse, so that he might hide in some hole. How he wished that he were a
butterfly or a bird and could fly to his home!

He stood there, huddled up in one corner of the cage, trying to present
as little of his body as possible to the eager eyes of the crowd. He
prayed for aid with all his heart. It was useless. The cruel master saw
that the square was filled with people, eager to look at the
marionette. He opened the cage, and when Pinocchio stepped out he made
him run around in circles like a monkey.

Then the minister addressed the people:

"Africans of Africa! What you see here is not, as you believe, an
animal; at least, it is not a wild animal. It is a boy. He is like many
other boys that are to be found in certain parts of the earth. How he
happened to fall into my hands would be too long a story. When I tell
you about his habits and his mode of living, you will be able to judge
for yourselves how strange a creature he is. Just think, on arising in
the morning, he wants to wash his face, neck, and hands,--and with what?
Water!"

At these words, a murmur of surprise arose from the spectators, and
some of the people laughed outright.

"That is not all," he continued. "When he has washed himself, he passes
through his hair an object, made of bone, that has long, pointed teeth.
Do you understand his purpose?"

The mothers looked at one another, and some of them touched the woolly
hair of their children, glad that their little ones did not have to
undergo such hardships.

"Nor is that all. You must know that when he wishes to blow his nose,
he takes from his pocket a piece of linen, called a handkerchief, and
blows his nose upon that."

An outburst of laughter greeted these words and completely drowned the
voice of the speaker.

"But there is more, my people! This individual possesses the ability to
eat raw butter, yet his meat must be cooked. He takes porridge with a
spoon and caries it to his mouth. He is even stupid enough to cut bread
with a weapon called a knife."

The astonishment was great! When it had subsided a little there was a
rush to the huts. The people came out carrying water, raw meat, and
butter. One brought a chicken, which the minister immediately killed
and cooked.

At the word of command, Pinocchio washed his hands, neck, and face.
This the marionette did willingly, for he felt the need of it. Then the
broiled chicken was given to him. Pinocchio, to the delight of all, cut
off one of the legs with his knife, and having spread it with pieces of
butter, proceeded to eat it with evident relish.

The women then wished to see him comb his hair. Pinocchio, who had no
comb, passed his fingers through his tangled locks, and finally
succeeded in parting them. Then he drew a handkerchief from his pocket
and blew his nose. The children shouted with glee, and even the parents
could not help laughing at the queer things the marionette did.

CHAPTER XLII
PINOCCHIO BREAKS THE CAGE AND MAKES HIS ESCAPE

For the next few days the poor Emperor and King of all African kings
was compelled to exhibit himself, and to repeat his performances before
thousands of eyes eager to see his strange accomplishments. He was
compelled from morning till night to hear the insults of the boys and
the laughter of the men. All this made him very miserable.

What annoyed him most was the warning he received not to refuse to eat
whenever food was brought to him. "That is what the monkeys and the
elephants do," said the marionette sorrowfully, recalling what he and
his school companions had seen when they went to the circus.

It is unnecessary to say that he thought of his father, of his dear
Fatina, and of his home. They were constantly in his mind. Slowly,
slowly it dawned upon him that this way of living could no longer be
endured, and finally he was convinced that if he did not soon see his
little home, if he did not soon eat the hard, black crust given him by
the loving hands of his father, if he did not soon drink the water from
his own well, he should die of a broken heart.

"My home, my home!" he cried, the tears rolling down his cheeks. "Home,
my home!" he repeated, no longer thinking of the gold and silver for
which he had come to Africa.

"I want to see my father again." And then he stood erect in his cage.
His head went through the top of it and the side fell apart. Away he
leaped over the heads of the crowd,--away like lightning! Out of the
village, across the plains, beyond the hills! Compared with him, the
swift south wind would have seemed no faster than a snail.

He ran and ran and ran. Nor did he make an end of running until he
reached the wide waters of the Mediterranean Sea.

There he stopped. He looked back at Africa, the land of all his empty
dreams; then flinging himself into the water, he said aloud, "I will
return when I have a little more sense."

At that moment a familiar voice shouted to him: "Good Pinocchio! Hurrah
for Pinocchio!"

THE END






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Pinocchio in Africa, by Cherubini

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PINOCCHIO IN AFRICA ***

***** This file should be named 5327.txt or 5327.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/2/5327/

Produced by Walter Moore, James Linden and James Nugen

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

