The Project Gutenberg EBook of PoPHILO, by Dom

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

** This is a COPYRIGHTED Project Gutenberg eBook, Details Below **
**     Please follow the copyright guidelines in this file.     **

Title: PoPHILO

Author: Dom

Posting Date: August 21, 2012 [EBook #5329]
Release Date: March, 2004
First Posted: July 1, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POPHILO ***














Copyright (C) 2002 by L.M. Wong
Dommy dominaeprimus@yahoo.com







PoPHILO

Dommy


PRELUDE

THINKERS IN THEIR OWN WORDS DISPLAY AND CONVEY THE
DEPTH OR SHALLOWNESS OF THEIR OWN AND SO SHALL BE
PILLORIED OR ACCLAIMED BY THEIR OWN THOUGHTS.

THERE IS IMMENSITY IN SPARSENESS AND SPARSENESS IN
IMMENSITY.



























PoPHILO
POPULAR PHILOSOPHY

  Dommy









1.Better to be a willing servant to our mind than an unwilling slave to a
tyrant?s will.

2.The physical self and mind as willing servants to a worthy cause is a form
of devotion. The physical self and mind as unwilling slaves to a despised
cause is physical and spiritual violation.

3.Controlled freedom is externally induced refrain, discretion and
responsibility .It is only when we are given the sovereignty of freewill do we
realise our susceptibility and vulnerability.

4.If a soothsayer predicts negative events in our lives, use freewill to avoid
them. If a soothsayer predicts positive events in our lives ,use  freewill to
fulfil them.

5.We should all generate our own knowledge not just absorb all that we have
learned. In order to attain our full intellectual potential ,we need both the
scholar and innovator in us.

6.When at last we realise how much we?ve lost when things have passed, we
have grasped both wisdom and folly.

7.A pessimist is plagued by dark vision. An optimist is embraced by clear
hope .A practical realist has both dark vision and clear hope .

8.Sweeping statements are uninsured ventures offering high risks of
swallowing our words and pride.

9.The course of one?s life is like a quest for a masterpiece. It hinges on just
the right intensity and apt strokes.

10.The best we thought we were at earlier times are sometimes not as good as
the best stage we are at now. Being at one?s best depends on the time scale it
is judged on. We peak differently at different times. All our peak points are
the summits of their own time.

11.A mortal fact here : Those who live within the century they were born in
and never get to see the next or those  fortunate enough to see the next.

12.Clich,s that we cannot do without are not clich,s but language essentials.

13.Anxiety to the mind is akin to a fractured leg to the body.

14.To maintain constant levels of alertness, for the prolific mind ; repose
while for the sedentary mind ; stimulation.

15.Moderate amounts of guidelines in convention and etiquette ensures that
civilization behaves in civil fashion. Excessive amounts of convention and
etiquette converts life into ritualistic enslavement of thought and action.

16.If you don?t know nothing you know something.

17.One insists because of truth. One insists because of prejudice.

18.Experience is when something becomes easier, more predictable with less
surprises with our ability to discern those worth cherishing and those
only worth  during their fleeting hour.

19.Innovation may spell the demise of erstwhile techniques which were
innovations of yesteryears or just muffle them. The possibility of revamps,
revivals cannot be overruled entirely be they in similar, related or different
fields of interest. Nostalgia has its charms.

20.In order to be profound in thoughts the mind must be liberated from the
immediate reality of trifles.

21.The inexperienced and strong pour all their power to complete a task.
     The experienced and not as strong place their power where it?s needed.

22.There are those who are weak with strong will and those strong with
     weak will.

23.Sharing is to be aware that we are not the absolute owner and to attune
ourselves to the pendulum cycle of holding and releasing.

24.Communication isn?t confined to mere expression. Communication
involves discretion and sensitivity as well to connotations and subtleties.

25.A wizened head is not necessarily a wise one, vice-versa.

26.To be educated with what we know and to expect them in a particular
form only is to be unprepared for exceptions.

27.Innovation brings changes to lifestyle , technology and attitude too.

28.To be comfortable with Falsehood is to be uneasy with Truth.

29.If conventional methods bind us  in a knot , let innovation undo it.

30.If conformity fills the world, inventiveness shapes it.

31.If conformity follows the charted course, innovation plots it.

32.Tradition is a method to get fledglings and elders involved. For a while,
regardless of seniority ,they are united by a common cause.

33.Daring, recklessness and folly are discerned by the odds, rational thought
and degree of desperation.

34.Observe interests before resolving the conflict.

35.Meet your Maker with readiness and anticipation , honour and humility ,
knowledge and receptiveness ,forgiveness in soul , remorse for vices , joy for
virtues and devoted willingness to be of service to the Omnipotent.

36.Some interpretations of morality and immorality change as humanity
evolves while the absolutes remain.

37.We labour for ourselves and for others.

38.Trends are variants and possibilities. They dock at the harbours of fashion
and drift away to the sea of pass,. From obscurity sometimes they do return.
Direction lies not there. Direction lies in rudiments upon which trends were
moulded.

39.Unbridled discerning divides us.

40.To know much of everything is extraordinary. To know much of
something or someone is a common norm.

41.Most of the time a-know-it-all is a know-less-than-all.

42.Having just adequate knowledge to exist is like being familiar with our
own dwelling. But once outside ,we become ignorant strangers.

43.Let us live and understand not just mere pride from knowing about things.

44.Search within and discover that
...we know more than we think
...we know less than we think
...we are less than what we think we are
..we are greater than what we think we are

45.It is a terrible affliction to underestimate and overestimate ourselves
frequently.

46.An identical replacement should be deemed as such without undue
expectations for it to resemble or be what was lost or unattainable. To have a
substitute subjected to endless comparisons brings agony and disillusionment.

47.Withholding, releasing, utilising and non utilising  information exacerbates
or brings peace.

48.To shape one?s own methods and principles , observe others. From that
emerges one?s identity with tolerance and understanding of others.

49.The best way to honour and cherish is to treasure and remember it at its
finest.

50.It is great to be flawlessly felicitous for the moment. It is greater to be
relevant always.

51.Blood is the fluid of life. Water is the fluid for sustaining life.

52.Two options to attain greatness and awareness. One, through conspicuous
actions .Two, through inconspicuous means.

53.We  realise mistakes
...while it?s been made
...after it has been made
...after been informed
...after admonishment
...after  been criticised
...after its consequences have befallen us
...before its occurrence

54.Acknowledgement comes while we are here or when we have left.

55.Opportunity is not a one way traffic flow. There are times when others and
events create opportunities for us. In our time of need, magnanimity ,
obligation or circumstantial twists of events, we create opportunities for
others.

56.Having an interest in a certain subject covers more than academic pursuits.
Practical pursuits come to play too. It can be a possession of something with
the potential to augment progress in a particular sector or more.

57.Interest may lead to growth or decline, conception or doom to those
affected.

58.When we realise that we are misfits in other matters, console ourselves
with our strengths.


59.It is not easy being a perfectionist. The mind has to live up with the
demands of the heart?s desire, the form has to toil while the conscience has to
answer whether to live with a flaw or eradicate it even if it means more effort.
The restless heart searches constantly for improvement. The final attainment
and result of work is left for the perfectionist to regard it as worth every iota
of distress, sacrifice , struggle and rumination invested or else the set up is
undone and rebuilt again.

60.Thinking is the means of marshalling our dormant memory, facts , ideas
and dreams while we coax them to form a cohesive logical fluxion.

61.Endurance and Faith are required in the advance into uncertainty for they
are our defiant impetus of resistance which pit against tempting surrender.

62.Rational judgment and discretion are imperative in an age when sources of
knowledge provide contradictory accounts. It aids those who are bemused
and buried in the quagmire of indecision.

63.Seekers seek for
...the purpose of conquering
...the purpose of cherishing
...for the sake of seeking
...in order to destroy


64.Bellicose seekers will be met with opposition while the one who comes in
peace will be greeted with cooperation.

65.Public opinion is what society considers you to be. Reputation is what you
have done to enable associates , rivals and strangers  to consider you to be.
Self-esteem is what you consider yourself to be .

66.Artists create
...what they think the public want  .... for the joys of creating
...what they think that the public should see ... according to their whims
...exactly what the public want ... or things which will invite controversy
...for the sake of creating  ... for the sake of their sanity.


67.It is much easier to yearn and possess than to cherish and preserve.

68.WHAT CAUSES CONFLICT ?
Differing points of view and no middle road for both to tread.

69.Actions are impulses and thoughts brought to the physical realm.

70.Curb fears that immobilise us. Value and harness those which mobilise us.

71.Sometimes the way to peace is to just accept the state of things.

72.The ability to adapt, learn , to be adept and improvise are methods  used
for mastering situations .The ability to amass possibilities are methods of
altering or avoiding situations in which we were cast in.

73.We may not welcome old age yet we ought to welcome wisdom from
experience.

74.Among us are those who treasure their childhood and wish to be children
and innocent. There are those who treasure adulthood .There are those willing
to remain in the world of adolescent joys and pain.

75.Be calm if one is as wise as one ought to be.
    Fear not if one is wiser too.
    Fear when one is less than one ought to be.


76.Situations influence our mood. We cannot deny that our moods do exist.
We are all moody people.

77.Fear for yourself and for others if you have no control over destructive
impulses.

78.A perfectionist can be one who demands perfection from oneself and/or
from others. Demands for perfection may be constant or occasional , realistic
or otherwise while dealing with human or technological limitations .


79.Swearing to keep secrets is easy. To refrain ourselves from disclosing is
the challenge.

80.Sometimes it is the average  person with common sense who puts things
right not experts weighed down by their theories and principles.

81.It is easy to disclose a secret. It is hard to live with the fact of having done
so.

82.Past brushes with fright make either the coward or the brave.

83.The make does not make a person.

84.There are times when changes appear to threaten our plans. They are
sometimes inevitable. At times it is our less than perfect ideals which are
threatened and to alter them will be to our advantage later.

85.Better to transform faces of the present and deal with the tide of
approaching time than undo an established past .

86.Truth can be blurred but its persistence ensures that its implications will
not be shrouded indefinitely. Truth outlives schemers .

87.Deny truth and believe delusions. Deny truth and be hounded by its
legitimacy .Deny truth but later come to terms with it.

88.We retain the exterior and keep the core  vice-versa .
     Keep both core and exterior or discard both for new.

89.If one searches and discovers common links in the mesh of basic
principles , dissimilarity floats on the surface and similarity is submerged
below.

90.Conformity tries to cajole individuality to apologise for its uniqueness.

91.If our expressions  of individuality in no way transgress human laws or
God?s ,there is no basis to demand for a renouncement or recant.


92.It is best that we allow not ourselves to be stunted by well worn methods
and well tried ways. Time will tell as to when we are secure and confident
enough to venture out from the narrow sphere.

93.If you have been spared certain labour, use the time allocated to your
leisure for self evaluation and elevation .

94.It is not adequate to just grow wiser. Disseminate your work so others
may derive the same joys as well.

95.The question is laid to every person. Will one travel along the lighted or
darkened passage ?

96.Sense of duty comes in various forms. Whatever the preference or nature
the end is for some benefit.

97.Society tends to consider us...
...too much of certain things too little of others
...capable of certain things incapable of others
...knowledgeable of some and ignorant of certain  things
...should be certain things and not be others
...apt for some and inappropriate for others
...too early for certain things too late for others
...just about right for some others.

98.Desire, goals and interest are among those which have another in place
when fulfilled.

99.It takes varying doses of effort to end below, equal to or grander than  the
manner in which we have started.

100. Biological and mental  age has a bearing towards our ambitions and
enthusiasm not just the environment. One extract does not make a compound.

101.Philosophy is the sum of experience and knowledge  regarding a matter
or a scope of matters compressed into blocks of wisdom or expressed in a full
length treatise form.

102.What seems to be the start or the end may turn out to be a brief term ,
long term or perpetual existence of a state.

103.The measure of courage is based on the manner in which we confront the
actual event or how one comes to grips with the outcome.

104.We know that we have become more discerning in taste when we are
more selective, are no longer smitten or persuaded by one of its elements .
We appreciate the entirety.

105.If  what that has been expressed does not correspond with what has been
done, language is unnecessary and superfluous.

106.When one has nothing to say it is time to reflect on that state of
emptiness.

107.There are those who want to prove themselves. There are those who
never wanted to. There are  those without the chance to do so. There are
those who have done so. There are those who go on until enough has been
done .

108.There are
...those who are not
...those who want to be
...those who do not want to
...those who will never be
...those who will be
...those who think they are
...those trying to be
...those who nearly are
...those who are

109.Banalities are the light and mundane touches to life. They do not make
the larger picture but they assist in completing it.

110.Sleep?s a cure and a disease.
	Sleep?s a necessity and an addiction.
	Sleep?s a willing servant and a temptor.
	Sleep clears the mind and muddles the head.

111.What we perceive as tools of leisure are another?s tools of trade.

112.There are people. There are names. We are known by them. We build
them, we besmirch them. We create and alter them. We are proud or
embarrassed of them. We remember or forget them. We honour, ridicule,
criticise or dishonour them. We play with them, use, abuse and share them.

113.To be fearful and survive, to have confronted countless deaths and lived,
breeds strength and calm nurtured by mastery of terror and vulnerability.

114.Victory and euphoria by itself is ephemeral. The spoils and the future
matter more.

115.At times we have to clear the conscience that we have expended our
most fervent efforts.

116.Sometimes the passage to comprehension is to derive first hand
experience. Sometimes it is done through other sources. In any method,
dedication is vital.

117.When there?s madness there?s chaos and consequences.
	When there is craving there is desire.
	When there?s madness and desire there breeds frenzy and obsession.
	 Reality is lost.

118.When there is a dream there is a drive. Where there are principles you
can find conviction. When there is dedication there is responsibility. Where
there is consideration, there breeds caution and care. There is a sense of
reality.



119.Be one?s life prominent or inconspicuous, hectic or laid back, complex or
simple, matters not. Whether one sees the pattern of occurrence and truth
matters.

120.A power failure is a bright flash which put us in the dark.

121.It is personal opinion which must be curtailed for fair judgment. Only
those who laud or maul know the extent of their personal opinions in their
judgment.

122.Those who appreciate most are those who understand best.

123.The world is a hive of variety and we beings of variety.

124.Perspiration forms not only upon the brow of those who toil. The
anxious, fearful, industrious, weary, and relieved have the salt on them too.

125.If nothing is of importance , we would not take anything or be taken
seriously.

126.When the initial passion had waned, conviction with rational reason
sustain interest.

127.In order to atone for past misdeeds, at times, the peace offering comes
with a returned opportunity.

128.We back away to avoid involvement, back away to watch.
	We back away when threatened, back away when instinct tells us.
	We back away when it?s time to leave, when we care enough for
	another to manage on their own.

129.You have to be either strong or weak enough to turn your back from
something.

130.In most cases, it is poor perception that hinders, not physical impediment.


131.At the commencement, new findings come to us in abundance. At later
stages when a sizeable amount had been unearthed, they come at a slower
pace.

132.When we worry because of the dearth of things to ruminate on, we have
found a chunk to ponder on. Closest things at hand are too often disregarded.

133.We ought to be grateful for all the circumstances which enabled us to
attain and those which inspired us.

134.Choices are made according to varying mixtures of rational reasoning and
emotions.

135.To bear with resentment is difficult .To take our leave from its misery is
happy relief.

136.Repetition enhances appreciation and zeal or heightens annoyance and
aversion.

137.To keep is to impede or nurture. To keep is to destroy or preserve.

138.Awareness is not only exploring the inner self but the outer environment
as well.

139.We go in pursuit for many aims, to learn, to inflate the ego, to serve a
cause, to heighten the reputation, to capture, to treasure, to harm and to
protect.

140.There is cost involved in both victory and defeat.

141.What others think of us may or may not be what they thought of us
previously. What others think of us may or may not be what we think
ourselves to be.

142.From what we know, we can decrease or augment, deplete or replenish,
waste or retain, discourage or nurture , obliterate or create.


143.Whether one?s labours are rewarded with favour or spurned, whatever
the outcome, one ought to be consoled with the comfort that the execution of
our labours were made under the cover of probabilities and guided by clarity
of conscience.

144.Sometimes gestures and silence are the most apt communication.

145.Far better to give a sterling performance without an audience rather than
to an unappreciative one.

146.Where love resides there is a bond. Where there?s a bond it may not
always have love as company.

147.When love is no more, mutual respect and tolerance are left. When these
due to friction are depleted, parting is best.

148.Rage so long as it reigns, obscures profundity of all else but raging fever.

149.Our scars and hurt have tales to tell. They are part of the cost of living
and experience.

150.Faith is trust.

151.In the imperfect cosmos, enhancement of one feature comes with
depletion or sacrifice of another.

152.When we serve for gain or from generosity, we still have to put up with
some personal discomfort.

153.One stroke of a thread ferrying needle undoes a stitch. One potent stroke
of a drug carrying needle undoes a life.

154.If matters were simpler, there would be more trust, less elaborate
schemes and less reading between the lines.

155.If we view valid individualism and idiosyncrasies as unacceptable, then
being ourselves is tantamount to an illegal act.

156.At times scarcity and limitations bring about excellence.

157.Our passion indicates our commitment .How our passion consumes and
endures testify to the intensity of conviction.

158.To be exceptional may mean being at the extreme ends of classification.

159.It takes effort to create well, duplicate well and emulate well.

160.As we progress what were once seen as luxuries become necessities.

161.To be ennobled through age is a reward. To be debased in character as
we age is a shame.

162.No one relishes the ill mannered fledgling or elder.

163.We all play our part towards the well being of civilization.

164.When you fear yourself you will fear your own shadow.
       When you fear for yourself, you will also fear your own shadow.

165.There is order in disorder when feuding factions champion similar
causes.

166.There is pain and relief in both holding on and letting go.

167.For most, fantasy?s encroachment into reality is better received than
reality?s rude burst into fantasy.

168.Most would wish to stay with fond fantasies if there are no fond realities.
When and where there are fond realities to live with, there we shall stay.

169.It is not sufficient to have one?s facts precise but also to be sure of them
and ourselves.

170.In anger it is too easy to draw exaggerated stereotypical conclusions. It
takes sensitivity towards conscience and a vigorous spirit to resolve
objectively.

171.Circumstances and distractions make the weary and wary fair game.

172.Reality deals with what is. Fantasy deals with what might be even if it is
impossible.

173.There is dignity and greatness in the grand and humble. Our eyes need to
seek the less obvious for our minds to appreciate them.

174.The pace with which we go about our work manifest calm or alarm.

175.Being immersed in concentration is like tuning out in order to tune in.

176.We came here unsoiled. Our misdeeds soil us.

177.Our struggles wear us away, our passions invigorate us.

178.Society spares neither those who speak too much or those who speak
little.

179.A wrinkled brow should not be the price of temporary discomfort.

180.When we try overzealously to be proper in appearance and manners, we
at times overdo it to the extent that we end up apologising and blushing over
matters which are normal and natural.

181.Let?s face it, not all are compensated equally in material comforts for
their troubles.

182.The measure of strength is the volume of abuse which it is capable of
withstanding.

183.Some buckle under pressure , some buckle under excessive sweetness.

184.To see truth ,  we have to see through deceit.

185.One is charred by one?s torch when one is snuffed by the flame of one?s
passion.

186.There is the disquiet of unease in either knowing or not knowing.
      There is the ease of calm knowing and not knowing.

187.Confusion brings forth fear, fear brings forth confusion.

188.In a serious surrounding, we tune in with ease to  the significant. In a
mundane surrounding , we have to wait for revelations from banalities to
help us delve into significance.

189.There is a drive to action or to the brake of passivity when we are overly
anxious.

190.Familiarity tends to make us take things for granted while the unknown
cautions us .

191.By using our strength we can either do a lot of good or a lot of damage
to ourselves or to our surroundings.

192.We appreciate by preserving, devouring, using and by being careful.

193.Control is present in creation and destruction.

194.Credit is given or withheld when justified or otherwise, when expected or
otherwise and when under obligation.

195.If we persist against reason, it is like dehydrating a parched desert.

196.There are fantasies which deserve a shot at reality and those which
should remain as they are.

197.There are realities which we are thankful for and those which we wished
had stayed as unfulfilled fantasies.

198.Fantasies are stakes in a world of intangibles.


199.For the preservation of sanity we reach for relief from orthodox and
unorthodox quarters.

200.To stray is to lose or to find.

201.Uncomprehended text are just blots on matter which ignorance is unable
to decipher.

202.Despite the worth of a piece of work, if it?s not understood it is worthless
or at best a nagging mystery.

203.Be thankful for having both food and shelter during intemperate weather.

204.We forget about others while drunk in our own comforts and pleasures.

205.There are escape artists who perform stunts by liberating themselves
from danger. There are escape artists who perform stunts by shirking
responsibility.

206.We are given the option to etch our niche in humankind?s odyssey as
those who follow the paved path or as those who hacked their own.

207.Fiction is when one?s work is courted by reality and possibility, the
logical and illogical.

208.If you want a recital, ask for what one knows. If you wish to witness an
accomplishment, ask for what one can do with what one knows.

209.Seek for one and you shall find many. Accept one and you shall accept
many.

210.One can only caution oneself or another if one has foresight, the lessons
of  experience or knowledge.

211.If we hadn?t been particularly exceptional in a certain matter, compensate
for it in others if one is able.


212.The enhancing mask of vanity is a lesser vice compared to the deceptive
mask of lies.

213.It takes the higher to make the lesser realise. It takes the lesser to make
the higher realise.

214.Paces frantic, moderate or leisurely yield results.

215.Variety, uniformity and contrast is to be found in similar or a myriad of
elements.

216.There is control in bursts of energy or in composure.

217.We think of things which we believe and do not believe.

218.Reality is as normal or ludicrous as the events which shape it.

219.Keeping ourselves alert is the easiest, most natural and challenging thing
to attempt.

220.Seeing the sane and farcical keep our sanity.
       Being able to tell the difference assures us of our sanity.

221.Wishing for the worst for others bares the worst in us.

222.To commit ourselves truly, it is best that we make as few pledges as
possible.

223.We mostly refrain from requesting assistance because of pride, taciturn
nature ,fear or over confidence .

224.Pride is forgotten when one is threatened or desperate.

225.When inspiring thoughts leave us ,  we lose the fervour. We are left with
tokens of achievement and the longing to achieve more.

226.Reverberating thoughts impede or propel.


227.Results are produced through depletion of renewable and non renewable
resources.

228.We are spent or revitalised when we give or derive.

229.We are all tied to strings of some sort. Some strings are longer, firmer
and more essential than some others.

230.Discretion is found in those with many priorities or in those who
understand subtleties of human ways.

231.An act of disregard can set the stage for a succession of similar misdeeds
because those in a position to rectify chose not to commit and instead
conformed to the state.

234.Praise emboldens, inflates or reddens the cheeks.

233.Relationships are equal and unequal.

234.A question does not necessarily beget an answer.

235.We are noted for
...being in and out of prominence
...our potential to be in or out of prominence

236.We are elated that others understand us. We are uneasy because others
comprehend us.

237.The reluctant will not. The reckless will. The rational evaluate.

238.A disguise is a state contrary to the actual or natural state.

239.It is next to impossible  trying to assist those who are unwilling to be
assisted.

240.Do not venture beyond one?s accustomed depths for the sake of
answering a childish challenge.


241.There is ceremony for both our physical advent and departure.

242.Attempts themselves do not manifest righteousness.

243.If we allot too much leeway for others in the running of our lives, we
might not get to know ourselves or its potential.

244.We cannot survive solely in the realm of the past, however grand, for the
rest of our existence.

245.Awareness come not only from work of others but from our own
observation as well.

246.Sanity should not be confused with conformity.

247.A philosopher is one who roams through the wilderness of specifics in
order to derive compact and representative generalisations .

248.The fire within heats us to action or burns us to oblivion.

249.Desperation heeds not reason, decorum or consent.

250.We criticise others well and convincingly. Can we do the same for
ourselves or will it take another to see the cracks on our crystal ?

251.When one is too enmeshed in light matters, serious matters become
heavy burdens.

252.Being out of touch from the familiar makes the return strange.

253.The superfluous are decorations built from the base of essentials.
       We can add them on or discard them  when it pleases us or when
       prodded by necessity but we cannot dispense with the essentials.

254.How well we perform a task reflects how much we have learned.
       How well we perform a task reflects our aptitude level.



255.When a situation is prevalent, a deviation is seen as an exception,
anomaly or luxury.

256.Life comes to us in fragments .We have to link the pieces to find our
      place in it.

257.We express knowledge in full, in portions, always or at times.
       We admit ignorance in full, in portions, always or at times.

258.Process involves cause and transition of former states to that of latter or
resulting states and eventual outcome.

259.For one to know intellectual fullness and depth, one must beforehand
be submerged in the levity of banality. The two states come in intervals.

260.We develop our intellect by striving to know what others know. We
advance our minds by formulating what others know not.

261.Impulse demands for attention .It is our discretion which chooses to
      see to its needs or to ignore it.

262.We are too preoccupied with singular functions which deal with worldly
tasks. It is akin to acknowledging the individual components
of a contraption and not the reason for its invention.

263.Philosophy and deep rumination is often ill considered by those in the
fever and throes of the rat race.

264.In order to relate to a state, experience of that state comes to play.

265.Some things lose their appeal when they lose their novelty.

266.Be sure to secure the base of or triumph at the time of glory lest it be
eroded when it is our turn to face the brink.

267.We regard time spent on a matter only to find it unsuitable for our
purpose a waste yet it isn?t for the evolution of thought and concepts
have brought us to our present stage besides strengthening our tenacity.

268.A preference may be linked to the emotions or emotional detachment.
      Preferences may be formulated from practical necessity or the heart?s
      calling.

269. Bitter or sweet farewells are in synchrony with our emotions at the
        time.

270.Little bits of misery is found all over existence and it is unevenly
       distributed.

271.One cannot be dogmatic in a game of cat and mouse.

272.We are victims and beneficiaries of our excesses, austerity and
       moderation.

273.Between ?could have been? and ?has been? is ? being?.

274.Jadedness is when excitement?s throbs are tempered by experience.

275.Matters past which we had derived from sources other than ourselves
      is knowledge.
      Matters past which we have lived through is experience.
      We have knowledge and experience with us.

276.All worthy actions done were done not in vain.

277.Others know us for what we have done.
      We know ourselves by what we have done , what we have
      yet to do , what we are capable of and what we cannot do.

278.All of us devour a form of life in order to sustain our own.

279.One sometimes can have no inkling of a matter until it is one?s
       turn of fortune to encounter it.

280.One?s taste can be flaunted for show but one?s show is not to
       everyone?s taste.


281.Some matters serve a specific purpose while there are those which
possess relevance always.

282.A humorist has laughter to spare and share.

283.Life cannot be considered seriously by one who sees it as a mere
absurdity.

284.Glumness is a disease when and where laughter is infectious.

285.He who laughs last caught the joke last or has a pathetically slow sense
of humour.

286.One who conveys a joke cracks it. One who listens catches it.

287.Humour makes the heavy world a lighter one.

288.Humour lightens and brightens up solemnity.

289.It is logical to limit oneself to necessities in lean times. It is thrift to limit
oneself to necessities in boom times.

290.A sober approach to birthdays  is to consider them as a time for
reflection and resolution in place of common revelry.

291.Material with knowledge and wisdom. Material with knowledge
but without wisdom. Material which give neither.

292.Thought and conduct are fused as a singular entity in wisdom.

293.If one were to be blamed, be blamed for zeal?s abundance rather  than
the pathetic lack of it.

294.When one is a compulsive achiever, a person of accomplishment at an
earlier than usual phase, one is at a state whereby it would have taken others
a much longer time to grasp. For those who prefer to progress gradually ,
early achievement  is a remarkable  exception / anomaly.


295.Prudence makes us servants of our needs and anxiety.

296.Confidence lends courage .

297.The beginning of our affection is selfish and self-serving. At its maturity
our affection is such that sacrifice becomes a viable option for the welfare and
happiness of another.

298.We adapt , adopt and  emulate  in order to progress and as we progress.

299.We are pained at the point of release for we know what we shall miss.
We are indifferent if we do not know of what we shall be deprived of.

300.The extreme ends of involvement are at the fringes of impassioned and
detached states.

301.When we are unfamiliar with something, we review it  often so that we
can assimilate it in our minds and to accustom our thoughts with it.
When we are familiar with something we become well versed  enough to kid
around with it.

302.We were born as dots among masses. We try to leave as complete
sentences. Yet the length of our trail hangs heavily upon circumstances.

303.We may holler out loud. We may be heard by all. All comes to nought
till another answers the call.

304.Our tongues make things great and ordinary sound as they are or contrary
to their significance and nature.

305.Waiting can be brief respite from outcome or torment of outcome?s
uncertainty.

306.Vision to create a cause. Conviction to stay and Effort to pursue it.

307.Dissatisfaction fuels both beneficial and destructive effects.

308.Carbonated drink makers are a jolly lot. They are in a bubbly profession.

309.Critics whine, critics praise, critics appraise, critics condemn , critics
dismiss , critics ignore , critics avoid.

310.We complain of work which drain us and we complain of a lack of work.

311.We can say what we really wish to. What hinders our speech are
variables in circumstances and its retinue of effects .

312.We recall because there was a yesterday and it has passed.
       We do because we have today and it passes but once.
       We plan because we believe in tomorrow and it will come to pass.

313. It is the tempered soul that outlasts the fury of the pyre, the mortality of
the flesh, the vicissitudes of fancies, impermanence of favours, the narcissism
of vanity and the intransigence of factions. For awhile, and while it lasts, the
soul wears the godhead and inspiration, and it sees the wisdom withheld from
foolishness and the dues of virtues. How one wishes to have that crowning
wisdom, on the strength of our worthiness, unhindered by our most personal
and private of pitfalls.










End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of PoPHILO, by Dom

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK POPHILO ***

***** This file should be named 5329.txt or 5329.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/2/5329/



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

This particular work is one of the few copyrighted individual works
included with the permission of the copyright holder.  Information on
the copyright owner for this particular work and the terms of use
imposed by the copyright holder on this work are set forth at the
beginning of this work.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
