The Project Gutenberg EBook of Everybody's Book of Luck, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Everybody's Book of Luck

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: July 10, 2017 [EBook #55082]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERYBODY'S BOOK OF LUCK ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Christopher Wright, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)









                             _Everybody's_

                                 BOOK

                                  OF

                                 LUCK

                            [Illustration]


                      WHITMAN PUBLISHING COMPANY
                 RACINE, WIS.      POUGHKEEPSIE, N. Y.

                           PRINTED IN U.S.A.




                               CONTENTS


  CHAP.                                                            PAGE.

  I.     THINGS THAT BRING YOU GOOD LUCK AND BAD LUCK                  3

  II.    HAVE YOU A TALISMAN?                                          6

  III.   HINTS ON FORTUNETELLING                                      12

  IV.    PALMISTRY--WHAT MAY BE LEARNED FROM HANDS                    13

  V.     YOUR HANDWRITING REVEALS YOUR CHARACTER                      32

  VI.    YOUR FACE IS YOUR FORTUNE                                    40

  VII.   WHAT DO YOUR BUMPS MEAN?                                     46

  VIII.  HOW ASTROLOGY DECIDES YOUR DESTINY                           49

  IX.    YOUR CHILD'S OCCUPATION DECIDED BY THE STARS                 55

  X.     WHAT ARE YOUR HOBBIES?                                       59

  XI.    WHAT IS YOUR LUCKY NUMBER?                                   60

  XII.   YOUR LUCKY COLOR                                             65

  XIII.  WHICH IS YOUR LUCKY STONE?                                   67

  XIV.   DREAMS--WHAT THEY MEAN                                       72

  XV.    TEACUP FORTUNETELLING                                        83

  XVI.   LUCKY AND UNLUCKY DAYS                                       91

  XVII.  THE LUCK OF FLOWERS                                          99

  XVIII. SUPERSTITIONS REGARDING ANIMALS                             104

  XIX.   CRYSTAL GAZING                                              107

  XX.    THE MOON AND THE LUCK IT BRINGS                             111

  XXI.   FORTUNETELLING BY MEANS OF PLAYING CARDS                    113

  XXII.  FORTUNETELLING GAMES                                        137

  XXIII. THE LUCK OF WEDDINGS AND MARRIAGES                          151

  XXIV.  FOLKLORE AND SUPERSTITIONS OF THE MONTHS                    159

  XXV.   A CALENDAR FOR LOVERS                                       173

  XXVI.  MAKING USEFUL MASCOTS                                       191




THINGS THAT BRING YOU GOOD LUCK AND BAD LUCK


Ask a dozen people whether they have any superstitions, and the
majority will tell you, without hesitation, that they have not the
slightest belief in such things. If the truth is told there are very
few of us who do not cherish some little weaknesses in this direction.
One person may believe in a number of superstitions; another has,
perhaps, only a few that are observed; but he or she that has none at
all is a remarkably rare individual.

As a matter of fact, most superstitions are based on reason and sound
common sense, and the man or woman who pays heed to them is acting
intelligently, whether he or she knows it or not. Take, for instance,
the belief that it is unlucky to walk under a ladder. True, the old
assertion is that it is unlucky to do so because Jesus Christ was taken
down from the Cross by means of a ladder. But the more practical reason
is that painters and other men on ladders are very likely to drop
things and, if you happen to be passing at the time, the paintpot or
the tools will fall on you.

Of course, the reasons for all superstitions are not so evident as this
one about walking under a ladder: nevertheless, there is a germ of
reason in them all, whether or not we know the reason. Thus, the man or
woman who observes the common superstitions of everyday life is acting
wisely. Not only will he or she avoid a good deal of trouble, but his
actions will provide him with a sense of well-being, and the effect it
will have on his mind, the psychological effect as it is called, is all
to the good.

It is not proposed to explain why this or that superstition is worthy
of being observed; in many cases, the reason is obscure; but here we
will give some of the beliefs which are current at the present time.

First of all, you should never pass anybody on the stairs of a
private house, and, while talking of stairs, it may be said that many
people believe that, for someone to fall up a step, is a sign of an
approaching wedding.

Never light three cigarettes with the same match unless you are
prepared for a spell of ill-fortune. This superstition gained currency
during the War, probably because a match held long enough to light
three cigarettes would give the enemy a clue to your position,
especially at night-time.

If the cord of a picture frame snaps and the picture falls to the
ground, it is an omen that somebody is going to die. If the picture
is a portrait of a living person, then that person's life is the one
likely to be terminated. This omen may be considered a remarkably silly
one, with not a shred of sense to recommend it. Yet how many people can
point to instances when the prophecy has come true!

Of salt, there are several omens. The chief one tells you not to
help anybody to salt; in other words, it is unwise to put some on a
person's plate. Helping them to salt is helping them to sorrow. Another
superstition says that if you spill salt you will be unlucky unless
you throw a pinch of it over your left shoulder.

To break a mirror is known by all as a serious matter. The reason
why it is unlucky, we are told, doubtless finds its origin in a mere
association of ideas. The mirror being broken, the image of the person
looking into it is destroyed: therefore, bad luck in some form must be
the fate of the careless one. What exactly is the penalty one must pay
for breaking a mirror is not definite. Some people speak of seven years
of misfortune, while others claim that it means seven years of celibacy.

To take certain things into the house is the height of folly, if you
believe in superstitions. May or hawthorn blossom is one, though the
berries of this flower seem to have no ill-potency. Peacock's feathers
are another. Somewhat similar is the contention that it is very unlucky
to open an umbrella indoors.

While sitting at the meal-table, there are several things that must
not be done. Helping a friend to salt has been already mentioned, but
you must not allow the knives or forks to become crossed. Quarrels
with your friends will result if you do. Of course, you must not sit
down, thirteen of you, around the table. As is well known, this belief
has its origin in the Last Supper, when our Lord sat at meat with his
twelve apostles. On the other hand, should you taste a fruit for the
first time in that season, you have only to frame a wish and it will be
granted. Much the same applies to mince-pies. You will be awarded with
a whole happy month for each pie that you eat at Christmas-time which
is made in a different house. Of course, it is highly unwise for two
people to pour tea out of the same pot at the same meal.

To give a friend an edged tool is sure to cut the friendship, whether
it be a knife, a pair of scissors, a razor or a chisel. When such a
gift is to be made, the usual plan is to sell it to your friend for a
penny.

You should never put a shoe on a table, and, to see a pin lying on the
floor and leave it there, is an omen that you will want before you die.
As the jingle runs:

    See a pin and let it lie, you're sure to want before you die.
    See a pin and pick it up, then you're sure to have good luck.

Elsewhere, a good deal is said about dreams. Here it will be sufficient
to mention one or two items of interest. It is decidedly unlucky to
dream of a baby, yet to dream of a funeral is lucky. The following is
worth bearing in mind:

    Friday dream and Saturday told;
    Sure to come true, if ever so old.

And here it will be appropriate to recall the fact that it is an unwise
thing to get out of bed on the wrong side. The devil will be with you
all the day, if you do.

You should avoid looking at the new moon through glass; but if you have
a wish that you want fulfilled, you have only to count seven stars on
seven nights in succession. Let it be said, however, that to count
seven stars for this space of time is not as simple as it appears.

It is unlucky to treasure locks of people's hair, and, should you drop
a glove, it is to your advantage if someone else picks it up for you.
If the fire refuses to light properly in the morning, anticipate a
whole day with the devil.

Everybody knows that one of the luckiest things that can be done is to
pick up a horse-shoe. But it is not generally known that the more nails
left in it, the better. Nor is it sufficiently well recognized that
a shoe, hung up, should have the tips pointing upwards. If they are
turned down, the luck will run out of them.

Naturally, you will never start anything fresh on a Friday, and you
will not cut your fingernails on a Sunday. Regarding fingernails, a
poet, of sorts, has said:

    Cut them on Monday, you cut them for news.
    Cut them on Tuesday, a new pair of shoes.
    Cut them on Wednesday, you cut them for health.
    Cut them on Thursday, you cut them for wealth.
    Cut them on Friday, a sweetheart you'll know.
    Cut them on Saturday, a journey you'll go.
    Cut them on Sunday, you cut them for evil:
    For all the next week, you'll be ruled by the devil.

Of course, bad luck has not a monopoly on your superstitions, for good
luck has something to say also. To see a piebald horse is fortunate;
to find white heather, four-leaved clover or four-leaved shamrock is
even more fortunate. To open a pea-pod and find ten peas in it is
particularly lucky. For a black cat to come into your house is worth
much. To come across a nickel with a hole in it is not without its
merits, but the best thing of all is to put on some article of clothing
inside out, and to wear it all day long, without being aware of it
until bed-time.




HAVE YOU A TALISMAN?


"A person who finds a four-leaved clover, and believes it is a
harbinger of something good, has adopted the right attitude, for he
keeps a keen look-out for that particular good and holds out both hands
for it. Seldom is he disappointed, for he has unconsciously set going
the mental machinery which brings his wishes within reach. Had he not
found the clover and had gone along life's highway unexpectant of
anything good, he would never have discovered this pleasant happening.
And therein lies the true psychology of luck, which seems too simple
to be true, but then its simplicity is really the sign-manual of its
verity."

This quotation from the writings of a well-known author goes direct to
the point about talismans. If you adopt a talisman and put your faith
in it, you immediately prepare your mind for receiving an abundance
of good fortune. Reject all talismans and argue that there is no such
thing as luck, and you straightway set going the mental machinery which
looks on the dark side of things and which misses every slice of luck
that comes along. Therefore, we say, with emphasis, take to yourself a
talisman, a mascot, a charm--call it what you will--and you will never
regret it.

[Illustration]

Of talismans, there are countless varieties; some are known the world
over, others are the particular choice of individuals. They range from
the amulets and scarabs of the ancients to the golliwogs and crudities
of the ultra-moderns. Your choice may roam between these two extremes,
but whatever your choice, it must be set with the seal of your faith.

In order to assist you in picking out a talisman for yourself, we
append the following accounts of those examples which are favored
most:--

_THE HORSE-SHOE._--No symbol is a greater favorite than the horse-shoe.
There are many legends regarding its origin, but the most commonly
accepted concerns the well-known visit of his Satanic Majesty to the
shoe-smith. As a consequence, the Devil evinced a wholesome dread of
horseshoes, and would not go near a house or person possessing one.
It is more likely, however, that the horse-shoe was accepted as a
symbol of luck because it was a commonplace object very nearly the same
shape as the metal crescents worn by the Romans when they wanted to be
fortunate. These crescents were always carried with the horns turned
up, and, if a horse-shoe is to bring good luck, it, too, must be placed
with the prongs uppermost. The reason for the prongs being so turned
depends on a belief that misfortune always travels in circles, but when
it reaches the tips of a horse-shoe, it is baffled, unless all the luck
has already run out of the tips through them being turned downwards.

Of course, an old, worn shoe is more lucky than a new one, and it is a
recognized fact that the more nails found in it the luckier will be the
finder.

_THE SCARAB._--This device is accounted very lucky or very unlucky,
according to the disposition of the wearer. The symbol represents
the scarab beetle with its wings outspread or with them closed. Such
charms are made to-day in large numbers for sale in Egypt, but those
who trade in them usually claim that each particular specimen has been
in the family since Biblical times. As a rule, the device is made in a
rough kind of bluish porcelain and is carved, in intaglio, with divine
figures. The Egyptians used to make up the scarab as a neck pendant
or as a little ornament for placing in the coffins of the dead. Its
mission was to scare away the evil one.

[Illustration: No. 2.--An Egyptian Scarab, such as were used as
talismen. Two forms are shown, one with the pectoral wings outspread;
the other, with wings closed.]

_THE TET._--This symbol was shaped somewhat like a mallet, and was
always worn with the head uppermost and the handle hanging down. It
was made in porcelain or stone, and was often colored gaudily. The
Egyptians were the first to find efficacy in this charm, and they wore
it suspended around the neck to ward off attacks from visible and
invisible enemies. Thus, it was a protection against evil in any form;
it was also supposed to provide the wearer with strength and endurance.
The tet has been much forgotten of late years, but there are adherents
who value it above the horseshoe and almost any other charm.

[Illustration: No. 3.--The Talisman on the left is the Tet; on the
right, the Arrow-Head.]

_THE ARROW-HEAD._--The early Britons spent a great deal of their time
in taking suitable flints and shaping them into the form of triangles.
These were called arrow-heads, and when the two side edges had been
sharpened they were fixed into sticks and used as weapons or tools.
Out of this use grew the idea that arrow-heads were potent charms in
providing bodily protection against enemy force or the usual illnesses.
Accordingly, people began to wear them as neck ornaments and, for
this purpose, decorative arrow-heads were made. Ever since then, they
have been cherished for their powers in warding off attacks, and a
superstition still exists which claims that if one of these arrow-heads
is dipped in water, the water will be more potent than any doctor's
medicine.

_THE CADUCEUS._--This device, which figures as part of the design of
some postage stamps, has been considered a bringer of good fortune
ever since the time of the ancient Greeks. It consists of two snakes
entwining a rod, surmounted by a pine cone. By the side of the cone
is a pair of wings. It was the symbol of Mercury. The rod had the
supernatural powers of quelling disputes and letting people dwell in
harmony. The snakes possessed the property of healing; the pine cone
preserved good health; and the wings stood for speed and progress. Thus
people wear the caduceus today in order to ensure a life free from
quarrels and illness, and to enable them to be healthy and "go ahead."

[Illustration: No. 4.--The Caduceus or Staff of Mercury.]

_THE EYE AGATE._--As is generally appreciated, the "evil eye" is the
source of all trouble and misfortunes, and the early Eastern races
thought that, if the "evil eye" could be avoided or frightened away,
all would be well. Searching for a charm to effect their purpose, they
alighted upon the eye agate, and this they believed would give no
quarter to the "evil eye." Accordingly, agates were cut to resemble
an eye which would be powerful enough to neutralize the effects of
the evil one, and these were worn as brooches, rings and necklaces.
The agate chosen for the purpose consisted of thin layers of stone of
various colors. Thus, by cutting the stones oval and removing parts of
the top layers, it was possible to produce a charm closely resembling a
human eye, both in shape and color.

Such eyes are still sold today, and many people treasure them in the
hope that they will ward off evil in any form.

_THE JADE AXE-HEAD._--Many jewelers still sell little axe-heads carved
out of jade, for wearing around the neck. The axe-head has been
considered a symbol of strength and vigor ever since primitive times,
and jade has a world-wide reputation as a charm against disease and
accidents.

_THE SEAL OF SOLOMON._--This device is now regarded as a symbol of
the Jewish religion, but it can be traced to several other religions,
and, no doubt, it dates even farther back than the commencement of the
Jewish era. The triangle with the upward point stood for goodness;
the triangle with the downward point for wickedness; while the two
intertwined symbolized the triumph of good over bad. Those who wear the
device contend that it preserves them from all that is ill, and, at the
same time, it gives them a share of the world's blessings.

[Illustration: No. 5.--The Seal of Solomon, one of the oldest lucky
charms in existence.]

_THE ABRACADABRA._--This charm dates from the second century, and was
a symbol of the Gnostic worship. It often took the form of a little
piece of parchment, folded into the shape of a cross, but it can, also,
be seen as a tablet, made of stone or metal, shaped like an inverted
triangle. On the charm, of whatever shape, was inscribed the following:

  A B R A C A D A B R A
    B R A C A D A B R
      R A C A D A B
        A C A D A
          C A D
            A

It will be seen that the word "Abracadabra" can be read along the upper
line and also down and up the two sides. This word is said to conceal
the name of God and the charm has the powers of warding off dangers and
sickness.

_THE FOUR-LEAF CLOVER OR SHAMROCK._--Everyone knows that a four-leaf
clover or shamrock is supposed to be a bringer of luck and good
fortune. As these are not readily found and, moreover, they soon
perish, the opportunity has been seized by jewelers to produce
artificial ones in various precious and semi-precious metals. To wear
either is supposed to avoid misfortune. It may be mentioned that the
four-leaf Shamrock as a charm has proved immensely popular by those who
are interested in the Irish sweepstakes.

_BLACK CATS._--Of course, it is lucky for a black cat to walk into your
house, but failing an actual cat, a counterfeit one serves the same
purpose. Thus, people who pin their faith to black cats often make
stuffed ones, or draw pictures of them, and look to the creature of
their own handiwork to serve the role of mascot.

_YOUR OWN TALISMAN._--So far, the talismans that have received
universal acceptance have alone been mentioned, but the tendency today
is for enthusiasts to originate a mascot of their very own. It may take
any or every form, according to the whim or fancy of the individual.
Maybe you will prefer to find your own mascot or talisman in this
direction. If you have no preferences, why not constitute a device
which embraces your lucky number, your lucky flower, your lucky color,
and so on? It is a suggestion bristling with opportunities.

Just to show that people are tending towards the idea of choosing a
talisman of their very own, we will conclude with a story that was
recently published.

"There is a precious stone to which the board of directors of a firm of
diamond dealers annually pass a vote of thanks. The stone is a sapphire
and it has been named Shani, meaning 'bringer of luck.'

"Shani was bought by the firm about seventy years ago, and it only
leaves the safe on New Year's Day. A special meeting, attended by every
member of the firm, is then held in the board room. Shani is placed in
the middle of the table and, with hands clasped in prayer, the members
offer thanks for the good luck the sapphire has brought the firm during
the preceding year.

"One of the directors said, 'My grandfather once received a tempting
offer for Shani and yielded, but a few hours after the sapphire had
been sent away he was taken violently ill with fever. The sapphire was
brought back from a distant part of India, and my grandfather became
well at once.'"

Should not we all have a Shani?




HINTS ON FORTUNETELLING


Hundreds of dollars are paid each week to professional fortunetellers
by people in all walks of life, in order that they may gain a peep into
the future. These people belong to every class of society; they are of
all ages and they consult the mediums on almost every matter connected
with human existence. There is the industrial magnate, the society
girl, and the hard-working shop assistant, all anxious to peer into the
coming months.

Accordingly, the teller of fortunes and the writer of horoscopes is
doing an excellent business. The dollars and the cents are pouring in
at a remarkable rate, and those who read the future, as a profession,
are having the time of their lives.

This state of things is one calculated to make you stop and think for
a moment. Why should not you learn the rudiments of fortunetelling
yourself? Why should not you find out how to read the signs of your own
future and the future of your friends? The subject is interesting; it
is not a difficult one and all you need to know is set out in this book.

Your course of study may well begin with the chapter on Palmistry.
Having mastered that, turn to the one on Handwriting, and follow with
"_What do your Bumps Mean?_" These three sections will give you a very
useful start and then you might continue with "_How Astrology Decides
Your Destiny_" and "_Your Face is Your Fortune_."

The five chapters named will enable you to read people with a great
deal of success, and it should not be long before your friends
compliment you on your accuracy. Probably this will spur you to further
efforts, and you will study the passages on lucky numbers, dreams,
tea-cup readings, lucky colors, etc. These will add a polish to your
preliminary knowledge.

Very soon you will gain a reputation as a seer and it will add not a
little to your vanity when people come to you and ask you to read their
futures. In doing so, you will be advised to follow a few rules. Never
jump to hasty conclusions. Weigh all the facts and strike a balance.
If the hand says "yes" and the face says "no," the conclusion is that
"it may be." When disappointing things are noted, be charitable and let
the applicant off lightly. In cases where dire illnesses are portended,
suppress the facts or state them in such a way that the applicant has a
chance of avoiding the trouble, if he or she takes suitable measures.
But, whatever happens, never make a statement for which you have not
"chapter and verse."

And this brings me to my last point. Hands, faces, heads and other
characteristics give their readings, but none of these readings should
be taken as absolutely final. The power is within us to fight against
our failings and to better our good qualities. We may even allow our
best ones to deteriorate. That is why two people born at the same time
and in the same town need not grow up exactly alike. And it is also why
a small percentage of horoscopes and fortunes are bound to miss the
mark.




PALMISTRY--WHAT MAY BE LEARNED FROM HANDS


"There are more things in Heaven and Earth...."

People who can see as far as the ends of their noses and then only
through a fog, declare (with a superior sniff) that Palmistry is
nothing but a trap to catch fools; they call it quackery, or declare
perhaps that it is merely a fake or blind guesswork.

Now, while we would be the first to deny that Palmistry is an exact
and infallible science, yet we just as strongly affirm that it is
undoubtedly a most fascinating and interesting recreation; as to its
truth, each one must decide that question for himself.

For the few who have a wish to take up this study seriously, there are
many now who will naturally wish to know just sufficient to be able to
"tell fortunes." Fortunetellers are always popular at some jolly party
or quiet friendly gathering of an evening.

In this book they will find all the simple information required; on
the other hand the student will find a sincere delight in reading and
sifting thoroughly the numerous books that probe the depths of the
subject.

Quite apart from any markings which may be upon the hand, a general
indication of the habits and temperament of the individual in question
can readily be gained by a careful examination of the texture or
quality of the skin.

It were as well to note here that the impressions gained must never
be taken by themselves, but only in conjunction with other confirming
signs. Especially is this so when judging the character of a friend or
acquaintance.

_TEXTURE OF SKIN._--The skin may, of course, be smooth or rough. To
judge this you should turn the hand in question back upwards; now get
the feel of the skin by actual touch; a smooth, fine-textured skin
denotes a refined nature, and _vice versa_. This is a very strong
indication indeed, insomuch that should there be other tendencies
pointing to coarseness of nature, this texture of the hand would have a
refining effect upon the whole.

_ELASTICITY OF THE HAND._--This is best tested by actual grip (as in
shaking hands). All hands naturally present some feeling of elasticity;
this is a matter of comparison, but it is very easy to tell the quick,
virile grip of an elastic hand to the dead fish feeling which a flabby
hand gives us when we grasp it.

_A FLEXIBLE HAND_ denotes an active and energetic person, one who will
be readily adaptable to new conditions. He will always rise to the
occasion, and manfully withstands the buffets of ill-fortune. This type
is always trustworthy and a good friend.

[Illustration: No. 6.--Beware of these Hands.--A shows a weak,
flattened thumb; B a curved little finger and C a coarse, short thumb.
Each has other defects as well.]

_A FLABBY HAND_--one that does not respond to your grip or responds but
sluggishly--is the hand of an idle man, untrustworthy and inconsistent,
a man of weak and negative character; but be sure to search well for
other confirming signs of this weakness.


THE SHAPE OF THE HAND

A fairly accurate guide to character is certainly contained in the
shape of the hand. Hands may be roughly divided into two classes--broad
and long. A person having a _long hand_ you may judge to have great
capacity for mental effort and matters of detail.

The broad-handed person you may expect to be a strong man physically;
his culture will be bodily rather than mental. He could with advantage
improve his culture by reading, and by enjoying the best music.


THE SHAPE OF THE FINGERS

When an individual is found with _square_ finger-tips, he should make
a good marriage partner; he will be practical--a man of method and
reason. He is punctual, but should cultivate imagination.

_POINTED FINGER_ tips will be found on the hand of the musician, the
painter, and, in fact, anyone who is of artistic temperament.

Persons with these fingers should curb their imagination with reason,
and cultivate the power of doing things, not only dreaming them, though
dreaming is well enough in its way.

_TAPERING_ fingers indicate people of extremes. "Ice and fire" are
these people--impulsive and generous to a fault. They should guard
against undue and morbid sensitiveness, and should cultivate a sane
philosophical outlook upon life. They are capable of the highest, but
are frequently their own worst enemies.

_SPATULATE FINGERS._--These are the sportsmen of the world. They are
not worried much by the opinions of others, while they love a busy,
healthy life; a sound mind in a sound body.


GENERAL SHAPE AND FORMATION OF THE HAND

If the hands are knotted with the joints swollen, powers of analysis,
calculation and reflection are shown; philosophers have this type of
hand.

_SMOOTH_ fingers and hands indicate the artistic temperament. These
people are frequently inspired, and have curious intuitions concerning
coming events. Musicians, spiritualists, and martyrs are of this type,
together with many folk who are square pegs in round holes; maybe doing
work which is uncongenial to them.

_THE THUMB_ has also in it certain very marked indications of
character. The three bones (or Phalanges) in the thumb each have their
interpretation. Beginning at the top these should be judged by length
as follows:--

  1. Will. (The pushing type of man.)
  2. Reasoning power. (The thinker or philosopher.)
  3. Love.

Thus a long first or top phalange indicates great will power; or if it
is not a certain indication, it points to a definite likelihood of the
will being strong.


THE MOUNTS

Take your subject's hand and examine it closely; a strong magnifying
glass should form part of the equipment of every wise palmist. It will
be seen that there are certain portions of the hands which are raised
above the surface. These are known as "mounts." As will be noticed in
the accompanying picture, we call these mounts by astrological names, a
method adopted from the very earliest times. They are eight in number,
named: Jupiter, Mercury, Venus, Saturn, Apollo, Luna and Mars (of which
there are two).

Let us look at our picture on page 21. At the base of the first finger
you will see Mount Jupiter, then taking the base of each finger in
turn, will be found Mounts Saturn, Apollo, and Mercury. Mount Luna will
be found at the base of the hand, below the little finger, near the
wrist, Mount Mars just above it, Mount Venus stands below Jupiter and
at the root of the thumb, with the second Mars above it.

All individuals have not these mounts developed to the same extent, and
in these variations strong indications of character are to be found.

We will now have a little discussion upon the subject of Mounts, taking
each individually, and in turn.

Usually one of these mounts in your subject's hands will be found to
stand out clearly from the remainder. This will give you a good idea of
the general type of person whose hand you are judging.

These are the general indications to be found.

_THE SATURNIAN._--If the Mount of Saturn be over-developed, you have
the cold, sceptical type of man. He lacks the milk of human kindness,
and is probably a pessimist. A moderate development, on the other hand,
is good; this man should be prudent, not miserly; optimistic yet not
fatuously so, a well-balanced man.

We well know that the excess or over-development of one particular
quality (however excellent this quality may be) is evil. Thus a
super-artistic temperament gives the neurotic; while the over-prudent
man becomes the grasping miser.

_THE JUPITERIAN._--Jupiterians, or folk with an excessively strong
mount of this name, are the strong men of the world. In excess they
are ambitious to a fault, masterful, overbearing and bullying. With
a moderate development we have exceedingly good qualities indicated.
Power of leadership, rightful ambition, initiative, and great abilities
for hard work.

_THE APOLLONIAN._--Taking the men and women of Apollo we have the
essential optimists, the Micawbers and Mark Tapleys of life. Allied
to their cheery natures is a love of the artistic and the really
beautiful. The sculptors, painters, and musicians who make life
so pleasant, are very frequently Apollonians. The best advice to
give an Apollonian is "moderation in all things." He or she must be
very careful in the choice of a marriage partner; this last is very
important indeed.

_THE MERCURIAN._--In excess we have craft, guile, and fondness for
falsehoods. In moderation we find the good business man, shrewd,
cautious, possessor of a capacity for doing the lion's share of the
work, and a fine eye for the main chance. Let him cultivate his
opposites. Unselfishness, kindness and generosity will make a Mercurian
a most charming person. Their lack will leave a clever, scheming
scoundrel.

_THE MARTIAN._--When we find Mars in the ascendant (i. e., the mounts
excessively developed) we find aggression and even bullying. In
moderation we have a fighter in the best sense of the word; a man
who will withstand the blows of fate and fight his way through life,
resisting evil. He is never mean, and you will find him a sincere and
trustworthy friend.

_THE VENUSIAN._--When this mount is predominant in excess we find
a person of unbalanced mind; he will be careless and will make a
dangerous marriage partner. Developed to a moderate degree we find
generosity, a power to feel for others, with a pleasing personality.
The folk of Venus love beauty, and love their life; they are strongly
attracted to those of the opposite sex, and are likely to fall in love
without counting the cost. These people should cultivate a habit of
thinking before they act, and should not allow generosity to degenerate
into extravagance.

_THE LUNARIAN._--Lastly let us take the Mount of the Moon. In excess
we again find the neurotic or unduly nervous person. In moderation the
Lunarian will be a person of imagination, sympathy, and one who loves
to look on all that is most beautiful in life. He should be successful
as a musician, playwright, or novelist, and has a ready capacity for
learning foreign languages.

Let me give one piece of final advice to those who truly judge
character by the mounts, or indeed by any signs on the hand. Never
judge by one sign or you will be led into stupid mistakes. Always
take the hand as a whole, for frequently some point in the formation
striking you as bad may be strongly counterbalanced by other good signs.

This is exceedingly important, and rightly applied will save you many
foolish pitfalls in your early fortunetelling days!


THE FINGERS

Each of the mounts at the base of the fingers gives its name to the
finger above it, i. e., the first finger is called Jupiter, the little
finger is Mercury, and so on.

When judging character by the mounts, the fingers which share their
name must also always be noted as to their development. Let us first
take Jupiter.

If that finger is well developed (i. e., long in comparison to the
remainder) this will accentuate the Jupiterian qualities seen in the
well-developed mounts. This may be applied throughout the mounts. The
important thing to remember is that mount and corresponding finger
should be read together. This is essential.

To conclude this section let us take the phalanges (or joints of the
finger) with their interpretations.

Counting from the top joint nearest to the nail, the meaning given by
palmists to the three phalanges of each finger are as follows:--

(_Length of phalanx_, or distance between the respective joints, is the
_deciding factor_.) For simplicity, we have made a small table.

  ----------+------------------------+----------------+------------------
    Name    |                        |                |
  of Finger |      1st Joint.        |   2nd Joint.   | 3rd Joint.
  ----------+------------------------+----------------+------------------
  _JUPITER_ | Religion.              | Ambition.      | Despotic or
            |                        |                | fondness for
            |                        |                | governing others.
  ----------+------------------------+----------------+------------------
  _SATURN_  | Fondness for spiritual | Out-door life. | Earthly ambition.
            |  mysticism.            |                |
  ----------+------------------------+----------------+------------------
  _APOLLO_  | Excess or foolish      | Caution.       | Love of show.
            |  optimism              |                |
            |   (Micawber).          |                |
  ----------+------------------------+----------------+------------------
  _MERCURY_ | The orator's finger.   | Great tenacity.| Cunning and
            |                        |                |  greed.
  ----------+------------------------+----------------+------------------


THE LINES OF YOUR DESTINY

We now come to the most fascinating side of Palmistry--the actual study
of the network of lines upon the hand, and their relation to the mounts
and to each other.

This is where your magnifying glass will be of enormous value. There
are very many small signs, seemingly of little matter, but in reality
of very great importance, such as stars, crosses, squares, and
triangles, little marks with frequently great meanings.

One word of warning must be given before we go farther. If you see
evil in a palm never on any account tell of it. But if you see some
misfortune approaching which a little foresight might avoid, by all
means warn your subject. Should you by any chance see, or think you
see, anything calculated to alarm another, keep it to yourself.
Always remember that human intelligence is frail and finite but life
is infinite. Palmistry shares in this frailty; it is interesting and
intensely fascinating, but far from infallible. It is not an exact
science in the sense of mathematics, where two plus two equals four, no
more and no less.

Let us take these lines in turn and discuss the meaning of each.


THE LIFE LINE

When the Life line rises high in the hand, great ambition is shown. If
you see a Life line circling well into the palm (thus forming a large
Mount of Venus) emotional characteristics such as love and generosity
are shown. If, on the contrary, the line forms a small Mount of Venus,
coldness will be predominant.

If the Life line commences very feebly and gradually strengthens, this
is a good sign. It indicates a weak childhood but a robust maturity.


THE HEAD LINE

The Head line works in conjunction with the line of Health (see
illustration), thus:--If the Head line is broken some ill health may be
indicated which has made or will make its effect felt upon the brain
and thinking powers. But only if all other lines should support this.

An independent nature is shown when the Head line branches off from the
Life line early in its course, and vice versa.

If the Head line should curve towards Saturn, there is shown a material
outlook upon life; this is the financier's Head line. Curving towards
Apollo an artistic nature is shown, while should this line originate
near Mount Jupiter it is a sure sign of capacity for leadership, and
many go-ahead qualities that make for success. If the Head line is
firm, a definite, purposeful nature is probable, while a weak, wavy
Head line indicates a weak, wavering outlook upon life.

With the Head line joining the Heart line, emotional qualities are
to the fore; this individual is impulsive and should put the curb of
reason upon himself.

Should the Head line have branches which run towards Mount Mercury,
Luna and Mars, it is an excellent sign, showing good balance, ready
wit, and quick adaptability.


THE HEART LINE

When this originates on or near the mount called Saturn, there is a
leaning towards a sensual, pleasure-loving nature.

Rising from between Saturn and its neighbor Jupiter, we have a very
deliberate, practical man. His love, while very sincere, is governed by
reason; he is intensely practical, and rather lacking in imagination,
which it were well worth his while to cultivate. His head will always
rule his Heart, especially is this indicated should the Heart line bend
towards that of the Head.

Should the Heart line cross the palm entirely, the owner is the exact
opposite of the individual just mentioned. This person's heart will
rule his head; he is sentimental even to a fault, and should practice
business-like qualities, and not dream overmuch. Love in a cottage is
all very well--but how when the roof leaks?

A short Heart line is a warning for care in marriage; without this
care a couple may well come to shipwreck on the rocks of married life.
Forewarned is forearmed!


THE LINE OF FORTUNE

This is a line running (as its name suggests) towards the Mount of
Apollo. It is a valuable and somewhat rarely-found line. This is the
line of genius; effort will scarcely be needed by its owner; he will
seem to fly towards success on the wings of destiny.

This is the ideal, but it must be borne in mind that there are other
lines which must be studied in conjunction with it.

On the other hand its absence does by no means prohibit or even
endanger success; it merely indicates that individual effort will be
required, and what is life without something to strive for?


THE HEALTH LINE

A good strong Health line is very desirable; should this line be
broken, however, there is no need for alarm, it is merely indicated
that a certain amount of care is necessary in one's personal habits of
life.


THE LINE OF FATE

This line runs across the middle of the palm, from the Mount of Saturn
to the Bracelets, but its full course need not be traced on any
particular hand. When of full length and a middle position is revealed,
the fate of the individual may be reckoned as particularly lucky. Such
a person has strong determination, can make quick decisions and can be
powerful without being a tyrant. He has the power of drawing people to
him, in a friendly way, and is, thus, always liked.

[Illustration: No. 7.--The Map of the Hand.

  _a._ Life line;
  _b._ Fate line;
  _c._ Health line;
  _d._ Head line;
  _e._ Heart line;
  _f._ Marriage line;
  _g._ Bracelets;
  _h._ Mount of Jupiter;
  _j._ Mount of Saturn;
  _k._ Mount of Apollo;
  _l._ Mount of Mercury;
  _m._ and _o._ Mounts of Mars;
  _n._ Mount of Venus;
  _p._ Mount of Luna;
  _s._ Line of Fortune.
]

Should the line run from the Bracelets and stop at the Head line, this
is a sign that the possessor will have many troubles and obstacles to
overcome. Whether he will surmount them depends on the strength of
the Head line. In cases where the Fate line continues up one of the
fingers, the owner must take care that success does not turn his head
and ruin the future. A Fate line that wriggles its way across the palm
indicates a life of ups and downs, and, should the line be broken
in places, it is a sign that happiness will vary from time to time.
Generally speaking, if small lines run upwards out of the Fate line,
the signs are good, but the reverse is the case if they run downwards.


THE LINE OF MARRIAGE

This line is a short, comparatively inconspicuous one, found at the
edge of the palm, below the little finger. It runs inwards but not very
far towards the center of the palm. How to recognize its significance
is explained under the heading, "An ABC of Hands."

Now let us put our house in order, refresh our minds, and summarize the
broad principles upon which any study of Palmistry must rest.

First we have the mounts. It is in the varying relation of the lines
to these mounts and to their adjacent fingers that our deductions are
founded. One mount lies at the base of each finger, Jupiter, Saturn,
Apollo and Mercury respectively. Secondly, we have the four fingers
with their astrological names, each finger bearing the name of the
mount at its base.

_Table showing the general qualities of the mounts._

  ------------+-----------------------------------------------------------
     Name of  |
      Mount   |                         Quality
  ------------+-----------------------------------------------------------
  _JUPITER_   | Ambition, leadership, a magnetic personality. (In excess)
              |   Brutal and bullying.
  ------------+-----------------------------------------------------------
  _SATURN_    | Cautious, prudent. (In excess) Miserliness, coldness.
  ------------+-----------------------------------------------------------
  _APOLLO_    | Artistic Temperament, optimist, healthy living. (In
              |   excess) Shallow character, frivolous, and extravagant.
  ------------+-----------------------------------------------------------
  _MERCURY_   | Energy, good judgment. (In excess) Lying, fraud,
              |   deception.
  ------------+-----------------------------------------------------------

Here is a good, sound rule to remember when reading the hands of your
friends. First find your type--i.e., Jupiterian, Apollonian, etc. This
is accomplished by noting the main characteristics of the hand which
you are examining. Suppose that the Mount of Apollo is fully developed
and well raised, and that the finger of Apollo is inclined to be long,
there you have practically a pure Apollonian type, i.e., Apollo in
excess. If the Mount of Apollo is developed but also the finger of
Saturn is long, this forms an admirable mixture. This subject will
feel the benefit of the steadying influence of Saturn at work on his
light-hearted Apollonian nature.

Pure types are rare--and fortunately so--for in a pure type, no matter
which, you are frequently liable to find a rather poorly-balanced
outlook on life. The cold need heat, and the brilliant require solid
perseverance and a capacity for hard work to win lasting success.

[Illustration: No. 8.--The Marriage Line in varying shapes.]


WHICH HAND SHOULD BE READ?

The answer to this question is a very decided both! As a general
rule the left hand will show the inherent characteristics of the
individual; the right hand shows the same characteristics modified by
our surroundings or by the individual's personal efforts. The former
is possibility--the latter actuality; in short, it is what we actually
make our life.

The safest rule about reading right and left hands is this:--Read both
hands separately and carefully, then read them in their relation one to
the other.

There is no blind fatalism in the sayings and doings of a true student
of Palmistry. What he does or should do is to point out the likelihoods
and warn against inherent weakness. In so much he is like a guide
helping us to pick our way through the tortuous maze of life.

It may strike some of our readers that we have spoken more of the
indications of character to be found in the hand rather than of the
indications of "Fortune." A few moments' thought will show a very sound
reason for this.

It is certainly our characters which shape our destinies; should you
find a hand with all the indications of strong character, while also
possessing a strong will and well-cut Life line, you would be sure in
prophesying a happy life for its owner; or as sure as we poor humans
ever can hope to be!

If you find a hand with the indications of weak will and character, yet
with the Health and Life lines strong and well defined, you may well
advise the owner of the hand that effort, effort and effort again, is
required if he or she would win through!

Remember that tact is more precious than fine gold! A tactful and
timely warning may prove of the greatest value, while without tact you
will surround yourself with an army of acquaintances whose feelings you
have hurt by your thoughtless and unintentionally cruel remarks!

There is no infallibility about this matter, but with the facts given
in this book there are vast possibilities for really pleasurable and
interesting recreation. If the study be taken up seriously, and used
with discretion, there are almost unbelievable opportunities for good.

This is what a man once said to me--and he was a man who thought
deeply, and probed matters to their depths:

"A wise palmist is as precious as a careful signalman upon life's
crowded railroad, and a wise palmist is a tactful palmist."


AN A B C OF HANDS

In order to be able to follow the explanations given for each type of
hand, the list set out below will prove useful.

(1) The 1st phalange is the section of the finger carrying the nail.

(2) The 2nd phalange is the section of the finger between the 1st and
2nd joints.

(3) The 3rd phalange is the section of the finger between the 2nd and
3rd joints.

(4) The positions of the Mounts of Mercury, Apollo, Saturn, Jupiter,
Luna and Venus are shown in Fig. 7. Of the Mounts of Mars, there are
two positions. One is situated between the Mount of Jupiter and the
thumb, while the other comes between the Mounts of Mercury and Luna.

(5) The Girdle of Venus, which is rarely found, is a curved line
running between Mercury and either Jupiter or Saturn.

(6) The Bracelets are the lines running across the wrist, close to
where it joins the palm.

_ABILITY._--A small cross is shown where the Life line finishes.

_ABILITY, LACK OF._--A short Head line, terminating in the center of
the palm, with the Mounts of Saturn and Apollo almost non-existing.

_ACTIVE PERSON._--A rough, firm palm and an indistinct Heart line.

_AFFECTIONATE PERSON._--A clear Heart line and a very plump Mount of
Apollo.

_AMBITIOUS PERSON._--A short line traced from the Life line to the
Mount of Jupiter, existing on both hands.

_AMIABLE PERSON._--The Mounts of Jupiter and Mercury are very plump on
both palms.

_AMOROUS PERSON._--A hand deeply furrowed, somewhat silky in texture
and the Heart line well developed.

_ANGER._--The thumb has short phalanges, especially the first phalange;
finger-nails square and reddish at the base.

_ARTISTIC TEMPERAMENT._--A line running directly from the Head line to
the third finger, and fingers long and tapering.

_AUDACIOUS PERSON._--The Mount of Mercury and the two Mounts of Mars
very clearly in evidence.

_AVARICIOUS._--The Head line extends across the palm, from end to end,
and is straight. At its end, it forms a small triangle.

_BILIOUS TEMPERAMENT._--The Health line wriggles its way along the
palm, while the hand is damp and clammy.

_BRAVE PERSON._--Straight fingers and both the Mounts of Mars are well
defined. Few hair lines cut across these mounts.

_CAUTIOUS PERSON._--The first phalange of the thumb twists inwards,
whilst all the fingers are remarkably straight.

_CHARITABLE PERSON._--A good Heart line with well-developed Mounts of
Venus and Mars (particularly the Mars Mount below Jupiter.)

_CHEERFUL PERSON._--A long first phalange to the fourth finger and the
Mounts of Jupiter, Apollo and Mercury nice and plump.

_CLEVER PERSON._--The Life line shows a cross at one of its ends and
the Mounts of Apollo and Mercury are well defined.

_CONCEITED PERSON._--Very plump Mounts of Saturn, Apollo and Mercury.

_CONSCIENTIOUS PERSON._--A broad, thin hand, a very distinct Mount of
Jupiter, and the first phalange of the thumb nicely curved.

_CONVINCING SPEAKER._--The fourth finger is almost as long as the
third, usually because the first phalange is long. This finger is
pointed.

_CORDIALITY._--The Heart line extends almost across the palm; it is
straight, except at one end, which branches into a fork.

_COWARDLY._--When the hand is opened out flat, the fourth phalanges of
all the fingers dip or curve downwards. None of the mounts are distinct.

_CRUEL PERSON._--The Heart line is almost or quite non-existing. The
hand is long, but square-cornered, and the finger-nails are pointed at
the base.

_DARING PERSON._--The Heart line curves round to the back of the hand,
while both the Mounts of Mars are fully developed.

_DECEITFUL PERSON._--The Head line wavers, is not very distinct, and it
has a double prong at one end. One of the prongs cuts across the Mount
of Luna.

_DEFIANT PERSON._--The third phalange of the first finger is longer
than the third phalanges of other fingers. The thumb is large.

_DISAPPOINTMENTS TO BE EXPERIENCED._--The Life line has a number of
small hair lines running from it, like herringbone pattern. Some of
these hair lines reach the bracelets.

_DISSIPATED PERSON._--A star beside the thumb-nail and the Head line is
deep and wide.

_ENERGETIC PERSON._--The head line runs from side to side of the palm.
It is clear throughout, while the four mounts below the four fingers
are very distinct.

_ENVIOUS PERSON._--On the first finger there are several clear lines;
they are found mostly on the third phalange, but some exist on the
second. None on the first.

_EXTRAVAGANT PERSON._--The tips of all the fingers bend back and the
Head line is weak.

_FAITHLESS PERSON._--The two Mounts of Mars and that of Mercury stand
out more clearly than the others.

_FAME, PERSON DESTINED FOR._--The Fate line is more distinct than any
other and no other line crosses it.

_FAR-SEEING PERSON._--The palm is depressed in the middle, the thumb
is well developed, strong in outline, and all the phalanges of the
fingers are about as long as they are wide.

_FAULT-FINDING PERSON._--A long, narrow hand, with an ill-defined Heart
line.

_FLIRT._--The Head line consists of a line joining up several links,
forming a species of chain.

_FORCEFUL PERSON._--A cross on the Mount of Apollo and small lines
crossing.

_FORTUNATE PERSON._--The Heart and Head lines almost touch below the
Mount of Jupiter. A cross is often found between them just at this
point. The third finger shows a long line running the length of two
phalanges.

_GOOD CHARACTER._--The Mounts of Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury are much
in evidence, while the tips of the fingers are nicely rounded.

_GREEDY PERSON._--When the hand is spread out the fingers bend inwards,
because of the excessive width of the palm. The Head line runs across
the palm almost in a straight line.

_HAPPY PERSON._--On the third finger there is a deep line running the
length of the third phalange. Also, the bracelets appear as a single
deep furrow.

_HARD WORKER._--The fourth finger has the second phalange a trifle
long, while the two Mounts or Mars are well developed.

_IDLER._--The Head line is very short; the Mounts of Luna and Mercury
are well developed, while the Mount of Mercury almost touches that of
Mars.

_IMPATIENT PERSON._--The Mounts of Mars and Mercury stand well above
the level of the palm and are crossed by several small lines.

_INTELLIGENT PERSON._--The Mounts of Apollo and Mercury are much in
evidence, while the Life line terminates in a cross.

_JEALOUS PERSON._--The Head line continues round to the back of the
hand, while the Mount of Mercury is more defined than the others.

_JUST PERSON._--Square-tipped fingers and square nails, while the space
formed between the Heart and Head lines is unusually wide.

_KIND PERSON._--A star figures on the thumb, while the Mounts of Apollo
and Mercury are much in evidence. The Heart line is not short.

_LIKING FOR OPPOSITE SEX._--A star is seen on the Mount of Mercury or a
star may appear between the Heart and Head lines.

_LONG LIFE._--The Heart line curves entirely round the thumb, being
plainly evident all the way, while the bracelets consist of three clear
lines.

_LUCKY PERSON._--See diagram of a very lucky hand.

_MARRIAGE._--The Marriage line is a comparatively short line, found
above the Heart line and starting from the edge of the palm, under the
little finger.

If straight and well defined, it is a sign of a happy married life.
(See Fig. A, p. 23.)

If curved down, there are troubles to overcome.

If the line runs down to the Heart line, money difficulties will arise
in married life. (See Fig. B.)

If the line ends in a fork, there are fears of quarrels and, perhaps,
separations. (See Fig. C.)

If the line runs up and touches the Fate line, marriage will bring many
successes.

If there is practically no length to the actual marriage line, but
a fork appears almost at the commencement, it is a clear proof that
troubles will arise and prevent the owner from marrying when he or she
desires it. There will be delays, postponements and other difficulties,
but they will be overcome in the end. (See Fig. D.)

If there is an island where the line should commence, this may be taken
as a sign that the possessor is not a suitable person for marriage.
But, if the line is a good one, after the island is past, there are
hopes that he or she will mend. (See Fig. E.)

If the marriage line hardly exists or does not appear at all, it is a
sign of single blessedness through life.

If the marriage line on the right hand is minutely examined, short
hair lines may be seen rising upwards from it. The number of these
denotes the number of children of the marriage. It is usually said that
the perpendicular lines represent the boys and the slanting lines the
girls. As these lines are often very indistinct, it may be necessary to
dust the hand with a dab of face-powder, in order to see them.

_NARROW-MINDED PERSON._--The Head line is short and it wavers or
wriggles its way across the palm.

_NEAT, ORDERLY PERSON._--Where each finger is hinged to the palm, there
is a deep crease making a badge on either side of it. The hand itself
is square and vigorous in appearance.

_NERVOUS PERSON._--The hand is very much lined, and there is difficulty
in picking out the chief lines. The Mount of Luna is large and much
furrowed.

[Illustration: A VERY LUCKY HAND

No. 9.--_The Life line begins on the Mount of Jupiter and is doubled._
The Heart line commences on the same mount and is forked at both ends.
The Head line is doubled and forked at one end. The Fate line is long,
straight and rises from the Bracelets. The finger of Apollo is lined.
The Marriage line is straight and clear.]

_OVERBEARING PERSON._--The fingers are square-tipped and the first
phalange of the thumb is long and thick. The hand itself is rough and
coarse. A short Heart line.

_PASSIONATE PERSON._--The Heart line is long and the Mount of Mercury
over-pronounced.

_PHILOSOPHIC PERSON._--The finger-tips are square; the phalanges are
all more or less fleshy and full; the thumb is large and long; the palm
is comparatively small.

_PROFLIGATE PERSON._--The Head line takes a wavering course, and there
is a star on the thumb, close up to the nail.

_RECKLESS PERSON._--The finger of Saturn is more pointed at the tip
than the other fingers. The Fate line does not come anywhere near to
the Bracelets.

_REFINED PERSON._--The Mounts of Mercury and Luna are far more
pronounced than the others; the fingers are slightly pointed, and the
texture of the hand is silky.

_RELIGIOUS PERSON._--The first finger has a square tip; the Mount of
Jupiter is large; the first phalanges of all the fingers are decidedly
long, and there is a cross in the center of the palm, close to the Head
and Heart lines.

_SECOND-SIGHT, PERSON WITH._--An unusual line runs from the Mount of
Luna to the Mount of Mercury. It takes a circular course and much
resembles the Life line, reversed. This line commences with an island.

_SLEEPY PERSON._--A deeply-grooved short Head line.

_SUCCESSFUL PERSON._--The Life line starts from the Mount of Jupiter
and is double throughout its course. The Heart line commences at almost
the same spot and is forked at both ends.

_SUPERSTITIOUS PERSON._--The Mount of Jupiter is particularly well
developed. There are several lines running across it; while the Head
line is shorter than usual.

_TACTFUL PERSON._--The hands are long and narrow; the texture of the
skin is smooth and silky, and all the first phalanges are plump and,
perhaps, longitudinally lined.

_TALKATIVE PERSON._--The Heart and Head lines are not easily
discovered, and the Mount of Mercury stands up more than the other
mounts.

_THOUGHTFUL PERSON._--The first finger almost as long as the second;
it is pointed at the tip more than the others. A wide space is formed
between the Heart, Head, Fate and Fortune (or Health) lines.

_TIMID PERSON._--None of the Mounts appear plainly, while the Head and
Heart lines run very close together.

_UNTRUTHFUL PERSON._--The little finger is long, reaching at least to
the base of the nail of the third finger. The Mount of Luna is crossed
with many lines.

_VAIN PERSON._--The Mount of Jupiter is fuller than the others and it
is crossed with many lines. The fingers are long and rather pointed.

_VINDICTIVE PERSON._--The Head line wriggles along its course. It has a
fork close to the Mount of Luna.

_WEALTHY PERSON._--When earned, the Mount of Luna, on both hands, shows
a number of lines which all run in one direction. They do not cross at
all. When inherited, the same, but there is, in addition, a cross on
the Bracelets.

_WITTY PERSON._--The Mount of Mercury shows up clearly. In addition,
there is a curved line which runs from the junction of the first and
second fingers to the junction of the third and fourth fingers. The
Heart line is usually good.




YOUR HANDWRITING REVEALS YOUR CHARACTER


Your handwriting is you; disguise it as you will, it still reveals
your character. As a matter of fact, it is a sheer impossibility for
an ordinary person to alter his or her writing completely. The natural
hand and the purposely-changed hand will bear several resemblances,
however hard the individual may try to make them dissimilar. This is
due to the fact that the same character lies behind both efforts.
Not only is your handwriting you, but the handwriting of your friend
is "him or her." This being so, you will find it a simple matter to
arrive at his or her qualities by analyzing a few lines of the person's
handwriting. To become sufficiently expert for this, you will not need
more than half-an-hour's study.

_FIRST_ of all we must attend to the direction of the lines of writing,
as, should these be level, a normal and calm state of mind is shown,
generally reliable, and not subject to change.

When the lines slope toward the right, much energy is indicated; when
the lines slope downward, a lack of energy is shown, usually from
depression which may result from ill health.

If the writing slopes upward with excess, it shows recklessness; if
downwards, with a very sloping inclination, it shows mental depression
verging almost on loss of reason.

If the signature slopes upwards, then we may expect to find personal
ambition, but if downwards, some physical weakness. If instead of
the whole line ascending only words here and there will ascend, this
indicates "hope," but if scattered words ascend and descend in the same
line, we may read a lack of tenacity in emotions.

_SECONDLY._--The lines forming the letters may appear:--

 (A) Practically upright; or

 (B) Sloping slightly to the right.

 (C) Sloping very much to the right as if each letter were falling over
 the rest.

 (D) Sloping to the left, and lastly,

 (E) "Back-hand writing."

Between A and B might be called normal.

 A Shows pluck and self-possession, and, if pointed, mathematics.

 B Tenderness, but should the writing be pointed, a quick, acute mind,
 with no sympathy with sentiment.

 C Shows indolence; if with pointed letters, mental power, but should
 the letters be rounded, mental and physical indolence.

 D Shows a love of ease, while

 E Looks peculiar and indicates self-consciousness, and, as a rule,
 hidden sentimentality.

_THIRDLY._--The writing small and pointed, we get curiosity; if medium
in size, and gradually increasing towards the end of the line, it shows
an outspoken nature; should the writing diminish towards the end of the
line we read tact.

If it is fine and threadlike in appearance, it shows a sensitive mind,
diplomacy.

Large writing shows promptness, but if the strokes are very fine, we
see appreciation of other people's work--a connoisseur.

Small, clear writing shows love of the abstruse, and if the lines are
very delicate, a feeling for the mystic. If the writing is extremely
small, it shows pettiness of nature, fussiness over unimportant details.

Letters of different sizes show unreliability of nature, exaggerating
trifles and ignoring more important things.

Light and fine writing means delicacy of feeling, but if carried to
excess it shows fastidiousness.

_FOURTHLY._--The connections of the letters with each other must be
judged. If the connecting stroke is long, it shows some facility
in talking and expression, the power of using words well, _not_
talkativeness.

Letters ingeniously connected show constructiveness, but should they be
separate, we get perception and intuition.

Any eccentricity indicates that the person's career has not been
ordinary. Marked originality, especially of capitals, shows unusual
taste. Tremulous tendency resulting neither from illness nor old
age--Irritability. Highly restrained, small--Refractory disposition,
difficult to live with. Regular and well-placed lines, followed
by those careless and irregular--A mind quick to embark on an
enterprise, but lacking perseverance. Back-handed less susceptible than
inclined--The head ruling the heart.

Generally the body of the letter or specimen gives the present
character, the signature the past.

_CROTCHETS._--Egotism, self-satisfaction (a return upon self.)

_HARPOONS (HOOKS)._--Tenacity, united perhaps with weak will.

_DASHES._--Perfectly straight--Persistence.

 Undulating.--Art, levity.

 Undulating, beginning or finishing with a crotchet or ungraceful
 flourish.--Lack of taste, slight vulgarity.

 Light.--Writer attaches little idea to things expressed.

 Ending Thickly.--Resolution, desires ideas to carry weight.

 Curved Ascendingly.--Versatility; slight inconsistency; speaks without
 thought.

 Tremulous.--Timidity, hesitation.

 Placed at end of line or paragraph.--Lack of self-assertion.

 Ending abruptly, thick and hard.--Distrust, reserve.

 Sharply elongated.--Impulsive nature; prudence taught by experience.

 Used instead of "full stops."--Cultivated caution.

_CAPITAL LETTERS._--Large and well-formed.--Pride.

 Print-like in shape.--Dignity.

 Thin strokes.--Boasting.

 Exaggerated in height.--Love of ceremonial.

 The angle very pointed.--Acuteness, penetrative, leadership.

 Large and badly-formed.--Egomania.

 Large upper hall.--Self-assertion.

 Large bases.--Self-confidence.

 The capital letter of Christian names larger than that of
 surname.--Love of home.

 The capital letter of surname larger.--Love of position.

 Small capitals.--Lack of self-assertion.

 Capital letters made like small ones.--Said to show poetic feeling,
 love of Nature.

 Print-like in form.--Originality.

 Eccentric in any way.--Pose or whim.

 Widely spaced.--Love of open air.

 Curving far below the line, and almost encircling the
 word.--Protective love of animals.

 Letters incorrectly used.--Small detail made over-important.

 Tendency to replace by print.--Sense of form, artistic and poetic.

_SPECIAL LETTERS._--_A.M.N.H._, _G.O._, _R.U.W._--Normal
width.--Well-poised mind.

 Too wide.--Self-contentment, satisfaction.

 Nearly touching.--Timidity, want of knowledge of the world.

 First leg slightly raised.--Aristocratic tastes.

 Second leg exaggerated.--Pose, affectation.

 Unconnected, ending with crotchet rentrant.--Egotistical, selfish.

 The letters begun and ended with a small crotchet rentrant.--Avarice,
 meanness.

 Letters and words connected.--Power of assimilating ideas, but lack of
 originality; logic.

 Letters disconnected even with their parts.--Creative power, want of
 logic.

 Equally connected or disconnected.--Balanced intuition and deduction.

 Last letter increasing in size.--Lack of power of concealment.
 Decreasing.--Finesse.

Handwriting does not invariably show sex, as the qualities indicated
are common to both men and women.

The writing develops as the soul develops, and imitation comes before
originality.


QUALITIES SHOWN IN HANDWRITING ALPHABETICALLY ARRANGED

 _ABILITY._--Small writing, angular, clear, decided capitals.

 _ACCURACY._--Neat, well-placed lines and words, punctuation correct.

 _AFFECTION._--Softly sloping writing, rounded, fairly thick.

 _AMIABILITY._--Rounded letters, often unfinished, medium capitals.

 _AMBITION._--Large first stroke of capital "M's" ascending lines of
 writing. Imposing signature.

 _ANALYTICAL._--Small-pointed, clear writing, letters divided, decided
 capitals.

 _ARGUMENT._--Words connected, giving logic, and occasional extra long
 connecting strokes, small writing. (See A.2.)

 _AUTHORITY._--Large capitals, especially the letter "I" and first
 letter of surname, level crossing to t's.

 _BOASTFUL._--Large writing, exaggerated capital, flying cross bar to
 t's. (See A.1.)

 _BOLD._--Large well-formed capitals, clear rounded, but not pointed
 writing.

 _BROAD-MINDED._--Well-spaced words, clear capitals, O's and A's wide
 and rounded.

 _CANDOUR._--O's and A's open at the top.

 _CAPRICE._--Eccentric letters, irregular writing, no punctuation.

 _CARE._--See Accuracy.

 _CARELESSNESS._--Ill-formed letters, open O's, no punctuation.

 _CAUTION._--Dashes used instead of full stops.

 _CEREMONIOUS._--Capitals important, all large above the line, some
 added flourishes.

 _CHANGEABLE._--Letters differently formed, eccentric capitals,
 variability of line.

 _CHEERFULNESS._--Short, fat loops, rounded letters.

 _DEJECTION._--Lines tending downwards, curved letters unfinished, last
 of capital "M" very small.

 _DELICACY._--Thin thread-like letters, fine pointed writing. (See A.3.)

 _DISORDER._--Ill-formed, unfinished letters, no punctuation, separate
 letters.

 _DISSIMILATION._--Words terminating in thread-like strokes,
 interchangeable letters.

 _DISTRUST._--Last downstroke ending very abruptly.

[Illustration: No. 10.--A]

 _DRINK._--Thick strokes, when seen through a glass very ragged,
 ill-formed letters; self-indulgence.

 _EATING, GOURMANDIZING._--Small, rounded writing, black, small
 capitals.

 _ECONOMY._--Close, compressed writing, no margins. (See A.4.)

 _ENERGY._--Lines sloping upwards to the right, short downstrokes,
 high-barred crosses to t's.

 _EXAGGERATION._--Very large and eccentric capitals, flourish under
 signature.

 _EXTRAVAGANCE._--Wide margins, large letters, full loops above and
 below the lines.

 _FAINT-HEARTED._--Small capitals, ill-formed thread-like letters,
 downward tendency.

 _FOPPERY._--Exaggerated capitals, especially letter "I," wide spacing.

 _FORGETFULNESS._--Letter "N" shaped like small "U." (See B.1.)

 _FORMALITY._--Neat lettering, punctuation careful, capitals rather
 large.

 _FRIVOLOUS._--Light writing, eccentric, or half-made capitals,
 irregular lines.

 _GEOMETRY._--Small, neat writing, print-like small capitals, upright
 slope to writing, or slightly backward.

 _GENEROSITY._--Final letters naturally rounded, with upward tendency.

 _GESTURE OR MOVEMENT._--An elaborate finish resembling a flourish but
 joined to last letter.

 _GRANDEUR, LOVE OF._--Imposing and well-formed capitals, large and
 carefully made "M's."

 _GROSSNESS._--Very black, thick stroke both up and down, letters badly
 formed; short loops wide. (See B.2.)

 _HASTY ACTION._--Long-shaped commas.

 _HOME, LOVE OF._--Capital letter of Christian name larger than that of
 surname.

 _HONESTY._--Well-formed, clear and even letters, level at the bottoms.

 _HOPE._--The lines ascending with regularity.

 _HYPOCRISY._--Small A's and O's, open at bottom.

 _HYSTERIA._--Very irregular writing, badly made letters, and wild
 crossing strokes to t's, thin and long downstrokes, initial small
 letters out of proportion to remainder of words.

 _INDOLENCE._--Rounded writing, sloping "backwards"--i.e., to the left
 (See A.5.)

 _INDECISION._--Thin strokes crossing the t's, or else the stroke
 "tucked in."

 _INGENUITY._--Curious and original shaped capitals.

 _INSINCERITY._--Letters raised high above the level, words
 thread-like, terminations indistinct.

 _INTEMPERANCE._--Curious rough, black strokes, or else vague formation
 of letters.

 _INTRIGUE._--Twisted forms to letters, unnecessary and thread-like
 strokes.

 _INTUITION._--Letters separated. (See B.3.)

 _IRRITABLE._--Curious short downward crossing to t's, cramped and
 pointed letters.

 _LANGUAGE._--Occasional long connecting strokes in middle of words or
 from word to word. (See B.4.)

[Illustration: No. 11.--B.]

 _LOGICAL._--Even, small, well-formed letters, capitals well balanced.

 _LUXURY._--Black writing, slanting strokes, large capitals.

 _MADNESS._--Irregular, badly-formed, unfinished words, lines very
 irregular, and variable directions.

 _MEAN._--Cramped and compressed letters and lines.

 _METHODICAL._--Well-formed letters, even lines, good punctuation.

 _NARROW._--Well-formed but close letters, careful capitals.

 _NATURE, LOVE OF._--Simple capital letters. (See B.5.)

 _NEUROTIC._--Irregular dwindling letters, various sizes, words
 unevenly placed.

 _OBSTINACY._--Small writing, heavy crossing to "t's" and angular
 letters.

 _ORDER._--Letters even, well formed and placed.

 _ORIGINALITY._--Eccentric forms of letters.

 _PENETRATIVE._--Acute letters, well-finished long upstrokes to "t's."

 _PERSEVERANCE._--The bars crossing the "t's" increasing in size.

 _POETRY, FEELING FOR._--Capital letters made like small ones in shape
 and neat well-formed words.

 _PRETENTIOUSNESS._--Many curves and involved capitals.

 _RETICENCE._--Closed "o's," "a's," and "e's."

 _SIGHT._--In affections of the eyes the terminals are unfinished.

 _SLY._--Dwindling ill-formed letters.

 _STINGY._--Cramped writing, close lines.

 _SUBTLETY._--Small letters and dwindling lines. (See 6.B.)

 _SELFISH._--The final coming round to the left, and making a complete
 loop on itself.

 _TEMPER, HASTY._--Angular stops.

 _IRRITABLE._--The cross-bars of the "t's" slightly hooked.

 _OBSTINATE._--The cross-bar ending in a decided harpoon or hook; a low
 thick bar. High and thick and tending sharply downward.

 _OBSTINACY AGAINST OWN INTERESTS._--A short straight down stroke.

 _CONTROL OF._--Dashes used instead of stops.

_TRUE._--Clear, well-formed rounded letters.

_VANITY._--Large flourished capitals, wide margins. (See B.7.)

_WIT._--Small, rounded letters, generally undulating handwriting.




YOUR FACE IS YOUR FORTUNE


Everybody sums up the faces of his friends and of the people he meets.
It is a habit we all have. But most of us are apt to classify these
faces into groups according to whether the possessors are good-looking,
ordinary or supremely ugly. We say to ourselves, "Isn't So-and-so
charming," or alternatively, "How positively plain is So-and-so."

As a matter of fact, the degree of beauty expressed in an individual's
face ought to count for very little. What ought to count is the
character which his or her features reveal. Let it be said quite
definitely that faces indicate character more accurately than any other
physical property of an individual. A person can change his voice and
he can check his actions, but he cannot alter his features for more
than a second at a time, and then only superficially.

Thus it comes about that faces are definite indications of character,
and these indications are fairly easy to read, once the rules are
learned. Of course, all such things as accidental blemishes, such as
scars and broken noses, must be ignored at the outset.

First, let us take the general shape of the face.

[Illustration: No. 12.]

_THE SHAPE OF THE FACE._--There can be thousands of different shapes,
but the normal is shown by Fig. 1, where the width across the forehead
is more than across the chin. The forehead, the nose and the rest of
the face should be about equal in length.

Add to the width across the forehead and you have a brainy person,
a clear thinker, a person whose opinions are worth considering.
Of course, an excess of width in this place suggests some mental
instability.

Fig. 2 shows an entirely different type. It may belong to a jolly
person who is excellent company; but do not go to him for sound
advice. There is not enough length of forehead, nor width of forehead,
to house a superabundance of brains.

Fig. 3 introduces us to a ponderous type, slow-thinking, fond of food,
and with animal instincts lurking in the background of his make-up.

Fig. 4 reveals a long face, narrow for its width. This belongs to
a person who is limited in vision, and who can be very awkward at
times. Such an individual will find it very hard to agree with others,
especially in business matters. He may be deep and more often than not,
he is a rather sad companion.

[Illustration: No. 13.]

_THE NOSE._--Fig. 1 shows the normal nose, betokening an average
character.

Fig. 2 is too rounded at the tip. Force of character is lacking.

Fig. 3 reveals a drooping line between the tip of the nose and the
upper lip. This stands for a character that loves amusements and is apt
to neglect the real things of life.

Fig. 4 gives a pronounced, fleshy curl where the nose joins the face.
This is a sign that the possessor is a clear thinker, a leader of
others, an intelligent person.

Fig. 5 shows a thin, pointed nose. The possessor is, probably, of a
refined nature, but he or she is apt to be lacking in sympathy, even
cruel.

Fig. 6 depicts a curved ridge. This is the nose of a person who lacks
a refined nature. He may be jolly and humorous, but certainly not
actuated by the highest ideals. Many noses of this shape are the result
of an accident, which, of course, does not count.

A long nose indicates cautiousness, watchfulness, and often timidity.

A prominent nose that stands well out from the face shows a desire to
observe and examine things, without the interference of others.

A fleshy tip to the nose displays a kindly nature, and a love of ease.

A short, small nose tells of conceit and a lack of sympathy for others.

A turned-up nose means that the possessor is a busybody, one who cannot
keep a secret, but may be kind and generous.

_THE EYES._--Large eyes denote love of talking and the ability to learn
languages.

Small eyes denote secrecy and close-mindedness.

Full, dark eyes denote love of the opposite sex.

Truthful eyes are set straight in the head.

Untruthful eyes slope towards the nose.

Eyes that slope downwards from the nose are cruel and deceitful.

Eyes set widely apart denote breadth of mind.

Eyes set close together denote narrow-mindedness.

_THE CHEEKS._--Full, rounded cheeks denote sociability and a love of
friends.

Thin cheeks denote those who prefer their own company.

Fullness in lower part of cheek denotes love of eating and drinking.

A moderate fullness denotes hospitality.

High cheekbones show that the possessor is very methodical. He or she
is likely to interfere in other people's business.

_THE FOREHEAD._--Prominent brows denote a practical disposition.

Fullness in center of forehead denotes a good memory for dates and
events.

A broad forehead denotes a humorous disposition.

A rounded forehead denotes musical ability; this is usually accompanied
by curved eyebrows and wavy hair.

_THE MOUTH AND LIPS._--When upper lip is deeply grooved down the
center, it denotes modesty and refinement.

A plain upper lip, boldness and forwardness.

A long upper lip denotes self-esteem and self-control.

Redness and fullness in center of lip, love and passion for opposite
sex.

Fullness at either side shows love of children and animals.

A mouth that displays the teeth when smiling denotes love of
approbation and attention.

A full, red, well-developed lower lip denotes a kindly, sympathetic
disposition.

Thin lips denote a hard, selfish, and unsympathetic nature. The same
with straight lips.

[Illustration: No. 14.]

_THE CHIN._--A receding chin, as shown in Fig. 1, p. 43, denotes a lack
of firmness. It belongs to a person who has insufficient will of his
own.

A chin shaped as Fig. 2 or 3, or midway between these, provides a very
acceptable character. There is determination and grit, without an
excess of these qualities. Fig. 2 may be taken as the normal type.

Broad, bony structures of the chin denotes conscientiousness and
straightforwardness.

Length and projection of chin denotes firmness, stability, and
perseverance.

An extremely long and projecting chin denotes stubbornness and
obstinacy. (Fig. 4.)

A full ridge of fat under the chin denotes economy.

_WRINKLES._--A wrinkle commencing in the lower cheek and extending
right under the chin, from side to side, is caused from constant
talking.

A wrinkle running from the side of the nose, downwards upon the
lower cheek, to the outer corners of the mouth, is a sign of love of
approbation.

Whenever in laughter three parallel circular lines are formed in the
cheeks there is a fund of folly in the character.

Wrinkles lying horizontally across the root of the nose denote ability
to command.

Several perpendicular wrinkles between the eyebrows denote a plodding,
persevering disposition.

_DIMPLES._--A round dimple in the chin denotes love of the beautiful in
the opposite sex.

Dimples at the outer corners of the mouth are another sign of
mirthfulness.

Dimples in the center of cheeks are another sign of approbation.

When a little cleft is seen at the tip of the nose it denotes the
natural critic.

Close attention should always be given to texture and quality of the
hair, eyes, and skin; this is most important, as the coarseness or
refinement of character is shown very plainly to those who take the
trouble to notice these things.

Color of hair, eyes, and skin is also very important; the depth of the
feelings and passions is shown here; poorly colored people are much
less passionate than their deeper colored fellow-creatures.

Thus from dark individuals of coarse quality we expect coarse passions,
and from dark fine-quality individuals deep, refined emotions.

[Illustration: No. 15.]

_THE EYEBROWS._--Fig. 2 is intended for the eyebrows of a normal
individual. Such a person goes about his duties in an ordinary,
intelligent manner and does his best to make the world a little better
place for having him in it.

In Fig. 1, the eyebrows have insufficient shape. They belong to an
individual of extremes; he or she is either too determined or devoid of
kindness.

In Fig. 3, the eyebrows are too curved, forming a full semi-circle.
This is a sign of shallowness; they belong to a person who is not going
to put himself out for somebody else.

In Fig. 4, the eyebrows are higher at the outer than at the inner ends.
Such are difficult to diagnose. They may belong to a very jolly, funny
person; but they may also belong to someone absolutely untrustworthy,
a foxy individual, in fact. They should be read in company with other
facial signs.

In Fig. 5, the eyebrows meet on the nose. Hesitate before trusting a
person so provided. He may be perfectly reliable, but make sure first.

Nos. 1 to 5 show eyebrows of fine or medium thickness, but Figs. 6
and 7 are coarser and heavier. Those that are neither too fine or too
thick are best, since they are more likely to belong to a well-balanced
person. Fine pencil streaks show a finniky, perhaps unkind nature.
Heavy, bushy eyebrows point to an austere, querulous nature.

In Fig. 7, the upstanding hairs suggest a nature that may derive
pleasure from posing.

_A FINAL HINT._--In checking the "points" of a face, it is often found
that one feature may contradict another. This does not prove that
the explanations given above are incorrect. It goes to show that the
character of the individual is not definitely set in one direction. He
may vary at times or he may have the aptitude for fighting against one
characteristic in favor of another. The only sound plan is to assess
the character by striking a balance of all the "points" at issue.


 HAVE YOU A MOLE?

 Many people do not like these little marks, but let them be comforted,
 for in olden times, according to the wise men of the day, great
 reliance was placed on them. Just what a mole means depends on where
 it is to be found. The following may describe a mole of your own:--

 RIGHT EYE (above).--Wealth and a happy marriage.

 LEFT EYE (above).--You have a great liking for the opposite sex and
 you will, thereby, gain much happiness.

 TEMPLE.--As above.

 NOSE.--You will succeed in business.

 CHEEK.--You will be happy, but not be blessed with fame and fortune.

 CHIN.--Fortunate in your choice of friends.

 EAR (either).--A contented nature.

 ARMS.--A happy nature, but with something of the "don't care" spirit.

 SHOULDERS.--Will face difficulties with fortitude.

 HANDS.--A practical nature. Able to take care of yourself.

 LEGS.--Strong willed.

 NECK.--You have a great deal of patience.




WHAT DO YOUR BUMPS MEAN?


Just feel the shape of your own head, and then ask a friend to let you
do the same thing to him or her. Most likely you will be very surprised
at the difference between the two. You may have bumps in certain places
while your friend has them in totally different parts.

The science of phrenology, which is the reading of bumps,
has discovered that bumps in certain places point to certain
characteristics; if you have them, you must have the characteristics,
and, if you have not them, you cannot have those qualities. In fact,
the reading of character through the medium of bumps is a very definite
science, and it is a science that can be easily learned and applied by
almost anyone. Of course, there is much to learn, but there is no need
to know a great deal if you merely want to assess a person's character
in general terms.

A chart is supplied on p. 47, and on it is marked out just enough to
enable you to read a head with ease. Only certain areas are mapped out;
the rest of the head may be the location of bumps, but it does not
present the bumps which are likely to interest us just now.

The areas are as follows:--

1.--_Lying at the top of the head, in the center and coming a little
way towards the forehead._ If this area is well developed, it shows
that the individual has a benevolent nature. He is generous and kind;
he will work for the good of others and not think only of himself.

If the area is over-developed, the individual will be inclined to favor
others at the expense of his own safety; if it is under-developed, he
will be cruel and selfish.

2.--_Situated above but a little behind the eye; usually the place is
just covered by hair._ When this area is well developed, it shows that
the individual possesses plenty of happiness and a store of wit and
mirth. He is a pleasant person, smiles on adversity and is excellent
company.

If the area is over-developed, the individual is one who can never be
taken seriously, who pokes fun at everything; if it is under-developed,
he is the type of person who is never known to smile.

3.--_In the middle of the head, where it curves down towards the back
of the neck._ In cases where this area is well developed, the person is
one who has strength of mind; he is firm in his actions; he cannot be
persuaded against his own judgment; and he likes his own way.

If this area is over-developed, the person is obstinate and stubborn;
if it is under-developed, he is easily led, apt to waver and has not a
mind of his own.

[Illustration: No. 16.--Chart of Phrenology.

  1--Benevolence, generosity, kindness.
  2--Happiness, Wit, Mirth.
  3--Firmness, Strength of Mind.
  4--Self-Esteem, Dignity, Pride.
  5--Conscientiousness, Sense of Duty.
  6--Love.
  7--Courage.
  8--Desire for Marriage.
  9--Love of Children.
]

4.--_In the middle of the head, lower down at the back than No. 3._
When this area is found in a well-developed condition, the possessor is
a person who has dignity, self-esteem and proper pride. He is one who
lives an upright life because he puts a high price on these qualities.

If this area is over-developed, the individual is over-confident, he
thinks too much of himself and is haughty; if it lacks development, he
is too humble and suffers from an inferiority complex.

5.--_Lying beside Nos. 3 and 4._ To find this area well developed is a
sure sign that the possessor is a conscientious individual; it shows
that he has a high sense of duty, and his life will center around
actions that are based on what he thinks is right.

If this area is over-developed, the possessor will never progress
far because he will be always stopping and wondering whether what he
proposes to do is right; if under-developed, the possessor is one who
does not care whether what he does is wrong or right, so long as it
brings him pleasure and gain.

6.--_At the base of the skull, at the back, where it joins the
backbone._ If this area is well developed, it shows that the individual
has the power of loving somebody of the opposite sex in a proper
manner. He or she will fall in love when a suitable occasion arises and
will make an excellent partner.

If this area is over-developed, the individual will be too passionate,
will fall in love with little or slight provocation, and will give
himself or herself a great deal of unhappiness; if under-developed, he
or she will be too cold to be moved by the thoughts of love.

7.--_A slight distance away from the back of the ear._ When this area
is well developed, the individual may be counted on to be courageously
inclined. He will not know the meaning of fear, and will not hold back
because troubles may be brewing.

If this area is over-developed, we have a quarrelsome person and if
under-developed, one who is afraid of his skin.

8.--_Beside No. 7, but more in the center of the back of the head._
Whenever this area is properly developed, it shows that the possessor
would make an admirable husband or wife. He or she would be devoted,
loyal and attentive.

If the area is over-developed, the possessor has a jealous disposition;
if under-developed, he or she is fickle and apt to flirt with others.

9.--_Beside No. 8, in the center of the back of the head, low down._
Should this area be well developed, it shows that the possessor has a
proper love and regard for children and that he thinks no person has
experienced the fullest joys of life who has not become a parent.

If this area is over-developed, the possessor thinks so much of
children that he spoils them; if it is under-developed, he is of the
type that "cannot stand them at any price."




HOW ASTROLOGY DECIDES YOUR DESTINY


Astrology is one of the oldest sciences in the world. It is said to
have originated with the Egyptians, almost at the very beginning of
time. Indeed, it is almost impossible to trace a period when this
science was not practiced.

There is nothing new under the sun, and its close followers will
scarcely allow any errors in its deductions. They go so far as to
declare it to be an exact science, a term which means that everything
can be reasoned out and proved; nothing is left to guesswork.

Such sciences are Mathematics, Algebra, and Geometry. We need not
believe that Astrology is all this, but certainly some very startling
and accurate predictions have been made by astrologers.

However, as in all other methods of fortunetelling attempted by us
mortals, it is far from infallible. So long as we do not take it to be
exact and sure, we shall get plenty of amusement and interest from its
study, with the exciting feeling all the time at the back of our minds
that "it might come true."

Here is a list giving you the names and meanings given to planets by
astrologers.

  ---------+------------------------------------------
    Name.  | Approximate meaning given by Astrologers.
  ---------+------------------------------------------
  Mars.    | Strength.
  Venus.   | Beauty.
  Mercury. | Capacity for adapting oneself.
  Uranus.  | Improvement.
  Sun.     | Life.
  Jupiter. | Freedom and growth.
  Saturn.  | Diminished--shrinking--lack of growth.
  Neptune. | Able to receive--receptive.
  Earth.   | Physical--not spiritual.
  The Moon.| Feeling.
  ---------+------------------------------------------

The main idea at the back of astrology is that the planets (or starry
bodies which revolve round the sun) each have a strong and varying
influence upon the minds of human beings.

_THE ZODIAC._--Of course when the planets revolve round the sun they
travel through a course or path. The Zodiac is the name given by
astronomers to the boundary which encloses this course or path in the
sky.

The signs of the Zodiac are the spaces into which the Zodiac is
divided.

Here are the signs of the Zodiac arranged in order to show which signs
are opposite to each other.

  Aries.      facing      Libra.
  Taurus.                 Scorpio.
  Gemini.                 Sagittarius.
  Cancer.                 Capricorn.
  Leo.                    Aquarius.
  Virgo.                  Pisces.

Now each sign has a planet which is said to rule it; this is called the
ruling planet. It is from the nature of this planet that the probable
character and fate of the individual are told. It is not necessary to
know the whys and wherefores of this, if you have not studied astronomy
it will only serve to muddle you, and if, on the other hand, you do
understand astronomy you will not need any explanation. We will just
say what does happen, and that will tell you all you need in these
first steps.

Well, we all know that the earth revolves upon its axis once in every
24 hours. Now, according to astronomers, this causes one of the Zodiac
signs to appear in the eastern sky, where it remains for two hours.
We have said that each sign has a planet ruling it, so the sign that
appears on the sky at the time of birth decides what planet that person
is born under or is influenced by.

Let us suppose for a moment that you were born when the sign Libra was
rising, as the saying is. The planet which rules Libra is Venus, so the
person born at that time would be a Venus type, i.e., a person having
the influence of Venus upon him.

In addition to the main ruling planet, astrologers will tell you that
there are other "neighboring" planets--we will call them neighboring
because it is a simple term--which also have their effect upon us.
Astrologers call this one planet being "in aspect" with another. For
instance, you might have the planet Mars in aspect with (or influenced
by) the planet Saturn; you would then be dealing with a very strong
character.

The qualities of Mars which give the fighter and the pushing type, or
in excess the bully, will be well steadied by the qualities of Saturn,
which by themselves give coldness and, in excess, lack of feeling.
The two together result in a character remarkable for its steadiness
combined with its never-wearying energy and good balance.

So you see, we seldom find pure types (i.e., qualities of Mars, or
other planets by themselves), and it is very fortunate that this is so;
we should get a very one-sided world if we did.

Now we come to that part of Astrology which really interests most
people; here will be shown the birth-dates for each month in the year
and the probable characters of persons born at that special time. You
may ask why the characters are given and why not the fate or future of
the person concerned. The reason is this: you can be pretty sure that
what you read of an individual's character will give you a sound idea
of what in all probability his future will be.

After all, the carving out of our lives is in our own hands. We are the
masters of our fate, or as the song has it, "Captain of our Soul."

However, if we believe astrologers, there is a way to tell the times
of our lives when matters should go smoothly or the reverse. The most
favorable times for speculating with money, starting in business, in
fact, the most and least favorable periods of our lives can, according
to astrology, be worked out by what is known as the Horoscope.

Now this Horoscope is in reality a chart of your life. The rocky waters
are shown, and the barrier reefs which each of us must avoid through
our life, so you will see a use in the study of astrology. It would
seem to be Nature's warning to us all of the necessity for effort,
effort and again effort.

Here are the birth dates and characteristics of persons born between
the dates mentioned. Since astrology is not infallible, do not take all
these characteristics too seriously.

You will notice that each date is taken from about the 20th of one
month to the 20th of the next month.


WHEN WERE YOU BORN?


Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th.

People born during this period have considerable mental ability and a
keen business instinct. They are fond of the imaginative arts. They are
proud; they like their own way and they see that they get it. Generally
speaking, they are better fitted to lead than to follow others.

However, they do not take kindly to changes of any kind, and are
annoyed by newfangled ideas. They do not want the advice of other
people and often resent it. They do not strike out in new directions
and they avoid taking risks. They lack "push."

To these people, we say:

Don't wait for opportunities--make them.

Don't let your pride persuade you to keep on the wrong road rather than
turn back.

Don't be afraid of admitting and correcting a mistake.

Don't run away from trouble; meet it with a bold front.


Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th.

People born during this period have a strong sense of duty. They have
a kindly disposition and are inclined to be affectionate. They refuse
to think ill of anyone until the bad qualities are proved. Being
straightforward themselves, they imagine everyone else is the same and,
on this account, they are likely to suffer some bitter experiences.

However, they lack a proper regard for their own welfare. They are a
little too confiding and they are not adaptable. Once they make up
their minds on a matter, it is almost impossible to persuade them to
change it.

To these people we say:

Don't brood over troubles. Face the facts, fight them out, and then,
forget all about them.

Don't be guided by impulses.

Don't neglect the financial side of things, if you want to succeed.


Feb. 20th to March 20th.

People born during this period are just in their dealings, and would
not injure another willingly. Their code of honor is a strict one. They
are industrious and persistent. They endeavor to perform their share in
making the world a better and a happier place.

However, they are too cautious and do not take sufficient risks to make
life a complete success. Too often, they ask themselves whether they
should go ahead with a project and, while they are hesitating, the
opportune moment flies away.

To these people, we say:

Don't listen to the voice of despair.

Don't be downhearted, if you don't see, at first, the way to do a thing.

Don't think in small things. Think large.


March 21st to April 19th.

People born during this period are thoughtful. They are artistic,
are fond of the fine arts, and like all that is beautiful. They are
self-willed and rebel when others try to drive them. They do not take
much notice of convention, and the way of the world means nothing to
them.

However, they are apt to shrink from disagreeable work, and everything
sordid disgusts them. They are too sensitive and take offense too
readily.

To these people, we say:

Don't set yourself against the world: you will lose if you do.

Don't tire of your task before it is done.

Don't be too thin-skinned.

Don't forget that it takes all sorts of people to make up the world.


April 20th to May 20th.

People born during this period possess a warm and generous heart.
They are good workers and display a genuine interest in everything
they undertake. They possess the kind of mind that seems to act
instinctively and which does not depend so much on real reason. They
are lavish in gifts and kindness.

However, they are liable to rush to extremes, and they lack balance.
Consequently, they are easily misled.

To these people, we say:

Don't get excited unnecessarily.

Don't be too easily persuaded.

Don't allow your emotions to master you.


May 21st to June 21st.

People born during this period are ambitious and they aspire to very
high things. They are sensitive and sympathetic. They have lively
imaginations and they are given to building castles in the air. They
are naturally eloquent and are never at a loss for something to say.

However, they are rarely content with things as they find them.
Consequently, they grumble a great deal. They do not weigh up the "pros
and cons" before deciding on a matter; and they jump to conclusions.

To these people, we say:

Don't be discouraged too quickly.

Dream if you like, but don't neglect to translate your dreams into
realities.

Don't be too enthusiastic.

Don't forget that work rather than plans win a home.


June 22nd to July 22nd.

People born during this period are highly generous and they make
sacrifices in order to help others. They do nothing in a half-hearted
way, whether it is work or play. They are persevering and the home is
put before anything else.

However, they dislike changes which mean an alteration in domestic life
and they are a trifle old-fashioned in some of their beliefs. A little
flattery or persuasion is apt to lead them astray, and their better
judgment is rapidly overborne by a strong personality.

To these people, we say:

Don't dash headlong into anything.

Don't be irritable under contradiction.

Don't let your emotions run away with you.

Don't spoil your chances for a little show of love.


July 23rd to August 21st.

People born during this period easily adapt themselves to
circumstances, and they are considered "jolly good company." They
have "push" and enterprise in a marked degree. They are affectionate,
generous and highly capable.

However, they lack a certain amount of self-control and they are not
always dependable. They frequently forget promises, and they are often
late in keeping appointments. In money affairs, they are likely to
overlook their obligations.

To these people, we say:

Don't let your emotions sweep you off your feet.

Don't become downcast too easily.

Don't be obstinate.

Don't make up your mind in a hurry.


August 22nd to Sept. 22nd

People born during this month are well equipped for the battle of
life, and they have several qualities which should bring them success.
They are not easily flurried, and they know how to stand firm in an
emergency. They are quick in perceiving the correct thing to do, no
matter what it is. They are capable, dependable and thorough.

However, they are prone to be too independent, and they are apt to
disregard good advice, preferring their own judgment. They are not
quick in making friends because they are too wrapped up in themselves.

To these people, we say:

Don't take a plunge before reckoning up everything first.

Don't forget that there are two sides to every question. There is yours
and the other man's.

Don't fall into the habit of doing tomorrow what should be done today.


Sept. 23rd to Oct. 23rd.

People born during this month are far-seeing and have excellent
judgment. They have a passion for "finding out" things, and they
want to know about everything that happens. Consequently, they are
intelligent. They make delightful companions.

However, they are bad losers, and they often let themselves get out
of hand. This seriously hurts their vanity, as they are exceedingly
desirous of creating a good impression.

To these people, we say:

Don't speak until you have thought twice.

Don't be obstinate. Admit you are wrong when you know you are.

Don't abuse your opponent.


Oct. 24th to Nov. 22nd.

People born during this month possess great ambition, and are
persevering. They are full of energy and passionate spirit. One rebuff
does not stop them; they return to the fray again and again, until they
have conquered. They are precise in their actions, neat, methodical and
tidy.

However, they are domineering, and endeavor to impose their will on
others. They lack discrimination and, once they conceive a hatred,
there is nothing which can dispel it.

To these people, we say:

Don't domineer.

Don't do things when you feel resentful.

Don't forget that prim and proper things sometimes defeat their own
ends.


Nov. 23rd to Dec. 21st.

People born during this month are, usually, virile and full of go
and enterprise. They have more will power than the average and know
how to surmount obstacles. Nothing comes amiss to them, and they are
self-reliant.

However, they are inclined to quarrel with those who offer advice. They
carry independence too far, and they often speak without realizing the
significance of their words. They seldom confide in others.

To these people, we say:

Don't act or speak and then think. Think first.

Don't be obstinate and think you are being determined.

Don't be headstrong and disregard advice that is disinterested.

Don't be carried away by fickle fancies.




YOUR CHILD'S OCCUPATION DECIDED BY THE STARS


It is a well-known fact that every human being is considerably
influenced, as far as character and capabilities are concerned, by the
time of the year in which he or she was born. That being so, it follows
that the occupation best suited to any particular individual is, in a
measure, related to his or her birth-date.

Parents who are anxious to do the best for their children should take
note of these conditions; they may be helpful in keeping round pegs
out of square holes. Below, we offer suggestions which have proved of
use in thousands of cases, where doubt had previously existed. The
information may be used in this way: Suppose a child is about to leave
school and is ready to make his or her entry into the world of work.
In a number of cases, the child has a very definite idea of what he
or she wants to do. If the work is reasonably suited to the child's
temperament, station in life, and so on, it is much the best plan to
allow him or her to follow the particular bent. It is just as well
to note whether the chosen occupation fits in with the work which we
list below for his or her individual birth-date. If it approximates
to some occupation which we mention, well and good. Let the child go
ahead, there is every chance of success. But, if it is quite alien
to anything which is given in the list, caution is needed. We do not
say that the child's ambition should be checked and that he or she
should be put to a job of our selection, but we do say that caution
ought to be exercised. We are perfectly ready to admit that the stars
and the birth-date are not the only factors which count. Environment,
upbringing, the father's occupation, and other things must influence
the child. All these influences should be weighed and carefully
considered.

But where astrology and the stars can give most help is in the case of
a boy or girl who has no formulated idea as to what he or she wants
to become. Thousands of children reach the school-leaving age without
showing the slightest inkling for any particular job. To the parents
of such children, we say, consult the lists set out below, seeing
that they are based on astrological teachings. Go over the selected
occupations carefully, discuss them with the child, explain what they
offer in terms of money, work, hours, etc., and watch the effect they
have on the child. In this way, it will soon be possible to gain an
idea as to what occupation should be eventually decided on.

Here are the occupations suitable for each person:

_CAPRICORN BORN_ (Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th).--Since people born in this
period have considerable mental ability, it follows that they do
well in most of the professions, since they can pass the necessary
examinations and become well qualified. Thus, they ought to do
satisfactorily in medicine, the law, dentistry, the scholastic
profession and similar occupations. The fact that they do not care
to take risks unfits them for many business openings, but where
aspirations are not high, they do well as clerks and in filling posts
which consist of routine work. Girls, especially, should seek work
which is connected with the imaginative arts.

_AQUARIAN BORN_ (Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th).--Boys display a good deal
of interest in occupations which require the use of their hands.
This makes them capable in many engineering posts, in wireless, in
cabinet-making and similar jobs. They are not good at creating or
inventing in connection with these industries, however. There is the
roving disposition implanted in these boys and many of them think that
the pilot's job on an air liner could not be equalled.

Girls are, also, interested in working with their hands: thus they are
fitted for dressmaking, the millinery trade, for dealing with arts
and crafts supplies, etc. A certain number are eminently suited to
secretarial work.

_PISCEAN BORN_ (Feb. 20th to March 20th).--Children born in this period
have a love for the sea and, therefore, the boys find congenial work
as ship's mates, stewards, marine engineers, etc., while girls are
suitable for stewardesses and other jobs filled by women on ocean-going
vessels.

In addition boys and girls are both fitted to all kinds of work in
shops, chain stores, etc., but they are not at their best when managing
their own businesses. They require authority behind them.

A few Pisceans have artistic ability which should lead them to do
splendidly as authors, painters, musicians, etc.

_ARIES BORN_ (March 21st to April 19th).--The Aries child is often a
problem, for certain of them have a rooted objection to anything in
the nature of routine work. They chafe at going and coming at the same
hour each day, and of doing the same work year after year. It is not
that they are lazy, but that their nature refuses to be driven by set
rules. With such children, it is wisest to interest them in whatever
they fancy, until the time comes when they launch out on some brilliant
scheme of their own. Aries men are the ones that fill unusual,
out-of-the-way posts.

Where this rooted objection does not exist, the children are good in
almost any position which permits of movement, as travellers, for
instance.

_TAURIAN BORN_ (April 20th to May 20th).--As a rule, children who are
Taurians are very successful. They do not mind hard work and they have
a "flair" for doing the right thing, without knowing why. They have a
head for figures and money, and thus do well in banks and stockbroker's
offices. They take kindly to long training, which enables them to
succeed in law and medicine.

Both boys and girls are good with their hands. This makes them
successful in a large number of occupations, as widely diverse as
engineering and tailoring, or hairdressing and piano playing.

_GEMINI BORN_ (May 21st to June 21st).--Gemini children show a good
deal of ambition, and their chief fault is that they object to
beginning at the bottom of the ladder. Perhaps this is useful, in a
way, as it goads them on to climbing upwards. They have a good deal of
vision. Thus they make excellent newspaper men and women. They do well
in new trades, notably in radio and the motor world. Also, they ought
to make a success in certain branches of aviation. Their eloquence fits
them admirably for travellers, and they would make their mark in any
business which, eventually, gave them work of an imaginative nature.
In a general way, they find interest in theatrical work, in literary
activities and in architecture. All Gemini people have a streak in
their natures which causes them to seek unnecessary changes.

_CANCER BORN_ (June 22nd to July 22nd).--Children born during this
period are usually "workers." They will plod, they do not mind long
hours, and they will set themselves to difficult jobs, if told to get
on with them. As a rule, they should be set to something which enables
them to work "on their own." They much prefer this to being a small peg
in a large machine. They are suited to small businesses and agencies. A
mail-order business might fit in with their requirements. Girls would
do well as private teachers, running small schools of their own. They
are, also, suited to the drapery trade.

_LEO BORN_ (July 23rd to August 21st).--Those who are born during this
period succeed best in what might be called "clean" occupations. The
boys do not want to put on overalls and become grimy, and the girls
prefer work that enables them to be always neat and tidy. Both of them
show aptitude in marketing such things as jewelry, drugs, books and
clothes, but they do not want to be concerned with making them. They
are not so much interested in vending the necessaries of life as the
luxuries. Thus, motor cars, victrolas, cameras, sports requisites,
etc., attract them.

They are not much suited to clerical work, but a good number find an
outlet for their ambitions in the theatrical and literary world, while
a few make good dentists, radiologists and medical practitioners.

_VIRGO BORN_ (Aug. 22nd to Sept. 22nd).--These children are capable,
but their great failing is that, once they find a fairly suitable
post, they will not look for anything better. They prefer to hold on
to a moderate certainty than to risk a little for a great success.
Consequently, Virgo-born are found living on salaries just sufficient
to keep them from want.

They are eminently suited to clerical work of the higher types, such as
in banks, insurance companies, stockbrokers' offices, etc. They make
good company secretaries, excellent journalists, fairly good actors and
actresses, and the girls do well as teachers.

_LIBRA BORN_ (Sept. 23rd to October 23rd).--Children of this period do
not mind hard work, but they hate monotony, especially if it is at all
sordid. They have good judgment, a quality which fits them for such
diverse occupations as medicine and the drama, the law and dressmaking.
No special trades or professions can be singled out for them; but, as
long as they are set to work in a direction which provides them with an
outlet for a nicely balanced judgment and a capacity for what might be
termed the detective instinct, they should succeed admirably.

_SCORPIO BORN_ (Oct. 24th to Nov. 22nd).--There is an abundance of
ambition in these children, and they seek position rather than money.
Thus, the boys do well in the Navy and the Army, and, in a less degree,
in the Air Force. The Church holds out good openings for many of them,
and the Mercantile Marine interest not a few. Medicine attracts both
boys and girls, and so does the stage. Anything to do with chemicals
seems to influence many of the boys. Scorpio-born children are often
heard to say that they want to make a name for themselves.

_SAGITTARIAN BORN_ (Nov. 23rd to Dec. 21st).--Children of this period
are fond of animals; thus they are suited to become veterinary
surgeons, horse-dealers, farmers and even jockeys. One section of
them, having excessive will power and plenty of self-reliance, makes a
type of individual who seeks publicity in the political world. All are
capable in business, especially in the executive branches. Not a few
men become company promoters, chairmen and directors. The girls make
excellent teachers and welfare workers.




WHAT ARE YOUR HOBBIES?


According to your Zodiac sign you have a disposition for certain
hobbies. You may not necessarily have these hobbies but your
inclinations lie towards them.

_CAPRICORN BORN._--Gardening. Nature Study. Rambles in the countryside.
Making things of almost any kind. Chemistry. Physics.

_AQUARIAN BORN._--Aviation, ranging from actual flying to making
aeroplane models. Gliding. Constructing all kinds of articles. Painting
pictures. Drawing. Needlework.

_PISCES BORN._--Traveling, especially by sea. Photography. Constructing
and using wireless apparatus. Making electrical apparatus.
Theater-going and amateur theatricals. Arts and crafts (girls).

_ARIES BORN._--Traveling, touring. Anything connected with motor cars.
Sight-seeing. Making things. Reading. Arts and crafts (girls).

_TAURUS BORN._--Constructive hobbies, from wireless to the building of
houses. Walking. Golf. Swimming. Collecting antiques.

_GEMINI BORN._--Likely to be interested in inventions. Good at solving
puzzles. Football. Tennis. Nature rambling. Girls have a bent for
household duties, such as cooking, needlework, etc.

_CANCER BORN._--Interested in the wonders of the world. Anxious to see
things and people. Music. Reading. Collecting antiques. Almost any
outdoor game. Girls are fond of needlework of the finer kinds.

_LEO BORN._--Hobbies allied to the daily work. Intellectual reading,
especially anything bearing on historical matters. Going about. Golf.
Swimming. Making things of an artistic nature.

_VIRGO BORN._--Indoor games. Making and repairing household articles.
Good at manual activities, from playing the piano to constructing toys.
Prefers to be amused indoors than out in the open.

_LIBRA BORN._--Doing things to keep the home ship-shape. Football.
Cricket. Photography. Reading. Wireless. Needlework and knitting
(girls).

_SCORPIO BORN._--Scientific recreations of all kinds. Keeping pets.
Nature rambling. Girls take a keen interest in household duties.
Card playing. Seeing people. Dabbling in mysterious matters, such as
thought-reading, table-rapping, seances, etc.

_SAGITTARIAN BORN._--Hobbies of an intellectual character. Walking.
Outdoor sports. Boxing. Nature study. Keeping pets. Reading.




WHAT IS YOUR LUCKY NUMBER?


Once more from the rising sun of the East further marvelous theories
have reached us through the paths of the ages. To many of our prosaic
Western minds, maybe not unnaturally, these ideas will at first sight
appear almost ridiculous. However, do not condemn numerical mysteries
unheard, for no Manual of Fortunetelling would be complete should it
not include a talk on this most arresting subject.

Students of numbers, as do astrologers and students of palmistry,
declare that there is no such thing as luck or chance in the world.
They also state that we are strongly but not inevitably influenced by
certain powerful laws of Nature.

Number science is certainly unknown to the great majority of us, but
there are some superstitions which are based on evil numbers; these
superstitions we treat with great respect. Very few of us really care
to sit down thirteen at table, while I have known a man go sad and
smokeless rather than be the third to light his cigarette off one match!

Fortunetelling by numbers is allied to astrology very closely indeed.
Let us now take each day of the week individually and see what
information we can get from it. You will find that very useful as a
check upon your other forms of fortunetelling.


ON WHAT DAY WERE YOU BORN?

If, as I suggested, we take the days of the week we shall find that
they in turn are influenced by the order in which they are found, or by
the number which is theirs. For instance, Sunday being the first day,
is influenced by No. 1, and Friday, being the sixth day takes No. 6 as
its ruling number.

According to the ancients each number has its corresponding planet;
here is a little table showing the planet representing and ruling over
each number.

  No. 0. Represented by Space.
  No. 1. Represented by The Sun.
  No. 2. Represented by The Moon
  No. 3. Represented by Mars.
  No. 4. Represented by Mercury.
  No. 5. Represented by Jupiter.
  No. 6. Represented by Venus.
  No. 7. Represented by Saturn.
  No. 8. Represented by Uranus.
  No. 9. Represented by Neptune.

Taking each day of the week in order, we find the following
characteristics.


TABLE OF DAYS IN WEEK

No. 1 (_Sunday_).--You will see by your table that this day takes
the Sun for its ruler--Sun-day. It is a fortunate day; persons born
on a Sunday have a brave and honest influence on them. They will be
optimistic, but not foolishly so, while at the same time they have
great pride in the reputation of themselves and their families. If they
have any fault it is, maybe, that this pride is felt, a little too
strongly; they may be inclined to take themselves rather too seriously.
However, I repeat, this is an excellent day.

No. 2 (_Monday_).--This day is the Moon-day. The lesson for Monday men
to learn is steadiness. They are too easily influenced and are blown
hither and thither upon life's winds. They adapt themselves well to
change of place, circumstances, scene, and frequently follow the sea.
They have plenty of imagination in their natures, and should cultivate
common sense.

No. 3 (_Tuesday_).--The day of Mars (French--Mardi). Frequently the
engineers of the world. An ambitious go-ahead day is Tuesday. These
Tuesday folk are the explorers, the men who emigrate, and the earnest
patriots of life. Soldiers, workers at the furnace among other workers,
are found among those born on Tuesday. Their womenfolk are inclined
to be rather shrewish and domineering. They are not naturally good
managers, and should cultivate this quality because they are always
rare workers.

No. 4 (_Wednesday_).--The table tells us that these are the Mercurians.
The men are quick at calculating figures, and always capable and
thoughtful workers. Mercury, as its name implies, gives quickness, with
business trading capacity. The women appear not to be so favorably
influenced, they must guard against grumbling and gossip; then they may
do well enough.

No. 5 (_Thursday_).--Under the planet of Jupiter, these Thursday
people have many good qualities. They are liberal and good natured,
but have one vice--the outcome of their virtue. They are inclined to
be too liberal with themselves, which is extravagance. Given an idea
they can turn it to good account, but do not, as a rule, originate
ideas. Statesmen are here found; let these Jupiterians beware of a
love of display and what is commonly known as side. Then they are very
excellent people indeed.

No. 6 (_Friday_).--Look at the table--see Venus is the planet of
Friday. This accounts for many things. Here we see the typical Venus
type. Gay, light-hearted, with no thought of the morrow, they flit
happily through life like a gilded butterfly upon the wing. If they
lack taste they over-dress. Their good qualities are their charming
personalities, pleasing manners, and a quick command of music and art.
They should beware of being only butterflies, and should cultivate
strength of character. They should also obtain by hook or by crook a
liking for hard work; it will serve them in good stead.

No. 7 (_Saturday_).--Saturday, as its name tells us, has sad Saturn for
its planet. Here we have the exact opposite to the persons mentioned
who were born on a Friday. Saturday people miss half the joy of living
by their cold and calculating natures. Careful with money, they
are patient workers, they must beware of being miserly, and should
certainly cultivate their missing sense of humor. The good qualities in
these people are their sincerely earnest outlook and their capacity for
an almost endless grind of hard work. Their womenfolk frequently make
old maids and should practice sweet temper and a kindly feeling towards
the rest of the household.


YOUR OWN NUMBER

But there is much more in the science of numbers than that which can be
gleaned from the days of the week. There is your own personal number,
the number which influences you and your actions more than any other.
If you know your number, think how you can use it for good and avoid
others for ill! The finding of your number is a simple matter when
you have mastered the elements of numerology, which is the science of
numbers.

Let us explain how your own number is found. First, write down your
birth-date, the day of the month, the month itself and the year.
Thus, three items are required. Take first the day of the month. If
it consists of one figure, leave it. If it consists of two, add them
together, and, if the answer comes to two figures, add them together.
All this may appear a little involved, but it is not, as one or two
examples will show.

Suppose you were born on the 9th of the month, then 9 is the number you
want.

But, suppose it was the 16th, then six and one make seven. Therefore 7
is the required number.

Again, if you were born on the 29th, then nine and two make eleven, but
as eleven consists of two figures, you must add them together, and they
make 2.

So much for the day of the month, now for the month itself. January
stands for one, February for 2, and so on, to December for 12. The
numbers of the months from January to September can stand as they are,
but October November and December, being 10, 11 and 12, must be added
up, as already described. Thus October is one, November is two and
December three.

Thirdly, the number of the year must be considered. Say you were born
in 1910. These figures add up to eleven, and eleven, being double
figures, adds up to 2. Therefore 1910 is equivalent to 2.

Work out your figures here.

You have now obtained three separate figures, add them together and if
they come to a one-figure number, that is the number which you require.
On the other hand, if it is a double-figured amount, add the two
figures as before, until you arrive at a single-figured amount. Then
that is the number you require.

So as to make the whole thing perfectly clear, we will take a complete
example and work it out, exactly as you must work out your own
birth-date.

_Example._--12th September, 1913.

  12 = 1 + 2 = 3
  September is the 9th month = 9
  1913 = 1 + 9 + 1 + 3 = 14 = 1 + 4 = 5
  3 + 9 + 5 = 17 = 1 + 7 = 8

Therefore, the personal number of anyone born on 12th September, 1913,
is 8. Eight should guide and influence all his or her actions. We are
not going to pretend that benefits will accrue on every occasion that
the personal number is observed, but we are going to say that we have
noted some marvelous pieces of good fortune when it has.

When you have found your personal number, there are several ways in
which you can use it. Suppose your number is the one just found,
eight; then you can conclude that the eighth day of any month will be
a propitious one for you. But that is not the only one. The 17th is
equally good, because one plus seven gives eight. Moreover, the 26th is
in a similar position. Two and six make eight.

Yet another way to use your personal number arises when you want to
know whether some important step should be taken on a definite day.
What is the particular day? Add up its numerological values, exactly
as you did with your birthday, and if it resolves itself into the same
number as your personal number, you may go ahead with cheerfulness. Put
forth your best effort, and, on the day, you will have ample chances of
success.


THE NUMBER OF YOUR NAME

Numerology permits of still another step. Take your own name and
see what number it is equal to. You will be able to do this in the
following way: A stands for one, B for two, C for three, and so on.
When you reach I, which is 9, commence again and give J the value of
one, then continue. To make all this clear, we will set out the values
of the complete alphabet:

  1 = A   J   S
  2 = B   K   T
  3 = C   L   U
  4 = D   M   V
  5 = E   N   W
  6 = F   O   X
  7 = G   P   Y
  8 = H   Q   Z
  9 = I   R   --

Thus, suppose your name is Joan Shirley, the letters resolve themselves
into the following numbers:--

  J   O   A   N   S   H   I   R   L   E   Y
  1 + 6 + 1 + 5 + 1 + 8 + 9 + 9 + 3 + 5 + 7 = 55
  55 = 5 + 5 = 10 = 1 + 0 = 1

From all that we have said, it will be clear that the birthdate may be
used for finding the personal number, or the letters of the name may
be used. On rare occasions, the two ways will provide the same number.
When this is the case, great faith should be placed in that number.
But, when the two ways give different numbers, what? Does one disprove
the other? No. You simply have two numbers favorable to you. The
birthdate number is the more definite and reliable because your very
existence is based on it.

A word at the end. Married ladies must use their maiden name for
finding the name number.


DO YOU KNOW THAT

_Odd Numbers_ have always been credited with mystic powers capable of
influencing the destinies of people; and a curious survival of the idea
is to be found in the fact that countrywomen, without knowing why, put
an odd number of eggs under their hens in the belief that otherwise no
chickens will be hatched?

In addition, we have noticed that books of sweepstake tickets
generally have the odd-numbered tickets withdrawn from them before the
even-numbered ones.

_Number Three._--This number comes in for a considerable share of
popularity, even from mythological times, when there were the three
fates and the three graces. Shakespeare introduced three witches
in "Macbeth." In nursery rhymes, we have the three blind mice. In
public-house signs, we frequently come across the numeral "three," and,
of course, pawnbrokers have three brass balls.

_Number Seven._--Seven is deemed extremely lucky, it being the perfect
or mystic number which runs the entire scheme of the Universe in
matters physical and spiritual. Man's life is popularly divided into
seven ages: the product of seven and nine--sixty-three--was regarded as
the grand climacteric, and the age was considered as a most important
stage of life.

The seventh son of a seventh son, according to Highland belief,
possesses the gift of second sight, and the power of healing the sick.
Many people believe that a cycle of seven years of misfortune is likely
to be succeeded by another of prosperity.

_Number Nine_ is credited with mystic properties, good and bad. A piece
of wool with nine knots tied in it is a well-known charm for a sprained
ankle. The cat o'nine tails is a form of punishment not to be taken
lightly.

_Number Thirteen._--Of this number, everybody can supply instances when
it has brought bad luck. But it may be cheering to mention that, in
certain parts of the world, thirteen is regarded in quite a favorable
light. Whether it is good or bad is a matter for each individual to
decide.




YOUR LUCKY COLOR


The old saying, "green for grief," is a well-known one, and the writer
would rather wear any color on earth than green, not even a green scarf
or belt. Moreover, she sees to it that the other members of the family
do not indulge in the unlucky color. But mind you, green only brings
her ill-fortune when used for wearing apparel. There is no objection,
of course, to a green front-door nor to wallpaper of the same color.
For such uses, green plays its part harmlessly enough.

Though green dresses are more distressing to the writer than a red
rag to a bull, she is quite prepared to admit that many people find
it a very lucky color. This brings us to the point. There is no color
that is universally unlucky; it is only so in the hands of certain
individuals. With others, it may be an absolute harbinger of all that
is lucky. Even green may do this.

Now the question is, "Which is your lucky color?" If you know it, well
and good. Make use of it in every possible way. When wearing dresses
made of it, you will feel more confident of yourself than when arrayed
in something else. You will get more work done, and it will be better
work. The only thing is that you must be sure that it is your lucky
color. If you are not quite sure, the tonic effect is absolutely lost.

Not only should you wear your fortunate color, but it is a good plan
to surround yourself with it. We know a woman who pins her faith to
purple. Her dresses are mostly purple; the wallpaper in her bedroom is
purple; purple casement curtains adorn the windows; there are purple
rugs in various parts of the house; even the back of the hair-brush
on her dressing table is purple. And, since she decided that purple
was her lucky color and used it in every reasonable way, she has had
several strokes of marvelous good fortune.

But, of course, you may say in reply to all this that you do not know
your lucky color. What then? This is where we can give you a little
help. Most people's lucky color depends on the time of their birth and
the following list sets out the birth colors. We know full well that
everybody does not derive good fortune from his birth color, but that
they find it in some other hue. Therefore, the proper course is to make
trials with the appropriate color listed below and, if that does not
answer satisfactorily, to choose another of your own liking and try
that. Only by personal experiment can you finally decide the point.

These are the birth-colors. The first given for any period is the one
almost universally accepted. Those following after the first are,
however, favored by a certain number of people.

         Birth Date                 Colors

  Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th    Emerald Green
                            Sapphire Blue
                            Black

  Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th    Various Blues
                            Dark Green

  Feb. 20th to March 20th   Purple
                            White
                            Silver

  March 21st to April 19th  Rose Red

  April 20th to May 20th    Turquoise Blue
                            Other shades of Blue

  May 21st to June 21st     Light shades of Yellow
                            Orange
                            Gold

  June 22nd to July 22nd    Mauve
                            White
                            Silver

  July 23rd to August 21st  Gold
                            Brown
                            Yellow

  Aug. 22nd to Sept. 22nd   Yellow
                            Orange
                            Light Blue

  Sept. 23rd to Oct. 23rd   Rose Pink
                            Yellow

  Oct. 24th to Nov. 22nd    Dark Green
                            Red
                            Brown

  Nov. 23rd to Dec. 21st    Purple
                            Blue

_COLORS_, of course, have certain values attached to them:

  White is a symbol of purity.
  Red is typical of fire, blood and anger.
  Orange stands for marriage.
  Green recalls spring and suggests youth and hope.
  Purple means royalty and everything regal.
  Yellow is associated with great success.
  Black is a symbol of sadness and mourning.




WHICH IS YOUR LUCKY STONE?


Ever since time began, it has been a common belief that people derived
luck and good fortune by wearing precious stones. A stone, however,
that brought luck to one person might be ineffective when worn by
someone else. Thus everybody is required to find out which stone he or
she must wear in order to enjoy the utmost good fortune.

As a rule, the stone which any particular person must choose is
decided by the month in which that individual was born. But this it
not invariably the case. Many people have noticed that luck has come
to them when they have been wearing some other stone than that decreed
by their birth-month. And, of course, the opposite has often happened.
History records a well-known case in point. The Hope diamond, for
instance, wrecked the lives of several royal personages, even including
some that were born in April; while an opal, possessed by members of
the Spanish royal family, brought disaster to many people, one after
the other, although certain of them were born in October.

Clearly, then, the proper thing is for all of us to choose our lucky
stone according to our own preferences; but failing any definite
preference to select it according to the month of our birth.


STONES OF THE MONTHS

Twelve verses of poetry have been written which set down in rhyme the
stones for all the months of the year. Here they are:--


JANUARY

    By her, who in this month was born,
      No gem save _Garnets_ should be worn.
    They will ensure her constancy,
      True friendship and fidelity.


FEBRUARY

    The February born shall find
      Sincerity and peace of mind,
    Freedom from passion and from care,
      If they the _Amethyst_ will wear.


MARCH

    Who in this world of ours, their eyes
      In March first open, shall be wise,
    In days of peril, strong and brave,
      And wear a _Bloodstone_ to their grave.


APRIL

    Those who from April date their years,
      Should _Diamonds_ wear lest bitter tears
    For vain repentance flow: this stone,
      Emblem of innocence is known.


MAY

    Who first beholds the light of day,
      In spring's sweet, flowery month of May,
    And wears an _Emerald_ all her life,
      Shall be a loved and loving wife.


JUNE

    Who comes in summer to this earth
      And owes to June her time of birth,
    With ring of _Agate_ on her hand
      Can health, wealth and lengthy life command.


JULY

    The glowing _Ruby_ shall adorn
      Those who in warm July are born.
    Then will they be exempt and free
      From all life's doubts and anxiety.


AUGUST

    Wear a _Sardonyx_ or for thee
      No conjugal felicity.
    The August born without this stone,
      'Tis said, must live unloved alone.


SEPTEMBER

    Children born when autumn leaves
      Are rustling in the September breeze,
    A _Sapphire_ on their brow should bind.
      'Twill cure diseases of the mind.


OCTOBER

    October's child is born for woe,
      And life's vicissitudes must know.
    But lay an _Opal_ on her breast
      And hope will lull those woes to rest.


NOVEMBER

    Who comes to this world here below,
      With drear November's fog and snow,
    Should prize the _Topaz's_ amber hue,
      Emblem of friends and lovers true.


DECEMBER

    If cold December gave you birth,
      The month of snow and ice and mirth,
    Place on your hand a _Turquoise_ blue,
      Success will crown whate'er you do.


AN ABC OF PRECIOUS STONES

_AGATE._--A stone, showing irregular bands of browns and yellows, which
is often known as onyx, cornelian, etc. It is supposed to have special
powers in making and binding friendships, Also, it insures long life,
health and prosperity for those born in June.

_AMBER._--A brownish material, resembling stone, which is derived from
fossilized pine trees. It provides health and happiness when worn round
the neck by people born in August.

_AMETHYST._--A form of quartz, showing a range of color-shades from
purple to lilac. Originally it was worn by the Greeks as a preventive
of drunkenness, and, then, as a cure for all excesses of passion.
Later, it became the stone associated with St. Valentine. This
immediately constituted it the particular charm for lovers. It is the
February birthstone.

_AQUAMARINE._--A bluish-green form of the beryl or topaz. As the name
implies, sea-water, it has long been a mascot for sailors and for those
setting out on a long sea journey. It stands for faithfulness: thus
it is an appropriate stone for a bridegroom to give to his wife, as a
wedding gift.

_BERYL._--A pale green stone which is sometimes found with a yellowish
tinge. The latter is known as the gold beryl. It is avoided by many
people as it stands for doubt, uncertainty and qualities of a wavering
nature.

_BLOODSTONE._--A stone found with many different colorings and
markings. A frequent variety has a greenish surface, sprinkled with
patches of vivid red: whilst a totally different variety shows a
mottling of red and brown, with streaks of green. The red markings
suggested the name of "bloodstone," and the blood became a symbol of
bravery, strength and the powers of fighting. Thus, it is a stone to
be worn by a man, rather than a lady. In olden days, the women gave
bloodstones to their menfolk before going into battle.

_CARBUNCLE._--Garnets, when given a round or oval shape, with the
surface domed and not cut into facets, are so called.

_CHRYSOLITE._--A form of beryl, generally found in colors ranging from
olive-green to amber-orange. It is a stone for the September-born and
is supposed to banish evil passions and sadness of mind.

_CORAL._--A reddish stone, formed by a microscopic animal living in sea
water. It is used chiefly for beads. Children wearing such beads are
said to be preserved from dangers, whilst married women are ensured
a life of happiness. Its powers are chiefly applied to those born in
November.

_DIAMOND._--A pure form of carbon, water-white in color. The largest
known diamond was given to Edward VII, by the Transvaal government
in 1907. It weighs one and three-quarter pounds, and is known as the
Cullinan diamond. This precious stone is considered to be a symbol of
strength and virtue. In olden days, the leaders wore it when going into
battle to safeguard their courage. It should be worn on the left side
and is the month stone of April.

_EMERALD._--This is a delightful variety of green beryl. It has,
normally, a brilliant appearance, which is supposed to dwindle should
either the giver or the receiver become unfaithful to the other. It
stands as a symbol for kindness and true love. It is the month-stone of
May.

_GARNET._--A ruby-colored stone in the usual form, but there are brown,
yellow, green and black varieties. It stands for constancy and fidelity
and is the month-stone of January.

_JADE._--A very hard stone, usually a rich green, but there are white
and other varieties. The Chinese considered that those who wore it
would be assured a long and contented life.

_JASPER._--An ornamental form of quartz, varying from a reddish-brown
to a brownish-black, usually streaked with other colors. It is
particularly hard, and this makes it a symbol of firmness and endurance.

_LAPIS LAZULI._--This heavenly blue stone is worn as a sign of truth
and honesty. The ancients considered that it would charm away certain
diseases.

_MOONSTONE._--Sometimes called the water opal, this whitish stone
reflects a bluish tinge. It is supposed to safeguard those who travel
to distant parts, especially if the journey is mostly by sea.

_OLIVINE._--A green form of chrysolite, which see.

_ONYX._--A form of agate in which the bandings of color are milk-white,
alternating with another hue. White and red bands produce the
stone known as the cornelian onyx: white and flesh colored bands,
chalcedonyx: and white and green bands, sardonyx. The latter is the
month-stone of August and stands for conjugal felicity.

_OPAL._--A semi-transparent stone, the most usual varieties being
whitish in color, but flashing various hues as the angle is changed.
The opal has been connected with more legends than, probably, any
other stone. To some it is a harbinger of bad luck, but most people
agree that it is a stone that brings good fortune to the wearer. It is
the month-stone of October. Then it denotes hope, it sharpens the sight
and the faith of the possessor. It is supposed to lose its flashing
qualities when worn by the unfaithful.

_PEARL._--A pearl is a symbol of purity and perfection, and, when given
to a lady, is said to inspire her love.

_PERIDOT._--A form of olivine or chrysolite. See "Chrysolite."

_PORPHYRY._--A stone which usually shows light red or white spots on a
background of deep red. There are green varieties, however. This stone,
when given to a lady, is a tribute to her beauty.

_RUBY._--A stone of deep, clear carmine color, when at its best. It is
the month-stone of July, and is supposed to correct evils resulting
from mistaken friendships.

_SAPPHIRE._--A beautiful blue stone which is reserved for those born
in September. It is usually supposed to bring good fortune to those in
love, but some people hold that it is a symbol of repentance.

_SARDONYX._--See "Onyx."

_TOPAZ._--A glassy stone, red, blue, yellow or green in color; but
amber is the most usual. It is the stone for those born in November,
and denotes fidelity and friendship.

_TURQUOISE._--A waxy bluish-green stone. It belongs to those born in
December and stands for prosperity in love.

_ZIRCON._--It is a stone of lustrous grey-black color. It is a symbol
of sympathy.




DREAMS--WHAT THEY MEAN


A

_ABROAD._--(Dreamer going or gone) An early journey.

_ACCIDENT._--(being the victim of one) Business deal impending requires
great caution.

_ACCIDENT._--(to a friend or relative) A letter from him or her
conveying good news.

_ANCHOR._--A voyage across the sea: (in water) a disappointment: (if a
girl dreams) a sailor will fall in love with her.

_ANGER._--To dream of being angry with anyone means that that person is
a true friend.

_ANIMALS._--As a rule, luck; (domestic animals) speedy return of absent
friends, family reconciliation: (wild animals) secret enemies.

_APPLES._--Long life: (to a woman) many years and many children.

_ARROW._--A letter has been written which will cause regret.

_AXE._--A way will present itself soon to attain a much desired end.


B

_BALL._--(Game) Money coming soon. (Rolling ball) an unexpected gift of
money which will be soon spent.

_BALLROOM._--(Dancing with a dear friend) Marriage to him or her.

_BANANAS._--A piece of good luck coming.

_BAND._--(Musical) A lucky speculation or business deal.

_BAREFOOT._--A successful speculation or bargain.

_BARREL._--(Full) Money coming quickly.

_BATH._--Health and long life: (if dreamer is a young girl) early
marriage to present lover.

_BATTLE._--(By girl) Will shortly fall in love; (by a soldier)
promotion.

_BEAR._--(Chasing the dreamer) Victory of an enemy: (bear running from
dreamer) victory over an enemy.

_BEES._--Steady pursuit of object in view will bring success.

_BEGGARS._--To dream of beggars is a fortunate sign to lovers and
business people.

_BLIND._--To dream of being blind is a very lucky sign; to see a blind
person is a warning of danger.

_BLOOD._--To see blood means great riches, an inheritance.

_BOAT._--The arrival of a dear friend.

_BOUQUET._--To receive one means much pleasure; to give one, constancy
of a lover or friend.

_BRACELET._--Good luck and fortune coming.

_BROTHER._--Seeing dead brothers or sisters in a dream is a sign of
long life.

_BULLDOG._--A good omen in love or business.

_BURIAL._--To dream of being buried means that wealth is coming--"as
much wealth as earth laid over you."

_BURNING._--(Houses, etc.) Riches and prosperity.

_BUYING._--Happiness and contentment, a legacy.


C

_CAGE._--(Birds in) Early fortunate marriage; (empty) friends or lovers
will go away.

_CAKES._--To dream of any kind of cakes is a good omen.

_CANARY._--(Singing) Marriage and a charming house.

_CARDS._--(Playing at) Speedy marriage.

_CATHEDRAL._--Prosperity and fortune.

_CEMETERY._--An omen of prosperity.

_CHAIR._--An increase in the family.

_CHERRIES._--Good news, pleasure and enjoyment.

_CHILDREN._--Lucky omen: increase in wealth.

_CHIMNEY._--Good luck, the higher the better.

_CHRISTENING._--Good fortune approaching.

_COCK CROWING._--Great prosperity.

_COINS._--(Copper) Good fortune; (silver) worry; (gold) commercial
troubles.

_COLD._--Friends will be kind to you.

_CORNFIELD._--Health, wealth and pleasant times.

_COWS._--Prosperity, the more the better.


D

_DAFFODILS._--Pleasure and amusement in abundance.

_DAGGER._--A friend will confer a favor.

_DEAD._--To dream of oneself as dead is a good and auspicious sign of
long life and success.

_DEATH OF A FRIEND._--Arrival of good news.

_DIGGING._--Good luck with perseverance.

_DOCKS._--Good news from abroad.

_DOG._--As a rule, a favorable sign; (Dog barking) somebody is trying
to do you an ill turn; (Dogs fighting) serious quarrel between two
friends of the dreamer.

_DONKEY._--Lucky omen, usually a legacy.

_DOVES._--Success, especially to lovers. To the married, they denote a
pleasure in store.

_DROWNING._--(Either the dreamer or another person.) Success, joy,
prosperity.

_DUCKS._--Increased prosperity and happiness.


E

_EAGLE._--Success in a new place.

_EARS._--A pleasant letter from a friend.

_EATING._--(Dreamer eating) ill luck; (seeing others eat) good luck.

_ECHO._--Sickness either of dreamer or relations.

_EGGS._--Good luck, money, success; (eggs broken) failure and loss.

_ELM TREE._--A good turn offered by a male relative.

_ELOPEMENT._--Sign of a speedy marriage.

_EMERALD._--A sign of good luck and happiness.

_EMPTINESS._--Always a bad sign in a dream.

_ENGAGEMENT._--(To dream of being engaged to a handsome person) Great
pleasure in store; (to a plain person) worry and trouble.

_EYES._--In general a sign of good luck, and the prettier the eyes the
better. To dream of someone with a defect of the eyes signifies minor
misfortunes.


F

_FACES._--(Smiling) Happy times with friends; (pale and gloomy) trouble
and poverty; (changing faces) a removal; (washing own face) repentance
for sin; (own face in glass) long-cherished secret plan will fail.

_FAIRY._--All dreams of fairies are good omens--success and riches.

_FALLING._--Indicates some misfortune.

_FAN._--Quarrels, a rival in love.

_FARMYARD._--Good fortune coming; comfort and happiness.

_FEATHERS._--(White) Success and riches; (black) loss and failure.

_FENCE._--(Climbing) A sudden rise in life.

_FIELDS._--(Green) Prosperity, a happy marriage, handsome children;
(clover, barley, wheat, etc.) great prosperity and happiness.

_FIGS._--A good dream, joy and pleasure; (if a woman dreams) happy
marriage and many children.

_FLEET._--(At sea) Realization of cherished hopes.

_FLOATING._--To dream of floating on water is a good and lucky sign.

_FLOODS._--Success after triumphing over difficulties.

_FLOUR._--Death of a relative bringing a legacy.

_FLOWERS._--Prosperity.

_FLY._--(Swarm of flies) Rivals and jealous persons are spreading
scandal.

_FLYING._--(Without wings) Success in love and business; (if ended by
a fall) failure in attaining object; (with wings) bad omen--frustrated
ambition.

_FOG._--Bad dream--business losses.

_FOREIGN._--(Country) Success and prosperity at home.

_FOREST._--Trouble and losses through rivals.

_FORK._--A warning of imminent danger.

_FOUNTAIN._--(Playing) Good luck, happy times and laughter.

_FOX._--Trouble through secret enemy; (killing one) good luck.

_FRIENDS._--(Absence of) Speedy return; (death of) good news; (illness)
bad news; (in good health) their prosperity.

_FROGS._--Beware of flatterers and pessimists.

_FROST._--Success through aid of friends.

_FRUIT._--Usually a good dream, according to kind of fruit; (dreamer
eating or throwing away fruit) bad sign.

_FUNERAL._--A legacy or a rich marriage.


G

_GAS._--Minor discomforts and annoyances.

_GATE._--An obstacle to success will suddenly disappear.

_GEESE._--Happiness, success; (to hear geese cackling) a profitable
business deal will be quickly concluded.

_GEMS._--Usually an unfortunate omen.

_GHOSTS._--To dream of ghosts is invariably the presage of misfortune.

_GIANT._--Good fortune, success in business or love.

_GIFTS._--(Receiving) Good fortune coming.

_GYPSIES._--A profitless voyage to many strange countries.

_GLASS._--To dream of anything made of glass refers to women;
(receiving glass of water) birth in the family.

_GLOVES._--Usually bad luck; (gloves on hands) honor and safety;
(losing gloves) loss in business.

_GOAT._--Bad luck, some misfortune, especially unlucky to sailors;
(white goat) a profitable venture; (many goats) an inheritance.

_GOD._--A good dream--health and happiness.

_GOLD._--Omen of loss and bad luck: (dreamer finding gold) a sign
that he will be robbed; (dreamer paying out gold) a sign that he will
increase the number of his friends.

_GOOSEBERRIES._--Time and trouble spent only for the benefit of others.


H

_HAIR._--Riches and fine clothes; (hair falling over face) a coming
event will cause displeasure; (having hair cut) losses in business;
(becoming bald) great danger.

_HAMMER._--Triumph over difficulties.

_HAMMOCK._--Loss of something that is prized.

_HAPPINESS._--A presage of doubt and difficulty.

_HARE._--(Alive) Friendship: (dead) good luck: (hare running) a lengthy
journey.

_HARVEST._--Hopes will not come to fruition.

_HAT._--(New) A small success: (blown off or damaged) losses.

_HATCHET._--A solution near to existing difficulties.

_HAWK._--A happy omen--success in life.

_HAY._--Good luck: (dreamer cutting hay) troubles and sorrow.

_HAZEL NUT._--(Eating) Troubles and discord.

_HEAD._--Good omen--health and money.

_HORSESHOE._--(Seeing one) A journey: (finding one) great good lock.

_HOSPITAL._--Misery, poverty, wounds.

_HOUSE._--Good luck: (dreamer building house) unlucky dream, signifying
loss and sickness.

_HUNCHBACK._--A troubled life, with many ups and downs.

_HUNGER._--To dream of being hungry is a fortunate omen, foretelling
that the dreamer, by industry and enterprise, will grow rich.

_HUNTING._--(Dreamer returning from a hunt) A fortunate dream: (dreamer
going hunting) frustrated hopes and disappointment.

_HUSBAND._--For a woman to dream of her husband is not a very favorable
dream, usually foretelling discord and deceit: for an unmarried girl to
dream that she has a husband is a very bad omen.

_HYMNS._--Singing hymns in a dream foretells sickness to the dreamer:
(hearing hymns sung) consolation in troubles.


I

_IRON._--A profitable bargain: (red-hot) sorrows: (burnt with same)
dreamer will receive some personal injury.

_ISLAND._--For a woman to dream of an island forebodes desertion by
husband or lover.

_ITCH._--A sign of good luck.

_IVORY._--To dream of anything made of ivory is a sign that the dreamer
will suffer from fraud and deception.

_IVY._--True friends will present themselves.


J

_JEWELS._--To dream of jewelry of any kind is always a bad sign; love
troubles or business dangers.

_JOCKEY._--(On horseback) A successful speculation or bet.

_JOLLITY._--To dream of jollity and fun by night is good for those
about to marry: to the poor a sign of good: to the rich a sign of
trouble and loss. See "Merry."

_JOURNEY._--(Making one) Peace and contentment at home.

_JUDGE._--A bad dream: beware of slander and malice.

_JUG._--(Drinking from one) Robust health and wholesome pleasures.

_JUMP._--To dream of jumping is unpropitious, foretelling obstacles
that prevent fulfillment of a desire.


K

_KANGAROO._--A secret and powerful enemy or rival.

_KENNEL._--An invitation to visit a male friend.

_KETTLE._--(Black) An ill omen, death: (copper) lucky dream.

_KEY._--Receipt of money: (for young people) a good and handsome
partner in life: (holding a key) settlement of business perplexities:
(lost key) anger, worry, want.

_KILL._--(Dreamer killing a man) Assured happiness: (dreamer being
killed) loss to the dream-adversary.

_KING._--(Seeing oneself as a King) Warning to beware of flatterers and
of self-conceit.

_KISS._--Beware of treachery and deceit: (kissing hand of somebody)
friendship and good fortune: (kissing a stranger's hand) a journey.

_KITCHEN._--Success, advancement in life.


L

_LAMP._--(Lit) Trouble, not serious.

_LANTERN._--Success: (to see light extinguished or darkened) sadness,
sickness, poverty.

_LARK._--Good luck: improvement in finances.

_LAUGHTER._--Presages difficult circumstances.

_LAVENDER._--(To smell or to see it growing) Good luck.

_LAWN._--(Looking at) Good health and prosperity: (running on) worry
and annoyance.

_LAWYER._--Trouble, quarrels, expenses, losses.

_LEAD._--An inheritance or legacy from beloved friend.

_LEAF._--(To dream of being covered with leaves) Difficulties will
prove to be only temporary: (faded leaves) disappointed hopes.


M

_MAGPIE._--A bad sign; back-biting and scandal by a false friend.

_MAN._--For a young girl to dream about a man is a warning against
gossip and gossipers.

_MANURE._--Financial gain: good crops.

_MAP._--News or visit from a friend abroad.

_MARBLE._--An inheritance.

_MARRIAGE._--To dream that one marries is a bad, unhappy sign.

_MASS._--(Attending Mass) Happiness and health.

_MAST._--To dream of tall, towering masts is a sign of prosperity.

_MATCHES._--An increase in wealth.

_MAYOR._--An elevation to place of dignity and respect.

_MEADOW._--A lucky bargain, comfort, and prosperity.

_MELANCHOLY._--A presage of mirth and happiness.

_MENAGERIE._--Enemies will fail to injure: friends will be true.

_MENDING._--(Clothes, etc.) Unhappiness, submission to others.

_MERMAID._--Bad luck and misfortune, especially to sailors and those
who live by the sea.

_MERRY._--(Being) A presage of sadness and gloom.

_MESSAGE._--(Receiving one) An advance in life.

_MIDWIFE._--An increase in the family.

_MILK._--A sign of peaceful circumstances; often means an increase in
family: (spilling) loss in business.

_MINCE PIES._--(Making) Good luck, a valuable present; (eating) good
news.

_MINT._--An improvement in health.

_MIRROR._--(Married folk dreaming) Children: (young people)
sweethearts: (seeing own face) failure of cherished project.


N

_NEEDLE._--Love or family quarrels: (unable to thread needle) baseless
suspicions causing trouble.

_NEGRO._--Unlucky: a warning of trouble.

_NEST._--A good omen: fortunate love: happy family life.

_NETTLES._--(Stung by them) Sign that the dreamer will make a bold
effort to reach a desired end or gain a desired object; for young
people to dream thus is a sign that they are in love and wishful to
enter the unknown and, possibly, unhappy state of matrimony.

_NEWSPAPERS._--(Reading them) A presage of news from a foreign country.

_NIGHT._--To dream of night presages sadness and gloom.

_NIGHTINGALE._--(Hearing nightingales sing) Joyfulness, success in
business, good crops, a happy marriage to a good and faithful mate:
(for a married woman to dream) she will have children who will become
great singers.

_NIGHTMARE._--To dream of having a nightmare is a sign that the dreamer
will be immediately married, and (if a man) his wife will turn out a
shrew.

_NINE._--To see objects or persons to the number of nine intensifies or
multiplies the effect, nine being the superlative of superlatives.

_NOISE._--Hearing loud, discordant noises, particularly if their source
is not apparent, is a bad omen.


P

_PEARLS._--Weeping and tears, hard times, worry, and treason.

_PEARS._--(Gathering them) Pleasant companionship and enjoyment:
(eating them) sickness and possibly death.

_PEAS._--(Seeing them growing) Fortunate enterprises: (cooked) good and
speedy success and enjoyment of well-gained riches.

_PEBBLES._--Sorrows and troubles: (young woman dreams) she will be made
unhappy by attractive rivals.

_PEDDLER._--Beware of false friends.

_PEN._--Avoid a friend whose example and advice are bad.

_PERFUME._--An augury of success and happiness.

_PERSPIRATION._--To dream of being bathed in perspiration foretells the
inception of some arduous task which will be successfully achieved.

_PETTICOAT._--A bad dream portending troubles caused by frivolity, to a
man: and to a woman vexations through vanity and pride.

_PIANO._--(Playing or seeing another play) The death of relations,
funeral obsequies.

_PIG._--Good luck, reasonable success in affairs.

_PICTURE._--To dream of painting pictures denotes that you will engage
in some unremunerative, albeit not unpleasant, enterprise.

_PIGEON._--Domestic peace and comfort, success in exterior affairs.
Wild pigeons signify dissolute women: tame pigeons, honest women and
wives.

_PINE-TREE._--Continual happiness and vigorous old age.

_PINS._--Differences and quarrels in families.

_PIT._--(Falling in) Disappointment in love, misfortunes, danger:
(being in, but climbing out) a difficulty overcome.

_PLOUGH._--A good omen in love, courtship and marriage, though the good
may be rather slow in coming.


R

_RABBIT._--(White) Success: (black) worry.

_RACE._--To see oneself winning a race is a good omen, except to sick
persons.

_RACES._--Bad luck: losses by trickery and swindling of low persons.

_RAGS._--(Being dressed in) Success and prosperity after much striving.

_RAILWAY._--A journey: (accident) a break in friendship.

_RAIN._--A lucky omen: an inheritance, prosperity, good crops: (heavy
storm) troubles and difficulties.

_RAINBOW._--Change of residence or manner of life: (if seen on the
right hand) a change for the better: (if on the left) an "Irishman's
rise."

_RAT._--Treachery from inferiors: (white rat) good fortune.

_RAVEN._--Bad luck to the business man, disappointment to the lover,
separation to the married.

_RAZOR._--An unhappy portent: love quarrels.


S

_SNAKE, SERPENT._--Bad luck, sickness, short life.

_SNOW._--Success, money, plentiful harvest: (eating snow) the dreamer
will soon undertake a difficult journey: (lost in snow) hostilities of
enemies.

_SOAP._--A way out of pressing difficulties will present itself.

_SOWING._--An indication of doubtful enterprises.

_SPADE._--To dream of using a spade is a sign that the dreamer will
commit indiscretions which he will endeavor to hide.

_SPARROW._--Troubles: (many) an early journey: (sparrow struggling to
escape) a foreboding of mischief.

_SPECTACLES._--Be on guard against persons trying to deceive.

_SPECTRE._--An omen of misfortune and disaster.

_SPIDER._--Good luck, successful schemes: (killing one) a very bad omen.

_SPINNING._--Worry and trouble in which strangers are mixed.

_STABLE._--Prepare for the visit of a true friend.

_STAIN._--(To dream of rubbing out stains which reappear) Retribution
and punishment for sin.


T

_TABLE._--(Sitting at) A sign of comfort and prosperity, a happy
marriage.

_TEA._--Trouble that will cause sleeplessness and bad health.

_TEAR._--To dream of tearing paper while reading is a sign that
business perplexities will be smoothed away.

_TEARS._--A presage of great joy and merriment.

_TEETH._--In a dream teeth denote relatives, the two front teeth
representing children, brothers or sisters, and others are distant
relations. Losing a tooth is a sign of death of a relative: the loss of
all in any way means that the dreamer will outlive all his family.

_THIEVES._--A warning against gossipers and tattlers.

_THIMBLE._--The loss of employment.

_THREAD._--Beware of intrigues: (breaking) poverty: (entangling the
thread of a spool or skein) difficulties, perplexities, business
troubles.


W

_WALK._--(Alone and slowly) A sign of poverty and sadness: (fast)
success in a desired object: (through fire) danger: (on water or on
the sea) bad luck: (with somebody else) enjoyment of comfort and
companionship: (girl to walk with her lover) a comfortable and happy
marriage.

_WALL._--Many obstacles in realizing a future plan: (climbing over or
destroying) obstacles successfully surmounted: (jumping over) joy and
happiness.

_WASH._--(Body) Release from anxieties: (clothes) a presage of hard and
unrequited toil for others.

_WASPS._--Vexation and troubles caused by envious persons.

_WATCH._--Gains, money, prosperity.

_WATER._--(Clear) Comfort and happiness: (dirty) sorrow and trouble:
(stagnant) severe illness, probably ending with death: (very cold)
beware of enemies: (hot) illness: (seeing in improbable places
or circumstances) trouble and danger: (dried up or disturbed) an
improvement in affairs: (gushing up from below) a sign of unsuspected
enemies: (carrying it in a sieve or other unlikely receptacle without
spilling) much domestic trouble, disappointment, great losses: (another
person doing so) good luck to the dreamer or to that person, or good
luck to the dreamer in connection with that person: (drinking clear
water) a lucky sign, comfort and satisfaction.




TEACUP FORTUNETELLING


(In the following pages, you may learn something of the meanings
attached to the tea leaves which remain among the dregs in the bottom
of your teacup.)


HOW TO TEST YOUR FORTUNES

Leave a slight amount of tea in the cup, not so much as a spoonful.
Place the saucer on the cup, swill the cup round, males do this so
that the liquid moves round in a clockwise direction, females in an
anti-clockwise direction. The tea is then run out of the cup, the
saucer lifted off and the shapes or formations are ready to be examined.

[Illustration: No. 17.--Birds seen in tea leaves generally denote an
end of your troubles.]


WHAT THE FORMATIONS MEAN

_ANCHOR._--Denotes a voyage full of hope. It is considered a splendid
omen for a sailor's bride.

_ARCH._--You are to undertake a journey in the near future. It is
sometimes a happy omen for a woman, signifying that she will marry a
tall, handsome man and be blessed with healthy children.

_AXE._--Denotes that your difficulties have now been overcome by your
own splendid endeavors. You have severed the old bad habits and made a
clean cut at your past blunders.

_BALLOON._--Although it denotes a certain rise in the consultant's
fortunes, it carries the warning to beware of a sudden fall.

_BANANA._--Signifies to the sick, quick restoration to health.

_BASKET._--Implies that a person, by changing his or her mind within
the last twenty-four hours, has reason for congratulation.

_BELLS._--If they are connected to a rope, you can look forward to
splendid news.

_BIRDS._--Generally, they denote an end of your troubles.

_BOAT._--If you cannot discover an occupant of the boat, the symbol
means a voyage.

_BOOK._--You should ask advice from some friend for whom you care. Good
advice is precious.

_BUGLE._--You will be the recipient of good news shortly.

_BUTTERFLY._--A warning to a young lady that her lover, whom she trusts
implicitly, is rather fond of flitting from one "peach" to another.

_CAP._--If you see a man's cap, you may have minor worries: if a
widow's cap, married joy will be yours.

_CARDS._--If you gamble, you will certainly lose.

_CHAIN._--This bids you put forth every ounce of energy in one big
endeavor: then, success will be yours.

_CIGAR._--Some of your schemes may "end in smoke."

_CLOCK._--This signifies that you are to have an important appointment
with someone very soon.

_COMET._--A symbol to warn you against playing with fire. Beware.

_CROSS._--You may have anxiety: but it will soon pass away.

_CROWN._--Denotes great honors coming to you.

_DART._--You will shortly have a proposal of marriage. Cupid is about.

_DICE._--You will lose money if you gamble.

_DOVES._--Your trials will end when you see this welcome "messenger of
peace."

_ENVELOPE._--Good tidings are heralded.

_EYE._--Look to some other power than your own.

_FINGERPRINT._--A reminder to you to ask and you will find out a
secret.

_FISH._--This signifies good news from abroad. If the fish is
surrounded by dots you will emigrate.

_FLAG._--A splendid omen--the best of news is coming from abroad, and
you are about to experience good fortune at home.

[Illustration: No. 18._--Cross. You may have anxiety, but it will soon
pass away.]

_FOOT._--This leaf-picture denotes good news which, however, is still
far off.

_FORK._--Your life would be all the happier were you not so easily
flattered.

_GALLOWS._--Contrary to expectation, to see this picture denotes
nothing of evil significance, but is merely a warning to you to be
cautious--in fact, a kindly symbol.

_GARDEN._--Prosperous, joyful days.

_GATE._--A reminder that patience is a virtue, and that the gate to
fortune will open for you in due course.

_GIANT._--This denotes you are attempting something which is far too
big for you. Better be a successful dwarf than a gigantic failure.

_GYPSY._--An invitation to you to wish for something you dearly desire,
and your wish will be granted.

_GLOBE._--Denotes you are to take a roundabout journey leading finally
to your home.

_GLOVE._--A sign of good luck.

_GOOSE._--You will be the recipient of foolish remarks from stupid
persons, but these need cause you no concern.

_GRAPES._--From time immemorial the symbol of perfect love between
couples.

_HAIR._--A lock of hair signifies great devotion on the part of your
lover.

_HALTER._--A warning that you are too easily led, and that you must
cultivate the art of self-reliance.

_HAM._--This is a sign you will undergo a brief illness, but will make
a quick recovery.

_HAMMER._--Triumph over adversity. After enduring many knocks you will
hit the nail of success.

_HAMMOCK._--Points to the knowledge that your sailor-lover is true and
dreams of you every night.

_HAMPER._--Suggests useful and serviceable, but inexpensive, presents
are coming.

_HANDCUFFS._--This is a cogent warning to you to get rid of an evil
habit before it is too late. Little sins lead to great crimes, and no
one desires to receive the attentions of the law.

_HARP._--Count yourself very fortunate.

_HAT._--This picture, if it is a lady's hat, signifies luck, but if a
man's, it means that you may experience a slight misfortune.

_HATCHET._--This leaf-picture is a warning to take great care or you
may experience danger.

_INITIAL._--In this important leaf-picture the initials should
be carefully studied. If the initial is formed near the rim, the
significance is one of good fortune. Initials most commonly found are
those without curves. Such straight initials are--A, I, L, N, T, V, W.

_INTERROGATION MARK._--Signifies doubt. Be careful.

_KEY._--An important picture suggesting that you look deeper and more
carefully in the cup for an initial, which, when you have found it,
will unlock something that has been up till now a mystery. A closed
book will be opened for you and past enigmas unravelled.

_LABEL._--This ticket-like picture, which must not be mistaken for an
envelope, is the sign that you possess a dear friend who will one day
be "tied" to you for life.

_LACE._--Denotes you will err on a very minor and fragile matter and
make a false move on very flimsy grounds.

_LADDER._--If on the side of the cup a rise in your fortunes is
indicated.

_LADY._--Points to the fact that you will shortly make a friend of one
who will prove of great service.

[Illustration: No. 19.--A Mark of Interrogation signifies doubt: be
careful.]

_LINES._--These indicate journeys.

_LOCK._--This denotes that you can safely confide in your nearest
friend. He or she will lock your secrets in his or her bosom.

_LOCKET._--A picture denoting steadfast loyalty on the part of a friend
whom you have not seen for long months.

_LOOKING GLASS._--You are warned by this picture that the world sees
you for what you really are. Your character is mirrored for your
friends to gaze upon.

_MAN._--Denotes a visitor who will bring a gift if his arm is
outstretched. If the symbol is clear he is a dark man; if vague he is
very fair.

_MAP._--A symbol bidding you travel, for you will be sure of success
wherever you go.

_MAZE._--A regular "maze of difficulty" confronts you, but with care
you will find a way out of the labyrinth.

_MILESTONES._--You are about to win success after traveling a long and
difficult road.

_MOON._--If shown as a crescent prosperity and fortune are indicated.

_MOTORCAR._--Denotes that you will achieve a rapid success.

_MOUNTAINS._--This majestic picture signifies an arduous, lengthy, and
uphill fight against bad fortune. Set your heart to it, and toil on to
the goal.

_MOUSE._--A reminder that the little irritation you are nursing is
really a very trivial affair.

_NAVVY._--A token that you are very bookish, and fond of digging into
abstruse treatises. You are reminded that "all work and no play makes
Jack a dull boy."

_NECKLACE._--Grace and beauty of body and mind are here indicated.

_NEEDLE._--A single needle signifies you are able to withstand all the
sharp pricks of circumstances. Several needles together mean quarrels.

_PENDULUM._--Great indecision and lack of character are here indicated.

_PENNON._--To decipher this small-pointed flag is a sign that someone
on board a ship is thinking much of you.

_PENNIES._--They denote great carefulness in small details, which leads
to ultimate prosperity.

_RING._--A very important symbol. Generally speaking, it always denotes
marriage, especially if seen at the bottom of the cup, in which case
search for an initial which will reveal to a man or woman his or her
future life-partner.

_RIVERS._--These denote much peace of mind.

_ROADS._--If the roads appear in the clear they predict a speedy change
of circumstances, usually for the better.

_ROBIN._--This bird always denotes hope. If you see it you can cheer
up, as the trouble you now experience is about to pass away.

_ROCK._--A massive rock denotes great burdens. If there are a number of
small rocks easy fortune and much happiness are indicated.

_ROCKET._--Another warning against high ambition.

_ROD._--If it is long and slender you will be very fortunate.

_ROOF._--If what appears to be the roof only of a house is seen the
signification is domestic bliss.

_ROOK._--Great happiness is indicated.

_SAILOR._--Foretells that very shortly you will receive a letter from
over the sea.

_SCALES._--This picture is the token that the friend you have weighed
in the balance and found wanting is really true and just.

_SCEPTRE._--A sign of honor from royalty.

_SERPENT._--If on the side of the cup and appearing to be rising to
near the brim you may take comfort in the fact that you will shortly
receive some information which will be of use.

_SHEAVES._--A good omen of a bounteous harvest of prosperity.

_SHIELD._--A reminder that you have just escaped from a great calamity.

_SHIP._--A large ship with funnels and masts is a token of a long
journey, usually on business.

_THIMBLE._--This homely picture denotes that industry and devotion to
duty bring their own reward.

_THIN PERSON._--The figure of a very slender person is usually the sign
of very prosperous days ahead.

_THISTLE._--This striking leaf-picture is a sign that you will only
achieve success by plain living and high thinking.

_THORN._--This is always an excellent omen. Good luck and many friends
are indicated.

_TONGS._--Suggests you are of a fiery nature, and will quarrel with
your best friend.

_TONGUE._--Someone you are fond of who is far away is speaking about
you.

_TOOL._--Any instrument of manual operation denotes that hard knocks
may be coming.

_TRIANGLE._--This is a token of all-round prosperity in love.

_TRIDENT._--This is a token of success and honors in the Navy.

_WAGON._--A reminder that you are soon to undertake a long journey.

_WAITER._--This picture denotes that riches and married happiness will
come to you.

_WALKING STICK._--A warning not to lean too much on your own efforts.

_WATERFALL._--Indicates the removal of many obstructions in your path
to happiness.

_WEATHERCOCK._--This picture points to a friend who is unreliable.

_WEB._--Signifies you will one day be caught in the toils as the result
of ignoring friendly warnings.

_WELL._--This denotes you are not dipping deep enough into knowledge.


 WHEN WILL YOU MARRY?

 It has long been held that an unmarried person can tell how many years
 it will be before he or she is married, in the following manner.

 Balance a small spoon on the edge of a teacup. The spoon should be
 perfectly dry. Then, with the assistance of a second spoon, tilt drops
 of tea into the balancing spoon and count them, one by one. The number
 of drops it takes to upset the spoon reveals the number of years that
 will elapse before the wedding takes place.

[Illustration]




LUCKY AND UNLUCKY DAYS


Most of us have discovered that certain days of the week, or even the
year, are more favorable to us than others. But there are some people
who have not made this discovery. To them, the indications given in
this chapter will be of considerable interest.

_Friday--an Unlucky Day._--Fortunately, six of the seven days of the
week are charitably disposed towards the majority of us. Here and
there, a person may be found who affirms that Monday, Thursday or some
other day never did him or her a kindness; but such a remark is not
general. Friday, however, can be put on the black list, as it is a
notoriously unlucky day. Most men and women cherish a superstitious
fear of it, and this opinion has existed since the first Good Friday.
Many will never embark upon any enterprise of importance; there are
fewer marriages on this day than any other, and sailors are averse to
sailing on Friday. Many are the tales they tell of vessels which put
to sea on a Friday, and were never heard of again. If all the bank or
financial crashes of the last century were counted up, it would be
found that Friday supplied the greatest number. A lengthy list could be
added to prove that Friday is a day of bad luck.

One good thing can be said for it, however--it favors its own: for
people born on a Friday are not affected by its evil disposition.

_Unlucky Dates._--In an old calendar, astrologers indicated the
following dates as unlucky. If any of them fell on a Friday, they were
doubly unlucky:

  January 1, 2, 4, 5, 10, 17, 29--very unlucky.
  February 26, 27, 28--unlucky; 8, 10, 17--very unlucky.
  March 16, 17, 20--very unlucky.
  April 7, 8, 10, 20--unlucky; 16 and 21--very unlucky.
  June 10 and 22--unlucky; 4 and 8--very unlucky.
  July 15 and 21--very unlucky.
  August 1, 29 and 30--unlucky; 19 and 20--very unlucky.
  September 2, 4, 21, 23--unlucky; 6 and 7--very unlucky.
  October 4, 16, 24--unlucky; 6, very unlucky.
  November 5, 6, 29, 30--unlucky; 15 and 20--very unlucky.
  December 15, 22--unlucky; 6, 7, and 9--very unlucky.

These were regarded as perilous days to fall ill upon, to have an
accident, to be married, to start on a journey, or commence any work.

What is most striking about this list is that the "thirteenth" does
not appear on it at all, although most people will tell you that the
thirteenth is the date they avoid more than all others.

_Lucky and Unlucky Dates depending on Birth-dates._--Much the most
accurate way of determining which dates are lucky and unlucky is by
using the portents displayed by the Signs of the Zodiac. To do this,
it is necessary to know when the individual affected was born. The
following is a list worked out on these lines:


Born--Dec. 22nd to Jan. 20th.

  -------------------------------------+------------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
    Jan.    2,  7,  8, 18, 26 and 31   |   Jan.   11, 14, 15 and 28
                                       |
    Feb.    3,  7,  9, 12, 13 and 27   |   Feb.   11, 18, 24 and 25
                                       |
    Mar.    1,  5,  7, 10, 24 and 28   |   Mar.    8, 16, 17 and 23
                                       |
    April   2,  3,  7, 16, 25 and 26   |   April  12, 13, 19 and 20
                                       |
    May     5,  6, 14, 15, 27 and 31   |   May    10, 16, 29 and 30
                                       |
    June    1, 14, 15, 18, 24 and 29   |   June    5, 13, 22 and 26
                                       |
    July    9, 12, 13, 17, 20 and 27   |   July    2, 11, 16 and 24
                                       |
    Aug.    3,  8,  9, 16, 21 and 31   |   Aug.    6, 18, 19 and 29
                                       |
    Sept.   5,  9, 14, 18, 19 and 27   |   Sept.   1,  3, 17 and 23
                                       |
    Oct.   10, 11, 16, 17, 25 and 30   |   Oct.    8, 12, 21 and 27
                                       |
    Nov.    6,  7,  8, 12, 13 and 26   |   Nov.   10, 17, 18 and 25
                                       |
    Dec.    3,  8,  9, 19, 24 and 31   |   Dec.    2,  6, 11 and 30
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------


Born--Jan. 21st to Feb. 19th

  -------------------------------------+------------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
    Jan.    1,  5,  9, 10, 15 and 20   |   Jan.    2, 19, 24 and 31
                                       |
    Feb.    2,  5,  6, 11, 16 and 29   |   Feb.   13, 20, 26 and 27
                                       |
    Mar.    3,  6,  7, 10, 17 and 30   |   Mar.   11, 19, 24 and 25
                                       |
    April   4,  5, 10, 20, 23 and 29   |   April   7, 14, 15 and 24
                                       |
    May     7,  8, 16, 17, 25 and 31   |   May     4, 12, 18 and 19
                                       |
    June    5, 12, 17, 18, 25 and 26   |   June    1,  2, 28 and 29
                                       |
    July   10, 11, 19, 22, 23 and 28   |   July    5, 12, 13 and 26
                                       |
    Aug.   10, 14, 19, 20, 24 and 25   |   Aug.    2, 22, 23 and 27
                                       |
    Sept.  10, 11, 12, 22, 29 and 30   |   Sept.   4,  5, 19 and 25
                                       |
    Oct.    1,  3,  9, 13, 27 and 28   |   Oct.    2,  8, 11 and 26
                                       |
    Nov.    4,  5, 10, 15, 23 and 28   |   Nov.   11, 18, 26 and 27
                                       |
    Dec.    7,  8, 13, 21, 25 and 27   |   Dec.    9, 16, 17 and 24
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------


Born--Feb. 20th to March 20th

  -------------------------------------+-----------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
    Jan.    5,  7,  9, 21, 22 and 27   |   Jan.    8, 16, 23 and 28
                                       |
    Feb.    4,  7,  9, 20, 21 and 26   |   Feb.    5, 10, 22 and 25
                                       |
    Mar.    5,  6, 12, 13, 17 and 29   |   Mar.   11, 15, 18 and 26
                                       |
    April   6,  8, 11, 15, 22 and 30   |   April   9, 12, 20 and 23
                                       |
    May     8, 14, 15, 19, 24 and 29   |   May     4, 17, 20 and 28
                                       |
    June   10, 11, 19, 21, 23 and 27   |   June    6, 18, 24 and 28
                                       |
    July   11, 15, 20, 22, 24 and 31   |   July    8, 21, 25 and 26
                                       |
    Aug.   13, 16, 17, 20, 28 and 30   |   Aug.    4,  5, 19 and 25
                                       |
    Sept.  15, 17, 19, 24, 27 and 28   |   Sept.   3,  8, 18 and 26
                                       |
    Oct.   17, 19, 20, 21, 29 and 30   |   Oct.    4,  6,  8 and 28
                                       |
    Nov.    8,  9, 10, 14, 19 and 21   |   Nov.    1, 12, 18 and 24
                                       |
    Dec.    3,  7,  9, 13, 22 and 28   |   Dec.   11, 16, 20 and 29
  -------------------------------------+-----------------------------


Born--March 21st to April 19th

  -------------------------------------+-----------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
    Jan.    1,  5,  9, 23, 27 and 28   |   Jan.   6, 16, 26 and 29
                                       |
    Feb.    2,  5, 10, 19, 25 and 29   |   Feb.   8, 15, 16 and 23
                                       |
    Mar.    4,  9, 10, 19, 20 and 31   |   Mar.   3,  6, 15 and 21
                                       |
    April   1,  5, 14, 15, 19 and 28   |   April  2,  3, 17 and 30
                                       |
    May     3, 12, 13, 18, 21 and 31   |   May    8, 14, 27 and 28
                                       |
    June    3,  7, 17, 18, 25 and 27   |   June   4,  5, 23 and 26
                                       |
    July    1,  6, 14, 23, 28 and 29   |   July   2,  4, 30 and 31
                                       |
    Aug.    2, 10, 11, 24, 25 and 26   |   Aug.   6, 12, 22 and 23
                                       |
    Sept.   7, 10, 11, 12, 21 and 25   |   Sept.  2, 23, 24 and 26
                                       |
    Oct.    3,  9, 13, 17, 19 and 31   |   Oct.   6, 14, 26 and 27
                                       |
    Nov.    1,  5,  8, 14, 20 and 30   |   Nov.   6, 18, 22 and 29
                                       |
    Dec.    1, 13, 25, 26, 27 and 31   |   Dec.   6, 12, 22 and 28
  -------------------------------------+----------------------------


Born--Feb. 20th to March 20th

  -------------------------------------+------------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
    Jan.    5,  7,  9, 21, 22 and 27   |   Jan.    8, 16, 23 and 28
                                       |
    Feb.    4,  7,  9, 20, 21 and 26   |   Feb.    5, 10, 22 and 25
                                       |
    Mar.    5,  6, 12, 13, 17 and 29   |   Mar.   11, 15, 18 and 26
                                       |
    April   6,  8, 11, 15, 22 and 30   |   April   9, 12, 20 and 23
                                       |
    May     8, 14, 15, 19, 24 and 29   |   May     4, 17, 20 and 28
                                       |
    June   10, 11, 19, 21, 23 and 27   |   June    6, 18, 24 and 28
                                       |
    July   11, 15, 20, 22, 24 and 31   |   July    8, 21, 25 and 26
                                       |
    Aug.   13, 16, 17, 20, 28 and 30   |   Aug.    4,  5, 19 and 25
                                       |
    Sept.  15, 17, 19, 24, 27 and 28   |   Sept.   3,  8, 18 and 26
                                       |
    Oct.   17, 19, 20, 21, 29 and 30   |   Oct.    4,  6,  8 and 28
                                       |
    Nov.    8,  9, 10, 14, 19 and 21   |   Nov.    1, 12, 18 and 24
                                       |
    Dec.    3,  7,  9, 13, 22 and 28   |   Dec.   11, 16, 20 and 29
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------


Born--March 21st to April 19th

  -------------------------------------+------------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
    Jan.    1,  5,  9, 23, 27 and 28   |   Jan.    6, 16, 26 and 29
                                       |
    Feb.    2,  5, 10, 19, 25 and 29   |   Feb.    8, 15, 16 and 23
                                       |
    Mar.    4,  9, 10, 19, 20 and 31   |   Mar.    3,  6, 15 and 21
                                       |
    April   1,  5, 14, 15, 19 and 28   |   April   2,  3, 17 and 30
                                       |
    May     3, 12, 13, 18, 21 and 31   |   May     8, 14, 27 and 28
                                       |
    June    3,  7, 17, 18, 25 and 27   |   June    4,  5, 23 and 26
                                       |
    July    1,  6, 14, 23, 28 and 29   |   July    2,  4, 30 and 31
                                       |
    Aug.    2, 10, 11, 24, 25 and 26   |   Aug.    6, 12, 22 and 23
                                       |
    Sept.   7, 10, 11, 12, 21 and 25   |   Sept.   2, 23, 24 and 26
                                       |
    Oct.    3,  9, 13, 17, 19 and 31   |   Oct.    6, 14, 26 and 27
                                       |
    Nov.    1,  5,  8, 14, 20 and 30   |   Nov.    6, 18, 22 and 29
                                       |
    Dec.    1, 13, 25, 26, 27 and 31   |   Dec.    6, 12, 22 and 28
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------


Born--June 22nd to July 22nd

  -------------------------------------+-----------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |       Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
    Jan.   3,  9, 11, 13, 16 and 29    |   Jan.   6,  8, 27 and 28
                                       |
    Feb.   7,  8, 13, 14, 22 and 27    |   Feb.   3, 11, 24 and 25
                                       |
    Mar.   5,  7, 12, 20, 21 and 25    |   Mar.   1,  4, 22 and 26
                                       |
    April  2,  7,  8, 12, 13 and 29    |   April  5, 19, 20 and 25
                                       |
    May    1,  5, 10, 11, 18 and 19    |   May    3, 17, 23 and 30
                                       |
    June   2,  7, 10, 15, 24 and 28    |   June  13, 19, 20 and 22
                                       |
    July   3,  4,  7, 20, 22 and 25    |   July  10, 13, 23 and 28
                                       |
    Aug.   5,  8,  9, 21, 22 and 30    |   Aug.   7, 12, 19 and 20
                                       |
    Sept.  5, 12, 13, 19, 27 and 28    |   Sept.  3, 10, 16 and 17
                                       |
    Oct.   1,  3, 11, 15, 16 and 30    |   Oct.   7, 14, 27 and 28
                                       |
    Nov.   6,  7, 16, 17, 27 and 30    |   Nov.   8,  9, 18 and 19
                                       |
    Dec.   4,  9, 13, 24, 30 and 31    |   Dec.   6,  7, 18 and 21
  -------------------------------------+-----------------------------


Born--July 23rd to August 21st

  -------------------------------------+-----------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |       Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
    Jan.   1,  4, 13, 15, 18 and 27    |   Jan.   3,  8, 12 and 30
                                       |
    Feb.   1, 15, 20, 24, 25 and 29    |   Feb.   8, 12, 21 and 28
                                       |
    Mar.   9, 18, 19, 20, 21 and 28    |   Mar.  12, 22, 24 and 25
                                       |
    April  1,  5, 10, 11, 18 and 23    |   April  7,  8, 16 and 22
                                       |
    May    2,  3,  6, 12, 13 and 31    |   May    5, 18, 19 and 24
                                       |
    June   3,  4, 13, 17, 26 and 30    |   June   2, 14, 21 and 22
                                       |
    July   2,  6,  9, 14, 23 and 29    |   July  12, 13, 24 and 25
                                       |
    Aug.   3,  7, 10, 23, 25 and 30    |   Aug.   9, 14, 21 and 22
                                       |
    Sept.  3, 15, 16, 22, 26 and 29    |   Sept.  5, 17, 18 and 19
                                       |
    Oct.   1, 13, 17, 27, 28 and 31    |   Oct.   9, 14, 15 and 29
                                       |
    Nov.   9, 10, 15, 20, 23 and 27    |   Nov.   5, 12, 13 and 17
                                       |
    Dec.   7, 11, 16, 18, 22 and 26    |   Dec.   3,  9, 23 and 28
  -------------------------------------+-----------------------------


Born--August 22nd to September 22nd

  -------------------------------------+------------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
  Jan.      1,  3,  9, 15, 20 and 31   |   Jan.    4, 11, 18 and 19
                                       |
  Feb.      3, 12, 13, 18, 23 and 27   |   Feb.    8, 15, 16 and 29
                                       |
  Mar.      1, 11, 20, 21, 28 and 29   |   Mar.    6,  7, 26 and 27
                                       |
  April     7,  8, 15, 17, 24 and 25   |   April   2,  3,  9 and 29
                                       |
  May       4,  7, 10, 18, 22 and 31   |   May     8, 21, 27 and 28
                                       |
  June      1,  6,  7, 11, 15 and 29   |   June    3,  9, 16 and 24
                                       |
  July      4,  9, 10, 17, 25 and 30   |   July    2, 14, 20 and 22
                                       |
  Aug.      3,  5, 12, 22, 28 and 29   |   Aug.   10, 17, 18 and 23
                                       |
  Sept.     4,  9, 10, 22, 23 and 28   |   Sept.   7,  8, 17 and 21
                                       |
  Oct.      1,  2, 11, 12, 25 and 30   |   Oct.    4,  8, 14 and 20
                                       |
  Nov.     17, 18, 22, 23, 25 and 30   |   Nov.    5,  7, 12 and 21
                                       |
  Dec.      9, 10, 18, 23, 26 and 28   |   Dec.    4,  5,  6 and 14
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------


Born--September 23rd to October 23rd

  -------------------------------------+------------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
  Jan.      1,  5,  9, 19, 20 and 27   |   Jan.    6,  7, 21 and 23
                                       |
  Feb.      2,  6, 15, 20, 24 and 29   |   Feb.   11, 17, 19 and 22
                                       |
  Mar.      4, 14, 18, 23, 27 and 31   |   Mar.    2,  9, 10 and 28
                                       |
  April     1, 15, 19, 23, 24 and 28   |   April   4,  5, 14 and 26
                                       |
  May       7,  8, 12, 17, 21 and 24   |   May     3,  9, 23 and 29
                                       |
  June      8, 12, 13, 16, 22 and 30   |   June    7, 19, 20 and 27
                                       |
  July      4, 14, 19, 20, 23 and 28   |   July   10, 17, 27 and 29
                                       |
  Aug.      1,  7, 10, 11, 15 and 30   |   Aug.   12, 13, 22 and 27
                                       |
  Sept.     3,  6, 11, 20, 22 and 29   |   Sept.   8, 16, 17 and 24
                                       |
  Oct.      4,  5, 17, 22, 24 and 27   |   Oct.    8, 12, 20 and 21
                                       |
  Nov.      1,  4,  6, 14, 19 and 26   |   Nov.    9, 17, 28 and 29
                                       |
  Dec.      3, 12, 13, 21, 25 and 29   |   Dec.    4,  7, 15 and 19
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------


Born--October 24th to November 22nd

  -------------------------------------+------------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
  Jan.      2,  3,  7,  8, 22 and 30   |   Jan.   10, 16, 18 and 24
                                       |
  Feb.      3,  9, 17, 18, 24 and 27   |   Feb.    1, 12, 14 and 20
                                       |
  Mar.      1,  6, 15, 20, 25 and 29   |   Mar.    3, 11, 19 and 30
                                       |
  April     2,  3, 12, 17, 21 and 29   |   April   7,  8, 26 and 28
                                       |
  May       5, 10, 11, 15, 19 and 27   |   May     4,  6, 24 and 26
                                       |
  June      6, 11, 15, 19, 23 and 25   |   June    2,  8, 26 and 28
                                       |
  July      4,  7,  9, 17, 21 and 30   |   July    3,  8, 19 and 31
                                       |
  Aug.      5,  9, 13, 17, 18 and 27   |   Aug.    2, 12, 22 and 28
                                       |
  Sept.     9, 10, 12, 23, 27 and 28   |   Sept.  11, 14, 18 and 29
                                       |
  Oct.      2,  3, 11, 20, 25 and 29   |   Oct.    8,  9, 22 and 24
                                       |
  Nov.      2,  6, 16, 17, 23 and 30   |   Nov.    5, 12, 18 and 29
                                       |
  Dec.      2,  5, 18, 19, 24 and 27   |   Dec.    3,  6, 16 and 18
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------


Born--November 23rd to December 21st

  -------------------------------------+------------------------------
            Lucky Dates:               |        Unlucky Dates:
                                       |
  Jan.      1,  9, 14, 15, 23 and 24   |   Jan.    6, 12, 18 and 22
                                       |
  Feb.      3,  5,  7, 19, 21 and 28   |   Feb.    8, 15, 16 and 23
                                       |
  Mar.      5,  8, 10, 19, 23 and 31   |   Mar.    6,  7, 15 and 21
                                       |
  April     4, 14, 15, 19, 20 and 28   |   April   3, 18, 22 and 26
                                       |
  May       1, 12, 16, 20, 26 and 31   |   May     7, 14, 15 and 27
                                       |
  June      7,  8, 13, 17, 21 and 25   |   June    3, 11, 23 and 24
                                       |
  July      6, 11, 15, 21, 22 and 25   |   July    7, 20, 23 and 29
                                       |
  Aug.      3,  6,  7, 14, 15 and 29   |   Aug.    4, 12, 18 and 28
                                       |
  Sept.     1, 10, 12, 15, 26 and 29   |   Sept.  13, 17, 20 and 22
                                       |
  Oct.      4,  5, 22, 23, 27 and 31   |   Oct.   11, 12, 18 and 26
                                       |
  Nov.      9, 19, 20, 23, 24 and 28   |   Nov.    6, 14, 15 and 22
                                       |
  Dec.      3,  7,  8, 17, 22 and 25   |   Dec.    6, 11, 18 and 28
  -------------------------------------+------------------------------

It should be noted in connection with the above figures that no
birth-date is unlucky. Thus, should any particular reader find that
his birthday is given as unlucky, he may transfer it immediately to
the list of lucky dates. As an example, take the last line of unlucky
figures, given above. They are Dec. 6, 11, 18 and 28, and they operate
for people born between Nov. 23rd and Dec. 21st. Should a person born
on Dec. 6th be consulting this list, the only unlucky dates in December
for him or her are Dec. 11, 18 and 28.




THE LUCK OF FLOWERS


It has been a favorite pastime with maidens in all ages to try to
foretell their future by the aid of flowers and plants.

One of the most popular fancies is provided by the four-leaved clover,
the story of which is told in various legends. One runs to the effect
that three beautiful sisters, Faith, Hope and Charity, came from over
the seas, and wherever they walked three-leaved clovers, crimson, white
and yellow, bloomed profusely. In their footsteps came another more
beautiful being, whose name was Love, and in his honor the clover added
a fourth petal to the trefoil.

In time, it became the talisman of love-sick maidens, who wore it in
their shoe to ensure a speedy meeting with their sweetheart, wore it
over their heart to frighten away evil spirits and to prevent being
jilted. In the case of a quarrel, it served to effect a reconciliation.

Apart from its sentimental associations, a four-leaved clover has long
been regarded as an emblem of good luck, and has been worn by those who
believe in such things when they wished to increase their chances of
good fortune.

_SPRING FLOWERS._--Naturally, many beliefs flourish around the flowers
of the garden and the hedgerow.

If you chance to find the first flower of the season on a Monday, it
means good luck.

If on a Tuesday, big undertakings are likely to be successful.

If on a Wednesday, it denotes your approaching wedding.

If on a Thursday, hard work with little profit will fall to your lot.

If on a Friday, unexpected wealth reaches you.

If on a Saturday, you may look out for misfortune.

If on a Sunday, phenomenal good luck will come to you.

_THE FIRST WILD FLOWER._--From the first wild flowers which you gather
in spring, it is possible to discover the initials of your future
husband or wife. If, for instance, they should chance to be daisies,
violets and buttercups, then expect to find some suitable person with
the initials D. V. B., but they may not be necessarily in this order.

If someone presents you with a yellow flower, then you may expect a
gift of money directly.

If you can turn a bluebell inside out without breaking it, then your
lover will be true as long as both of you live.

[Illustration: No. 21.]

_THE PANSY._--If you wish to know your future destiny, pluck a pansy,
which takes its name from _pensee_, a thought. Count the streaks or
lines upon the petals.

Four streaks tell that your dearest wish will be fulfilled.

Five streaks stand for hope with fear.

Six streaks suggest a surprise.

Seven streaks tell of constancy in your lover.

Eight streaks, fickleness.

Nine streaks, a change and then riches.

Markings leaning towards the left denote trouble.

Markings leaning to the right denote prosperity.

Should the central streak be the longest, then Sunday should be chosen
as your wedding day.

_THE DAISY._--One of the oldest of flower charms is to pluck at the
petals of a daisy or marguerite. At first pluck, these words are said,
"He loves me"; at the second, "He loves me not." These sentences are
repeated alternately until the flower is deprived of all its petals.
Whichever sentence was uttered last describes "his" affections.

_THE IVY._--

    Ivy, ivy, I thee pluck,
    And in my bosom, I thee put.
    The first young man who speaks to me
    My own true lover he shall be.

[Illustration: No. 22.]

_THE HAWTHORN OR MAY._--Once upon a time, every porch was decorated
with a branch of May to avert the evil eye and prevent witchcraft, but
the idea has been departed from, and now it is regarded as a harbinger
of ill-luck, and is rarely brought inside a house.

_THE MISTLETOE._--From very ancient times, this plant has been regarded
with curious veneration. Probably it gained special fame, in the first
instance, owing to the peculiar manner in which it grew. The Druids
looked upon it as a plant possessing marvelous properties, and they
esteemed nothing in the world more sacred than it. They gathered it
when the moon was just six days old because the moon was then thought
to be at its greatest power. This done, they sacrificed two young
bullocks which were milk-white. After that, the mistletoe was cut into
small pieces with the aid of a golden hook or bill and distributed
among the people present. These took it home and suspended it in a
prominent place to ward off evil spirits. From these associations,
the mistletoe has become an emblem under which young people may kiss,
without any evil coming to them through their act.

_HOLLY_ is used as a Christmas decoration because the Romans chose
it to hang in their houses on the fast in honor of Saturn. Friends
gave bunches of it to those whom they wished to endow with luck and
happiness, probably because the prickly leaves symbolized the crown of
thorns worn by Christ and the red berries the blood of the cross.


BIRTHDAY FLOWERS

Just as there are birth stones, so there are flowers which stand for
each month of the year. By wearing the blossom named for your month,
you may count on good fortune as the result.

_JANUARY._--The Snowdrop which is the emblem of purity, hope and
gentleness.

_FEBRUARY._--The Violet, the emblem of modesty, kindness and faith.

_MARCH._--The Daffodil, the emblem of daintiness, sincerity and
graciousness.

_APRIL._--The Primrose, the emblem of lovers.

_MAY._--The White Lily, the emblem of purity and sweetness.

_JUNE._--The Wild Rose, the emblem of love and loyalty.

_JULY._--The Carnation, the emblem of kindly thoughts.

_AUGUST._--The White Heather, the emblem of luck and the best of good
fortune.

_SEPTEMBER._--The Michaelmas Daisy, the emblem of riches and happiness.

_OCTOBER._--The Rosemary, the emblem of remembrance and kind thoughts.

_NOVEMBER._--The Chrysanthemum, the emblem of faith and truth.

_DECEMBER._--The Ivy, the emblem of loyalty, fidelity and faithfulness.


THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS

For many generations, certain flowers have been accepted as having
definite meanings. Thus, a gift of any of the examples listed below,
may be taken to infer whatever description is appended.

  _CAMELLIA._--Beauty, loveliness.
  _CANDYTUFT._--Indifference, lack of affection.
  _CARNATION_ (Red).--Alas for my poor heart!
  _CARNATION_ (White).--Disregard, disdain.
  _CLOVER_ (Four-leaved).--Be mine.
  _COLUMBINE._--Foolishness.
  _DAISY._--Innocence, purity.
  _DEADLY NIGHTSHADE._--Falsehood, untrue.
  _FERN._--You fascinate me.
  _FORGET-ME-NOT._--The same as the name.
  _FOXGLOVE._--I bow down to you.
  _GERANIUM._--To console you.
  _GOLDEN ROD._--Be on your guard.
  _HELIOTROPE._--I am devoted to you.
  _HYACINTH_ (White).--Your beauty is recognized.
  _IVY._--Faithfulness. I cling to you.
  _LILY_ (White).--Sweetness.
  _LILY_ (Yellow).--Gay, happy, joyful.
  _LILY OF THE VALLEY._--Happiness will return.
  _MIGNONETTE._--Your qualities are even greater than your charms.
  _MYRTLE._--Love.
  _ORANGE BLOSSOM._--Chastity.
  _PANSY._--Thoughts.
  _PASSION FLOWER._--Willing to suffer hardships for you.
  _PEACH BLOSSOM._--I am captivated by you.
  _PRIMROSE._--A token of love.
  _ROSE._--A token of love, also.
  _ROSE_ (Red).--Bashful, shy.
  _ROSE_ (White).--I will be worthy of you.
  _ROSE_ (Yellow).--Jealousy.
  _ROSEBUDS._--A confession of great love.
  _SWEET PEA._--Leave me and depart, or I leave you.
  _VERBENA._--Pray for me.


COMBINATIONS OF FLOWERS

In order to convey definite phrases, lovers have long been used to
resorting to certain combinations of flowers. A bunch made up of them
has the meaning which we print below.

_DAISY AND MIGNONETTE._--Your qualities surpass even your great beauty.

_FERNS AND LILY OF THE VALLEY._--You are sweet and charming, and you
fascinate me.

_IVY LEAVES AND YELLOW ROSE._--Your jealousy has put an end to our
friendship.

_COLUMBINE, DAISY AND LILY._--You have played false and broken our
friendship.

_PINK AND LAUREL LEAVES._--Your high qualities have been noticed by me.

_GOLDEN ROD, SWEET PEA AND FORGET-ME-NOT._--Danger is at hand, be
careful. I go away but do not forget me.




SUPERSTITIONS REGARDING ANIMALS


_SERPENTS._--These creatures have been regarded from very different
angles, according to the time and the country. The story of the serpent
in the Garden of Eden has caused many people to detest them: but
numerous are the references in histories which go to show that serpents
and snakes have been reverenced. In ancient Rome, the serpent was a
household god: at other times, it was regarded as a symbol of life and
vitality, and it was frequently used as a medium for healing the sick.
In India, this creature is looked upon as a mascot for time and wisdom.
Thus, it is worn by fanatics as a part of their headgear, and people
make metal replicas and wear them as rings, bracelets, etc. Clearly,
then, serpents have found more favor than disapproval, and they may be
counted as mascots, standing for wisdom, long life and good health.

_CATS._--Cats, the most domestic of animals, are regarded with mixed
feelings. Generally speaking, they are supposed to be unlucky, though
oddly enough a black cat is credited with good qualities when it takes
up its abode in a house. This is due to the fact that, during the
Middle Ages, black cats were supposed to be associated with witches and
in league with the evil one. As a result, people treated them kindly
and showered favors on them, not because they liked them, but because
they thought that this treatment would avert bad luck.

The person who drowns or kills a cat may look for ill-fortune for nine
years. Bad luck attends the vessel or ship on which a cat is found, but
on no account may the creature be thrown overboard after the vessel has
sailed. This would only make matters worse.

If a cat leaves a house, it is supposed to take the luck with it, and
leave nothing but bad fortune behind. If a white cat enters a home, it
announces trouble and sickness. A cat licking itself all over signifies
fair weather, but if it merely washes its face, it means the approach
of rain or storms.

_DOGS._--A dog howling under a window indicates death.

    Dogs begin in jest and end in earnest.

    A dog, a woman, a walnut tree,
       The more you beat 'em, the better they be.

    If a dog bark, go in: if a bitch, go out.

    A dog will bark ere he bite.

_HARES._--If a hare crosses your path, you may look out for a
disappointment. If it runs past houses, there will soon be a fire in
one of them.

In the Isle of Man, hares are believed to be the spirits of old women,
and on that account are shunned as articles of food. In other parts,
those who wish to look beautiful for a week make a point of eating
hare.

_BIRDS._--Robins are variously regarded in different parts of the
country. Some people think them unlucky, possibly because of their
association with the tragedy of the Babes in the Wood. But generally
they are welcomed to a garden or house, which is supposed to be all the
luckier for their coming. Robins that show signs of being friendly are
considered to foretell a hard winter.

Woodpeckers and kingfishers are also lucky, and any suggestion of
ill-luck is only possible when birds are deliberately killed after
having built their nest and claimed the hospitality of a home.

The screech of a peacock is best unheard when luck is particularly
wanted. The feathers of this bird, known to everyone by reason of their
beautiful coloring, should never be taken indoors, as they are reckoned
specially unlucky.

There is an old superstition regarding the cuckoo. Should a maiden,
hearing its notes for the first time that season, kiss her hand to it
and say:--

    Cuckoo, cuckoo,
    Tell me true,
    When shall I be married?

she may tell the number of years which will elapse until her wedding by
counting the number of times the bird cries "Cuckoo." She must reckon
each cry as a year.

Another superstition relating to the cuckoo is that what you are doing
when you hear its cries for the first time in any season is what you
will spend most time at during the remainder of the year. Folk in the
Channel Islands claim that they are sure to be fortunate if they jingle
their purses and run a short distance when hearing the cuckoo for the
first time in the year.

Owls, crows and magpies do not presage any good: in fact, many people
would rather not meet them when anxiety is at hand. An old jingle says
of magpies:--

    One for anger,
        Two for mirth;
    Three for a wedding
        Four for a birth.

Ravens are supposed to bring luck to the house where they build their
nests, so it is unlucky to kill one.

It is unlucky to touch a yellowhammer in May, since there is the
devil's blood in it then.

For a white pigeon to single out a house and hover round it is a sure
sign of an early marriage or engagement in that house.

A cock crowing during the night-time means a bad illness for someone
close at hand: if it crows during the afternoon, a visitor will arrive.

Sailors are not over-fond of seagulls, believing them to be the spirits
of their dead mates, yet they are most indignant if anyone tries to
shoot or kill one of them.

_OTHER ANIMALS._--A cricket singing within a house ensures good luck
for all the household.

Kill a spider and it will surely rain.

See a moth on your clothes and you will get new ones.

A death's head moth indicates bereavement.

Pigs are unlucky creatures when seen singly.

To see a white horse and then, shortly after, a red-haired person,
tells of approaching good fortune.

Moles are unlucky to find alive.

Of bees, the following rhyme is prophetic:--

    A swarm of bees in May
    Is worth a load of hay.
    A swarm of bees in June
    Is worth a silver spoon.
    A swarm of bees in July
    Is not worth a fly.

Country people are still given to treating bees as if they belonged
to the family. For instance, not a few folk tell the bees of the
betrothal, marriage and other outstanding events happening in the home.


PROPHECIES REGARDING ANIMALS

  (a) When black snails cross your path
      Black clouds much moisture hath.

  (b) When the peacock loudly bawls,
      Soon we'll have both rain and squalls.

  (c) When rooks fly sporting high in air,
      It shows that windy storms are near.

  (d) Bees will not swarm before a near storm.

  (e) When the cuckoo comes to the bare thorn,
      Sell your cow and buy your corn.
      But when she comes to the full bit,
      Sell your corn and buy some sheep.

  (f) Little bantams are great at crowing.

  (g) Good luck for a grey horse.

  (h) Let a horse drink what he will, not when he will.

  (i) Trust not a horse's heel, nor a dog's tooth.

  (j) Plenty of ladybirds, plenty of hops.

  (k) Never offer your hen for sale on a rainy day.

  (l) When the glow-worm lights her lamp,
      The air is always damp.

  (m) Unlucky to hear the cuckoo sing sitting.
      Or to sit and see the first swallow flitting.




CRYSTAL GAZING


Before we start this chapter, will you just take a look at the
following short list of terms used in crystal gazing and spiritualism?
You will find that they will make what follows quite clear, and that
they will be useful to refer to.

_SPIRITUALISTIC._--Belonging to the spirit world.

_SECOND SIGHT._--The power which all have (but few develop). The power
to see the future and other things with the spirit eye.

_AURA._--The circle of thought which each one of us is unconsciously
sending out by our characters and personalities.

_THE CRYSTAL._--Any object which helps to fix our attention; i.e., a
crystal, a bowl of water, shining metal. There is nothing about the
crystal that is magical by itself.

_PSYCHIC PERSONS._--Persons possessing second sight.


LOOKING INTO THE FUTURE

It is believed that this portion of the book will be found particularly
interesting because it is here that we touch upon spiritualism, perhaps
one of the most talked-of subjects of today.

In crystal gazing we actually see many things happen which maybe have
not happened as yet. In palmistry and astrology we see the signs but
not the actual events. Another distinct difference is that in crystal
gazing it is impossible to give definite instructions as to how to
receive these messages or visions because there is no "how."

What we hope to do in this chapter is to show you that perhaps you
possess powers of which you know nothing. Without making the foolish
mistake of taking this subject too seriously, you will be able to
interest and amuse your friends.

You may say, "But I haven't got this power--I could never see anything
in a crystal."

Don't say that, and don't think it! We all have a little of this power
sleeping within us. If we wish to improve it, we must use and practise
it, but don't overdo the thing.

To understand crystal gazing even a little, it is quite important to
know just a few simple facts about spiritualism (the study of the
spirit world.) This second sight, or clairvoyance (call it what you
will) is merely in its childhood as yet. A very short while ago we
should have thought it a miracle for anyone to speak from New York
to London along a wire. Now we think no more of it than we should of
crossing a road!

So with the crystal. At present a few of us only are able to see, more
or less clearly, those visions of the future. Who knows but that in
some future time we shall consider this quite an ordinary and natural
thing to do, just like telephoning, for instance.

The first thing to get hold of is this: we have not one body but two.
An earthly body and its exact copy in a spirit body. By this I do
not mean the soul, but rather our earthly body with all its features
just as before, is copied in a spirit of ether body. This may sound
difficult, but just try to grasp the idea.

In spiritualism there are two of each one of us; one an earthly you,
the other (dwelling usually in your earthly body) a spiritual you. But
sometimes this spirit body escapes from its earthly prison, maybe,
during sleep, sometimes when we look into the crystal, and sometimes
in what is called a trance or artificial sleep. It is then (when the
spirit body is free) that visions of future things are seen, and maybe
premonitions (or feelings) of the future are felt.

Our spirit body, with its ten thousand times more clear-sighted eyes,
sees things which are invisible to the earthly eyes. This body is able
to travel swiftly from place to place, although it always keeps a link
or connection with its earthly double.

When a person goes off into a trance, this is what has happened. The
earthly body sleeps while the spiritual body roams about the future,
past and present, or perhaps visits distant places. It is, of course,
able to speak with other spirit bodies, and thus get information about
other folk who have "passed over," as the spiritualists call death.

Now perhaps you can better appreciate the wonderful stories which you
hear about mediums (people who pass into these trances), who have
spoken--or are alleged to have spoken, for the verdict of science is
"Not proven"--with the voices of folk long dead, and whom they have
never seen.

While everyone does not actively possess this power of releasing his
spirit body, we all have it. That this is true can be seen in several
ways. Have you never had a presentiment or feeling of evil to come, a
strong feeling which it took all your determination and common sense to
drive away? Anyway, you will have frequently heard other people saying,
"I had a feeling that so-and-so would happen."

That feeling is explained by this wandering of the spirit body; for a
short time we have had our spirit eyes freely opened, and have gained
a glimpse of the unknown. As our spirit eyes are as yet undeveloped it
is but a glimpse, then down falls the thick curtain, and the mystery is
once more hidden from us!

Just as some children learn to walk more easily than others, so do some
people learn to walk with their spirit body and to speak the spirit
language more quickly than others.

Which seems very natural, doesn't it?

Let us briefly refresh our minds with the absolutely necessary facts
which you must know to understand the first steps in fortunetelling by
the crystal. What we are going to say next will then be more readily
understood:--

_FIRSTLY._--We have not one body but two, an earthly and a spiritual
body.

_SECONDLY._--Though normally contained in the earthly body, it is
possible for the spirit to escape from its prison, and pass from place
to place at a speed greater than light. This occurs during sleep, the
artificial or forced sleep of the trance, and also when one gazes into
the crystal.

_THIRDLY._--We have four eyes. Two earthly eyes, and two very much
keener spirit eyes. It is with these spirit eyes that we see the future
and the past in the crystal.

_FOURTHLY._--Each one of us is sending out thought-waves at this
moment. These are known by spiritualists as our aura. It is found
in different colors, which depend on our characters or the thoughts
leaving us. Certain reds show rage, for instance.


WHAT THE CRYSTAL IS FOR

The first thing to get hold of is that there is nothing magic or in any
way wonderful about the crystal itself. It is merely a means of fixing
the attention of our earthly eyes, so that we may see the more clearly
with our spirit eyes.

Now for a few hints upon actually looking into the crystal.

When you gaze into whatever object you have chosen, your earthly body
and earthly eyes pass into a more or less sleepy state, thus enabling
your spirit body to escape. That gives us our first point to remember.

Here it is: When you look into the crystal, whatever you do don't worry
about whether or not you will see anything! Try to think steadily of
what you wish to see; this will at first seem hard, but practice will
help you, and practice makes perfect.

Then remember to keep any glare of light from the eyes; it is wise to
sit with one's back towards the light. Let your surroundings be quiet
and peaceful; there must be absolutely nothing which may catch your
attention and so take it off the crystal. If, for instance, a noisy bus
or other vehicle were to pass during the time in which you were making
your attempt, it would probably disturb things very much.

One should never be discouraged if nothing whatever is seen at the
first few attempts. A puppy cannot at first see out of its eyes, and it
is the same with a beginner in crystal gazing; his spirit eyes may take
some little time to open, while others, more fortunate, may find theirs
open almost at once. Never strain the eyes in an unwinking stare. Let
them wink and blink quite naturally. To do anything else would be sure
to take your attention from the picture which you wish to see.


HOW TO BEGIN

The best thing to do is to try these various methods, and then see for
yourself which is the most successful in your own individual case.

Here are a few means you might try, in order to test this for yourself.

Use either a (1) crystal, (2) a polished object, (3) a bright coin,
(4) a sparkling gem, or (5) ordinary glass in the shape of a sphere or
ball. There are others, but they are not important.

In conclusion, it will be of interest to know just what you may expect
to see when, and if, your spirit eyes open. Probably a misty, fogged
appearance will first be seen in the crystal. This will remain for some
little time, until finally the scene or person (whatever it may be)
will appear. The latter may be faint and dim, or it may be clear-cut
like a good photograph.

The clearness or otherwise will depend among other things upon the
keenness of sight of the spirit eye. It will also be influenced by the
degree of quiet, and upon the absence of anything likely to disturb the
searcher in the realms of the future.




THE MOON AND THE LUCK IT BRINGS


People of all ages have looked upon the moon as a provider of good and
bad luck, and most of us have probably noticed that it has influenced
our actions, at times. Here are some of the beliefs that are centuries
old.

If you see a new moon over your right shoulder, it means that you will
experience good luck all the month.

If you have money in your pocket and you meet the new moon face to
face, turn the money over and you will not run short of money that
month.

It is unlucky to see the new moon through glass. If you do, go out of
doors, curtsey three times to the moon and turn some silver in your
hand. This will break the spell which will be cast over you if you do
not do as directed. There is one little point, connected with this
superstition, which has set us thinking. What of all those individuals
who wear glasses? We do not know the answer.

There is a strongly prevalent idea that everything falling to the lot
of man when the moon is waxing will increase or prosper; but things
decrease and do not prosper when the moon is on the wane.

Irish colleens were wont to drop on their knees when they first caught
sight of the new moon, and say, "Oh, moon, leave us as well as you have
found us." And, long ago, Yorkshire maidens "did worship the new moon
on their bent knees, kneeling upon the earth-cast stone."

If the full moon known as the Harvest Moon appears watery, it is an
ill sign for the harvest. (The Harvest Moon is due about the middle of
September.)

If the moon shows a silver shield, be not afraid to reap your field:
but if she rises haloed round, soon we'll tread on deluged ground.

If the moon changes on a Sunday there will be a flood before the month
is out.

A Saturday moon, if it comes once in seven years, comes too soon.

A fog and a small moon bring an easterly wind soon.

    In the waning of the moon,
    Cloudy morning: fair afternoon.
    Pale moon doth rain; red moon doth blow,
    White moon doth neither rain nor snow.
    When the moon's halo is far, the storm is n'ar (near).
    When the moon's halo is n'ar, the storm is far.

It has long been a custom for girls to go to the nearest stile, to turn
their back on the first new moon after Midsummer and to chant these
verses:

    All hail, new moon, all hail to thee.
    I prithee, good moon, reveal to me,
    This night, who shall my true love be.
    Who he is and what he wears,
    And what he does all months and years.

If she were to be married in the course of the next twelve months, the
moon answered her questions during her sleep of the same evening.

In many parts of the country it is supposed that, on Christmas Eve,
the moon will help maidens to find out when they are to be married.
The plan is for a maiden to borrow a silk handkerchief from a male
relation and to take it and a mirror to some sheet of water, while the
night is dark. She must go quite alone; but the sheet of water may be
an unromantic pail, full to the brim, stationed at the bottom of the
garden. As soon as the moon shows itself, the maiden places the flimsy
piece of silk in front of her eyes, and, by holding the mirror half
towards the moon and half towards the water, it is possible for her to
see more than a pair of reflections. The number of reflections are the
months which will ensue before her wedding bells ring out.

We recently came across the following information in a document quite
three hundred years old:

"The first, second and third days of the moon's age are lucky for
buying and selling; the seventh, ninth and eleventh are lucky for
engagements and marriage; the sixteenth and twenty-first are not lucky
for anything."

The same document affirmed that:

"A baby born before the new moon is twenty-four hours old is sure to be
lucky. Anything lost during the second twenty-four hours of the moon's
age is sure to be found. All things begun on the fifth twenty-four
hours will turn out successfully. A dream experienced on the eighth
twenty-four hours must come true."




FORTUNETELLING BY MEANS OF PLAYING CARDS


Telling fortunes, by means of playing cards, is one of the oldest
amusements indulged in by civilized people. The ancients of the Far
East used their Tarot packs for this purpose long before the birth of
Christ, and, ever since, it has been recognized that cards can be made
to give a surprisingly accurate reading of future events.

It is interesting to note that, until modern times, it was a common
practice of men who had to make great and far-reaching decisions for
them to consult a pack of cards and to be guided by what was revealed.
Napoleon, it may be recalled, never made an important move unless the
cards advised him to take the step. Julius Caesar was another great
leader who placed his trust in card readings, and even Shakespeare, the
shrewdest of all English writers, shows by a number of passages in his
plays that he recognized the use of cards for purposes of divination.
As for the noted men and women of today, it is rumored that several
derive guidance from their packs when they are in doubt.

Whether the science of cartomancy, the name given to telling fortunes
by the aid of cards, is taken seriously or not, there is no doubt that
it will afford a good deal of merriment when indulged in by a number of
pleasure-seeking friends and relations.

There are few rules governing this science, but those there are must be
strictly observed. First, it is absolutely imperative that the person
who is consulting the cards should set his or her mind on the matter.
Thus, when a definite question is requiring an answer, the question
itself must fill the mind. To let the mind wander to outside things
or things that are not involved must lessen the psychic effect. Next,
every consultant must cut the pack with the left hand, in order to set
his or her seal on the order of the cards. Finally, to obtain the most
accurate results, it is necessary that the consultant or person seeking
the information should shuffle the pack.


THE FOUR-CARD DIVINATION

This method of fortunetelling is some hundreds of years old and
references to it can be found in the works of people who wrote in
Stuart times. After the consultant has shuffled the pack of fifty-two
cards, he or she withdraws one of them at random and notes the suit.
The card is, then, put back in the pack, which is again shuffled. Next,
it is cut with the left hand, as already suggested.

Now comes the "lay-out." The cards are set face upwards on the table in
four rows, each of thirteen. In doing this, it is imperative that all
the rows should be commenced at the right-hand end.

That done, the key card is sought. In the case of a lady, the key
card is the queen of the suit shown by the card which she picked from
the pack at the outset. When it is a man who is seeking his fortune,
the key card is the king of the suit indicated by the card he picked
originally.

Having found the key card in the lay-out, count nine, eighteen,
twenty-seven, thirty-six and forty-five spaces from it, and pick up the
cards so placed. Remember that in counting, a line must be always begun
from the right; also that it may be necessary to revert to the first or
subsequent rows in order to obtain the full set of four cards.

In picking up the four cards, be careful to preserve their order; the
first must be set out first, the second must come second, and the same
with the third and the fourth. Each card stands for some definite
portent, and the four portents supply the reading which affects the
consultant.

The portents supplied by each card are as follows:--


Hearts

_ACE._--Interests will center more in the home than outside it.

_KING._--A person who has the good of others at heart.

_QUEEN._--Energy and ability are denoted. There is, however, a strong
tendency towards admiration for many members of the opposite sex.

_JACK._--Inclined to be selfish and somewhat averse to following the
desires of others.

_TEN._--A happy marriage is indicated.

_NINE._--A somewhat restless nature which soon tires and requires a
change of scene.

_EIGHT._--This is not a good card for those desiring marriage. If such
a ceremony does occur, it will be late in coming.

_SEVEN._--There is evidence that an open-air life is what is required.

_SIX._--A happy marriage in the near future is heralded.

_FIVE._--Happiness will be provided, but it will not be the result of
riches.

_FOUR._--Marriage is likely, but the measure of affection resulting
from it appears to be small.

_THREE._--Life will entail many reverses, but a broad mind will conquer
them.

_TWO._--Marriage will result, but not before many trials have beset the
path to happiness.


Diamonds

_ACE._--Friendships will spring up where enemies have existed.

_KING._--There is a clear indication of social happiness, but the home
may be neglected.

_QUEEN._--This suggests a strong character, but no great amount of
affection is displayed.

_JACK._--Amiability is the chief character indicated by this card.

_TEN._--There are signs of a large and happy family.

_NINE._--There is no need to worry over financial matters; money will
flow in when most required.

_EIGHT._--The consultant should keep a firm check on bad habits.

_SEVEN._--A very upright and high-minded individual.

_SIX._--A person who wavers when a decision has to be made.

_FIVE._--A somewhat shallow character is indicated, one who takes
insufficient thought of the morrow.

_FOUR._--The consultant displays too little trust in him or herself. An
inferiority complex is possessed.

_THREE._--A person of considerable merit, but is shy and retiring.

_TWO._--Do not tire of waiting for the good things of life; they will
come without any doubt.


Clubs

_ACE._--A successful life is ensured in the commercial world for men,
and in the home for women.

_KING._--The consultant will succeed in whatever he or she most
desires, but it may entail a tedious wait.

_QUEEN._--There are signs that too high a value is placed on the
opinions of others.

_JACK._--One who loves recreations and who gives too little attention
to the necessary things in life.

_TEN._--Expect many trials unless the other cards point to favorable
issues.

_NINE._--Money affairs will cause a good deal of anxiety.

_EIGHT._--There are definite signs that many so-called friends will
only flock to you when you can be of use to them.

_SEVEN._--You will have your share of sorrows.

_SIX._--Divide your life into three equal portions. One will be
pleasant, one will be very happy and the other, more or less ordinary.
The fates say nothing of the order in which they will come.

_FIVE._--You will have few causes for regrets, if you continue as you
are acting at present.

_FOUR._--There are people who are prepared to damage your reputation.
Therefore, be on your guard.

_THREE._--If a request is made of you in the near future, be cautious
how you reply. Much will depend on the answer.

_TWO._--Beware of coming storms.


Spades

_ACE._--Much good fortune attends the one who finds this card among the
four that are chosen.

_KING._--A card which indicates that the consultant revels in doing
kind actions.

_QUEEN._--This indicates that the consultant is, frankly, a flirt.

_JACK._--One who tries to make happiness a feature of his or her
surroundings.

_TEN._--Fix your thoughts on something devoutly wished for and the
Fates will grant it to you.

_NINE._--You are given to worrying over things that do not really
matter.

_EIGHT._--Do not set such store on money. It is not the only thing
worth having.

_SEVEN._--Be very careful that you do not marry for anything but love.

_SIX._--There is every prospect of a comfortable home, surrounded by
children who bring you happiness.

_FIVE._--Happiness will come to you either early in life or very soon.

_FOUR._--You do not know how to handle money and you must be careful
that you do not trust it to an unworthy person.

_THREE._--You expect too many luxuries. You would be far happier if you
valued the simple things of life.

_TWO._--Do not be depressed by troubles. They will pass away.

Now that the meaning of all the fifty-two cards is known, one thing
more requires to be explained. Let us suppose that the four cards have
been drawn from the lay-out, as already directed. It may happen that
one of them directly contradicts another card. What happens then? In
such a case, the second card to be drawn from the lay-out has the
effect of cancelling the first, but the force of the second card is
weakened thereby and its portent is lessened. It is because of this
that it is highly necessary to remember the order in which the four
cards are taken from the lay-out.


THE THREE-CARD DIVINATION

In this case, the first thing is to run through an ordinary pack and
separate the court from the non-picture cards. The latter are then
shuffled by the person seeking information, who finally cuts them with
the left hand. That done, the matching card is sought. The matching
card, it must be explained, is a card which matches the consultant.
Thus:

(a) A lady with brown hair is matched by the Queen of Clubs. A
gentleman, by the King of Clubs.

(b) A lady who is blonde, is matched by the Queen of Hearts. A
gentleman by the King of Hearts.

(c) A lady with auburn hair is matched by the Queen of Diamonds. A
gentleman, by the King of Diamonds.

(d) A lady with black hair is matched by the Queen of Spades. A
gentleman, by the King of Spades.

(e) Grey or white hair is matched according to its original color.

As soon as the matching card is decided on, the consultant shuts
his or her eyes, and, with the left hand, picks up a portion of the
non-picture card pack. With the right hand, he or she places the
matching card on the rest of the pack and the whole is reformed.

Thus, the pack now consists of forty-one cards, forty of them being
numeral cards and the remaining one, a picture card. On no account may
there be any shuffling at this point.

All is ready. The cards are turned over one at a time, no notice being
taken of them until the matching card is reached. Then, the next three
cards of the same suit as the matching card are withdrawn from the pack
and set out on the table, in the order in which they were found. These
three cards provide the reading sought by the consultant.

The interpretations are as follows:

_ACE._--You will be lucky in love affairs, if you have not already been
so. You will make your partner very happy and your home will be your
greatest pride.

_TWO._--You are inclined to take life too easily and you are not very
keen on hard work.

_THREE._--You are a rover and are liable to be very unsettled at times.
Remember the old saying that a rolling stone gathers no moss.

_FOUR._--You will experience four sorrows in your life that you will
never forget.

_FIVE._--There is not the slightest doubt that you will accumulate
wealth. Probably, some of it will come as a legacy.

_SIX._--You will gather many friends around you. All of them will not
be of equal worth.

_SEVEN._--Your health will be one of your strongest points, unless you
neglect it, when it will be sure to rebel.

_EIGHT._--You are a fortunate person, and there will be more than one
occasion in your life when you will experience a very lucky escape.

_NINE._--Do not expect to gain riches by means of games of chance,
lotteries, etc. Your fortunes will not be increased by them.

_TEN._--You have the habit of looking on the bright side of things.
This is a quality worth more than all the gold in the world. Cherish
it.


THE MAGIC SQUARE

This is a very old way of divining what the Fates have planned for
yourself, your friends and your enemies. The first thing is to take out
of the pack all the court cards, as well as the twos, threes, fours,
fives and sixes. Thus, all that is left are the cards ranging between
the sevens and the tens--sixteen in all.

The second thing is to take your matching card, as described under the
previous heading, and to place it with the sixteen cards. These are,
then, well shuffled and cut with your left hand.

The next step is to turn over the cards from the pack, one by one,
preserving the order carefully, until the matching card is reached.
When this is found, the cards that have been turned over are placed
at the bottom of the stack that is left in hand and the "lay-out" is
commenced.

[Illustration: No. 23.--The Magic Square, showing the order in which
the cards are to be set out.]

The first card in hand is placed on the table and the eight that follow
are arranged around it to form a square. This square will thus consist
of three rows, each made up of three cards, with the matching card in
the center.

It is very important that the eight cards are placed in definite
positions, as follows: The first is set down to the right of the
matching card; the second to the left of it; the third immediately
above it; the fourth just below it; the four remaining cards are placed
in the upper left-hand corner of the square, the upper right-hand
corner, the lower right-hand corner and the lower left-hand corner,
respectively. (See the diagram.)

All these cards are read in the following manner: The three above the
matching card refer to the past; the card on either side of it to the
present; and the three below it to the future. Next, the three cards on
the left-hand side of the matching card refer to your friends; the card
above and below the matching card refers to yourself; and those on the
right of it to your enemies.

Following this, you must note that a heart stands for very fortunate
things, a club for good things, a diamond for things that are passable,
and spades for things that are no good at all.

Thus, should a heart come in the middle of the bottom row it shows that
you are to be very fortunate in the future; if a diamond fills the same
position in the upper row, it is clear that your past was only passably
happy; and if a spade comes immediately on the right of the matching
card, it is a clear proof that the particular enemy you have in mind is
being harassed by a period of ill-luck. And so on, according to which
suit fills each of the remaining positions.


THE FORTUNETELLING PYRAMID

A simple way of discovering what kind of luck is awaiting you in the
future consists in taking a complete pack of fifty-two cards, shuffling
them well, and cutting them with the left hand.

Following this, you place one card on the table, face up. Below it
you set out two cards, also face up, and continue with a row of three
cards below the two. Other rows follow with four, five, six, seven,
eight and nine cards in each, so that the whole forms a pyramid. This
accounts for forty-five cards. The surplus of seven are placed on one
side when the figure is completed or they may be thrown aside, one at
a time, while the figure is being made at any point desired, but it is
important that they must be rejected before being seen.

To estimate the amount of luck or good fortune that awaits your future,
pick up the last card that was laid down in each row. Naturally, there
will now be no card left in the first row, one in the second, two in
the third row, and so on until the ninth row will consist of eight
cards only. Take the nine cards picked up and sort them into suits.
If there are most hearts, you are to be a very lucky person; if there
are most clubs, you are to be just lucky; if there are most diamonds
you will be passably lucky; but luck will not come your way at all if
spades are in the majority.

Should two suits tie for first place the Fates require you to make the
pyramid over again.


SEVENS AND THREES

The following method of consulting one's luck must have been attempted
many millions of times, but it is not known so well now as it was a
century ago. The first thing is to shuffle a full pack thoroughly.
This, of course, must be done by the person whose luck is being tested.
And then, it is necessary that he or she cuts with the left hand.

After these preliminaries, someone takes the pack and deals the cards
one at a time, face downwards, on to the table, placing them in a
heap. The consultant who is seeking to find out what the Fates are
determining should really be blindfolded, but this is unnecessary if
the cards are new and cannot be recognized by any markings on the backs.

The consultant has to choose any three cards as they are being slowly
dealt. They can be three cards coming together, or widely separated, or
just as he or she fancies.

As each card is selected, it is set aside and, when the three are
chosen, not before, they are turned face up and arranged in the order
of selection. Each card from one to nine stands for its own value, but
tens and all court cards stand for nought. Thus, if the three cards are
a seven, a ten and a five, the mystic number derived from them is 705.

The final step is to find out if the mystic number is divisible either
by seven or by three. If the total is divisible by either of these
numbers, then there is good luck awaiting the consultant; if the total
is divisible by both seven and three, the luck is doubled. On the
other hand, should there be a remainder when dividing, bad luck is not
claimed.


YOUR LUCK IN THE COMING WEEK

A hundred years ago, this method of reading what the Fates were likely
to provide for us in the coming week was resorted to in almost every
house where a pack of cards existed.

The first step is to pick out your matching card from the pack, as
explained under the heading "The Three-Card Divination." This card is
set out on the table, face up. Then you shuffle the remainder of the
pack and cut it with your left hand. That done, you form a ring round
the matching card, using the first seven cards from the pack for the
purpose. All the cards in the ring should be face down and none should
overlap.

The next thing is to discard the three top cards from what remains of
the pack and then to take the third, sixth, ninth, twelfth, fifteenth,
eighteenth and twenty-first cards, placing them one each on the seven
cards already set out in a circle. These cards must not be looked at
while this is being done, and they may be set on the original seven
in any order thought fit. But this should be noted, whichever card is
paired first must be taken to represent the coming Sunday and the other
days follow in a clockwise arrangement.

Thus, the arrangement now consists of a circle, formed of seven heaps
each consisting of two cards. Read them thus:

  (a)  Two hearts in the same heap represent a day of exceedingly good
  fortune.

  (b)  One heart and one club, a day of very good fortune.

  (c)  One heart and one diamond, a day of good fortune.

  (d)  One heart and one spade, a day of moderate fortunes.

  (e)  Two clubs, a day as (c).

  (f)  One club and one diamond, a day as (d).

  (g)  One club and one spade, a day of fair luck.

  (h)  Two diamonds, a day neither lucky nor unlucky.

  (i)  One diamond and one spade, a day much as (h).

  (j)  Two spades, a day of no luck.


ARE YOU TO BE LUCKY?

Ever since the pack of cards has been constituted as it is now, it
has been considered that the four suits have a definite value as far
as luck and fortune are concerned. This is a fact that most people
probably know, but for the benefit of those who are unaware of it, we
will point out that hearts stand for more luck than all the others,
that clubs are the next in point of favor, that diamonds come third,
and that spades bring no luck at all.

These values are used in the following method of finding out whether
you may consider yourself as lucky or not. The full pack is taken and,
from it, all the twos, threes, fours, fives and sixes are extracted.
These cards are put on one side, as they are not used, and the
remainder is shuffled.

The next thing is for you to cut the short pack with the left hand and
then to deal it into four equal stacks. Each stack is given one card at
a time; that is to say, the eight cards of one stack are not allotted
all at once.

This done, you take the third heap, without looking at the other three,
and turn up the cards. Most likely all the suits will be represented
and the thing is to note how many cards there are of each. If there
are most of hearts, your good luck is assured; if clubs predominate,
then you are still fortunate; if diamonds head the list, you will have
average luck; but when spades are in the majority, your best plan is to
tell yourself that there is no such thing as good and bad luck.

One thing more about the reckoning. If, say, hearts occur only four
times in the heap, and no other suit is present as often, then, as we
say, good luck is yours. But, should hearts occur five, six, seven
or eight times, then your good luck is correspondingly increased in
amount. The same rule should be applied to the other suits.


PEERING INTO THE FUTURE

You probably have some question that you would like answered. It may
concern--well, it can concern anything you like and you need confide to
nobody what it is about. This is a method of obtaining the answer to
such a question:

If you are of the female sex, take the four queens from a pack and,
if you are a male, take the four kings. Place them face down on the
table in front of you and, with your eyes shut, shuffle them round and
round, using only your left hand. Work the cards round in the opposite
direction to the movement of the hands of a clock. When you have lost
all idea of the identity of the cards, still with your left hand and
with your eyes tightly shut, place the cards in a line in front of you.
Now, open your eyes and turn the cards face up.

The card to the left of the line stands for "This year"; the card
filling the second position stands for "Next year"; the card coming
third, for "Sometime"; and the card at the right of the line, for
"Never." The card that is a heart answers the question and the others
are ignored. Thus, if the heart fills the second position, the answer
is "Next year"; if it comes fourth, the answer is "Never."

It is claimed by astrologers that a true answer to the question is only
obtained on the first occasion that this method is employed after a new
moon has appeared.


WHAT REVERSED CARDS REVEAL

In most cases, the cards of an ordinary pack look the same whether
viewed one way or the other; in other words, if they were cut in halves
across the shortest dimension, each half would be exactly alike. But
this is not so in every case. Take, for instance, the aces of hearts,
clubs and spades; with these the tops and bottoms would be different,
though with the ace of diamonds, they would be the same. All the sevens
offer further cases where the two halves are not identical and the same
may be said of some of the eights. In addition, it must be pointed out
that all packs do not follow the same arrangement, so that a list of
these unbalanced cards cannot be given.

Astrologists have long considered that these cards, which are not alike
top and bottom, possess certain powers in deciding one's luck. This is
how they act:

Take a full pack and shuffle it thoroughly, then cut with the left
hand. After that, turn each card over, one by one, and it is advisable
to work slowly, as mistakes are easily made.

Look at every card in turn, count the pips on it that are the right way
up and those that are upside down. When the latter are more in number
than the former, you have a reversed card. Set it aside and continue
with the cards that follow. Note that it is not any card that permits
of being reversed, but only those that are actually reversed, that
should be set aside. Note, also, that a reversed card to you is not
reversed to someone sitting opposite you.

When the pack has been run through and all the reversed cards taken
out, note what you have found. Count up the number belonging to each
suit. If hearts are in the majority, you are indeed lucky; if spades
figure most, you are the reverse. Clubs are not quite so lucky as
hearts and diamonds rank a little below clubs.

Should any suit figure much more than the others, then the above
readings are strengthened.


CARD COMBINATIONS

This method of discovering certain facts about your future is as old as
the hills, if not older. It depends on laying out the cards and noting
how certain of them are arranged.

The first thing you do is to take an ordinary pack and remove from it
all the twos, threes, fours, fives and sixes. This will leave you with
thirty-two cards in hand. Next, you shuffle very thoroughly and cut
with the left hand. That done, you set out the thirty-two cards in four
rows, each of eight cards. Be careful to commence each row at the right
and then work to the left. Of course, you must put them out in exactly
the same order as they come off the pack.

The "lay-out" being completed, you carefully look at the cards. You
look, first, to see if by any chance there are four aces touching
anywhere. If so, the scrutiny ceases and you find out, from the list
given below, what the meaning is of four aces touching. But if there
are not four such aces, then you search for four kings and, failing
them, four queens, and so on, down to four sevens. If all these fail,
you look for three cards of a kind starting as before with aces and
working down to sevens. Should there be no groups of threes, then you
look for groups of two. Of course, after that there is no point in
continuing the scrutiny if there are no twos.

Be careful to understand that the cards forming a group need not all
occur in the same horizontal line. As long as one card touches another
of the same value, whether at the top, bottom, sides or even at the
corners, it will count. Note also that the only reading that may be
taken from a "lay-out" is the highest reading. Thus, if there are four
aces and three queens, you are not permitted to take the reading of the
queens, if you prefer it, to that of the aces. The reading of the aces
alone counts.

These are the readings:--


Fours

_FOUR ACES._--Dangers may attack you while you are least expecting them.

_FOUR KINGS._--You are likely to rise in the world and be endowed with
fame.

_FOUR QUEENS._--You will be led into quarrels, not of your own seeking.

_FOUR JACKS._--Treachery is afoot and you will be the victim, unless
you play your cards remarkably well.

_FOUR TENS._--You will succeed at what you have most set your heart.

_FOUR NINES._--People will endeavor to cheat you. Keep your eyes open
and thwart the wrong-doers.

_FOUR EIGHTS._--You are likely to form some great desire, and that
desire will be attained, if you are true to yourself.

_FOUR SEVENS._--There is a very happy home marked out for you, if you
wish it.


Threes

_THREE ACES._--Good news is coming.

_THREE KINGS._--Some great desire that you have is about to be
realized. It is nothing to do with work or business, but pleasure.

_THREE QUEENS._--You will be happy in one particular friendship that
you are about to make.

_THREE JACKS._--Certain disputes are trying to find their way into your
existence. Be guarded.

_THREE TENS._--Wait patiently and a very happy time will not be long in
coming.

_THREE NINES._--Your wishes may not come true as soon as you would
like. But wait.

_THREE EIGHTS._--Marriage is imminent for those of single blessedness
who have set their hearts on it.

_THREE SEVENS._--First, there is a cloud and behind it is bright
sunshine. This applies to you.


Twos

_TWO ACES._--You are about to start on some new enterprise and make a
success of it.

_TWO KINGS._--You are shortly meeting a stranger who will mean a good
deal to you.

_TWO QUEENS._--Doubt is to cloud your mind. You will seek advice from a
certain quarter. Take the advice and do not lose sight of the giver.

_TWO JACKS._--Your faith is to be sorely tried. See that you do not
injure your reputation.

_TWO TENS._--There is every sign of good fortune in the future.

_TWO NINES._--There is a great surprise in store for you.

_TWO EIGHTS._--Be judicious in your dealings with the opposite sex.

_TWO SEVENS._--The unengaged are soon to be engaged.


Other Combination of Cards

Should the cards offer none of the above arrangements, the following
may be found, but they are meaningless unless all the foregoing have
failed.

_KING OF CLUBS AND TEN OF HEARTS._--Love is coming.

_KING OF DIAMONDS AND TEN OF SPADES._--Beware of lovers' quarrels.

_KING AND QUEEN OF SAME SUIT._--A proposal or its equivalent.

_QUEEN OF SPADES AND ANY JACK._--Take care of the wiles of a woman well
known to you.

_TEN OF HEARTS AND NINE OF CLUBS._--A journey is awaiting you.

_TEN OF HEARTS AND ACE OF SPADES._--A birth.

_NINE OF HEARTS AND ACE OF CLUBS._--Your wishes will be fulfilled.

_SEVEN OF HEARTS AND SEVEN OF CLUBS._--Your troubles are about to end.


ZODIAC CARD READING

Perhaps you do not know which is your lucky month. If you would like to
find out, the following simple method is helpful.

Take one or two packs of cards, according to the instructions below.
Bridge cards are preferable as they are small. Then, cut twelve pieces
of paper, each the size of one of the cards. On each piece, draw a sign
of the Zodiac and arrange the pieces on the table, as shown in the
diagram. It will be seen that the signs are placed in their monthly
order from April to March and not from January to December. This order
must be followed.

[Illustration: No. 24.--The Arrangement of the Signs for Zodiacal Card
Reading.]

Next, find out your lucky number, as directed in the chapter "What is
your Lucky Number?" For such numbers from one to four, one complete
pack is needed; for numbers from five to eight, two packs are
necessary. When nine is the lucky number, either use three packs or
take two packs and shuffle in with the cards four pieces of paper, each
the same size as a card, and on each write a heart, a club, a diamond
or a spade.

Shuffle the cards thoroughly and then deal them out, giving each
sign of the Zodiac a card in turn. Lay on each sign as many cards as
indicated by your lucky number, then stop.

Look at the cards lying on each sign. Wherever you find more hearts
than any other suit on a sign, take it as a portent that the month
indicated by the sign is a lucky one for you. Of course, it is quite
possible and even desirable that you may have more than one fortunate
month.


A BIRTHDAY MESSAGE FROM THE CARDS

We have seen this fortunetelling game played at many parties and other
gatherings, and it has always caused a good deal of innocent amusement.

First of all, an ordinary pack is taken and the court cards are
withdrawn from it. They alone are used, while the numeral cards are put
on one side. These court cards are shuffled and the players sit around
the table.

One of the players is appointed as the seer. He or she takes the twelve
cards, spreads them out in a fan, face down, and the first player
selects one. When this card is withdrawn from the fan, it is turned up.
While everybody looks at the chosen card, the seer asks the player the
date of his or her birth. On hearing the date, the seer notes whether
it comes under the heading, spring, summer, autumn or winter. Then he
reckons:

(a) Any date in March, April or May as spring.

(b) Any in June, July or August as summer.

(c) Any in September, October or November as autumn.

(d) Any in December, January or February as winter.

Next, he looks down the appropriate section, given below, and reads out
the message, according to the card which the player has withdrawn from
the fan.

That completes the business for the first player and the performance is
gone through afresh, in exactly the same way, for the second and all
subsequent people taking part in the game.

Here are the messages provided by each card:


Spring

_KING OF HEARTS._--Kindness to an elderly person will result in
financial gain to you.

_QUEEN OF HEARTS._--A friendship will grow into love, quite
unexpectedly.

_JACK OF HEARTS._--You are advised not to marry the one that is good
looking.

_KING OF CLUBS._--You will have a love letter that will cause you some
surprise.

_QUEEN OF CLUBS._--Show more affection. Coldness is unlikely to bring
you happiness.

_JACK OF CLUBS._--Money will mean much in your matrimonial affairs.

_KING OF DIAMONDS._--The one you look upon as your best friend is a
"dark horse."

_QUEEN OF DIAMONDS._--You are marked out for fortune's smile.

_JACK OF DIAMONDS._--A light-haired woman is anxious to do you a good
turn.

_KING OF SPADES._--Be very charming to the person with blue eyes.

_QUEEN OF SPADES._--You are shortly to come into money.

_JACK OF SPADES._--A sudden change in domestic affairs is imminent.


Summer

_KING OF HEARTS._--An old acquaintance of whom you have lost sight will
return into your life.

_QUEEN OF HEARTS._--That for which you have been longing is not far off.

_JACK OF HEARTS._--A telephone call will revive some old memories which
will please you.

_KING OF CLUBS._--Show your love and your love will be returned.

_QUEEN OF CLUBS._--A stranger will assist you to good fortune.

_JACK OF CLUBS._--You will attend a wedding and something will happen
there which will surprise you.

_KING OF DIAMONDS._--You are wanted overseas, but do not be in a hurry
to accept the invitation.

_QUEEN OF DIAMONDS._--You will find happiness most where money abounds.

_JACK OF DIAMONDS._--You have remarkable powers which you are not fully
using.

_KING OF SPADES._--Your happiness lies in marriage. Treat the one who
is to be your partner with consideration.

_QUEEN OF SPADES._--Live more in the open air and many kinds of
happiness will come of it.

_JACK OF SPADES._--Be careful to hide your feelings.


Autumn

_KING OF HEARTS._--A close relation will share some good luck with you.

_QUEEN OF HEARTS._--Friendship will change into love.

_JACK OF HEARTS._--Get a move on and your luck will change.

_KING OF CLUBS._--Don't let money stand in the way of your marriage.

_QUEEN OF CLUBS._--Do not be surprised if an enemy relents and becomes
a friend.

_JACK OF CLUBS._--Try to forget your disappointment. Happiness is due
from quite another quarter.

_KING OF DIAMONDS._--Relatives are rising against you. Act fearlessly
and they will recognize your sterling qualities.

_QUEEN OF DIAMONDS._--You are marked out by the Fates to be the
recipient of some very good fortune.

_JACK OF DIAMONDS._--Within seventeen days or weeks, a startling offer
is to be made to you.

_KING OF SPADES._--Make a wish within the next hour and it shall be
fulfilled within the next year.

_QUEEN OF SPADES._--Avoid the one with the dark complexion.

_JACK OF SPADES._--A late marriage will be more prosperous than an
early one.


Winter

_KING OF HEARTS._--Good friends are ready to help you on the road to
success.

_QUEEN OF HEARTS._--Do not decide until you are quite certain.

_JACK OF HEARTS._--Be cautious of the friends you make while dancing.

_KING OF CLUBS._--Get out of the groove you are in and sail away to
success.

_QUEEN OF CLUBS._--A delightful adventure will pave the way to
happiness.

_JACK OF CLUBS._--Flirting never gave anybody any lasting happiness. Be
more sober.

_KING OF DIAMONDS._--Some good news is coming and the postman will
bring it.

_QUEEN OF DIAMONDS._--Keep your head and you will keep your lover.

_JACK OF DIAMONDS._--You have too many strings to your bow and too many
irons in the fire.

_KING OF SPADES._--You are beloved by someone you least suspect.

_QUEEN OF SPADES._--Your affairs will straighten out shortly and then
you will understand.

_JACK OF SPADES._--Your rival seems to be gaining successes, but wait.
In a short space, they will collapse like a pack of cards.


THE WISH CARD

The nine of hearts has long been regarded as the wish card; that is to
say, if a player wins this card, in any agreed manner, he or she will
have a wish fulfilled.

The most usual way to decide who is to be the lucky individual is for
the players to sit around the table and for each to write down a wish
on a slip of paper, and then to initial it. That done, the papers are
collected and set aside to await the decision of the cards.

The cards are dealt to the players in turn in the ordinary manner from
a full pack. Just how many each person is to receive depends on the
number of players, but all must have the same number, and each should
be given as many as the pack allows. Thus, there will often be a few
cards left over. These are set in the middle of the table and not used.

When play starts, somebody begins by turning over the first card on
his or her pack. If this is a numeral card, the next person follows
by turning over the first card on his or her pack, and so the play
continues round the table. But, if someone turns over a jack, the next
person must pay that person one card, i.e., the card coming first
on his pack. If a queen is turned over, the payment is the next two
cards; if it is a king, the next three cards, while an ace requires the
payment of the four next cards. The person playing the jack, queen,
king or ace takes not only the cards paid but any that may be lying
face upwards in front of the person paying. All paid cards are placed
at the bottom of the receiver's pack.

There is one point more to note; if, while in the act of paying, the
payer turns over a jack, queen, king or ace his debt is cancelled, the
previous player gets nothing and the next player has to enter upon the
business of paying.

As soon as one player has lost all his or her cards, the game stops and
everybody glances through his or her pack to see who possesses the wish
card, the nine of hearts. The lucky individual is then given the slip
of paper on which his wish is written and must read it out loud. Not
until it has been announced to all the company will the Fates take any
consideration of it.


OLD MAID

The game known as "Old Maid" is a favorite that will continue to be
played as long as cards exist. How it is played is within the knowledge
of everybody, but the following variation is not so well-known, and it
is certainly more exciting.

Instead of taking out of the pack any of the queens, in this variation
the Queen of Clubs is removed. Then, the passing on of cards from one
player to another and the pairing, whenever possible, proceeds in the
usual way. But a red queen can only be paired with the other red queen,
which makes the Queen of Spades a troublesome card.

Whoever is left with it at the end of the game is a very unfortunate
old maid, since spades are the most unlucky cards of the whole pack.


THE LAST CARD

Have you some question that you want answered? It may be a question to
do with love, marriage, health, finances, or almost anything. Here is a
way to find the answer.

[Illustration: No. 25.--The Last Card.]

From a pack of playing cards, take out the four aces, the four twos,
the four threes and the four queens--sixteen cards in all. Note that
men use the four kings instead of the queens.

Shuffle the sixteen cards and then spread them out on the table, face
down. They should lie on the table in a mixed-up heap and not in an
orderly pack.

To start, pick any card from the heap, turn it over, and then,
according to its value, place it in its proper position, as indicated
by the formation shown in the diagram. Suppose, for instance, that it
is a two of hearts; then it fills the space of the bottom left-hand
corner; or if it is the queen of diamonds, it goes in the second space
of the third row.

When the first card is placed, pick at random a second card and put it
in the position indicated for it in the diagram. Follow in the same
way with all the other cards, from three to fifteen, but not with the
sixteenth. This is the card which supplies your answer. If it is the
queen (or king) of hearts, your answer will be "Certainly yes"; if
it is the two of spades, it is "Certainly not." The other cards come
between these two and supply answers varying from "yes" to "no." Their
actual meanings are as follows:--

1.--_QUEEN OF HEARTS._--Certainly yes.

2.--_ACE OF HEARTS._--Yes.

3.--_THREE OF HEARTS._--Probably yes.

4.--_TWO OF HEARTS._--A likelihood of yes.

5.--_QUEEN OF CLUBS._--It may be yes.

6.--_ACE OF CLUBS._--It is hopeful.

7.--_THREE OF CLUBS._--If you are lucky, it will be yes.

8.--_TWO OF CLUBS._--It is fifty-fifty.

9.--_QUEEN OF DIAMONDS._--The chances are equal.

10.--_ACE OF DIAMONDS._--If you are unlucky, it will be no.

11.--_THREE OF DIAMONDS._--It is not hopeful.

12.--_TWO OF DIAMONDS._--It may be no.

13.--_QUEEN OF SPADES._--There is a likelihood of no.

14.--_ACE OF SPADES._--Probably no.

15.--_THREE OF SPADES._--No.

16.--_TWO OF SPADES._--Certainly no.

Be very careful to decide the question before the cards are touched.


MADAME LENORMAND'S METHOD

Madame Lenormand, one of the most celebrated fortunetellers who has
ever lived, had a method of divining people's futures by means of cards
which we describe here.

[Illustration: No. 26.--Madame Lenormand's "Lay-Out."]

First, she decided on her client's matching card, in the way explained
elsewhere in this chapter, and placed it on the table in the position
marked 1, in the diagram.

Next, she took the four aces, twos, threes, fours, fives and sixes from
a pack, giving twenty-four cards, and allowed her client to shuffle
them, which was followed by the same person cutting them with the left
hand.

Then Madame took the cards and arranged them around the matching card
in the order shown in the diagram. The layout completed, she looked at
the various cards and gathered information from their positions.

It would be impossible for any ordinary person to derive as much
information from them as she did, but we can follow the chief lines of
her thoughts.

This is how she reasoned:

My client assumes the central position, and around her are positions
2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9. Now what cards fill these stations? If
there is an abundance of hearts, then friends surround her; if there is
an abundance of spades, then enemies encompass her. If there are clubs
or diamonds, then just ordinary people are flocking to her side.

It will be seen that Madame gave little consideration to the clubs
or diamonds, though she naturally preferred the former, and made her
calculations largely on the positions of the hearts and spades. Broadly
speaking, the nearer the hearts pressed around the matching card, the
better were the fortunes of her client, the farther away were the
hearts, the worse were the client's fortunes.

Then, she considered an ace to have a stronger force than a two, and a
two a stronger force than a three, and the six weakest of all. Thus an
ace of hearts could more than neutralize the evil influences of a six
of spades; but an ace of spades would be more than a match for the six
of hearts.

We advise you to follow Madame Lenormand's method and see how the cards
dispose themselves in your favor.


PATIENCE LUCK

Many people who play games of patience a good deal are convinced
that, if they are able to bring three different forms of patience to
a successful conclusion on the same day, they only have to wish for
something and the wish will be granted to them.

The particular games they play are known as "Tens," "Demon" and "the
Idiot's Delight."

It must be understood that there is no necessity to be successful
on the first trial of each of the games. Such a thing is almost
impossible. What these devotees do is to go on playing until they bring
out, say, the "Tens," and then they turn to either of the other two and
work at it. Should they be so lucky as to get out all the three, then
they formulate their wish and wait for it to come true.

In case some readers do not know how to play these fascinating games,
we will proceed to explain them.

_TENS._--For this, two full packs are required. The cards are well
shuffled and then a row of ten cards is dealt out on the table, face
down. This done, another row of ten cards is laid out, also face down.
Next, a third row is set out, but this time the cards are placed face
up.

The player looks at the ten face cards and throws out any aces. Then he
builds up suits, as far as he can, by resting a card of opposite color,
and of one degree lower in value, on some other card. Thus, a red goes
on a black, a black on a red, a queen on a king, a two on a three, and
so on. When the shifting of cards causes a file to have no face card
in it, then the uppermost non-face card may be turned over, ready for
being used.

As soon as all the possible movements have been effected, a fresh set
of ten cards is dealt out, one being placed on each file. The movements
are recommenced. Note that not only can one suitable card be placed on
another, but partial runs of cards may be so moved, as long as there is
no broken sequence in them. Thus, a black two, a red three, a black
four and a red five may be lifted in one operation on to a black six;
but a red three, a black four, a black five may not be put on a red
six. It is possible, however, to lift the red three and black four on
to a red five, if such a card is available.

Should a file become quite empty, with not even face-down cards in it,
then it is possible to fill it with a king and any proper following
sequence, should such a one be within reach in any other file. The use
of this movement becomes apparent after a few games have been played.

When the second lot of ten face cards has been dealt with, a third ten
is set out, and other lots of ten are dealt in the same way, until the
double pack, in hand, is exhausted.

The aim of the game is to have no cards left in the lay-out, and this
is obtained by building up sequences from "king" to "two" and, as soon
as one of these complete sequences is formed, it is removed from the
game.

If, when all the two packs have been dealt out and all the possible
movements of cards made, there are broken sequences left, then the game
has failed and it is finished.

In order to make the explanation absolutely clear, a diagram is given
on this and the opposite page. It shows how the cards should be set on
the table before any play is commenced. Naturally, the choice of the
face cards is arbitrary. This is how the movements will be made:

First, the ace of hearts is thrown aside and the card behind it is
turned up. Then, the six of clubs (black) is placed on the seven of
diamonds (red) and the five of hearts (red) is put on the six of clubs.
The card immediately behind the six and, also, the one behind the five
are turned face up. Next, the three of diamonds (red) is put on the
four of clubs (black), and the card behind the three is turned up. But
the four and the three can go on the five of hearts. So the card below
the four is turned. In addition, the cards turned up by the movements
of those mentioned may help to continue the sequences.

[Illustration: No. 27.--The "Lay-Out" for Tens.]

[Illustration: No. 28.--See Opposite.]

_DEMON._--For this game, one pack of cards is required. After it has
been thoroughly shuffled, four cards are placed in line, face up, and
then thirteen cards are dealt, face down, in a stack. Some people call
this stack the rubbish heap. Next, one card is turned up: it is known
as the formation card.

Before any more is done, the four cards placed in line are examined.
Should one of them be of the opposite color to another, and of one
degree lower in value, it is put on the higher card. Thus, a red ten
goes on a black jack and a black queen on a red king, and so on. If
at this point, or at any subsequent time in the game, one of the four
files, originally formed by the four cards first set down, becomes
vacant, then it is filled by taking a card from the rubbish heap.

Now, let us think of the formation card. Naturally, there are three
more of the same value in the pack. Whenever any of these three are
discovered, they are placed beside the original formation card. The
game is to get out the four formation cards and to build up on them in
their proper sequence and in the same suit. Any card uncovered in the
play, in building up the alternate sequences on the original files, or
turned up from the rubbish heap, may be used for the purpose.

When the lay-out has been arranged, the cards in hand are turned
over in threes and used for file sequences or formation building. On
reaching the end of the pack in hand, it is picked up and turned over
in threes again. And this is continued as often as any cards may be
used from the pack. When no more cards can be used, there is no point
in turning over the threes any more and the game ceases. If the four
formation cards have been found and built up with the twelve subsequent
cards following them, the game has been successful; but when this is
impossible the game has failed.

Note that in a case where the formation card is, say, a six, it is
built upon in the following order: seven, eight, nine, ten, jack,
queen, king, ace, two, three, four and five.

_THE IDIOT'S DELIGHT._--Here, again, one pack is needed. First, a line
of nine cards is laid out, face up; followed by a line of eight cards;
then one of seven, and others of six, five, four, three, two and one
card. This gives the formation shown in the diagram.

The aim of the player is to get out the four aces and to build upon
them, in proper order and the same suits, until the kings are reached.
If this is managed, the game is a success: if not, a failure.

At the outset, the only cards that can be moved or used in any way
are those shown black in the diagram. They are moved according to the
following plan: a black six goes on a red seven, a red queen on a black
king, and so on. Any number of cards can be placed one on top of the
other, if moved one at a time, but it is not allowable to move a stack
of two or more cards, except to place it in one of the top nine spaces,
and then only when one of these spaces becomes vacant.

[Illustration: No. 29.--The "Lay-Out" for The Idiot's Delight.]

Two points remain for explanation:

(1) When one of the cards, shown black in the diagram, is moved, the
card above it comes into play and can be moved.

(2) The "lay-out" does not take all the fifty-two cards. There are
seven over. These can be used for making up sequences as and when
desired.

Now, if you can get these three games to work out successfully and do
them the same day, not necessarily the first time you try, frame your
wish, a reasonable one, of course, and await the issue with confidence.




FORTUNETELLING GAMES

THE ZODIAC WHEEL


The wheel, illustrated on this page, is divided into a dozen sections,
and each contains a symbol that stands for a Sign of the Zodiac. These
signs greatly influence our lives. We were born under the rule of one
of them, and it is the one that rules our own particular birth-date
that we must specially note.

[Illustration: No. 30.--The Zodiac Wheel.]

To test _YOUR_ luck on almost any question, cut out the wheel and
fix it to a wall or door, by forcing a pin through the center. Do
this loosely so that the wheel will revolve freely when spun in the
direction of the arrow. If it is desired to keep the book intact, copy
the wheel on a sheet of stiff paper. The twelve sections are easily
provided with the assistance of a pair of compasses and then the signs
must be drawn, as they are done in the illustration.

Before the wheel commences to rotate, blindfold yourself or if you can
be sure of playing fairly, merely close your eyes. Then ask the wheel
the question about which you desire information, and follow by touching
the revolving symbols with some pointed instrument, such as a pencil.

The pencil point will arrest the motion of the wheel and, also, it will
touch one of the twelve sections. Be careful to keep the pencil from
moving until your eyes are opened. Then, note the section which the
pencil indicates.

[Illustration: No. 31.--The Oracle]

 Take a long pencil, with a point. Place your hand high up above the
 oracle. Shut your eyes. Rotate the pencil three times and then bring
 the point down to the paper. Steady the pencil and keep it still: then
 open your eyes. If the pencil point rests within a circle, the number
 gives your age when you will be passing through a very lucky period of
 your life. If you are more than 20 years of age, add the additional
 years to the number found in the circle.

This is how the wheel answers your question: The reply is "Yes," if the
pencil touches your Zodiacal month sign.

The reply is "Probably yes" if the pencil touches one of the sections
on either side of your Zodiacal month sign.

The reply is: There is a fair chance of the answer being "yes" if the
pencil touches one of the sections two away from your Zodiacal month
sign.

The reply is "No" if the pencil touches the section directly opposite
to your Zodiacal month sign. Thus VII is opposite to I, VIII is
opposite to II, and so on.

The other sections give no reading at all.

Your Zodiacal month sign can be found from the following table:

  I    _Aries_          Born between March 21 and April 19.
  II   _Taurus_            "  "  April 20 and May 20.
  III  _Gemini_            "  "  May 21 and June 21.
  IV   _Cancer_            "  "  June 22 and July 22.
  V    _Leo_               "  "  July 23 and Aug. 21.
  VI   _Virgo_             "  "  Aug. 22 and Sept. 22.
  VII  _Libra_             "  "  Sept. 23 and Oct. 23.
  VIII _Scorpio_           "  "  Oct. 24 and Nov. 22.
  IX   _Sagittarius_       "  "  Nov. 23 and Dec. 21.
  X    _Capricorn_         "  "  Dec. 22 and Jan. 20.
  XI   _Aquarius_          "  "  Jan. 21 and Feb. 19.
  XII  _Pisces_            "  "  Feb. 20 and Mar. 20.

Note.--When the wheel is to be spun, the section that corresponds to
the date must be placed in the "twelve o'clock" position.


YOUR MARRIAGE MONTH

Here is a very popular game which tells you in which month you should
be married. There are two diagrams. The first is a frame, embellished
with the signs of the Zodiac. Cut out the blank part in the center. The
second diagram consists of two court cards. Cut them out separately,
leaving the signs given on the edges. It will be seen that the two
court cards fit into the Zodiacal frame.

The game is based on the fact that the signs of the Zodiac are very
powerful in watching over people's destinies.

To play this game, place the Zodiacal frame on the table, close your
eyes, and twist the frame round three or four times, or until you have
no idea of the position of the signs. Then, take the two court cards
and, while your eyes are still shut, shuffle them about on the table
until you do not know which is which. Pick up either of them, whichever
you prefer, but without seeing them, and then proceed to fit the card
of your choice in the frame. You will be able to do this by the sense
of touch.

When you have set the card in the frame, open your eyes, and examine
what you have done. If any sign on the card is immediately opposite the
same sign on the frame, it indicates the month in which you are most
likely to be married. When two signs on the card pair off with two
signs on the frame, your choice lies between the two months suggested
by the signs. On occasions there will be no signs on the card pairing
off with the signs on the frame. These are the instances when the Fates
are undecided. The belief is, however, that your marriage month is
indicated by a sign on the card being duplicated by the same sign, one
position to the right, on the frame. In saying "to the right," the
intention is that the move be made in the same direction as the motion
of the hands of a clock.

[Illustration: No. 32.--Your Marriage Month.--The Frame.]

[Illustration: No. 33.--Your Marriage Month.--The Court Cards.]




THE DISCS OF FATE

This is an excellent device for those who enjoy fortunetelling schemes.
There are four discs and they all have to be cut out. While doing this
care must be taken to preserve all the projections intact. Note that
the white center of each disc must be removed. This is fairly easy to
do if a pointed pencil is pushed carefully through the paper.

When the four shapes are ready for use, slip them on to a long pencil,
so near together that they are almost touching. See to it that the
disc bearing the lucky devices is fitted on last. It will then hide
the three others. The game consists in revolving the discs and, while
they are turning, there is a likelihood that they will spread out on
the pencil-axis. This can be avoided by slipping a rubber band on to
the pencil in front of the discs, and another behind them. Leave just
enough space for them to revolve comfortably.


How to Consult the Discs

Place the arrow projections, one at 3 o'clock, another at 6 o'clock,
the third at 9 o'clock, and the remaining one at 12 o'clock. When all
is ready, twirl your finger three or four times round the disc in the
same direction as the hands travel round a clock face.

Then, when the discs have come to rest, look at the cut-out space in
the disc bearing the lucky symbols. Count up the numbers shown in this
space and consult the lists below. Whatever message is attached to your
number, so is your fate. It is well to remember that if any part of a
projection comes within the disc-space, its particular number counts,
whether it can be seen or not. The fact that the projection is visible
is what matters.

You can consult the discs on love, marriage or fortune, but you must
decide which you are engaging before the discs are rotated.

[Illustration: No. 34.--The Discs of Fate.]


Love Answers

1.--Do not be cold. More affection will help on your cause.

2.--Take no thought of interfering relatives. Make up your own mind.

3.--A proposal is not far distant. Give it very careful consideration.

4.--A quarrel, followed by a speedy reconciliation, is predicted.

5.--A misunderstanding will cause a good deal of dissatisfaction; but
all's well that ends well.

6.--A pleasant adventure will be experienced by you within the next
twelve months.

7.--You are more successful than, apparently, you imagine.

8.--Make up your mind which one you want. There is danger ahead if you
keep more than one hanging to your apron strings.

9.--Whatever is to happen will happen soon. Do not be taken unawares.

10.--What you think of him or her, he or she thinks of you.


Marriage Answers

1.--The right person is the one you think.

2.--Marriage will not come suddenly upon you and it will come late.

3.--Do not let money matters enter into the considerations of your
marriage.

4.--There will be certain ups and downs to navigate before the ceremony
is arranged.

5.--Your marriage will be influenced by a person with dark eyes and
dark hair.

6.--You ought not to hesitate.

7.--There are as good fish in the sea as ever came out of it, so do not
worry.

8.--Do not be in any hurry. Time is not precious and nothing is as
important as knowing your own mind.

9.--More than likely, your own wedding will be influenced by some other
wedding.

10.--Don't worry. Everything is progressing satisfactorily.


Answers Regarding Your Fortunes

1.--Money will come to you, but not until you have worked hard to gain
it.

2.--Expect some important change of position very soon.

3.--Somebody is about to lend you a helping hand.

4.--A large slice of luck will come your way before two moons have run
their course.

5.--Do not be afraid to strike out of the old rut.

6.--You are placing too much faith in friends. Be more self-reliant.

7.--When you are least expecting it, you will get all you deserve, and
more.

8.--Do not be too keen on experiments. Be thankful for what you already
have.

9.--Avoid anything in the nature of "chance" where money is concerned.

10.--You will go on a journey and much benefit will come of it.


THE LUCKY SQUARE

This is a rattling good game for several players. First, give each
person a sheet of paper and a pencil. On the paper, a large square has
to be drawn, such as is used for crossword puzzles. Each side of the
square is divided into six equal portions, and lines are drawn from
side to side and from top to bottom. The figure is now a large square,
divided into thirty-six small squares--six along any horizontal or
vertical row.

[Illustration: No. 35.--The Square required for this game.]

The next thing is to exhibit a card on which is printed the following
signs of the Zodiac:

  _ARIES_
  _CANCER_
  _TAURUS_
  _VIRGO_
  _PISCES_
  _GEMINI_
  _LIBRA_

The card is so placed that the players can see the names and refer to
them during the game.

When play starts, the first person chooses any letter he likes, but
will probably select one which helps to spell one of the words set
out above. He calls out the letter and all the players put it in one
of the squares on their paper. That done, the next person selects any
letter he chooses, and, on calling it out, all the players put it in
another of the squares. The third person does similarly, and so do all
the other players, until the game is stopped by someone or until all
the thirty-six squares are filled.

The aim of each player is to be the first to spell in consecutive
squares, either horizontally or vertically, one of the names of the
signs, as given on the card. And, naturally, the aim of the other
players is to frustrate their opponents. Obviously, it is forbidden for
one person to look at the attempt of another.

The first player to complete a word cries "stop," and if he is adjudged
correct, he has a wish granted to him.

There is a good deal of skill needed in this game. Suppose the first
competitor selects P as his letter. All the others know he is aiming
for "Pisces" and player No. 2 then calls V. Clearly, he is trying for
"Virgo." So player No. 3 quietly calls A which leaves him free to
work on "Aries," "Cancer," "Taurus" or "Libra." Now, suppose No. 3 is
working for "Aries," in calling, say I, he helps No. 1 to the I of
"Pisces," and so on.


WHEN IS YOUR WEDDING?

Several ways are mentioned in this book of finding out which month is
to bring you some particular portion of luck, and here it is proposed
to describe a game of dominoes that tells you the month in which
you are to be married. Nothing is told you about the year of your
nuptials--merely the month, and it is an amusing game for unmarried
people only.

Get out the dominoes and ask an unmarried friend to take a hand with
you. When you have played to the finish, the result will provide one
of you with the name of your marriage month, whichever was previously
decided on. Then, it is usual to play a second game, so that the second
of you may receive enlightenment on the same point.

The game is played in practically the ordinary way that one takes a
hand at dominoes. All the cards from double-six to double-blank are
shot on the table, pips down, and shuffled. Then, each player selects
five cards at random and examines them. The player who is seeking
information lays down any card he or she chooses and then the game
consists in matching the two ends with other cards bearing a number
that will match. This is done by the two players in turn.

If at any point in the game one of the players while still holding a
card cannot match at either end, he or she must draw cards, one by one,
from the heap on the table, until it is possible to match, but one card
must always be left in the heap.

The game ceases when one player has disposed of all his or her cards,
or when the game is shut (i.e., there are no more cards available that
will match seeing that they have all been used) or when neither player
can "go" and there is only one card left in the heap.

As soon as the game is finished, the pips at the two ends of the
formation are added together, and, whatever the addition happens to be,
stands for the number of the month. Thus, if there is a five at one
end and a two at the other, this gives an addition of seven, and the
seventh month is July. It should be remembered that when a "double"
card figures at one end, only the single number is reckoned; thus the
total can never exceed twelve, as two sixes, one at either end, is the
highest possible score.

It will be very quickly appreciated that the thing to avoid is to stop
the game with a blank at both ends. What this means will be perceived
by all players.


THE GAME OF LUCK

L stands for Luck, and that is why the track of the game we are now
discussing is arranged in the form of this letter.

The game, shown on the next page, is played by two or more persons and
the scores are decided by throwing a dice, each person taking a turn.

Should any player arrive at one of the sections marked with a cross,
he must go back to the nearest previous station which is a multiple of
five; also, if he alights on a section marked with shaded lines, i.e.
15, 50 and 75, he goes forward to the next station which is a multiple
of five.

The balloons are so arranged that every player must eventually reach
one of them. This is how his luck or fortune is determined:

Whichever balloon is reached, the figures forming it are added up and
the key is given below.

100 = 1 + 0 + 0 = 1.--You are a favored individual, who should find
the world a very pleasant place. You are proud of yourself and your
near relations, and you have a reputation amongst your friends that you
value. Your worst fault is that you are prone to take yourself a little
too seriously.

101 = 1 + 0 + 1 = 2.--You have a great deal of imagination and are not
slow in recognizing how things will map out in the future. You can turn
your hand to a good number of things and are, thus, a useful member of
society. Your worst fault is that you are prone to believe too much of
what irresponsible people tell you.

102 = 1 + 0 + 2 = 3.--You are a hard worker and you are likely to
pull your weight in the world. You have an exploring nature and love
to go about and see things. Your worst fault is that you are a trifle
domineering and like to be obeyed.

103 = 1 + 0 + 3 = 4.--You have a facility for calculating and you have
a head for business especially if figures play an important part. You
are quick in most of the things you do. Your worst faults lie in the
direction of grumbling and gossiping.

104 = 1 + 0 + 4 = 5.--You have a generous nature and are kindly and
affectionate. In most ways, you are a clear thinker, but you have one
fault. You are extravagant and must have whatever you desire at the
moment, whether you can afford it or not.

105 = 1 + 0 + 5 = 6.--You have a charming personality, pleasing manners
and are entertaining. You are excellent company and make an admirable
friend. You will get on in the world, but, even so, you are not fond of
hard work.

106 = 1 + 0 + 6 = 7.--You are a careful and patient worker: you are
sincere and conscientious; you have an honest desire to get on in the
world. Your greatest fault is that you lack a sense of humor and are
totally unaware that life has a bright side.

[Illustration: No. 36.--The Game of Luck.]


A GAME FOR "GROWN-UP" PARTIES

A good deal of fun can be obtained at "grown-up" parties by giving
marks to the various players, according to their merits, as set out in
some of the chapters of this book: then finding out who obtains the
highest score and adjudging him or her the champion of the evening.

The following details are suggested, but they may be, of course,
altered in any way as thought desirable:

_PALMISTRY._--First, every player's hand is examined, and the person
with the longest Marriage line is awarded five points. Those with
shorter lines are given four, three, two, one or no points, according
to the length of their Marriage lines.

The same process is then followed in the case of the Heart, Head and
Fate lines.

This accounts for a possible total of twenty marks.

_BUMPS._--Second, the players take it in turn to have certain of their
bumps read. For this, the chart of phrenology should be consulted and
a maximum of five points awarded for the best development of the bumps
numbered, on the chart, 2, 5, 6, 7 and 8.

This, also, accounts for a possible total of twenty marks.

_HANDWRITING._--Third, everybody is given a pen and paper, and asked
to write three or four lines of any passage, taken from a newspaper,
in the usual handwriting. Anyone who obviously disguises or distorts
his or her writing can be dealt a low mark. When all have finished the
papers are examined and assessed according to the hints printed under
the heading "Qualities Shown in Handwriting, Alphabetically Arranged."

The writing is tested for the following:

Accuracy, Generosity, Ingenuity, Logic and Wit. As the papers take a
little time to check, it is advisable for a helper to attend to them
while the next item is progressing.

If five marks are the highest awarded for each test, this will account
for a further twenty marks.

_THE ORACLE._--Fourth, turn to the Oracle on p. 138, and allow each
person to rotate the pencil and strike a number, the eyes being shut
during the performance.

Give ten points to the player with the lowest score and deduct one
point from ten for each successive score.

This will account for a possible total of ten points.

_THE ZODIAC WHEEL._--Fifth, the Zodiac Wheel is set up and each person,
before being blindfolded, states the month in which he or she was
born, and then asks a question. If the wheel answers "Yes," the player
receives ten points; if the reply is "probably yes," then the player is
awarded six points; while four points are given for the answer "there
is a fair chance."

Here the game may end or it may be continued, at will, by introducing
further items. If the program we outline is adhered to, the total of
possible marks is eighty.

[Illustration: No. 37.--The Wish-Bone of a chicken will provide some
good fun. Two rivals hold a tip with two fingers; but their fingers
must not grasp higher up the shank than indicated by the arrows. Then
they tussle to see who can snap off the larger part of the bone. The
winner frames a wish which, of course, is sure to be granted.]




THE LUCK OF WEDDINGS AND MARRIAGES


It seems only natural that many superstitions should cluster around a
bride and her wedding day, since from the dawn of civilization, if not
the birth of humanity, all the world has loved a lover. Every act of
hers, according to lore, is fraught with significance and attended by
good or evil fortune, and she is hedged round on every hand by customs
and conventions as old as the hills.


LUCKY AND UNLUCKY TIMES

The season of the year is an important consideration. She must avoid
Lent if she hopes for good luck, but the forty days following Easter
are supposed to be extremely fortunate for the celebration of nuptials;
and so is June, which takes its name from Juno, the goddess who is
generally regarded as the patroness of womankind.

If she values her prospects of happiness, a bride will avoid May. The
belief dates from the time of the Romans, who observed the Festival of
the Dead at that time. All other religious ceremonies and observances
were neglected for the time being, even the temples were closed, and
those who contracted matrimony then were considered to be acting
in defiance of the Fates, who revenged themselves on the foolhardy
mortals. In Scotland the feeling against May marriages dates back to
the time of that most fascinating and tragic figure in history, Mary
Stuart, who married her third husband, the Earl of Bothwell, then
aroused criticism by wearing blue and white, and lived so unhappily all
the rest of her life. Superstitious people shook their heads at the
temerity of King Alfonso and Princess Ena of Battenberg, who elected to
be married on May 31, and were the objects of a dastardly attempt on
their lives whilst on their way back to the palace.


WHEN TO MARRY

    Marry when the year is new,
    Always loving, kind, and true.
    When _FEBRUARY_ birds do mate
    You may wed or dread your fate.
    If you wed when _MARCH_ winds blow
    Joy and sorrow both you'll know.
    Marry in _APRIL_ when you can--
    Joy for maiden and for man.
    Marry in the month of _MAY_
    You will surely rue the day.
    Marry when _JUNE_ roses blow
    Over land and sea you'll go.
    They who in _JULY_ do wed,
    Must labor always for their bread.
    Whoever wed in _AUGUST_ be
    Many a change are sure to see.
    Marry in _SEPTEMBER'S_ shine
    Your living will be rich and fine.
    If in _OCTOBER_ you do marry
    Love will come, but riches tarry.
    If you wed in bleak _NOVEMBER_,
    Only joy will come, remember.
    When _DECEMBER_ snows fall fast
    Marry and true love will last.

Another poet has given us a different version of the same theme:

    Married in January's frost and rime,
    Widowed you'll be before your time;
    Married in February's sleety weather,
    Life you'll tread in tune together;
    Married when March winds shrill and roar,
    Your home will lie on a foreign shore;
    Married 'neath April's changeful skies,
    A checkered path before you lies;
    Married when bees or May-blooms flit,
    Strangers around your board will sit;
    Married in queen-rose month of June,
    Life will be one long honeymoon;
    Married in July's flower-banks' blaze
    Bitter-sweet memories in after days;
    Married in August's heat and drowse,
    Lover and friend in your chosen spouse;
    Married in gold September's glow,
    Smooth and serene your life will flow;
    Married when leaves in October thin,
    Toil and hardship for you begin;
    Married in veils of November mist,
    Fortune your wedding ring has kissed;
    When December's snows fall fast
    Marry and true love will last.


THE LUCKY WEDDING DAY

    Monday for health,
    Tuesday for wealth,
    Wednesday the best day of all;
    Thursday for losses,
    Friday for crosses,
    Saturday no luck at all.


MARRIAGE DAY SUPERSTITIONS

Superstitions and customs vary greatly in different countries and
periods, but they all bear somehow a strong family resemblance.

For instance, one old English proverb runs: "Blest be the bride that
the sun shines on," yet in Germany a bride prays for rain, believing
that a new joy comes with each raindrop, and that then all her tears
will be shed before, and not after, her wedding. There, too, it used to
be the custom to take a lot of old dishes to the door of the bride's
house and break them to pieces in the street, and if by any chance one
escaped, it was accepted as a bad omen.

In China, however, when a marriage was being arranged, and any article
of value, such as a vase or a bowl, was broken the ceremony was
postponed.

At the wedding feast in Scandinavia someone makes a speech or sings
a song, which ends up in a tremendous noise, and this is the signal
for a general peal of laughter and for the guests to present their
congratulations to the newly-wedded couple.

The Slavs pour a tankard of beer over the bridegroom's horse for luck,
and in the North of England, the maid pours a kettle of hot water over
the doorstep to ensure that another wedding will take place ere long
from the same house.

A curious idea among the Burmese is that people born on the same day of
the week must not marry, and that if they defy the Fates their union
will be marked by much ill-luck.

To prevent these disastrous marriages, every girl carries a record
of her birthday in her name, each day of the week having a letter
belonging to it, and all children are called by a name that begins with
that letter.

In New Guinea it is always Leap Year, for in that island the men
consider it to be beneath their dignity to notice women, much less to
make overtures of marriage to them. The proposing is left to the women
to do. When a New Guinea woman falls in love with a man she sends a
piece of string to his sister, or, if he has no sister, to his mother
or some other lady relative.

Then the lady who receives the string tells the man that the particular
woman is in love with him. No courting, however, follows. If he thinks
he would like to wed the woman he meets her alone and they arrange
matters.


OMENS OF GOOD OR ILL

There are so many things for good or ill which the bride herself must
or must not do that she would have a very anxious time keeping them all
in mind if she is very superstitious. These customs begin on the eve of
her wedding, when, for luck, she steps on a chair, and then mounts the
table to ensure good fortune and a rise in the world.

On the morning of the day--the happy day--if she should be awakened
by the singing or chirping of a bird, even of a sparrow, or by
swallows sweeping past her lattice at dawn, she may accept these as
signs of great good luck. She must be careful, however, not to break
anything, particularly the heel of her slipper, as such things spell
disagreement and trouble with her new relations.

A cat mewing betokens the same undesirable state of affairs, so she
would be wise to see that it has its breakfast in time. If it sneezes,
that means the best of luck.

The bride must not gaze on her reflections, however pleasing, in
the mirror, after she has fully dressed. If she happens to do so,
then she must put another pin in her veil, button her glove, or make
some addition to her toilette, to avert evil consequences. The girl
who keeps a pin removed from the bridal veil is not supposed to get
married, and yet in Brittany the girl who secures one, makes sure of a
speedy marriage.

If a small spider is found in the folds of the bridal gown or
trousseau, it is accepted as an excellent sign that money will never be
wanting in the family, but the spider should not be killed: it must be
taken out of doors.

Under no circumstances may the bride read or listen to the reading of
the wedding service immediately before the ceremony, not even on the
day previous. She must not try on her wedding ring, and if it falls
during the ceremony woe betide her. It is considered unlucky to pass
a funeral on the way to church, or to meet a monk, a pig, a hare, a
lizard or a serpent. On the other hand, it is a happy omen to encounter
a lamb or a dove, as both of these are emblems of Christ, and the only
forms into which the Evil One cannot enter, according to mediaeval
superstition.

A storm of thunder and lightning during the service is regarded as
fateful, and so is an open grave in the churchyard. In entering the
church and returning to her home or the place where the reception is
held, the bride should step with her right foot first. If she sees
her groom before he sees her, she will rule him absolutely, but if he
forestalls her glance, then he will be the master.

The bride and bridegroom are not supposed to meet each other until
they do so at the altar, and in former times a bride did not appear at
breakfast, or even emerge from her room, until she was fully attired
and ready to go to church.

The forward individual who steals the first kiss before the bridegroom
has had a chance to do so is supposed to ensure good luck throughout
the year. It was wont to be the prerogative of the clergyman, but it
seems a trifle hard on the newly-made husband.


THE ORIGIN OF MARRIAGE CUSTOMS

Since marriage is usually regarded as the chief event of life, for
a woman at least, and as most women are highly superstitious, it is
not surprising to find that every detail surrounding the auspicious
occasion is enveloped in a web of legendary lore.

_THE BRIDAL WREATH._--In ancient times in England bride and bridegroom
alike wore wreaths conserved specially for their use in church, and
in the thirteenth century the bridal chaplet frequently consisted of
ears of corn--signifying plenty. Rosemary was considered lucky in
Shakespeare's day. "There's rosemary, that's for remembrance."

_ORANGE BLOSSOM._--These spotless blossoms, which betoken purity and
innocence, and are symbolical of a prosperous life, are supposed to
have been first brought by pilgrims from the Holy Land, and thereby
possess a religious significance.

_THE BRIDE'S VEIL._--This was originally a fine piece of cloth held
over the couple during the ceremony. Later on it was only held over
the bride, as it was supposed she was more in need of it than her
bridegroom, and so it became part of her attire. In Ireland the old
custom still prevails of a sprig of mistletoe, or a twig of hawthorn,
being used to keep her veil in place.

_THE WEDDING RING._--Since earliest times the giving or exchanging of
rings cemented any and every contract. Amongst the early Christians,
the thumb and first two fingers typified the Trinity, and the husband
placed the ring on his wife's finger in the threefold Holy name.
Some authorities believed that the third finger of the left hand was
connected by a nerve or artery with the heart, hence its choice for
this purpose.

_THE BRIDE'S CAKE._--This important part of the wedding feast has come
down to us from the Romans, who baked one compounded of flour, salt,
and water, which was partaken of by the bridal pair and their friends
as they witnessed the wedding contract.

_THE BRIDE'S DOWRY._--The phrase "with all my worldly wealth I thee
endow" dates back to primitive times when a man bartered so many head
of cattle for his bride. This money, known as "dow," or "dower," was
originally handed over during the ceremony, and in the course of
centuries the bride's father provided its equivalent either in money or
kind.

Later still the bride herself spun the linen for her portion, and
was not regarded as eligible for wifehood until she had stocked a
chest with her handiwork. The term spinster arose in this way, and
if a girl's marriage was delayed until she was of mature age she
occasionally sold the contents of her linen chest and set aside the
proceeds as her dowry. The box, with a lid which is to be found in
old-fashioned chests and trunks, was destined as a receptacle for money
thus earned and earmarked.

_THE GOING AWAY._--The rice and confetti thrown after the newly-wedded
couple signifies fruitfulness and plenty, and the flowers, usually
roses from which the thorns have been extracted, bestrewing their path
denoted happiness, just as the orange blossom and the myrtle of the
bridal bouquet were emblems of constancy and never-dying love.

_THROWING OLD SHOES._--In Anglo-Saxon marriages the bride's father
presented his daughter's shoe to her bridegroom, who touched her on
the head with it to remind her that he was now her master. Then the
throwing of shoes came to be considered a sign of good luck. "Nowe,
for goode lucke caste an olde shoe after mee." The custom, too, is
symbolical of the parting of the new life from the old, or of shaking
the dust of a place from one's feet and severing all connection with it.

_A TEAR HANDKERCHIEF._--In some parts of the Tyrol a beautiful old
custom is still observed. When the bride is starting for the church,
her mother gives her a fine handkerchief, woven for the purpose of
the best linen possible. This is called the "Tear-Kerchief," and with
it the girl is supposed to dry the tears she will naturally shed on
leaving home.

After the marriage-day the "Tear-Kerchief" is folded up carefully and
laid in the linen closet, where it remains till its owner's death; then
it is taken out and spread over her face.


THE BRIDAL DRESS

    Something old, something new,
    Something borrowed, something blue.

So runs the ancient rhyme regarding the bride's wedding dress. White is
the popular wear, and has been for several centuries, but previously
yellow, pink, and a brilliant scarlet were frequently chosen, unless
by a girl named Mary, who was expected to wear blue, the Virgin's
sacred color. Some years ago, the daughter of a duke, who was united
in marriage to a commoner, shocked society by insisting on a "green"
wedding. In less than a year, she and her baby were buried in the
family tomb.


WHICH COLOR

    Married in white, you have chosen aright.
    Married in green, ashamed to be seen.
    Married in grey, you will go far away.
    Married in red, you will wish yourself dead.
    Married in blue, love ever true.
    Married in yellow, ashamed of your fellow.
    Married in black, you will wish yourself back.
    Married in pink, your spirits will sink.
    Married in brown, you'll live out of town.
    Married in pearl, you'll live in a whirl.


THE BRIDEGROOM

The groom, as the secondary figure in the day's ceremonies, escapes
very easily as far as superstition goes, and may do pretty well what he
pleases, save letting his hat or the ring drop, both of which are very
unlucky. He should carry a tiny horseshoe in his pocket, and fee the
clergyman with an odd sum of money.

No one ought to hand him or his bride a telegram on the way to church,
and if he wishes to be master in his own house, then he must take care
to see her before she has time to catch a glimpse of him ere arriving
at the altar.


MARRIAGE PROVERBS

Happy is the wooing that's not long in doing.

Marrying for love is risky, but God smiles on it.

The married man must turn his staff into a stake.

    Mary in May, rue for aye.
    Marry in Lent, live to repent.

Advent marriage doth deny, but Hilary gives thee liberty: Septuagesima
says thee nay, eight days from Easter says you may: Rogation bids thee
to contain, but Trinity sets thee free again.

Happy is the bride that the sun shines on.

My son's my son till he gets him a wife.

To change the name and not the letter is to change for the worse and
not the better.

Wedlock's a padlock.

He who marrieth does well; but he who refrains from marriage doth
better.

    Needles and pins; needles and pins,
    When a man marries, his trouble begins.

          Honest men marry soon,
          Wise men not at all.

Marry in haste: repent at leisure.

He who repents him not of his marriage, sleeping and waking, in a year
and a day, may lawfully go to Dunmow and fetch a gammon of bacon.

It will not always be a honeymoon.

Keep your eyes wide open before marriage and half shut afterwards.

Lips, however rosy, need feeding.

Marriage with peace is the world's paradise: with strife, this life's
purgatory.

Marry above your match, and you get a good master.

Marry for love and work for silver.

Marriages are made in heaven.

Don't marry for money, but seek where money is.

A man may not wive, and also thrive all in the same year.

Better be half hanged than ill wed.

He that marries for wealth sells his liberty.

He that marries late, marries ill.

He that is needy when he is married shall be rich when he is buried.

Better have an old man to humor than a young rake to break your heart.

Marry your sons when they will; your daughters when you can.

Marry your daughters betimes, lest they marry themselves.

Two heads are better than one, or why do folks marry?




FOLKLORE AND SUPERSTITIONS OF THE MONTHS


JANUARY

This month is so called in honor of the god Janus, who is always
depicted with two faces or heads, one to look forwards, the other
backwards. His work was to preside over the beginning of any new thing
and, ever since his time, people have invoked his aid and sympathy when
they have been setting out on some new enterprise. On New Year's Day,
the Romans gave presents to one another, much as we do at Christmas,
but accompanying the gifts was usually a small copper token showing the
double head of Janus. To possess one of these tokens ensured prosperity
when commencing some new work, and it was supposed to carry enterprises
already started, but not yet finished, to a successful conclusion. The
accompanying illustration gives a reproduction of one of the tokens
used.

[Illustration: No. 38.--Janus, the Two-Headed God. On New Year's Day
the Romans gave copper medallions bearing this device to their friends.
To possess such a medallion was a sure way to be lucky in commencing
any new piece of work or any new enterprise.]

_NEW YEAR SUPERSTITIONS._--Endless are the superstitions which have
gathered around the dawn of the New Year, which, although neither a
Christian nor a Church festival, afford sober reflection to many.
In several districts, the custom known as "first-footing" is still
common. People wait until the old year has been rung out and then they
call on their friends to wish them a happy new year. They must not
go empty-handed, however, or this will provide a lean year for the
friends. A cake will ensure abundance, a red herring stands for luck,
and the gift of even the smallest coin is a certain portent that a
lucky financial year is opening.

While anyone is free to pay these visits, it is much the happiest omen
if the caller be a man, a dark-haired man, and if he takes with him a
lump of coal and a fish. Any fish serves the purpose--even a tin of
sardines. Let a man, answering these requisites, be the first to cross
the threshold of your door, after the old year has gone, and there is
no better way of entering on the new year.

Another custom, which has many supporters, is to tidy up the house, to
build up the fires and to open wide the front door, just when the old
year is departing. The open door allows the exhausted year to make its
exit completely. It is then supposed to take with it anything savoring
of ill-fortune. The tidy house welcomes the new year in a spirit of
brightness and gladness.

For a clock to stop just as the new year is coming in, or to be found
to have stopped then, is an ill omen. Therefore, householders have
long been careful to give an eye to their timepieces some little while
before.

Weather-lore regarding the new year is plentiful. Here is a well-known
rhyme:

    If on New Year's night wind blow south,
    It betokeneth warmth and growth:
    If west, much milk and fish in the sea:
    If north, much cold and snow there will be:
    If east, the trees will bear much fruit:
    If north-east, flee it, man and brute.

January has been described as follows:

    The blackest month in all the year
        Is the month of Janiveer.
    In Janiveer, if the sun appear,
        March and April will pay full dear.
    If January calends be summerly gay,
        It will be winterly weather till the calends of May.

(The calends, it may be explained, were the first days of the months.)


_ST. PAUL'S DAY_ (January 25th)

    If St. Paul's Day be faire and cleare,
        It doth betide a happy year:
    But if by chance it then should rain,
        It will make deare all kinds of graine:

    And if ye clouds make dark ye sky,
        Then meate and fowles this year shall die:
    If blustering winds do blow aloft,
        Then wars shall trouble ye realm full oft.


FEBRUARY

February derives its name from Februare--to expiate, to purify. In this
connection, it is interesting to note that on the 2nd of the month
falls Candlemas Day, which is the purification of the Blessed Virgin
Mary.


_CANDLEMAS DAY_ (February 2nd)

  (a) If Candlemas Day be fair and bright,
      Winter will have another flight:
      But if Candlemas Day brings clouds and rain,
        Winter is gone and won't come again.

  (b) If Candlemas Day be fine and clear,
      Corn and fruits will then be dear.
        (There'll be twa winters in the year.)


_ST. VALENTINE'S DAY_ (February 14th).--Like so many of our old
observances, the festival of St. Valentine dates from the time of the
Romans, but the Church rechristened the custom and called it after one
or two saints of the name, both of whom were martyred, one in the third
and the other in the fourth century.

Latterly, the day has been dedicated to Cupid by fond lovers who
believe it to be the date on which each bird chooses its mate.

The poet Drayton sings:--

    Each little bird this tide
      Doth choose her loved peer,
    Which constantly abide
      In wedlock all the year.

Charms and omens are in favor on St. Valentine's Eve. Maidens decorate
their pillows with five bay leaves and firmly believe that, if they
dream of their lover then, they will be married to him in the course
of the year. Another fancy is that the first person of the opposite
sex whom one encounters, that morning is destined to be one's husband
or wife. Naturally, there must be some sort of friendship in view
previously.

A weather prophecy regarding February runs:--

    All the months in the year
    Curse a fair Februeer.
    February fill the dyke,
    Weather, either black or white.
    If February gives much snow,
    A fine summer it doth foreshow.

In Cornwall, there is a proverb, "A February spring is not worth a
pin," and the same thought is expressed in Wales by the saying that
"The Welshman had rather see his dam on the bier than to see a fair
Februeer."


MARCH

March was given its name by the Romans in honor of Mars, the God of
War, as at this time of the year the weather was such that it enabled
them to begin their campaigns after the worst of the winter was over.
The Saxons called this month _LENET MONAT_, meaning "length month," in
reference to the lengthening of the days.

Several weather prophecies refer to March:--

  (a) A peck of March dust and a shower in May
      Make the corn green and the fields gay.

  (b) As many mists in March you see,
      So many frosts in May will be.

  (c) A peck of March dust is worth a king's ransom.

  (d) March damp and warm
      Will do farmers much harm.

  (e) Eat leeks in March and garlic in May,
      And all the year after physicians may play.

  (f) March search, April try,
      May will prove whether you live or die.

  (g) If on St. Mary's Day (March 25th) it's bright and clear
      Fertile 'tis said will be the year.

  (h) A dry and cold March never begs its bread.

  (i) A frosty winter, a dusty March, a rain about Averil, another
  about the Lammas time (Aug. 1st), when the corn begins
  to fill, is worth a plough of gold.

  (j) March flowers make no summer bowers.

  (k) March winds and April showers bring forth May flowers.

  (l) Whatever March does not want, April brings along.

  (m) On Shrove Tuesday night, though thy supper be fat,
      Before Easter Day thou mayst fast for all that.


APRIL

The word April is probably derived from the Latin, _Aperio_, I open,
since spring generally begins and Nature unfolds her buds in this month.

April is regarded as the most sacred month in the calendar of the
Church, since it usually includes Good Friday, on which day blacksmiths
once refused to work owing to the fact that one son of Vulcan made the
nails for the Crucifixion.

_FIRST OF APRIL._--The great majority of the old-time customs which
clustered round this day and contributed a dash of gaiety and humor
to the more prosaic, everyday life of the community, have fallen into
the limbo of forgotten things, and the day is chiefly remembered by
schoolchildren, who exercise their juvenile ingenuity in playing pranks
on their fellows.

The most careful research has failed to ascertain the exact origin of
these observances, and someone has hazarded the theory that they began
with the advent of the second man on earth, who sought to try the
effects of a practical joke on the first.

Anyhow, a form of fooling may be traced to the time of the Roman
Empire, but little mention of such a thing is to be found in English
literature until the eighteenth century, although "Hunting the Gowk,"
the sending of some half-witted youth, the village idiot, on some
utterly absurd errand from house to house, was long before then a
favorite pastime in Scotland, and in France, too.

A weather prophecy for this day runs:

    If it thunders on All Fools Day,
    It brings good crops of corn and hay.

_SIMNEL OR MOTHERING SUNDAY._--It is a very old custom to make rich
cakes during Lent and Easter, which are known as Simnel cakes. In South
Lancashire the fourth Sunday of Lent is known as Simnel or Mothering
Sunday, and young people provide themselves with delicious cakes
"'gainst they go a-mothering." The sons and daughters present these to
their mothers, who in turn regale their families with "furmenty" or
"frumenty," derived from froment (wheat), as the dish was made of wheat
and milk, with the addition of a few raisins. For children to fail in
paying this compliment to their mothers is sometimes taken as a sign
that they will have no further opportunity of doing so.

_GOOD FRIDAY._--It is a misnomer to name the world's blackest Friday
thus, but the words are a corruption of _GOD'S FRIDAY_. Many quaint
and curious customs are connected with its celebration, the origins of
which are not merely secular but pagan, as well.

For instance, the worship of Terminus, the Romans' pagan god, has
still left its mark on Christian England, where, in certain parishes,
the custom known as "beating the bounds" is still kept up. Terminus
decreed that everyone possessing land should mark the boundaries with
stones and pay honor to Jupiter once a year. Failure to do this would
invoke the wrath of Jupiter and the crops growing on the land would
be blighted. Good Friday or the days previous were marked out for the
ceremony.

A wet Good Friday has always been considered favorable for crops,
although people on pleasure bent will think otherwise:

"A wet Good Friday and a wet Easter Day foreshows a fruitful year."

It may be useful to add here a saying about the day previous to Good
Friday; it runs, "Fine on Holy Thursday, wet on Whit-Monday. Fine on
Whit-Monday, wet on Holy Thursday."

_HOT-CROSS BUNS._--Hot-cross buns may be either a survival of the
sacred cakes offered in the temples to the gods, or of the unleavened
bread eaten by the Jews at the Passover. Bread marked with crosses was
common in ancient Egypt before the days of Christianity. It is an old
belief that the eating of buns on this day protects the house from
fire, and other virtues are ascribed to them. For instance, to eat such
a bun grants a wish that you may be anxious to realize.

_EASTER._--This name is derived from _Eoster_, the goddess of light and
of spring, in whose honor a festival was held in the month of April.
Few, if any of the old customs observed at this time still survive.

Eggs, as being the emblem of the Resurrection, are peculiar to the
feast of Easter, and it is lucky to eat them on the morning of
Easter Sunday. At one time, paschal candles were lit to signify the
Resurrection of our Lord. These were of colossal size, and each church
seemed to vie with its neighbor as to which should have the largest.
Easter Sunday was known as Joy Sunday, and was celebrated by gifts
to the poor and the liberation of prisoners. It was a time when all
differences of opinion should be swept aside and enemies should be
forgiven. To harbor enmity against others was to ensure a time of
blackness for oneself.

Many curious customs used to be observed. Most of them have fallen into
decay, but in some parts of the country bouquets in the form of balls
are still presented, and graves are decorated with sweet spring flowers.

Weather observances are numerous:--

  (a) April weather.
      Rain and sunshine both together.

  (b) If the first three days in April be foggy,
      Rain in June will make the lanes boggy.

  (c) If Christmas is snow, Easter is mud.

  (d) If Easter is late, there will be a long, cold spring.

  (e) A dry April, not the farmer's will.
      April wet is what he would get.

  (f) When April blows his horn (i.e., thunders),
      It's good for hay and corn.


MAY

Some authorities maintain that the month takes its name from Maia, the
mother of the god Hermes or Mercury; others claim that it comes from
Majores or Maiores, the Senate of the first constitution of Rome.

_WHITSUNTIDE._--Whitsuntide, which shares pride of place in the Church
Calendar with Christmas and Easter, is closely connected with the
Jewish feast of Pentecost, which became identified with one of the
great summer festivals of the pagan inhabitants of Western Europe, and
this idea is borne out by the fact that Whitsuntide has always been
the most popular festival period of the year.

It was commonly celebrated in all parts of the country by what was
termed Whitsun ale, which was usually consumed under the auspices of
the churchwardens in some barn near the church, when all assembled
agreed to be good friends for once in the year and spend the day in
"sober" joy.

The day was a prolonged picnic, for each parishioner brought what
victuals he could spare. The squire and his lady came with their pipe
and taborer, the young folk danced or played at bowls, and the old
looked on while they sipped their ale, which was brewed fairly strong
for the occasion and sold by the churchwardens for the repairs of the
church.

During the Middle Ages, Whitsun services were marked by some curious
customs, one of which was the letting down of a dove from the roof,
another the dropping of balls of fire, of rose leaves, and the like.

_THE MORRIS DANCES._--Whitsuntide was pre-eminently the time for the
performance of the Morris dances, which some suppose derive their
name from the Spanish Moriseo, a Moor, and the dance was originally
identified with the fandango. Others believed them to be connected
with one of the season's pagan observances prevalent amongst primitive
communities and associated in some mysterious manner with the
fertilization and slaughter of all living things.

Usually the Morris dances were only performed at special seasons once
or twice a year, and in some districts they were only indulged in at
Christmas. It is highly significant, and bears out the belief in the
religious origin of the movement, that the first of the Whitsuntide
dances in some villages was performed on the top of the tower of the
church. Lucky indeed were those who took part in these church-top
revels, for they were certain to be free of the devil's attentions for
some while to come.

Weather lore affirms the following:--

  (a) Dry May
      Brings nothing gay.

  (b) Mist in May, heat in June,
      Makes the harvest come right soon.

  (c) Shear your sheep in May,
      And shear them all away.

  (d) Change not a clout
      Till May be out.

  (e) A dry May and a leaking June
      Make the farmer whistle a merry tune.

  (f) A May wet was never kind yet.

  (g) For an east wind in May,
      'Tis your duty to pray.

  (h) Fogs in February mean frosts in May.

  (i) Who shears his sheep before St. Gervatius' Day
      (May 13th), loves more his wool than his sheep.


JUNE

June owes its name to Juno, the goddess of heaven, who takes a special
interest in women and protects their interests. She is supposed to
accompany every woman through life, from the moment of her birth to her
death. Little wonder, then, that the women of ancient times considered
that, by propitiating Juno, their fortunes were assured. This they
usually did on their birthdays.

Midsummer Day (June 24th) is sacred to the memory of John the Baptist,
and the ceremonies practised at this season in the Middle Ages were
partly relics of the saints and partly relics of old sun worship. Great
fires of wood or bones blazed on every mountain top, and were supposed
to be typical of the saint, who was called a burning and a shining
light.

These Beltane fires burned often on bare, flat rocks, not only in
England, Scotland, and Ireland, but on the Alps, the Hartz Mountains,
and elsewhere. It was a great thing to be present at or in view of one
of these fires, for the evil spirit was dispelled by the potency of the
light and flames.

Rhymes regarding June:--

  (a) A dripping June
      Brings all things in tune.

  (b) If St. Vitus' Day (June 14th) be rainy weather,
      It will rain for thirty days together.

  (c) He who bathes in May will soon be laid in clay;
      He who bathes in June will sing a merry tune;
      But he who bathes in July will dance like a fly.

  (d) Look at your corn in May,
        And you will come weeping away:
      Look at the same in June,
        And you'll sing a merry tune.
  (e) June, damp and warm, does the farmer no harm.

  (f) If it rains on Midsummer Eve, the filberts will be spoilt.


JULY

This month was so named in honor of Julius Caesar, whose birth-month it
was. The Saxons called it Hey Monat on account of the hay harvest.

The following old sayings regarding July may be noted with interest:--

  (a) A shower of rain in July,
        When the corn begins to fill
      Is worth a plough of oxen
        And all belonging theretill.

  (b) Ne'er trust a July sky.

  (c) Whatever July and August do not boil, September cannot fry.

  (d) If the first of July it be rainy weather,
      It will rain more or less for four weeks together.

  (e) Dog days bright and clear
        Indicate a happy year.
      But when accompanied by rain,
        For better times our hopes are vain.
      (The dog days are from July 3rd to Aug. 11th.)

  (f) St. Swithin's Day, if ye do rain,
        For forty days it will remain.
      St. Swithin's Day an ye be fair,
        For forty days 'twill rain nae mair.
      (St. Swithin's Day is July 15th.)

  (h) Whoever eats oysters on St. James's Day will never want
  money. (July 25th.)


AUGUST

Augustus Caesar, not to be behind Julius, named this month in honor of
himself. He was born in September, and it may seem strange that he did
not bestow his name on that month; but he preferred August as a number
of lucky incidents befell him then, and he gained several important
victories.

Rhyming prophecies regarding this month are as follows:--

  (a) If Bartlemy's Day (Aug. 24th) be fair and clear,
      Hope for a prosperous autumn that year.

  (b) Dry August and warm,
      Doth harvest no harm.

  (c) Yet there is a saying that "A wet August never brings dearth."

  (d) On St. Mary's Day (Aug. 15th) sunshine
      Brings much good wine.

  (e) So many August fogs,
      So many winter mists.

  (f) Mud in May means bread in August.

  (g) After Lammas (Aug. 1st) the corn ripens as much by
  night as by day.

  (h) As the Dog days commence, so they end.
      (The Dog days are from July 3rd to Aug. 11th.)

  (i) All the tears that St. Swithin can cry,
      St. Bartlemy's dusty mantle wipes dry.

 (St. Swithin's Day is July 15th, and St. Bartlemy's Day Aug. 24th.)


SEPTEMBER

September takes its name from the Latin word, _septem_, meaning seven.
It was the seventh month of the year as long as March was constituted
the first month. The Saxons named it Gerst Monat, or barley month,
because they reaped the barley then.

Sayings regarding the month:--

  (a) If it be fair on the First, it will be fair all the month.

  (b) A wet June makes a dry September.

  (c) September blow soft,
      Until the fruit is in the loft.

  (d) If Matthew's Day (Sept. 21st) is bright and clear
      There will be good wine in the coming year.

  (e) If the hart and the hind meet dry and part dry on Rood Day
  Fair (Sept. 14th), for six weeks there will be no more rain.

  (f) If on September 19th there is a storm from the south, a mild
  winter is certain.

  (g) If it does not rain on St. Michael's (Sept. 29th) and Gallus
  (Oct. 16th), a dry spring is certain for the coming year.

  (h) If St. Michael's (Sept. 29th) brings many acorns, Christmas will
  cover the fields with snow.

  (i) So many days old the moon on Michaelmas Day (Sept. 29th), so
  many floods after.

  (j) Michaelmas chickens and parsons' daughters never come to good.


OCTOBER

October is so called from being the eighth month in the old Latin
calendar.

_ALL HALLOW E'EN._--Hallow E'en, the vigil of All Saints' Day, was wont
to be a season of merry gathering and quaint observances, especially
where lovers were concerned. It is still kept up with great success
in Scotland. Propitious omens were sought. Nuts, for instance, were
burnt in pairs. If they lay still and burned together, it meant a happy
marriage, but if they flew apart, the lovers would not live in harmony.
All sorts of charms were practised. Girls pared apples and sought to
discern an initial in the shape the peel assumed. The apple had to be
peeled in one strip without any break, and the whole strip was then
thrown over the left shoulder. Also, they stuck an apple pip on each
cheek, and that which fell off first indicated that the love of him
whose name it bore was unsound.

The customs varied with the locality, but many of them were not unlike
the rites of St. Valentine's Day. Burns's poem enshrined most of the
Scottish practices, such as throwing a ball of blue yarn into a kiln,
winding it in a new one off the old, and, as the end was approached,
the maiden enquired, "Who holds?" and a voice from the kiln-pot gave
her the name of her future spouse.

Some girls took a candle into a dark room and peered into a looking
glass while they ate an apple or combed their hair, and saw the face
of their true love looking over their shoulder. Others went out into
the garden in couples, hand in hand, with eyes shut, and pulled the
first kail-runt or plant they came to. According to its being big or
little, straight or crooked, it was regarded as prophetic of the kind
of man they would marry. If the heart of the stem was soft or hard, so
would be the man's nature, and, if any earth adhered to the root, it
signified "tocher" or fortune.

October prophecies:--

  (a) If October brings much frost and wind,
      Then are January and February mild.

  (b) Dry your barley in October and you will always be sober.

  (c) In October manure your field,
      And your land its wealth shall yield.

  (d) October never has more than fifteen fine days.


NOVEMBER

November was the ninth month according to the old Latin calendar. It
was known as Wint Monat, or wind month, by the Saxons, as the stormy
weather then experienced prevented the Vikings putting to sea and
attacking their shores. It was sometimes called Blot Monat, or blood
month, as it was then customary to kill large numbers of cattle and
salt them for winter use.

November prophecies:

  (a) If ducks do slide at Hollantide (Nov. 11th),
      At Christmas they will swim.
      If ducks do swim at Hollantide,
      At Christmas they will slide.

  (b) At St. Martin's Day (Nov. 11th),
      Winter is on the way.

  (c) Set trees at Allhallo'n-tide (Nov. 1st), and command them to
  grow. Set them at Candlemas (Feb. 2nd) and beg them to
  prosper.

  (d) Where the wind is on Martinmas Eve, (Nov. 10th), there it will
  be for the rest of the winter.

  (e) If there be ice that will bear a duck before Martinmas (Nov. 11th),
  there will be none that will bear a goose all the winter.

  (f) Wind north-west at Martinmas (Nov. 11th), severe winter to
  come.

  (g) As at Catherine (Nov. 25th), foul or fair, so will be the next
  February.


DECEMBER

_Decem_ means ten and December was the tenth month of the early Roman
calendar. Probably it has had more names conferred upon it than any
other of the twelve months. Among the Saxons, it was originally Winter
Monat, but after their conversion to Christianity, it was Heligh Monat,
or holy month, in honor of the birth of Christ.

December proverbs:

  (a) December frost and January flood,
      Never boded the husbandman good.

  (b) Frost on the shortest day (Dec. 22nd) indicates a severe winter.

  (c) The day of St. Thomas, the blessed divine
      Is good for brewing, baking and killing fat swine.
      (St. Thomas's Day is Dec. 21st.)

  (d) Never rued the man that laid in his fuel before St. John
  (Dec. 27).

_CHRISTMAS EVE._--The Latin Church called Christmas the Feast of
Lights, because Christ, the true light, had come into the world, hence
the Christmas candle and the Yule log, which sometimes were of immense
size.

    "Now blocks to cleave this time requires,
    'Gainst Christmas for to make good fires."

In the western parts of Devonshire, a superstitious notion prevails
that on Christmas Eve at 12 o'clock the oxen in the stalls are found on
their knees, as in an attitude of devotion.

Mince pies were intended to represent the offerings of the wise men. As
many of the ingredients come from the East, the connection of ideas is
plain, but what can be the origin of the notion that it is desirable to
eat mince pies made by as many different cooks as possible to ensure as
many happy months is not so easily explained. Some authorities are of
the opinion that mince pies were formerly baked in coffin-shaped crusts
intended to represent the manger, but in all old cookery-books the
crust of a pie was styled the coffin.

It is said, by those who should be able to speak with authority, that
ghosts never appear on the night of December 24th-25th. This is a fact
that Charles Dickens must have overlooked.

Christmas Proverbs, etc.:--

 (a) A warm Christmas, a cold Easter.

 (b) A green Christmas, a white Easter.

 (c) Christmas in snow, Easter in wind.

 (d) Christmas wet, empty granary and barrel.

 (e) If there is wind on Christmas Day, there will be much fruit the
 following year.

 (f) Snow at Christmas brings a good hay crop next year.

 (g) If Christmas falls on a Sunday, there is good luck in store for
 all of us.

 (h) A child that's born on Christmas Day, is fair, and wise, and good,
 and gay.

 (i) Carols out of season, sorrow without reason.

    (j) If Christmas Day on Thursday be,
          A windy winter ye shall see:
        Windy weather in each week,
          And hard tempest, strong and thick.
        The summer shall be good and dry,
          Corn and beasts will multiply.

 (k) Light Christmas, light wheatsheaf. ("Light" here refers to the
 full moon.)

 (l) There is a firm belief that to leave Christmas decorations hanging
 beyond Twelfth-Night is to bring ill-luck to everybody in the house.

_HOLY INNOCENTS' DAY._--December 28th was formerly reckoned as the most
unlucky day of the whole year, and few had the temerity to begin any
work or start any new undertaking then.

_HOGMANAY._--In Scotland, the night of December 31st is known as
Hogmanay. Then the fire is "rested," and on no account is it allowed
to go out on the hearth, nor is the house swept, nor ashes nor water
"thrown out," in case all the luck should be swept out. "Dirt bodes
luck." It is lucky to give away food or money, to break a drinking
glass accidentally, for a girl to see a man from her window on New
Year's morning, and the birth of a child brings good luck to the entire
family.


OTHER WEATHER PROPHECIES

A blustering night, a fair day.

One fair day in winter is often the mother of a storm.

A snow winter, a rich summer and autumn.

A summer fog is for fair weather.

A foot deep of rain will kill hay and grain. But a foot deep of snow
will make all things grow.

A sunshiny shower never lasts an hour.

A late spring is a great blessing.

A wet spring, a dry harvest.

After a wet year, a cold one.

As the days lengthen, so the cold strengthens.

Between twelve and two, you'll see what the day will do.

Cloudy mornings, clear evenings.

Evenings red and mornings grey help the traveller on his way. Evenings
grey and mornings red bring down rain upon his head.

A bee was never caught in a shower.

If fowls roll in the sand, rain is at hand.

If hoar frost comes on mornings twain, the third day surely will have
rain.

If Friday be clear, have for Sunday no fear.

If the cock goes crowing to bed, he'll certainly rise with a watery
head.

If the moon changes on a Sunday, there will be a flood before the month
is out.

If the oak is out before the ash, twill be a summer of wet and splash.

If the wind is north-east three days without rain, eight days will pass
before south wind again.

Neither give credit to a clear winter nor a cloudy spring.

On Thursday at three, look out and you'll see what Friday will be.

Rain at seven, fine at eleven. Rain at eight, not fine till eight.

It is not spring until one can put down a foot on a dozen daisies.

Mackerel sky, mackerel sky; never long wet and never long dry.

Thunder in spring, cold will bring.

Sharp horns do threaten windy weather (referring to the points of the
moon).

When the squirrel eats nuts on a tree, there'll be weather as warm as
warm can be.

When the wind veers against the sun, trust it not, for back 'twill run.

When a cow tries to scratch its ear, it means that a storm is very
near.




A CALENDAR FOR LOVERS


The information set out below is derived from star-readings and other
heavenly data. It applies only to the average individual. The days
of the months refer to the birthdays of those whom the information
concerns.


JANUARY

1.--Will make a good partner, though desirous of being the ruler.

2.--Likely to marry late.

3.--Women born on this day often marry men younger than themselves.

4.--Will make an excellent partner if allowed to lead a peaceful life.

5.--Likely to marry late, but the union will bring considerable
happiness.

6.--Married life will be a success if both partners are prepared to run
the home on business lines.

7.--Will be cautious in entering the matrimonial state.

8.--Married life will become more and more a boon, as the years pass by.

9.--Will marry late and have much difficulty in making up his or her
mind.

10.--Money matters will cause the greatest concern during married life.

11.--Such an individual will make a difficult partner unless he or she
marries someone with a stronger will.

12.--Somewhat slow in deciding on marriage.

13.--Likely to miss rare opportunities by wavering.

14.--Will be critical regarding his or her partner.

15.--A faithful lover, but should avoid too close a relationship with
his or her partner's relatives.

16.--Will need a good deal of persuasion or assistance in agreeing to
marriage; but will not regret having taken the step, afterwards.

17.--Unduly shy in facing the routine of his or her wedding.

18.--Will want to keep dark the facts of his or her wedding, but not
because he or she is ashamed of the partner.

19.--A late marriage.

20.--Not likely to show the extent of his or her affections.

21.--Will think overmuch of gaining security in the world before
plunging into marriage.

22.--Will probably have an exalted opinion of his or her partner, due
to great affection.

23.--A faithful lover.

24.--Likely to marry late and will want to rule the roost.

25.--Slow at expressing feelings of love, but once the mind is made up
there will be no wavering.

26.--Such an individual should see that he or she is not marrying on
insufficient money. Considerable difficulties are likely to result, if
this warning is overlooked.

27.--There will be more love expressed after marriage than before.

28.--Such an individual must seriously question himself or herself
whether he or she is really marrying for love.

29.--Not a person to fall in love at first sight.

30.--Love is likely to be a matter of business.

31.--A very faithful lover and one that will take his or her
obligations very seriously.


FEBRUARY

1.--Unlikely to marry before a number of romances have been experienced.

2.--Will think worlds of the one he or she marries.

3.--Is not likely to enter matrimony without considering all the "pros
and cons."

4.--Likely to put too much faith in his or her partner and to think too
highly of him or her.

5.--A rather late marriage, but it will be a real love match when it is
eventually planned.

6.--Very likely to consider him or herself unequal to the partner;
perhaps unworthy is the more correct description. This erroneous idea
should be banished.

7.--Rather slow in showing affection.

8.--It is highly important that this individual marries the right
person; otherwise he or she will never be thoroughly happy.

9.--It is "fifty-fifty" whether he or she marries at all.

10.--Probably a breaker of hearts.

11.--Likely to expect the partner to be a paragon of virtue and to be
disappointed if he or she is not.

12.--If relations can be kept from interfering, marriage will bring
great blessings.

13.--Not likely to marry the person everybody supposes will be the one.

14.--Will make a very kind and attentive partner, if the partner plays
a similar role.

15.--Too fond of comforts and one's own company to embark on marriage
lightly.

16.--Will expect a great deal from married life. May easily be
disappointed.

17.--Will find it difficult to choose the right partner from a large
circle of acquaintances.

18.--Marriage will be late.

19.--Will fall in love many times before making the all-important
choice.

20.--Will not fall into love unconsciously. It will need an effort.

21.--Nobody will know what this individual thinks in regard to love
matters. Most likely he will announce, one day, to the astonishment of
all that he is to be married shortly.

22.--A long courtship awaits this person.

23.--Should marry someone with totally different qualities and an
entirely different outlook on life.

24.--Will grow to think so highly of his or her partner that life
without this person, even for a day, becomes unbearable.

25.--Likely to be fickle.

26.--Men born on this date are liable to find that the girl has
formed an attachment elsewhere, while they were weighing up her
good qualities. Girls may hesitate to say "yes" and find that the
opportunity has passed.

27.--Marriage might easily prove somewhat disappointing.

28.--Such individuals should make absolutely sure of their minds before
sealing the bargain.

29.--People born on the twenty-ninth are always considered to be very
lucky in matters of love and marriage.


MARCH

1.--There are signs that point to dangerous flirtations.

2.--Greatest happiness will come after the first few years of married
life have passed away.

3.--Marriage will mean considerable happiness.

4.--Such individuals have a most compelling way with the opposite sex
and they make excellent partners.

5.--Is not likely to remain satisfied with the love of one person.

6.--Marriage for such as you is necessary. It will be the making of you.

7.--A very faithful lover.

8.--Will be extremely happy, if he or she does not rush into marriage
and choose the wrong partner.

9.--It is probable that you will have numerous tempting chances to
marry. The proper selection will be a matter fraught with great
difficulties.

10.--Will treat matrimony too much as a business.

11.--Likely to make a very suitable match.

12.--An early marriage, most likely, not with the person most friends
think probable.

13.--A happy married life is almost certain.

14.--This individual will be at his or her wits' ends to make the final
and proper decision.

15.--After marriage, this person will thank his or her lucky stars
that events have shaped as they have, especially in view of doubt
experienced at the moment of deciding.

16.--"A dark horse." Nobody understands him or her, not even the
partner for life. This only adds to the individual's attractions.

17.--If this individual works hard, as the horoscope says he or she
should, married life will prove a great blessing.

18.--Married life will not be supremely romantic, but it will be
congenial.

19.--There are dark patches in this individual's married life. They may
be quarrels and estrangements, but they will not be continuous.

20.--He or she will be very faithful and have an extremely high opinion
of the partner.

21.--This individual will have unnecessary disappointments, largely
through a temperament which blinds him or her to the partner's point of
view.

22.--Likely to put up with difficulties rather than cause
unpleasantness. Is worthy of better treatment.

23.--The opposite of March 22nd. Is likely to cause trouble for things
that hardly matter.

24.--Rather fickle in love affairs.

25.--A very passionate individual. Will only be satisfied with marriage
if the partner gives way to him or her on almost all matters.

26.--Very fond of the opposite sex. May find the situation becomes
awkward.

27.--A thoughtful individual who will make the partner of the marriage
very happy.

28.--Will make a good husband or wife, but money matters may cause
difficulties.

29.--This individual may easily take offence at things done by the
partner. Otherwise, he or she will be affectionate.

30.--This person will probably show more affection before marriage than
after.

31.--A person who will make a charming partner if the one he or she
marries sets out to pander to his or her foibles.


APRIL

1.--An early marriage is probable and it should be a very happy one.

2.--Will make a marriage in which the man plays a subordinate part.

3.--The general course of marriage will be very happy, but there are
likely to be times of estrangement.

4.--A somewhat rebellious nature is likely to cause occasional
difficulties.

5.--Likely to marry without giving the matter all the consideration it
deserves.

6.--This individual will probably hesitate before accepting a partner
for so long that the opportunity will be missed.

7.--This individual will only be happy in the married state if the
partner is particularly amenable.

8.--A rather passionate lover, but the ardor will considerably lessen
as time rolls on.

9.--Married life may fall short of expectations because the individual
refuses to face difficulties.

10.--Marriage should be undertaken early.

11.--Has great attractions for the opposite sex and is likely to be
fickle.

12.--Very affectionate but is likely to overlook the desires of his or
her partner.

13.--This individual may neglect his or her partner through being
unthoughtful.

14.--An individual who will be quite content to sail through married
life in a placid manner.

15.--Likely to fall in love at first sight.

16.--Will find married life very congenial if he or she takes the upper
hand.

17.--An individual who will be difficult to understand, but with better
qualities than are usually attributed to him or her.

18--Will only be happy in married life if the home is artistically
planned.

19.--A happy married life if the partner can understand this
individual's temperament.

20.--Will marry early.

21.--Love and marriage will be the means of providing considerable
happiness.

22.--An individual who will love deeply, but may be inclined to
jealousy.

23.--Marriage will be planned and carried out in a very short space of
time.

24.--Should avoid marriage with a person of strong likes and dislikes.

25.--The course of true love never runs smoothly, and it will not with
this individual.

26.--Warm-hearted, this person will make an admirable partner.

27.--An individual who should not rush into marriage lightly. He or she
is liable to be guided more by the heart than the head.

28.--Will make an admirable lover and partner in marriage.

29.--Very emotional, this individual should guard against marrying
someone who is too matter of fact.

30.--An individual who will put the home before everything else.


MAY

1.--A very affectionate person where the right partner is concerned.

2.--Will be most concerned in providing joys for his or her partner.

3.--Is likely to be an admirable husband or wife as long as he or she
may indulge in harmless flirtations.

4.--Early married life may have its ups and downs owing to
misunderstandings. Later on, things will materially improve, due to a
better knowledge of each other.

5.--Very affectionate if allowed to idolize his or her partner.

6.--A very charming lover.

7.--This individual is apt to be swayed by extremes, but on the whole
he or she will prove an excellent partner in marriage.

8.--He or she is much too practical to allow petty worries to mar the
married life.

9.--An individual who will take marriage very seriously.

10.--Marriage will mean some sacrifices but many joys. It will be
tremendously worth while.

11.--An individual who will have numerous "affairs" before settling
down to the right partner.

12.--There are disappointments for this partner, and the greatest joys
of marriage will only come in middle life.

13.--A person who will expect his or her partner to be perfect. Given
this, he or she will be adorable.

14.--Love will be life to this person.

15.--A person who will work hard to give the partner a glorious time.

16.--An individual who will be sought after by numerous members of the
opposite sex.

17.--One who will love very deeply.

18.--An individual who will play with love for a long time before
giving it serious consideration.

19.--Having a warm heart and a generous nature, this person is sure to
bring his partner much happiness.

20.--This individual will have so many attachments that he or she will
find difficulty in making the right choice.

21.--An excellent and faithful husband or wife.

22.--This individual will aspire to marrying beyond his or her station.

23.--This person is likely to seek elsewhere, if refused on the first
occasion, be he a man. Thus, the prospective bride should be wary of
saying "no" out of caprice.

24.--Of a sensitive nature, this person will be very shy in showing his
or her feelings.

25.--Rather apt to grumble about the trifles of married life. Quick to
notice faults.

26.--This person is likely to work out the affairs of love much as he
or she would attend to a tradesman's account.

27.--A person who would prove a more practical than ardent lover.

28.--Very much admired by the opposite sex, but one who is likely to
cool down a great deal after marriage.

29.--One who finds it difficult to be more than three-quarters in love.

30.--A number of minor love affairs will suddenly give place to finding
the right partner, followed by a speedy marriage.

31.--Likely to be jealous without sufficient cause.


JUNE

1.--An individual who will treat matrimony with a great deal of caution.

2.--Slow in showing affection, but is in earnest when he or she does.

3.--This person will have to be careful if he or she is not to lose the
partner, wanted most.

4.--You have a very high opinion of the opposite sex, and your
affections are not centered on one person. This will make your married
life somewhat difficult.

5.--This person will have difficulty in knowing his or her mind.

6.--Marriage will be the beginning of much happiness.

7.--Do not be discouraged if things appear black at first. The end is
what matters most, and things will work out happily.

8.--His or her love affairs must be carefully handled if success is to
come of them.

9.--A happy married life is in store.

10.--It will require much tact if the good ship "Matrimony" is to sail
the seas of adventure without coming to harm.

11.--This individual may never realize all his or her dreams of
matrimony.

12.--Will most likely drift into the married state hardly knowing it.

13.--You are too practical to make anything but a very sensible union.

14.--This individual will have numerous flirtations, then a time of
quiet, followed by a happy marriage.

15.--It will require two sensible heads to make a successful marriage.

16.--This individual will look for an accomplished partner who will
understand all his or her peculiarities.

17.--Rather given to flirting.

18.--Will not fall into love easily.

19.--This individual will be much esteemed by the opposite sex, more
for his or her inner qualities than for those appearing on the surface.

20.--Will make a very charming partner.

21.--This person will make love a matter of fact affair and rob it of
its romance.

22.--A person who is apt to delay marriage too long, being afraid of
making a mistake.

23.--This person will expect the one he or she marries to be extremely
Victorian. There must never be as much as a suspicion of flirting.

24.--He or she will put the home before everything else.

25.--Much liked and even spoiled by the opposite sex, it will be
difficult for him or her to settle down comfortably to a married life.

26.--An individual who will never forget the first love.

27.--It is advisable to marry early to avoid entanglements.

28.--A person who will deny him or herself much in order to make his or
her partner happy.

29.--Many mistakes before marriage, but a life of great comfort after.

30.--A great decision will have to be made. It will depend on which of
two is the better to take.


JULY

1.--This person is likely to choose a partner without taking into
consideration all that he or she should.

2.--The course of early love may result in a certain amount of
unhappiness.

3.--Likely to marry early, after having experienced several attachments.

4.--There will be more happiness after marriage than before.

5.--This individual will thank his or her lucky stars that someone
else was not chosen for a partner. The "someone else" was thought by
everybody to be the favorite.

6.--A very attractive lover, but a breaker of hearts.

7.--A married life with several ups and down, but none of them really
serious.

8.--This individual belongs to the type of person who marries the girl
or man he or she knows best.

9.--Marriage will open a new and more beautiful life for this person.

10.--It is doubtful if this person really wants to marry.

11.--An individual who prefers the excitement of flirtations to the
settled life of marriage; that is until it is too late.

12.--Likely to seek a good marriage financially.

13.--A very happy marriage, if interfering relations can be kept at a
distance.

14.--Marriage may not be all that is expected of it.

15.--A long courtship followed by a happy union.

16.--Given a partner of worthy character, this individual will bless
the day of marriage.

17.--Will think more and more of his or her partner as time wears on.

18.--An individual whose matrimonial affairs will surprise his or her
friends.

19.--Many passionate romances will be experienced before the fateful
decision is made.

20.--An individual who will wish to be as romantic after the wedding as
before.

21.--A very sympathetic lover.

22.--An individual who will show very little affection, but who will
have, however, more than his or her share. A peculiarity of temperament
will cause him or her to hide it.

23.--Will make an excellent partner.

24.--This individual has only to idolize his or her partner to make a
perfect success of married life.

25.--As long as the partner does not wish to rule this person, marriage
will be extremely successful.

26.--Great happiness will come of the union as long as both the
partners retain their affections for the other.

27.--Many minor love affairs before the right one is experienced.

28.--An individual who is likely to marry someone of a very different
age--either considerably older or younger.

29.--A very bright and attractive husband or wife. That is what this
individual will be.

30.--A person who will be happy in marriage, as long as finances cause
no troubles.

31.--There is little indication that this person troubles much about
love matters.


AUGUST

1.--Marriage likely to be rather late.

2.--Will be very generous towards his or her partner.

3.--The first love will never be forgotten by this individual.

4.--The course of true love will not run smoothly at first: later, it
will mend.

5.--This person possesses a strong will and, as long as the partner
bends to this will, all will be well.

6.--It will be advisable to go slowly. Any undue haste may result in a
fiasco.

7.--This individual must put aside all the old loves, once the marriage
ceremony has been performed. It will be dangerous to meet them again.

8.--This person will prove a great favorite with the opposite sex. He
or she will be so successful that a good deal of caution is needed.

9.--The latter half of the married life will bring the most happiness.

10.--Marriage must be considered from all its angles before the
important step is taken: otherwise, disappointments will be caused.

11.--Your generous nature will assure a happy married life.

12.--Several love affairs are indicated before the real one will be
experienced. There should be no undue haste in the choosing.

13.--Your happiness in love affairs will not depend so much on you as
on those with whom you associate.

14.--Do not become apprehensive if the right partner is slow in coming
to you. A rather late marriage is indicated.

15.--There is every reason to think that this individual will choose
the right partner and enjoy a happy married life.

16.--It is likely that this person will marry someone well-off.

17.--There is an indication that there may be a break in the
engagement, but that the affair will be patched up to the satisfaction
of both parties.

18.--Money matters are the only ones that are likely to cause any
disagreements in the marriage life. Steer clear of these and all will
be well.

19.--Marry before you have settled habits or it will be difficult to
make the mutual concessions that marriage entails.

20.--There may be some unhappiness in the early part of your married
career.

21.--This person is likely to be very passionate.

22.--Likely to marry late, owing to a desire for personal comforts.

23.--This person will be easily pleased with married life, and the
union will be a very happy one if the partner is not of an exacting
nature.

24.--Is very fond of the opposite sex. He or she will find some
difficulty in deciding whom to marry.

25.--Somewhat fickle. He or she may cause the marriage partner some
anxiety on this account.

26.--An individual who will see the utmost good in his or her partner.

27.--This person's marriage will be a proper sequel to the years of
courtship.

28.--Married life should bring many joys and blessings.

29.--This person will find it difficult to be satisfied with the love
of one person.

30.--This individual will have the power of making his or her partner
think worlds of him or her.

31.--A person lacking passion; one who looks upon marriage as a
business proposition. The man will marry for a housekeeper; the woman
for a roof over her head.


SEPTEMBER

1.--Will make an excellent husband or wife.

2.--Likely to expect too much of marriage.

3.--This individual may tire of marriage if the partner is not
decidedly emotional and passionate.

4.--Greatest happiness is likely to come in the middle period of
married life. In the early portion, you and your partner will not have
learned to understand each other: in the late portion, there will be a
tendency for you to go your own ways.

5.--There is a likelihood that secret romances will be continued after
the knot has been tied.

6.--You are a little too independent and will not consider the feelings
of your partner as much as you should.

7.--There are signs that you may neglect to make love to your partner
after the wedding. Then the happiness of both will be jeopardized.

8.--You lack sufficient emotion to make marriage the success it ought
to be.

9.--Your marriage may be too much of a business and not enough of a
love affair.

10.--You are likely to be drawn to those who are not sufficiently
attracted to you. It means that the chances are you will marry late.

11.--Capable of being very affectionate.

12.--Will make an admirable husband or wife. You will be blind to the
faults of your partner.

13.--You will fall in love several times and have some difficulty in
deciding whom you ought to marry.

14.--A person who is too sensitive in love affairs. Likely to
experience some disappointments before marriage.

15.--You are an ardent lover, perhaps too ardent to make the happiest
of marriages.

16.--A person likely to enter upon marriage without giving the matter
all the consideration it deserves.

17.--Your knowledge of people enables you to judge accurately who will
make the best partner to fit in with your ideals.

18.--An individual who has a strong will and who, therefore, can do
much towards persuading the person of his or her choice to share life
with him or her.

19.--Your love-making will be governed less by your affections than by
your reason.

20.--Likely to marry late, as you do not feel your position good enough
to share with a partner.

21.--You are likely to be attracted to two very different people at the
same time. Your choice ought to be made in favor of the one who more
approximates your own station of life.

22.--You can be a delightful companion and ought to make an excellent
husband or wife.

23.--Your marriage will make a great difference to you, for the better.

24.--All your love affairs will not bring happiness, but your marriage
will be a success.

25.--Probably you will marry a person with whom you fell in love at
sight.

26.--Married life will bring considerable happiness, but there will be
occasions when your vanity will be hurt and you will then be somewhat
morose.

27.--You will usually treat your partner with considerable affection,
but there are times when you will speak in a very hasty manner.

28.--You must be careful whom you marry, as you are not likely to be
too sure of your own mind.

29.--Likely to have many strings to your bow.

30.--Be very certain that the attachments you form are worthy of you.


OCTOBER

1.--You have a strong desire to create a good impression with the
opposite sex. This desire may lead you into danger.

2.--An individual who will make an excellent partner except when he or
she is in the wrong. On such occasions he or she will present a very
unsympathetic nature.

3.--Marriage will mean everything to such individuals. They must be
careful that the wedded state brings no disillusions.

4.--What unhappiness comes in married life will be due to friends who
interfere.

5.--Home life will give you the existence you require: therefore you
must avoid marriage with a gad-about.

6.--Your marriage will be eminently successful.

7.--You are an individual of somewhat fickle temperament; but you will
settle down once you meet the right person.

8.--You are an excellent companion and will make numerous friends of
the opposite sex. Choosing the right partner, in your case, will be
difficult.

9.--An individual who will love intensely and who has the capacity for
making an excellent partner in marriage.

10.--Marriage should be thoroughly successful if financial worries do
not upset your calculations.

11.--An individual who will experience much pain as a result of
unsuitable friendships.

12.--Likely to find it difficult to remain in love with one person for
any length of time.

13.--Married life will bring considerable happiness, but lovemaking
should be indulged in after the wedding as much as before.

14.--Your partner will appreciate little surprises, such as tokens of
your affection, even after you are married. Do not forget this.

15.--You are liable to be too cold towards your partner. Recall the
early days of your friendship.

16.--An individual who will treat married life in a too matter-of-fact
way.

17.--Love is not life to you: but once you meet the right person,
happiness will reign supreme.

18.--You will approach your love affairs in a very common-sense manner.
Thus, you are not likely to make any mistake.

19.--A very worthy partner.

20.--The earlier years of married life will not be the most successful,
though they will be the most exciting.

21.--Do not expect every comfort and joy after the wedding ceremony.
Money may be a cause of difficulties.

22.--An individual who will experience some trouble in knowing his or
her mind.

23.--Slow in acquiring affection; but once a friendship is formed, he
or she will be in great earnest.

24.--A happy married life is almost certain.

25.--An individual who is likely to be a more practical than
affectionate lover.

26.--Unduly shy in facing the business of a wedding.

27.--This person will have much deeper affections than are suggested by
appearances.

28.--Family relations are not likely to make the path of matrimony any
rosier.

29.--More love and affection will be expressed after marriage than
before.

30.--Rather apt to rule his or her partner when things have settled
down after the wedding.

31.--A lover who would satisfy any reasonable being.


NOVEMBER

1.--There will be many surprises for this person.

2.--Great happiness will come of the union, as long as both the
partners avoid trouble-making friendships.

3.--Harmless flirtations are hardly harmless, when indulged in by this
person.

4.--There will be ups and downs in this person's married life, but the
"ups" will exceed the "downs."

5.--This person will not be rebuffed. If a man, he will not take "no"
for an answer.

6.--An attractive person with the opposite sex, but likely to cool down
a great deal after marriage.

7.--There will be many love affairs, but it is doubtful if marriage
will result with any of them.

8.--A person likely to make an admirable partner in marriage, if
allowed to follow his or her own harmless way.

9.--Marriage will come early.

10.--A very affectionate lover and marriage partner.

11.--Of a practical nature, this person will know exactly how to steer
clear of matrimonial troubles.

12.--Will make an admirable husband or wife.

13.--This person will love very deeply, perhaps too deeply, as it may
lead to unfounded jealousy.

14.--It is doubtful if this individual wishes in his heart to marry.

15.--Somewhat fickle in love affairs.

16.--Married life will be less romantic than anticipated, but it will
be more congenial and placid.

17.--Too fond of comforts and one's own company to embark on marriage
lightly.

18.--This person will be conscious of the fact that he or she
invariably falls in love with the wrong person. This will last until
the age of 22 or 23 is reached.

19.--Marriage should turn out very well.

20.--A late and happy marriage is indicated.

21.--Likely to be very passionate.

22.--A person who is sure to have several love affairs. A feature of
these is that some of them will be revivals of old ones.

23.--Marriage means everything to you and you are decidedly unsuited to
living a lonely life.

24.--You are sentimental and emotional and will think highly of your
partner.

25.--Do not rush into marriage without considering the matter very
seriously.

26.--You have an ideal for whom you are searching. However, the ideal
does not exist. There are plenty of good fish in the sea, nevertheless.

27.--A rather sudden wedding.

28.--You will be happy only as long as your partner gives you the upper
hand.

29.--Marriage will be mixed. Much happiness, some sorrows.

30.--This person will have many love affairs, in fact he or she is the
type that prefers a succession of such affairs to settling down to
marriage.


DECEMBER

1.--Somewhat headstrong, this person will want to rule the home.

2.--A very easygoing partner. Happy as long as his or her mate guides
the ship through the troubled seas.

3.--Men born on this day often marry women older than themselves.

4.--Somewhat slow in deciding on marriage.

5.--Likely to find marriage more of a boon than anticipated.

6.--This person will, probably, marry someone whom nobody anticipated
would be the individual.

7.--This individual should marry someone with totally different
qualities and an entirely different outlook on life.

8.--Such people have a most compelling way with the opposite sex and
they make good partners.

9.--Very fond of the opposite sex; a character that may easily
experience difficulties.

10.--Will make a marriage in which the man plays the minor part.

11.--Marriage will be planned and carried out in a short space of time.
The haste may be deplored later on.

12.--A person who will take marriage very seriously.

13.--This individual will play at lovemaking for a long time before
treating it seriously.

14.--A person who will have numerous flirtations, then a period in
which the other sex is more or less ignored, followed by a sudden and
happy marriage.

15.--Liable to delay marriage too long, or until it cannot provide the
blessings anticipated of it.

16.--Married life will bring many joys and blessings.

17.--Do not be cold and uncommunicative to your partner. Act as you did
before the wedding.

18.--You will be slow in acquiring affection. Once a friendship is
formed, however, it will be a very deep one.

19.--As long as your partner is not one given to "laying down the law,"
you will have a very happy existence.

20.--Be very careful that you do not fall in love with someone after
marriage.

21.--Marriage will be supremely happy.

22.--You are somewhat fickle and will, probably, suffer in consequence.

23.--Your marriage is likely to have the effect of complicating your
financial position.

24.--A person who will find married life of average happiness.

25.--Do not keep from your partner information that should rightly
be shared. You are not confiding enough and this may very well cause
unhappiness.

26.--Avoid extravagance in married life and all will be well.

27.--A kind and generous partner.

28.--Take little notice of what your friends tell you of your intended
one. Be guided by your feelings alone.

29.--You will marry late and your only regret will be that you did not
find your partner earlier.

30.--You and your partner will, largely, keep yourselves to yourselves.
You will be all in all to each other, and it will prove a very happy
existence.

31.--You will make an admirable husband or wife, especially if your
partner is one of the "easy-going" type.




MAKING USEFUL MASCOTS


Anyone of a handy disposition can make mascots that will bring luck to
him or herself, as well as to countless friends. In addition, they may
be made for selling at bazaars or even for profit in shops.

_HORSESHOES._--As a rule, it is best in this case to obtain a supply of
old and worn horseshoes--any local farrier will be glad to sell them
for a penny or two apiece--and to make them presentable. First, knock
off the rust, and then wash them if necessary. It is not a bad plan to
beg some old nails from the farrier, to slip one or two in the holes,
here and there of each shoe, and to twist them round with pliers so
that they cannot fall out. Then give the shoes a coat of paint--either
aluminum or stove-black. When dry, thread a strip of ribbon of your
lucky color through a hole on either side of the shoe, so that the shoe
can be easily hung up. But, please do be careful to arrange the ribbon
so that the shoe can only be hung tips upwards.

Failing a supply of worn shoes, the best idea is to cut horseshoes from
a sheet of thick cardboard. There is an illustration on p. 6 which
will give you an idea of the correct shape to aim at. When the shoes
are cut, paint them with black or silver ink, and tie with ribbon, as
already suggested.

_SWASTIKAS._--Large swastikas are best cut out of thick cardboard, as
suggested in the previous paragraph for horseshoes, but small ones,
suitable for wearing, are not difficult to cut out of sheet metal, if
a triangular file is at hand for cleaning up the corners and edges.
When worn, Swastikas are usually hung diamond-wise. Therefore, it is
necessary to drill a small hole in one of the corners of the shape. A
coat of gold paint or transparent lacquer will add to the appearance of
the finish.

_SCARABS._--When scarabs are to be made, the shape with the closed
wings will be found much the simpler to construct. They can be made out
of large oval buttons. If the buttons are flat, it is advisable to give
them a domed surface by applying a suitable layer of plastic wood. This
is a putty-like substance which dries rapidly and which can be moulded
to the required shape with the fingers. When the plastic wood is dry
and hard, smooth the surface with fine glass-paper and ornament it with
oil paints. A dull light blue serves best for the groundwork, and the
pattern can be added with a small brush, using grey or black paint. In
this way, some very realistic scarabs can be made easily.

_CADUCEUS OR STAFF OF MERCURY._--This lucky device is very difficult to
make in the form of a model. However, the same purpose can be served
by a picture. Draw the outline in pencil (see p. 9), give it a wash of
silver color and line in the pattern with India ink. A picture, made in
this way, about twelve inches high, on a white card, would look very
attractive when framed.

_ARROWHEADS._--Those of us who have an eye for geology will have no
difficulty in picking up flints, shaped like arrowheads (see p. 8),
along the sides of country roads. Failing these, we can get some slips
of granite, and, with hammer and chisel, shape them as shown on the
page mentioned. The next thing is to obtain some gilt wire, and to make
slings to support the arrowheads. These can then be hung up or worn,
according to their size.

_TETS._--These mallet-shaped mascots can be made readily by cutting
small strips of wood to serve as handles, and then moulding the heads
in plastic wood. When the latter has dried hard, all the surfaces are
coated with some bright colored paint, and, after that, additional
bands of color are added to serve as ornamentation (see p. 8).

_BLACK CATS AND OTHER DOLL MASCOTS._--Any woman or girl who is good at
needlework can make cats and doll-shaped mascots fairly readily. The
first thing is to cut a paper pattern of the parts, using newspaper
for the purpose. Usually, it is advisable to make the pattern in no
more than two parts; one for the left side, the other for the right,
or one for the front, the other for the back, according to the way the
creature is to be executed. If this is done, it must be recognized that
each part should be considerably larger than the animal is to appear,
since although the pattern looks as though it need only serve for the
front or back, or sides, it really has to supply the width as well.

When the paper pattern has been suitably shaped, cut out the stuff to
agree with it, allowing an edging for turning in. Use black velvet or
black fur cloth, unless some color is desired. Then, place the two
pieces together, face to face, stitch round most of the edges; follow
by turning the outside in and stuff the interior through the gap of
stitches. Old but soft rags do for the stuffing. When nice and evenly
plump, stitch up the gap, taking care to fold in the seams.

The last stage is to ornament the creature and form its features.
Buttons serve for eyes, stitches of red wool or silk make the mouth and
nose, and whiskers are supplied by hairs taken from a broom. A band of
ribbon, tied in a bow, round the neck, completes the mascot.


       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Notes:

Italic text is denoted by _underscores_.

Minor punctuation and printer errors repaired.

Every effort has been made to replicate this text as faithfully as
possible, including inconsistent hyphenation, obsolete and variant
spellings and other inconsistencies. Where intent was unclear, possible
errors were left as printed.

In some otherwise alphabetical lists, individual words are out of
alphabetical order. These are left as printed. Likewise, some
lettered lists have letters missing or out of order. These were left as
printed.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Everybody's Book of Luck, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EVERYBODY'S BOOK OF LUCK ***

***** This file should be named 55082.txt or 55082.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/0/8/55082/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Christopher Wright, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net
(This file was produced from images generously made
available by The Internet Archive)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

