The Project Gutenberg EBook of Arachne, Complete, by Georg Ebers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Arachne, Complete

Author: Georg Ebers

Last Updated: March 9, 2009
Release Date: October 17, 2006 [EBook #5516]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARACHNE, COMPLETE ***



Produced by David Widger





ARACHNE

By Georg Ebers


Translated from the German by Mary J. Safford




BOOK 1.




CHAPTER I.

Deep silence brooded over the water and the green islands which rose
like oases from its glittering surface. The palms, silver poplars, and
sycamores on the largest one were already casting longer shadows as the
slanting rays of the sun touched their dark crowns, while its glowing
ball still poured a flood of golden radiance upon the bushes along the
shore, and the light, feathery tufts at the tops of the papyrus reeds in
the brackish water.

More than one flock of large and small waterfowl flew past beneath the
silvery cloudlets flecking the lofty azure vault of heaven; here and
there a pelican or a pair of wild ducks plunged, with short calls which
ceased abruptly, into the lush green thicket, but their cackling and
quacking belonged to the voices of Nature, and, when heard, soon
died away in the heights of the tipper air, or in the darkness of the
underbrush that received the birds. Very few reached the little city of
Tennis, which now, during the period of inundation in the year 274 B.C.,
was completely encircled by water.

From the small island, separated from it by a channel scarcely three
arrow-shots wide, it seemed as though sleep or paralysis had fallen upon
the citizens of the busy little industrial town, for few people appeared
in the streets, and the scanty number of porters and sailors who were
working among the ships and boats in the little fleet performed their
tasks noiselessly, exhausted by the heat and labour of the day.

Columns of light smoke rose from many of the buildings, but the sunbeams
prevented its ascent into the clear, still air, and forced it to spread
over the roofs as if it, too, needed rest.

Silence also reigned in the little island diagonally opposite to the
harbour. The Tennites called it the Owl's Nest, and, though for no
especial reason, neither they nor the magistrates of King Ptolemy II
ever stepped upon its shores. Indeed, a short time before, the latter
had even been forbidden to concern themselves about the pursuits of its
inhabitants; since, though for centuries it had belonged to a family
of seafaring folk who were suspected of piracy, it had received, two
generations ago, from Alexander the Great himself, the right of asylum,
because its owner, in those days, had commanded a little fleet which
proved extremely useful to the conqueror of the world in the siege
of Gaza and during the expedition to Egypt. True, under the reign of
Ptolemy I, the owners of the Owl's Nest were on the point of being
deprived of this favour, because they were repeatedly accused of piracy
in distant seas; but it had not been done. Yet for the past two years
an investigation had threatened Satabus, the distinguished head of the
family, and during this period he, with his ships and his sons, had
avoided Tennis and the Egyptian coast.

The house occupied by the islanders stood on the shore facing the little
city. It had once been a stately building, but now every part of it
seemed to be going to ruin except the central portion, which presented
a less dilapidated appearance than the sorely damaged, utterly neglected
side wings.

The roof of the whole long structure had originally consisted of palm
branches, upon which mud and turf had been piled; but this, too, was now
in repair only on the central building. On the right and left wings the
rain which often falls in the northeastern part of the Nile Delta, near
the sea, had washed off the protecting earth, and the wind had borne it
away as dust.

Once the house had been spacious enough to shelter a numerous family and
to store a great quantity of goods and provisions, but it was now long
since the ruinous chambers had been occupied. Smoke rose only from the
opening in the roof of the main building, but its slender column showed
from what a very scanty fire it ascended.

The purpose which this was to serve was readily discovered, for in
front of the open door of the dwelling, that seemed far too large and
on account of the pillars at the entrance, which supported a triangular
pediment--also too stately for its sole occupant, sat an old woman,
plucking three ducks.

In front of her a girl, paying no heed to her companion, stood leaning
against the trunk of the low, wide-branching sycamore tree near the
shore. A narrow boat, now concealed from view by the dense growth of
rushes, had brought her to the spot.

The beautiful, motherless young creature, needing counsel, had come to
old Tabus to appeal to her art of prophecy and, if she wanted them,
to render her any little services; for the old dame on the island
was closely bound to Ledscha, the daughter of one of the principal
ship-owners in Tennis, and had once been even more closely united to the
girl.

Now, as the sun was about to set, the latter gave herself up to a wild
tumult of sweet memories, anxious fears, and yearning expectation.

Not until a cool breath from the neighbouring sea fanned her brow did
she throw down the cord and implement with which she had been adding a
few meshes to a net, and rising, gaze sometimes across the water at a
large white house in the northern part of the city, sometimes at the
little harbour or the vessels on the horizon steering toward Tennis,
among which her keen eyes discovered a magnificent ship with bright-hued
sails.

Drawing a long breath, she enjoyed the coolness which precedes the
departure of the daystar.

But the effect of this harbinger of night upon her surroundings was
even more powerful than upon herself, for the sun in the western horizon
scarcely began to sink slowly behind the papyrus thicket on the shore
of the straight Tanite arm of the Nile, dug by human hands, than one new
and strange phenomenon followed another.

First a fan, composed of countless glowing rays which spread in dazzling
radiance over the west, rose from the vanishing orb and for several
minutes adorned the lofty dome of the deep-blue sky like the tail of
a gigantic peacock. Then the glitter of the shining plumes paled. The
light-giving body from which they emanated disappeared and, in its
stead, a crimson mantle, with gold-bordered, crocus-yellow edges, spread
itself over the space it had left until the gleaming tints merged into
the deeper hues of the violet.

But the girl paid no heed to this splendid spectacle. Perhaps she
noticed how the fading light diffused a delicate rose-hued veil over
the light-blue sails, embroidered with silver vines, of the approaching
state galley, making its gilded prow glitter more brightly, and saw one
fishing boat after another move toward the harbour, but she gave the
whole scene only a few careless glances.

Ledscha cared little for the poor fishermen of Tennis, and the
glittering state galley could scarcely bring or bear away anything of
importance to her.

The epistrategus of the whole province was daily expected. But of what
consequence to the young girl were the changes which it was rumoured
he intended to introduce into the government of the country, concerning
which her father had expressed such bitter dissatisfaction before he set
out on his last trip to Pontus?

A very different matter occupied her thoughts, and as, pressing her hand
upon her heart, she gazed at the little city, gleaming with crimson hues
in the reflection of the setting sun, a strange, restless stir pervaded
the former stillness of Nature. Pelicans and flamingoes, geese and
ducks, storks and herons, ibises and cranes, bitterns and lapwings,
flew in dark flocks of manifold forms from all directions. Countless
multitudes of waterfowl darkened the air as they alighted upon the
uninhabited islands, and with ear-splitting croaking and cackling,
whistling and chirping, clapping and twittering, dropped into the sedges
and bushes which concealed their nests, while in the city the doors of
the houses opened, and men, women, and children, after toiling at the
loom and in the workshop, came out to enjoy the coolness of the evening
in the open air.

One fishing boat after another was already throwing a rope to the shore,
as the ship with the gay sails approached the little roadstead.

How large and magnificent it was!

None of the king's officials had ever used such a galley, not even the
epistrategus of the Delta, who last year had given the banking and the
oil trade to new lessees. Besides, the two transports that had followed
the magnificent vessel appeared to belong to it.

Ledscha had watched the ships indifferently enough, but suddenly her
gaze--and with it the austere beauty of her face--assumed a different
expression.

Her large black eyes dilated, and with passionate intentness she looked
from the gaily ornamented galley to the shore, which several men in
Greek costume were approaching.

The first two had come from the large white house whose door, since
sunset, had been the principal object of her attention.

It was Hermon, the taller one, for whom she was waiting with old Tabus.
He had promised to take her from the Owl's Nest, after nightfall, for a
lonely row upon the water.

Now he was not coming alone, but with his fellow-artist, the
sculptor Myrtilus, the nomarch and the notary--she recognised both
distinctly--Gorgias, the rich owner of the second largest weaving
establishment in Tennis, and several slaves.

What did it mean?

A sudden flush crimsoned her face, now slightly tanned, to the brow, and
her lips were compressed, giving her mouth an expression of repellent,
almost cruel harshness.

But the tension of her charming features, whose lines, though sharp,
were delicately outlined, soon vanished. There was still plenty of
time before the darkness would permit Hermon to join her unnoticed. A
reception, from which he could not be absent, was evidently about to
take place.

Yes, that was certainly the case; for now the magnificent galley had
approached as near the land as the shallow water permitted, and the
whistle of the rowers' flute-player, shouts of command, and the barking
of dogs could be heard.

Then a handkerchief waved a greeting from the vessel to the men on
shore, but the hand that held it was a woman's. Ledscha would have
recognised it had the twilight been far deeper.

The features of the new arrival could no longer be distinguished; but
she must be young. An elderly woman would not have sprung so nimbly into
the skiff that was to convey her to the land.

The man who assisted her in doing so was the same sculptor, Hermon, for
whom she had watched with so much longing.

Again the blood mounted into Ledscha's cheeks, and when she saw the
stranger lay her hand upon the shoulder of the Alexandrian who, only
yesterday, had assured the young girl of his love with ardent vows, and
allow him to lift her out of the boat, she buried her little white teeth
deeply in her lips.

She had never seen Hermon in the society of a woman of his own class,
and, full of jealous displeasure; perceived with what zealous assiduity
he who bowed before no one in Tennis, paid court to the stranger no less
eagerly than did his friend Myrtilus.

The whole scene passed like a shadow in the dusk before Ledscha's eyes,
half dimmed by uneasiness, perplexity, and suddenly inflamed jealousy.

The Egyptian twilight is short, and when Hermon disappeared with the
new-comer it was no longer possible to recognise the man who entered the
very boat in which she was to have taken the nocturnal voyage with her
lover, and which was now rowed toward the Owl's Nest.

Surely it would bring her a message from Hermon; and as the stranger,
who was now joined by a number of other women and two packs of barking
dogs, with their keepers, vanished in the darkness, the skiff already
touched the shore close at her side.




CHAPTER II.

In spite of the surrounding gloom, Ledscha recognised the man who left
the boat.

The greeting he shouted told her that it was Hermon's slave, Pias, a
Biamite, whom she had met in the house of some neighbours who were his
relatives and had sharply rebuffed when he ventured to accost her more
familiarly than was seemly for one in bondage.

True, in his childhood this man had lived near Tennis as the son of
a free papyrus raiser, but when still a lad was sold into slavery in
Alexandria with his father, who had been seized for taking part in an
insurrection against the last king.

In the service of Areluas, his present master's uncle, who had given him
to his nephew, and as the slave of the impetuous yet anything but cruel
sculptor, Hermon, he had become accustomed to bondage, but was still far
more strongly attached to his Biamite race than to the Greek, to whom,
it is true, his master belonged, but who had robbed him and his family
of freedom.

The man of forty did not lack mother wit, and as his hard fate rendered
him thoughtful and often led him to use figurative turns of speech,
which were by no means intended as jests, he had been called by his
first master "Bias" for the sage of Priene.

In the house of Hermon, who associated with the best artists in
Alexandria, he had picked up all sorts of knowledge and gladly welcomed
instruction. His highest desire was to win esteem, and he often did so.

Hermon prized the useful fellow highly. He had no secrets from him, and
was sure of his silence and good will.

Bias had managed to lure many a young beauty in Alexandria, in whom the
sculptor had seen a desirable model, to his studio, even under the most
difficult circumstances; but he was vexed to find that his master had
cast his eye upon the daughter of one of the most distinguished families
among his own people. He knew, too, that the Biamites jealously
guarded the honour of their women, and had represented to Hermon what
a dangerous game he was playing when he began to offer vows of love to
Ledscha.

So it was an extremely welcome task to be permitted to inform her that
she was awaiting his master in vain.

In reply to her inquiry whether it was the aristocrat who had just
arrived who kept Hermon from her, he admitted that she was right, but
added that the gods were above even kings, and his master was obliged to
yield to the Alexandrian's will.

Ledscha laughed incredulously: "He--obey a woman!"

"He certainly would not submit to a man," replied the slave. "Artists,
you must know, would rather oppose ten of the most powerful men than
one weak woman, if she is only beautiful. As for the daughter of
Archias--thereby hangs a tale."

"Archias?" interrupted the girl. "The rich Alexandrian who owns the
great weaving house?"

"The very man."

"So it is his daughter who is keeping Hermon? And you say he is obliged
to serve her?"

"As men serve the Deity, to the utmost, or truth," replied the slave
importantly. "Archias, the father, it is true, imposed upon us the debt
which is most tardily paid, and which people, even in this country, call
'gratitude.' We are under obligations to the old man--there's no denying
it--and therefore also to his only child."

"For what?" Ledscha indignantly exclaimed, and the dark eyebrows which
met above her delicate nose contracted suspiciously. "I must know!"

"Must!" repeated the slave. "That word is a ploughshare which suits only
loose soil, and mine, now that my master is waiting for me, can not be
tilled even by the sharpest. Another time! But if, meanwhile, you have
any message for Hermon----"

"Nothing," she replied defiantly; but Bias, in a tone of the most eager
assent, exclaimed: "One friendly word, girl. You are the fairest among
the daughters of the highest Biamite families, and probably the richest
also, and therefore a thousand times too good to yield what adorns you
to the Greek, that it may tickle the curiosity of the Alexandrian apes.
There are more than enough women in the capital to serve that purpose.
Trust the experience of a man not wholly devoid of wisdom, my girl. He
will throw you aside like an empty wine bottle when he has used you for
a model."

"Used?" interrupted Ledscha disdainfully; but he repeated with firm
decision: "Yes, used! What could you learn of life, of art and artists,
here in the weaver's nest in the midst of the waves? I know them. A
sculptor needs beautiful women as a cobbler wants leather, and the
charms he seeks in you he does not conceal from his friend Myrtilus, at
least. They are your large almond-shaped eyes and your arms. They make
him fairly wild with delight by their curves when, in drawing water, you
hold the jug balanced on your head. Your slender arched foot, too, is a
welcome morsel to him."

The darkness prevented Bias from seeing Ledscha's features, but it
was easy to perceive what was passing in her mind as, hoarse with
indignation, she gasped: "How can I know the object of your accusations?
but fie upon the servant who would alienate from his own kind master
what his soul desires!"

Then Bias changed not only his tone of voice, but his language, and,
deeply offended, poured forth a torrent of wrath in the dialect of his
people: "If to guard you, and my master with you, from harm, my words
had the power to put between you and Hermon the distance which separates
yonder rising moon from Tennis, I would make them sound as loud as
the lion's roar. Yet perhaps you would not understand them, for you go
through life as though you were deaf and blind. Did you ever even ask
yourself whether the Greek is not differently constituted from the sons
of the Biamite sailors and fishermen, with whom you grew up, and to whom
he is an abomination? Yet he is no more like them than poppy juice is
like pure water. He and his companions turn life upside down. There is
no more distinction between right and wrong in Alexandria than we here
in the dark can make between blue and green. To me, the slave, who is
already growing old, Hermon is a kind master. I know without your
aid what I owe him, and serve him as loyally as any one; but where he
threatens to lead to ruin the innocent daughter of the race whose blood
flows in my veins as well as yours, and in doing so perhaps finally
destroy himself too, conscience commands me to raise my voice as loud
as the sentinel crane when danger threatens the flock. Beware, girl, I
repeat! Keep your beauty, which is now to be degraded to feast the eyes
of gaping Greeks, for the worthiest husband among our people. Though
Hermon has vowed, I know not what, your love-dallying will very soon be
over; we shall leave Tennis within the next few days. When he has gone
there will be one more deceived Biamite who will call down the curse
of the gods upon the head of a Greek. You are not the only one who will
execrate the destiny that brought us here. Others have been caught in
his net too."

"Here?" asked Ledscha in a hollow tone; and the slave eagerly answered:
"Where else? And that you may know the truth--among those who visited
Hermon in his studio is your own young sister."

"Our Taus? That child?" exclaimed the girl, stretching her hands toward
the slave in horror, as if to ward off some impending disaster.

"That child, who, I think, has grown into a very charming girl--and,
before her, pretty Gula, the wife of Paseth, who, like your father, is
away on his ship."

Here, in a tone of triumphant confidence, the answer rang from the
Biamite's lips: "There the slanderer stands revealed! Now you are
detected, now I perceive the meaning of your threat. Because, miserable
slave, you cherish the mad hope of beguiling me yourself, you do your
utmost to estrange me from your master. Gula, you say, visited Hermon
in his studio, and it may be true. But though I have been at home only
a short time, Tennis is too full of the praises of the heroic Greek
who, at the risk of his own life, rescued a child from Paseth's burning
house, for the tale not to reach my ears from ten or a dozen different
quarters. Gula is the mother of the little girl whose life was saved
by Hermon's bold deed, and perhaps the young mother only knocked at her
benefactor's door to thank him; but you, base defamer--"

"I," Bias continued, maintaining his composure with difficulty, "I saw
Gula secretly glide into our rooms again and again to permit her child's
preserver to imitate in clay what he considered beautiful. To seek your
love, as you know, the slave forbade himself, although a man no more
loses tender desires with his freedom than the tree which is encircled
by a fence ceases to put forth buds and blossoms. Eros chooses the
slave's heart also as the target for his arrows; but his aim at yours
was better than at mine. Now I know how deeply he wounds, and so, as
soon as yonder ship in the harbour bears our visitor away again, I shall
see you, Schalit's daughter, Ledscha, standing before Hermon's modelling
table and behold him scan your beauty to determine what seems worth
copying."

The Biamite, panting for breath, had listened to the end. Then, raising
her little clinched hand menacingly, she muttered through her set teeth:
"Let him try even to touch my veil with his fingers! If I had not been
obliged to go away, this would not have happened to my Taus and luckless
Gula."

"Scarcely," replied Bias calmly. "If the chicken runs into the water,
the hen can not save it. For the rest--I grew up as a boy in freedom
with the husband of your sister, who summoned you to her aid. His
father's brick-kiln was next to our papyrus plantation. Then we fared
like so many others--the great devour the small, the just cause is
the lost one, and the gods are like men. My father, who drew the
sword against oppression and violence, was robbed of liberty, and your
brother-in-law, in payment for his honest courage, met an early death.
Is the story which is told of you here true? I heard that soon after the
poor fellow's burial the slaves in the brick-kiln refused to obey his
widow. There were a dozen rebellious brick-moulders, and you--one can
forgive you much for it--you, the weak girl----"

"I am not weak," interrupted Ledscha proudly. "I could have taught three
times twelve of the scoundrels who was master. Now they obey my sister,
and yet I wish I had stayed in Tennis. Our Taus," she continued in a
more gentle tone, "is still so young, and our mother died when she was
a little child; but I, fool, who should have warned her, left her alone,
and if she yielded to Hermon's temptations the fault is mine, wholly
mine."

During this outburst the light of the fire, which old Tabus had fed with
fresh straw and dry rushes, fell upon the face of the agitated girl. It
revealed her thoughts plainly enough, and, pleased with the success of
his warning, Bias exclaimed: "And Ledscha, you, too, will not grant him
that from which you would so gladly have withheld your sister. So I will
go and tell my master that you refuse to give him another appointment."

He had confidently expected an assent, and therefore started indignantly
at her exclamation: "I intend to do just the contrary." Yet she eagerly
added, as if in explanation: "He must give me an account of himself, no
matter where, and, since it can not be to-day, to-morrow at latest."

The slave, disappointed and anxious, now tried to make her understand
how foolish and hard to accomplish her wish was, but she obstinately
insisted upon having her own way.

Bias angrily turned his back upon her and, in the early light of the
moon, walked toward the shore, but she hastened after him, seized his
arm and, with imperious firmness, commanded: "You will stay! I must
first know whether Hermon really means to leave Tennis so soon."

"That was his intention early this morning," replied the other,
releasing himself from her grasp. "What are we to do here longer, now
that his work is as good as finished?"

"But when is he going?" she urged with increased eagerness.

"Day after to-morrow," was the reply, "in five, or perhaps even in six
days, just as it suits him. Usually we do not even know to-day what
is to be done to-morrow. So long as the Alexandrian remains, he will
scarcely leave her, or Myrtilus either. Probably she will take both
hunting with her, for, though a kind, fair-minded woman, she loves the
chase, and as both have finished their work, they probably will not be
reluctant to go with Daphne."

He stepped into the boat as he spoke, but Ledscha again detained him,
asking impatiently: "And 'the work,' as you call it? It was covered
with a cloth when I visited the studio, but Hermon himself termed it the
statue of a goddess. Yet what it represents--Does it look like my sister
Taus--enough like her, I mean, to be recognised?"

A half-compassionate, half-mocking smile flitted over the Biamite's
copper-coloured visage, and in a tone of patronizing instruction assumed
by the better informed, he began: "You are thinking of the face? Why no,
child! What that requires can be found in the countenance of no Biamite,
hardly even in yours, the fairest of all."

"And the goddess's figure?" asked Ledscha eagerly.

"For that he first used as a model the fair-haired Heliodora, whom
he summoned from Alexandria, and as the wild cat could endure the
loneliness only a fortnight, the sisters Nico and Pagis came together.
But Tennis was too quiet for them too. The rabble can only be contented
among those of their own sort in the capital. But the great preliminary
work was already finished before we left Alexandria."

"And Gula--my sister?"

"They were not used for the Demeter," said the slave, smiling. "Just
think, that slender scarcely grown creature, Taus, and the matronly
patroness of marriage. And Gula? True, her little round face is fresh
and not ill-looking--but the model of a goddess requires something more.
That can only be obtained in Alexandria. What do not the women there do
for the care of the body! They learn it in the Aphrodision, as the boys
study reading and writing. But you! What do you here know even about
colouring the eyelids and the lips, curling the hair, and treating the
nails on the hands and feet? And the clothes! You let them hang just as
you put them on, and my master's work is full of folds and little lines
in the robe and the peplos--But I have staid too long already. Do you
really insist upon meeting Hermon again?

"I will and must see him," she eagerly declared.

"Well, then," he answered harshly. "But if you cast my warning to the
winds, pity will also fly away with it."

"I do not need it," the girl retorted in a contemptuous tone.

"Then let Fate take its course," said the slave, shrugging his shoulders
regretfully. "My master shall learn what you wish. I shall remain at
home until the market is empty. There are plenty of servants at your
farm. Your messenger shall bring you Hermon's answer."

"I will come myself and wait for it under the acacia," she cried
hastily, and went toward the house, but this time it was Bias who called
her back.

Ledscha reluctantly fulfilled his wish, but she soon regretted it, for
though what he had to say was doubtless kindly meant, it contained a
fresh and severe offence: the slave represented to her the possibility
that, so long as the daughter of Archias remained his guest, Hermon
might rebuff her like a troublesome beggar.

Then, as if sure of her cause, she indignantly cut short his words: "You
measure him according to your own standard, and do not know what depends
upon it for us. Remind him of the full moon on the coming night and,
though ten Alexandrians detained him, he would escape from them to hear
what I bring him."

With these words Ledscha again turned her back upon him, but Bias, with
a low imprecation, pushed the boat from the shore and rowed toward the
city.




CHAPTER III.

When Ledscha heard the strokes of the oars she stopped again and, with
glowing cheeks, gazed after the boat and the glimmering silver furrow
which it left upon the calm surface of the moonlit water.

Her heart was heavy. The doubts of her lover's sincerity which the slave
had awakened tortured her proud soul.

Was Hermon really only trifling mischievously with her affection?

Surely it was impossible.

She would rather endure everything, everything, than this torturing
uncertainty.

Yet she was here on the Owl's Nest to seek the aid of old Tabus's magic
arts. If any one could give her satisfaction, it was she and the demons
who obeyed her will, and the old woman was glad to oblige Ledscha; she
was bound to her by closer ties than most people in Tennis knew.

Ledscha had no cause to be ashamed of her frequent visits to the Owl's
Nest, for old Tabus had no equal as a leech and a prophetess, and the
corsair family, of which she was the female head, stood in high repute
among the Biamites. People bore them no ill-will because they practised
piracy; many of their race pursued the same calling, and the sailors
made common cause with them.

Ledscha's father, too, was on good terms with the pirates, and when
Abus, a handsome fellow who commanded his father's second ship and had
won a certain degree of renown by many a bold deed, sought the hand
of his oldest daughter, he did not refuse him, and only imposed the
condition that when he had gained riches enough and made Ledscha his
wife, he would cease his piratical pursuits and, in partnership with
him, take goods and slaves from Pontus to the Syrian and Egyptian
harbours, and grain and textiles from the Nile to the coasts of the
Black Sea.

Young Abus had yielded to this demand, since his grandmother on the
Owl's Nest thought it wise to delay for a time the girl's marriage to
him, the best beloved of her grandsons; she was then scarcely beyond
childhood.

Yet Ledscha had felt a strong affection for the young pirate, in
whom she saw the embodiment of heroic manhood. She accompanied him
in imagination through all his perilous expeditions; but she had been
permitted to enjoy his society only after long intervals for a few days.

Once he remained absent longer than usual, and this very voyage was to
have been his last on a pirate craft--the peaceful seafaring life was to
begin, after his landing, with the marriage.

Ledscha had expected her lover's return with eager longing, but week
after week elapsed, yet nothing was seen or heard of the ships owned by
the Owl's Nest family; then a rumour spread that this time the corsairs
were defeated in a battle with the Syrian war-galleys.

The first person who received sure tidings was old Tabus. Her grandson
Hanno, who escaped with his life, at the bidding of his father Satabus,
who revered his mother, had made his way to her amid great perils to
convey the sorrowful news. Two of the best ships in the family had
been sunk, and on one the brave Abus, Ledscha's betrothed husband, who
commanded it, had lost his life; on the other the aged dame's oldest son
and three of her grandchildren.

Tabus fell as if struck by lightning when she heard the tidings, and
since that time her tongue had lost its power of fluent speech, her ear
its sharpness; but Ledscha did not leave her side, and saved her life by
tireless, faithful nursing.

Neither Satabus, the old woman's second son, who now commanded the
little pirate fleet, nor his sons, Hanno and Labaja, had been seen in
the neighbourhood of Tennis since the disaster, but after Tabus had
recovered sufficiently to provide for herself, Ledscha returned to
Tennis to manage her father's great household and supply the mother's
place to her younger sister, Taus.

She had not recovered the careless cheerfulness of earlier years, but,
graver than the companions of her own age, she absented herself from
the gaieties of the Biamite maidens. Meanwhile her beauty had increased
wonderfully, and, attracting attention far and wide, drew many suitors
from neighbouring towns to Tennis. Only a few, however, had made offers
of marriage to her father; the beautiful girl's cold, repellent manner
disheartened them. She herself desired nothing better; yet it secretly
incensed her and pierced her soul with pain to see herself at twenty
unwedded, while far less attractive companions of her own age had long
been wives and mothers.

The arduous task which she had performed a short time before for her
widowed sister had increased the seriousness of her disposition to
sullen moroseness.

After her return home she often rowed to the Owl's Nest, for Ledscha
felt bound to old Tabus, and, so far as lay in her power, under
obligation to atone for the injury which the horror of her lover's
sudden death had inflicted upon his grandmother.

Now she had at last been subjugated by a new passion--love for the Greek
sculptor Hermon, who did his best to win the heart of the Biamite girl,
whose austere, extremely singular beauty attracted his artist eyes.

To-day Ledscha had come to the sorceress to learn from her what awaited
her and her love. She had landed on the island, sure of favourable
predictions, but now her hopes lay as if crushed by hailstones.

If Bias, who was superior to an ordinary slave, was right, she was to be
degraded to a toy and useful tool by the man who had already proved
his pernicious power over other women of her race, even her own young
sister, whom she had hitherto guarded with faithful care. It had by no
means escaped her notice that the girl was concealing something from
her, though she did not perceive the true cause of the change.

The bright moonbeams, which now wove a silvery web over every
surrounding object, seemed like a mockery of her darkened soul.

If the demons of the heights and depths had been subject to her, as to
the aged enchantress she would have commanded them to cover the heavens
with black clouds. Now they must show her what she had to hope or to
fear.

She shook her head slightly, as if she no longer believed in a
favourable turn of affairs, pushed the little curls which had escaped
from the wealth of her black hair back from her forehead with her
slender hand, and walked firmly to the house.

The old dame was crouching beside the hearth in the middle room, turning
the metal spit, on which she had put the ducks, over the freshly kindled
fire.

The smoke hurt her eyes, which were slightly inflamed, yet they seemed
to serve their purpose better than her half-dulled ear, for, after a
swift glance at Ledscha, she stammered in her faltering speech: "What
has happened? Nothing good, certainly. It is written on your face."

The girl nodded assent, pointed with a significant gesture to her eyes
and the open air, and went down to the shore again to convince herself
that no other vessel was approaching.

What she had to confide to Tabus was intended for her alone, and
experience taught how far spoken words could be heard at night over the
water.

When she had returned to the hut, she bent down to the old woman's ear
and, holding her curved hand to her lips, cried, "He is not coming!"

Tabus shrugged her shoulders, and the smile of satisfaction which
flitted over her brown, wrinkled face showed that the news was welcome.

For her murdered grandson's sake the girl's confession that she had
given her heart to a Greek affected her painfully; but Tabus also had
something else on her mind for her beautiful darling.

Now she only intimated by a silent nod that she understood Ledscha, and
her head remained constantly in motion as the latter continued: "True,
I shall see him again to-morrow, but when we part, it will hardly be
in love. At any rate--do you hear, grandmother?--to-morrow must decide
everything. Therefore--do you understand me?--you must question the
cords now, to-night, for to-morrow evening what they advised might be
too late."

"Now?" repeated Tabus in surprise, letting her gaze rest inquiringly
upon the girl. Then she took the spit from the fire, exclaiming angrily:
"Directly, do you mean? As if that could be! As if the stars obeyed
us mortals like maids or men servants! The moon must be at the full to
learn the truth from the cords. Wait, child! What is life but waiting?
Only have patience, girl! True, few know how to practise this art at
your age, and it is alien to many all their lives. But the stars! From
them, the least and the greatest, man can learn to go his way patiently,
year by year. Always the same course and the same pace. No deviation
even one hair's breadth, no swifter or slower movement for the unresting
wanderers. No sudden wrath, no ardent desire, no weariness or aversion
urges or delays them. How I love and honour them! They willingly submit
to the great law until the end of all things. What they appoint for
this hour is for it alone, not for the next one. Everything in the vast
universe is connected with them. Whoever should delay their course a
moment would make the earth reel. Night would become day, the rivers
would return to their sources. People would walk on their heads
instead of their feet, joy would be transformed to sorrow and power to
servitude. Therefore, child, the full moon has a different effect from
the waxing or waning one during the other twenty-nine nights of the
month. To ask of one what belongs to another is to expect an answer from
the foreigner who does not understand your language. How young you are,
child, and how foolish! To question the cords for you in the moonlight
now is to expect to gather grapes from thorns. Take my word for that!"

Here she interrupted the words uttered with so much difficulty, and
with her blackish-blue cotton dress wiped her perspiring face, strangely
flushed by the exertion and the firelight.

Ledscha had listened with increasing disappointment.

The wise old dame was doubtless right, yet before she ventured to the
sculptor's workshop the next day she must know at every cost how matters
stood, what she had to fear or to hope from him; so after a brief
silence she ventured to ask the question, "But are there only the stars
and the cords which predict what fate holds in store for one who is so
nearly allied to you?"

"No, child, no," was the reply. "But nothing can be clone about looking
into the future now. It requires rigid fasting from early dawn, and I
ate the dates you brought me. I inhaled the odor of the roasting ducks,
too, and then--it must be done at midnight; and at midnight your people
will be anxious if you are not at home by that time, or perhaps send a
slave to seek you here at my house, and that--that must not be done--I
must prevent it."

"So you are expecting some one," Ledscha eagerly replied. "And I know
who it is. Your son Satabus, or one of your grandsons. Else why are the
ducks cooked? And for what is the wine jar which I just took from its
hiding place?"

A vehement gesture of denial from Tabus contradicted the girl's
conjecture; but directly after she scanned her with a keen, searching
glance, and said: "No, no. We have nothing to fear from you, surely.
Poor Abus! Through him you will always belong to us. In spite of the
Greek, ours you are and ours you will remain. The stars confirm it,
and you have always been faithful to the old woman. You are shrewd and
steadfast. You would have been the right mate for him who was also wise
and firm. Poor, dear, brave boy! But why pity him? Because the salt
waves now flow over him? Fools that we are! There is nothing better than
death, for it is peace. And almost all of them have found it. Of nine
sons and twenty grandsons, only three are left. The others are all
calm after so much conflict and danger. How long ago it is since seven
perished at once! The last three their turn will come too. How I envy
them that best of blessings, only may they not also go before me!"

Here she lowered her voice, and in a scarcely audible whisper murmured:
"You shall know it. My son Satabus, with his brave boys Hanno and
Labaja, are coming later in the evening. About midnight--if ye protect
them, ye powers above--they will be with me. And you, child, I know your
soul to its inmost depths. Before you would betray the last of Abus's
kindred--"

"My hand and tongue should wither!" Ledscha passionately interrupted,
and then, with zealous feminine solicitude, she asked whether the three
ducks would suffice to satisfy the hunger of these strong men.

The old woman smiled and pointed to a pile of fresh leaves heaped one
above another, beneath which lay several fine shad. They were not to be
cooked until the expected visitors arrived, and she had plenty of bread
besides.

In the presence of these proofs of maternal solicitude the morose,
wrinkled countenance of the old sorceress wore a kind, almost tender
expression, and the light of joyous anticipation beamed upon her young
guest from her red-rimmed eyes.

"I am to see them once more!" cried Tabus in an agitated tone. "The
last--and all three, all! If they--But no; they will not set to work so
near Pelusium. No, no! They will not, lest they should spoil the meeting
with the old woman. Oh, they are kind; no one knows how kind my rough
Satabus can be. He would be your father now, girl, if we could have kept
our Abus--he was the best of all--longer. It is fortunate that you are
here, for they must see you, and it would have been hard for me to fetch
the other things: the salt, the Indian pepper, and the jug of Pelusinian
zythus, which Satabus is always so fond of drinking."

Then Ledscha went into the ruinous left wing of the house, where she
took from a covered hole in the floor what the old woman had kept for
the last of her race, and she performed her task gladly and with rare
skill.

Next she prepared the fish and the pan, and while her hands were moving
busily she earnestly entreated the old woman to gratify her wish and
look into the future for her.

Tabus, however, persisted in her refusal, until Ledscha again called her
"grandmother," and entreated her, by the heads of the three beloved ones
whom she expected, to fulfil her desire.

Then the old dame rose, and while the girl, panting for breath, took the
roasted ducks from the spit, the former, with her own trembling hands,
drew from the little chest which she kept concealed behind a heap of dry
reeds, branches, and straw, a shining copper dish, tossed the gold coins
which had been in it back into the box, and moistened the bottom with
the blackish-red juice of the grape from the wine jar.

After carefully making these preparations she called Ledscha and
repeated that the cords possessed the power of prophecy only on nights
when the moon was full, and that she would use another means of looking
into the future.

Then she commanded the girl to let her hands rest now and to think of
nothing except the questions whose answer she had at heart. Lastly,
she muttered into the vessel a series of incantations, which Ledscha
repeated after her, and gazed as if spellbound at the dark liquid which
covered the bottom.

The girl, panting for breath, watched every movement of the sorceress,
but some time elapsed ere the latter suddenly exclaimed, "There he is!"
and then, without removing her eyes from the bottom of the vessel, she
went on, with faltering accents, as though she was describing a scene
close before her eyes. "Two young men-both Greeks, if the dress does not
deceive--one is at your right hand, the other at your left. The former
is fair-haired; the glance of his eyes is deep and constant. It is he,
I think--But no! His image is fading, and you are turning your back upon
him. You do it intentionally. No, no, you two are not destined for each
other. You think of the one with the waving black hair and beard--of him
alone. He is growing more and more distinct--a handsome man, and how his
brow shines! Yet his glance--it sees more than that of many others, but,
like the rest of his nature, it lacks steadfastness."

Here she paused, raised her shaking head, looked at Ledscha's flushed
face, and in a grave, warning tone, said: "Many signs of happiness, but
also many dark shadows and black spots. If he is the one, child, you
must be on your guard."

"He is," murmured the girl softly, as if speaking to herself.

But the deaf old crone had read the words from her lips, and while
gazing intently at the wine, went on impatiently: "If the picture would
only grow more distinct! As it was, so it has remained. And now! The
image of the fair man with the deep-blue eyes melts away entirely, and a
gray cloud flutters between you and the other one with the black beard.
If it would only scatter! But we shall never make any progress in this
way. Now pay attention, girl."

The words had an imperious tone, and with outstretched head and
throbbing heart Ledscha awaited the old woman's further commands.

They came at once and ordered her to confess, as freely and openly as
though she was talking to herself, where she had met the man whom she
loved, how he had succeeded in snaring her heart, and how he repaid her
for the passion which he had awakened.

These commands were so confused and mingled in utterance that any one
less familiar with the speaker would scarcely have comprehended what
they required of her, but Ledscha understood and was ready to obey.




CHAPTER IV.

This reserved, thoroughly self-reliant creature would never have
betrayed to any human being what moved her soul and filled it some times
with inspiring hope, sometimes with a consuming desire for vengeance;
but Ledscha did not shrink from confiding it to the demons who were to
help her to regain her composure.

So, obeying a swift impulse, she threw herself on her knees by the old
woman's side. Then, supporting her head with her hands, she gazed at the
still glimmering fire, and, as if one memory after another received new
life from it, she began the difficult confession:

"I returned from my sister's brick-kiln a fortnight ago," she commenced,
while the sorceress leaned her deaf ear nearer to her lips.

"During my absence something--I know not what it was--had saddened the
cheerful spirits of my young sister Taus. At the recent festival of
Astarte she regained them, and obtained some beautiful bright flowers
to make wreaths for herself and me. So we joined the procession of the
Tennis maidens and, as the fairest, they placed us directly behind the
daughters of Hiram.

"When we were about to go home after the sacrifice, two young Greeks
approached us and greeted Hiram's daughters and my sister also.

"One was a quiet young man, with narrow shoulders and light, curling
hair; the other towered above him in stature. His powerful figure was
magnificently formed, and he carried his head with its splendid black
beard proudly.

"Since the gods snatched Abus from me, though so many men had wooed me,
I had cared for no one; but the fair-haired Greek with the sparkling
light in his blue eyes and the faint flush on his cheeks pleased me, and
his name, 'Myrtilus,' fell upon my ear like music. I was glad when he
joined me and asked, as simply as though he were merely inquiring the
way, why he had never seen me, the loveliest among the beauties in the
temple, in Tennis.

"I scarcely noticed the other. Besides, he seemed to have eyes only
for Taus and the daughters of Hiram. He played all sorts of pranks with
them, and they laughed so heartily that, fearing the strangers, of whom
there was no lack, might class them with the Hieroduli who followed
the sailors and young men in the temple grottoes, I motioned to Taus to
restrain herself.

"Hermon--this was the name of the tall, bearded man--noticed it and
turned toward me. In doing so his eyes met mine, and it seemed as though
sweet wine flowed through my veins, for I perceived that my appearance
paralyzed his reckless tongue. Yet he did not accost me; but Myrtilus,
the fair one, entreated me not to lessen for the beautiful children the
pleasure to which we are all born.

"I thought this remark foolish--how much sorrow and how little pleasure
I had experienced from childhood!--so I only shrugged my shoulders
disdainfully.

"Then the black-bearded man asked if, young and beautiful as I was, I
had forgotten to believe in mirth and joy. My reply was intended to tell
him that, though this was not the case, I did not belong to those who
spent their lives in loud laughing and extravagant jests.

"The answer was aimed at the black-bearded man's reckless conduct; but
the fair-haired one parried the attack in his stead, and retorted that I
seemed to misunderstand his friend. Pleasure belonged to a festival, as
light belonged to the sun; but usually Hermon laboured earnestly, and
only a short time before he had saved the little daughter of Gula, the
sailor's wife, from a burning house.

"The other did not let Myrtilus finish, but exclaimed that this would
only confirm my opinion of him, for this very leap into the flames had
afforded him the utmost joy.

"The words fell from his bearded lips as if the affair was very simple,
a mere matter of course, yet I knew that the bold deed had nearly cost
him his life--I said to myself that no one but our Abus would have done
it, and then I may have looked at him more kindly, for he cried out that
I, too, understood how to smile, and would never cease doing so if I
knew how it became me.

"As he spoke he turned away from the girls to my side, while Myrtilus
joined them. Hermon's handsome face had become grave and thoughtful, and
when our eyes met I could have wished that they would never part again.
But on account of the others I soon looked down at the ground and we
walked on in this way, side by side, for some distance; but as he
did not address a word to me, only sometimes gazed into my face as if
seeking or examining, I grew vexed and asked him why he, who had just
entertained the others gaily enough, had suddenly become so silent.

"He shook his head and answered--every word impressed itself firmly upon
my memory: 'Because speech fails even the eloquent when confronted with
a miracle.'

"What, except me and my beauty, could be meant by that? But he probably
perceived how strangely his words confused me, for he suddenly seized
my hand, pressing it so firmly that it hurt me, and while I tried to
withdraw it he whispered, 'How the immortals must love you, that they
lend you so large a share of their own divine beauty!'"

"Greek honey," interposed the sorceress, "but strong enough to turn such
a poor young head. And what more happened? The demons desire to hear
all--all--down to the least detail--all!"

"The least detail?" repeated Ledscha reluctantly, gazing into vacancy
as if seeking aid. Then, pressing her hand on her brow, she indignantly
exclaimed: "Ah, if I only knew myself how it conquered me so quickly! If
I could understand and put it into intelligible words, I should need
no stranger's counsel to regain my peace of mind. But as it is! I was
driven by my anxiety from temple to temple, and now to you and your
demons. I went from hour to hour as though in a burning fever. If I
left the house firmly resolved to bethink myself and, as I had bidden my
sister, avoid danger and the gossip of the people, my feet still led me
only where he desired to meet me. Oh, and how well he understood how to
flatter, to describe my beauty! Surely it was impossible not to believe
in it and trust its power!"

Here she hesitated, and while gazing silently into vacancy a sunny
light flitted over her grave face, and, drawing a long breath, she began
again: "I could curse those days of weakness and ecstasy which now--at
least I hope so--are over. Yet they were wonderfully beautiful, and
never can I forget them!"

Here she again bowed her head silently, but the old dame nodded
encouragingly, saying eagerly; "Well, well! I understand all that, and
I shall learn what more is coming, for whatever appears in the mirror
of the wine is infallible--but it must become still more distinct. Let
me--first conjure up the seventy-seven great and the seven hundred and
seventy-seven little demons. They will do their duty, if you open your
heart to us without reserve."

This demand sounded urgent enough, and Ledscha pressed her head against
the old woman's shoulder as if seeking assistance, exclaiming: "I can
not--no, I can not! As if the spirits who obey you did not know already
what had happened and will happen in the future! Let them search the
depths of my soul. There they will see, with their own eyes, what I
should never, never succeed in describing. I could not tell even
you, grandmother, for who among the Biamites ever found such lofty,
heart-bewitching words as Hermon? And what looks, what language he had
at command, when he desired to put an end to my jealous complaints!
Could I still be angry with him, when he confessed that there were other
beauties here whom he admired, and then gazed deep into my eyes and said
that when I appeared they all vanished like the stars at sunrise? Then
every reproach was forgotten, and resentment was transformed into doubly
ardent longing. This, however, by no means escaped his keen glance,
which detects everything, and so he urged me with touching, ardent
entreaties to go with him to his studio, though but for one poor, brief
hour."

"And you granted his wish?" Tabus anxiously interrupted.

"Yes," she answered frankly, "but it was the evening of the day before
yesterday--that was the only time. Secrecy--nothing, Grand mother, was
more hateful to me from childhood."

"But he," the old woman again interrupted, "he--I know it--he praised it
to you as the noblest virtue."

A silent nod from Ledscha confirmed this conjecture, and she added
hesitatingly: "'Only far from the haunts of men,' he said, 'when the
light had vanished, did we hear the nightingale trill in the
dark thickets. Those are his own words, and though it angers you,
Grandmother, they are true."

"Until the secrecy is over, and the sun shines upon misery," the
sorceress answered in her faltering speech, with menacing severity.

"And beneath the tempter's roof you enjoyed the lauded secret love until
the cock roused you?"

"No," replied Ledscha firmly. "Did I ever tell you a lie, that you look
at me so incredulously?"

"Incredulously?" replied the old woman in protest. "I only trembled at
the danger into which you plunged."

"There could be no greater peril," the girl admitted. "I foresaw it
clearly enough, and yet--this is the most terrible part of it--yet my
feet moved as if obeying a will of their own, instead of mine, and when
I crossed his threshold, resistance was silenced, for I was received
like a princess. The lofty, spacious apartment was brilliantly
illuminated, and the door was garlanded with flowers.

"It was magnificent! Then, in a manner as respectful as if welcoming an
illustrious guest, he invited me to take my place opposite to him, that
he might form a goddess after my model. This was the highest flattery of
all, and I willingly assumed the position he directed, but he looked
at me from every side, with sparkling eyes, and asked me to let down my
hair and remove the veil from the back of my head. Then--need I assure
you of it?--my blood boiled with righteous indignation; but instead of
being ashamed of the outrage, he raised his hand to my head and pulled
the veil. Resentment and wrath suddenly flamed in my soul, and before he
could detain me I had left the room. In spite of his representations and
entreaties, I did not enter it again."

"Yet," asked the sorceress in perplexity, "you once more obeyed his
summons?"

"Yesterday also I could not help it," Ledscha answered softly.

"Fool!" cried Tabus indignantly, but the girl exclaimed, in a tone of
sincere shame: "You do well to call me that. Perhaps I deserve still
harsher names, for, in spite of the sternness with which I forbade him
ever to remind me of the studio by even a single word, I soon listened
to him willingly when he besought me, if I really loved him, not to
refuse what would make him happy. If I allowed him to model my figure,
his renown and greatness would be secured. And how clearly he made me
understand this! I could not help believing it, and at last promised
that, in spite of my father and the women of Tennis, I would grant all,
all, and accompany him again to the work room if he would have patience
until the night of the next day but one, when the moon would be at the
full."

"And he?" asked Tabus anxiously.

"He called the brief hours which I required him to wait an eternity,"
replied the girl, "and they seemed no less long to me--but neither
entreaties nor urgency availed; what you predicted for me from the
cords last year strengthened my courage. I should wantonly throw away--I
constantly reminded myself--whatever great good fortune Fate destined
for me if I yielded to my longing and took prematurely what was already
so close at hand; for--do you remember?--at that time it was promised
that on a night when the moon was at the full a new period of the
utmost happiness would begin for me. And now--unless everything deceives
me--now it awaits me. Whether it will come with the full moon of
to-morrow night, or the next, or the following one, your spirits
alone can know; but yesterday was surely too soon to expect the new
happiness."

"And he?" asked the old dame.

"He certainly did not make it easy for me," was the reply, "but as
I remained firm, he was obliged to yield. I granted only his earnest
desire to see me again this evening. I fancy I can still hear him
exclaim, with loving impetuosity, that he hated every day and every
night which kept him from me. And now? Now? For another's sake he lets
me wait for him in vain, and if his slave does not lie, this is only the
beginning of his infamous, treacherous game."

She had uttered the last words in a hoarse cry, but Tabus answered
soothingly: "Hush, child, hush! The first thing is to see clearly, if
I am to interpret correctly what is shown me here. The demons are to
be fully informed they have required it. But you? Did you come to hear
whether the spirits still intend to keep the promise they made then?"

Ledscha eagerly assented to this question, and the old woman continued
urgently: "Then tell me first what suddenly incenses you so violently
against the man whom you have so highly praised?"

The girl related what had formerly been rumoured in Tennis, and which
she had just heard from the slave.

He had lured other women--even her innocent young sister--to his studio.
Now he wanted to induce Ledscha to go there, not from love, but merely
to model her limbs so far as he considered them useful for his work.
He was in haste to do so because he intended to return to the capital
immediately. Whether he meant to leave her in the lurch after using her
for his selfish purposes, she also desired to learn from the sorceress.
But she would ask him that question herself to-morrow. Woe betide him if
the spirits recognised in him the deceiver she now believed him.

Hitherto Tabus had listened quietly, but when she closed her passionate
threats with the exclamation that he also deserved punishment for
alienating Gula, the sailor's wife, from her absent husband, the
enchantress also lost her composure and cried out angrily: "If that
is true, if the Greek really committed that crime--then certainly. The
foreigners destroy, with their laughing levity, much that is good among
us. We must endure it; but whoever broke the Biamite's marriage bond,
from the earliest times, forfeited his life, and so, the gods be
thanked, it has remained. This very last year the fisherman Phabis
killed with a hammer the Alexandrian clerk who had stolen into his
house, and drowned his faithless wife. But your lover--though you should
weep for sorrow till your eyes are red--"

"I would denounce the traitor, if he made himself worthy of death,"
Ledscha passionately interrupted, with flashing eyes. "What portion
of the slave's charge is true will appear at once--and if it proves
correct, to morrow's full moon shall indeed bring me the greatest bliss;
for though, when I was younger and happier, I contradicted Abus when he
declared that one thing surpassed even the raptures of love--satisfied
vengeance--now I would agree with him."

A loud cry of "Right! right!" from the old crone's lips expressed the
gray-haired Biamite's pleasure in this worthy daughter of her race.

Then she again gazed at the wine in the vessel, and this time she did so
silently, as if spellbound by the mirror on its bottom.

At last, raising her aged head, she said in a tone of the most sincere
compassion: "Poor child! Yes, you would be cruelly and shamefully
deceived. Tear your love for this man from your heart, like poisonous
hemlock. But the full moon which is to bring you great happiness is
scarcely the next, perhaps not even the one which follows it, but surely
and certainly a later one will rise, by whose light the utmost bliss
awaits you. True, I see it come from another man than the Greek."

The girl had listened with panting breath. She believed as firmly in the
infallibility of the knowledge which the witch received from the demons
who obeyed her as she did in her own existence.

All her happiness, all that had filled her joyous soul with freshly
awakened hopes, now lay shattered at her feet, and sobbing aloud she
threw herself down beside the old woman and buried her beautiful face in
her lap.

Completely overwhelmed by the great misfortune which had come upon her,
without thinking of the vengeance which had just made her hold her head
so proudly erect, or the rare delight which a later full moon was to
bring, she remained motionless, while the old woman, who loved her and
who remembered an hour in the distant past when she herself had been
dissolved in tears at the prediction of another prophetess, laid her
trembling hand upon her head.

Let the child weep her fill.

Time, perhaps vengeance also, cured many a heartache, and when they had
accomplished this office upon the girl who had once been betrothed to
her grandson, perhaps the full moon bringing happiness, whose appearance
first the cords, then the wine mirror in the bottom of the vessel had
predicted, would come to Ledscha, and she believed she knew at whose
side the girl could regain what she had twice lost--satisfaction for the
young heart that yearned for love.

"Only wait, wait," she cried at last, repeating the consoling words
again and again, till Ledscha raised her tear-stained face.

Impulse urged her to kiss the sufferer, but as she bent over the mourner
the copper dish slipped from her knees and fell rattling on the floor.

Ledscha started up in terror, and at the same moment the Alexandrian's
packs of hounds on the shore opposite to the Owl's Nest began to bark
so loudly that the deaf old woman heard the baying as if it came from a
great distance; but the girl ran out into the open air and, returning
at the end of a few minutes, called joyously to the sorceress from the
threshold, "They are coming!"

"They, they," faltered Tabus, hurriedly pushing her disordered gray hair
under the veil on the back of her head, while exclaiming, scarcely able
to use her voice in her joyous excitement: "I knew it. He keeps his
word. My Satabus is coming. The ducks, the bread, the fish, girl! Good,
loyal heart."

Then a wide, long shadow fell across the dimly lighted room, and from
the darkened threshold a strangely deep, gasping peal of laughter rang
from a man's broad breast.

"Satabus! My boy!" the witch's shriek rose above the peculiar sound.

"Mother!" answered the gray-bearded lips of the pirate.

For one short moment he remained standing at the door with outstretched
arms. Then he took a step toward the beloved being from whom he had been
separated more than two years, and suddenly throwing himself down before
her, while his huge lower limbs covered part of the floor, he stretched
his hands toward the little crooked old woman, who had not strength
to rise from her crouching posture, and seizing her with loving
impetuosity, lifted her as if she were a child, and placing her on his
knees, drew her into a close embrace.

Tabus willingly submitted to this act of violence, and passing her
thin left arm around her son's bull neck with her free hand, patted his
bearded cheeks, wrinkled brow, and bushy, almost white hair.

No intelligible words passed the lips of either the mother or the son
at this meeting; nothing but a confused medley of tender and uncouth
natural sounds, which no language knows.

Yet they understood each other, and Ledscha, who had moved silently
aside, also comprehended that these low laughs, moans, cries, and
stammers were the expressions of love of two deeply agitated hearts, and
for a moment an emotion of envy seized her.

The gods had early bereft her of her mother, while this savage fighter
against the might of the waves, justice, law, and their pitiless,
too powerful defenders, this man, already on the verge of age, still
possessed his, and sunned his rude heart in her love.

It was some time before the old pirate had satisfied his yearning for
affection and placed his light burden down beside the fire.

Tabus now regained the power to utter distinct words, and, difficult
as it was for her half paralyzed tongue to speak, she poured a flood of
tender pet names and affectionate thanks upon the head of her rude son,
the last one left, who had grown gray in bloody warfare; but with the
eyes of her soul she again saw in him the little boy whom, with warm
maternal love, she had once pressed to her breast and cradled in her
arms.

When, in his rough fashion, he warmly returned her professions of
tenderness, her eyes grew wet with tears, and at the question what he
could still find in her, a withered, good-for-nothing little creature
who just dragged along from one day to another, an object of pity
to herself, he again burst into his mighty laugh, and his deep voice
shouted: "Do you want to know that? But where would be the lime that
holds us on the ships if you were no longer here? The best capture
wouldn't be worth a drachm if we could not say, 'Hurrah! how pleased the
old mother will be when she hears it!' And when things go badly, when
men have been wounded or perished in the sea, we should despair of
our lives if we did not know that whatever troubles our hearts the
old mother feels, too, and we shall always get from her the kind words
needed to press on again. And then, when the strait is sore and life is
at stake, whence would come the courage to cast the die if we did not
know that you are with us day and night, and will send your spirits to
help us if the need is great? Hundreds of times they rushed to our aid
just at the right time, and assisted us to hew off the hand of the foe
which was already choking us. But that is only something extra, which we
could do without, if necessary. That you are here, that a man still
has his dear mother, whose heart wishes us everything good and our foes
death and destruction, whose aged eyes will weep if anything harms us,
that, mother dear, that is the main thing!"

He bent his clumsy figure over her as he spoke, and cautiously, as if he
were afraid of doing her some injury, kissed her head with tender care.

Then, rising, he turned to Ledscha, whom he always regarded as his dead
son's betrothed bride, and greeted her with sincere kindness.

Her great beauty strengthened his plan of uniting her to his oldest son,
and when the latter entered the house he cast a searching glance at him.

The result was favourable, for a smile of satisfaction flitted over his
scarred features.

The young pirate's stately figure was not inferior in height to the
old one's, but his shoulders were narrower, his features less broad and
full, and his hair and beard had the glossy raven hue of the blackbird's
plumage.

The young man paused on the threshold in embarrassment, and gazed at
Ledscha with pleased surprise. When he saw her last his grandmother had
not been stricken by paralysis, and the girl was the promised wife of
his older brother, to whom custom forbade him to raise his eyes.

He had thought of her numberless times as the most desirable of women.
Now nothing prevented his wooing her, and finding her far more beautiful
than memory had showed her, strengthened his intention of winning her.

This purpose had matured in the utmost secrecy. He had concealed it even
from his father and his brother Labaja, who was still keeping watch on
the ships, for he had a reserved disposition, and though obliged to obey
his father, wherever it was possible he pursued his own way.

Though Satabus shared Hanno's wish, it vexed him that at this meeting,
after so long a separation, his son should neglect his beloved and
honoured mother for the sake of a beautiful girl. So, turning his back
on Ledscha, he seized the young giant's shoulder with a powerful grip to
drag him toward the old woman; but Hanno perceived his error, and now,
in brief but affectionate words, showed his grandmother that he, too,
rejoiced at seeing her again.

The sorceress gazed at her grandson's stalwart figure with a pleasant
smile, and, after welcoming him, exclaimed to Ledscha: "It seems as if
Abus had risen from the grave."

The girl vouchsafed her dead lover's brother a brief glance, and, while
pouring oil upon the fish in the pan, answered carelessly: "He is a
little like him."

"Not only in person," remarked the old pirate, with fatherly pride, and
pointing to the broad scar across the young man's forehead, visible
even in the dim light, he added by way of explanation: "When we took
vengeance for Abus, he bore away that decoration of honour. The blow
nearly made him follow his brother, but the youth first sent the souls
of half a dozen enemies to greet him in the nether world."

Then Ledscha held out her hand to Hanno, and permitted him to detain it
till an ardent glance from his black eyes met hers, and she withdrew
it blushing. As she did so she said to Tabus: "You can put them on the
fire, and there stands whatever else you need. I must go home now."

In taking leave of the men she asked if she could hope to find them here
again the next day. "The full moon will make it damnably light," replied
the father, "but they will scarcely venture to assail the right of
asylum, and the ships anchored according to regulation at Tanis, with a
cargo of wood from Sinope. Besides, for two years people have believed
that we have abandoned these waters, and the guards think that if we
should return, the last time to choose would be these bright nights.
Still, I should not like to decide anything positively about the morrow
until news came from Labaja."

"You will find me, whatever happens," Hanno declared after his father
had ceased speaking. Old Tabus exchanged a swift glance with her son,
and Satabus said: "He is his own master. If I am obliged to go--which
may happen--then, my girl, you must be content with the youth. Besides,
you are better suited to him than to the graybeard."

He shook hands with Ledscha as he spoke, and Hanno accompanied her to
her boat.

At first he was silent, but as she was stepping into the skiff he
repeated his promise of meeting her here the following night.

"Very well," she answered quickly. "Perhaps I may have a commission to
give you."

"I will fulfil it," he answered firmly.

"To-morrow, then," she called, "unless something unexpected prevents."

But when seated on the thwart she again turned to him, and asked: "Does
it need a long time to bring your ship, with brave men on board, to this
place?"

"We can be here in four hours, and with favourable winds still sooner,"
was the reply.

"Even if it displeases your father?"

"Even then, and though the gods, many as there are, should forbid--if
only your gratitude will be gained."

"It will," she answered firmly, and the water plashed lightly under the
strokes of her oars.




CHAPTER V.

In the extreme northern portion of the little city of Tennis a large,
perfectly plain whitewashed building stood on an open, grass-grown
square.

The side facing the north rested upon a solid substructure of hard
blocks of hewn stone washed by the waves.

This protecting wall extended along both sides of the long, plain
edifice, and prevented the water from overflowing the open space which
belonged to it.

Archias, the owner of the largest weaving establishment in Tennis, the
father of the Alexandrian aristocrat who had arrived the evening before,
was the owner of the house, as well as of the broad plain on which
he had had it built, with the indestructible sea wall, to serve as a
storehouse to receive the supplies of linen, flax, and wool which were
manufactured in his factories.

It was favourably situated for this purpose, for the raw materials could
be moved from the ships which brought them to Tennis directly into the
building. But as the factories were at a considerable distance, the
transportation required much time and expense, and therefore Archias had
had a canal dug connecting the workshops with the water, and at its end
erected a new storehouse, which rendered a second transportation of the
ships' cargoes unnecessary.

The white mansion had not yet been devoted to any other purpose when the
owner determined to offer the spacious empty rooms of the ware house to
his nephews, the sculptors Hermon and Myrtilus, for the production
of two works with whose completion he associated expectations of good
fortune both for the young artists, who were his nephews and wards, and
himself.

The very extensive building which now contained the studios and spacious
living apartments for the sculptors and their slaves would also have
afforded ample room for his daughter and her attendants, but Daphne
had learned from the reports of the artists that rats, mice, and other
disagreeable vermin shared the former storehouse with them, so she had
preferred to have tents pitched in the large open space which belonged
it.

True, the broad field was exposed to the burning sun, and its soil was
covered only with sand and pitiably scorched turf, but three palm trees,
a few sunt acacias, two carob trees, a small clump of fig trees, and the
superb, wide-branched sycamore on the extreme outer edge had won for it
the proud name of a "garden."

Now a great change in its favour had taken place, for Daphne's beautiful
tent, with walls and top of blue and white striped sail-cloth, and the
small adjoining tents of the same colours, gave it a brighter aspect.

The very roomy main tent contained the splendidly furnished sitting and
dining rooms. The beds occupied by Daphne and her companion, Chrysilla,
had been placed in an adjoining one, which was nearly as large, and the
cook, with his assistants, was quartered in a third.

The head keeper, the master of the hounds, and most of the slaves
remained in the transports which had followed the state galley. Some
had slept under the open sky beside the dog kennel hastily erected for
Daphne's pack of hounds.

So, on the morning after the wholly unexpected arrival of the owner's
daughter, the "garden" in front of the white house, but yesterday a
desolate field, resembled an encampment, whose busy life was varied and
noisy enough.

Slaves and freedmen had been astir before sunrise, for Daphne was up
betimes in order to begin the hunt in the early hour when the birds left
their secret nooks on the islands.

Her cousins, the young sculptors, to please her, had gone out, too, but
the sport did not last long; for when the market place of Tennis, just
between the morning and noontide hours, was most crowded, the little
boats which the hunters had used again touched the shore.

With them and Daphne's servants seafaring men also left the
boats--Biamite fishermen and boatmen, who knew the breeding places and
nests of the feathered prey--and before them, barking loudly and shaking
their dripping bodies, the young huntress's brown and white spotted dogs
ran toward the tents.

Dark-skinned slaves carried the game, which had been tied in bunches
while in the boats, to the white house, where they laid three rows of
large water fowl, upon the steps leading to the entrance.

Daphne's arrows were supposed to have killed all these, but the master
of the hunt had taken care to place among his mistress's booty some of
the largest pelicans and vultures which had been shot by the others.

Before retiring to her tent, she inspected the result of the shooting
expedition and was satisfied.

She had been told of the numbers of birds in this archipelago, but
the quantity of game which had been killed far exceeded her greatest
expectations, and her pleasant blue eyes sparkled with joy as she began
to examine the birds which had been slaughtered in so short a time.

Yet, ere she had finished the task, a slight shadow flitted over her
well-formed and attractive though not beautiful features.

The odour emanating from so many dead fowls, on which the sun, already
high in the heavens, was shining, became disagreeable to her, and a
strong sense of discomfort, whose cause, however, she did not seek, made
her turn from them.

The movement with which she did so was full of quiet, stately grace, and
the admiring glance with which Hermon, a tall, black-bearded young man,
watched it, showed that he knew how to value the exquisite symmetry of
her figure.

The somewhat full outlines of her form and the self-possession of her
bearing would have led every one to think her a young matron rather than
a girl; but the two artists who accompanied her on the shooting party
had been intimate with her from childhood, and knew how much modesty and
genuine kindness of heart were united with the resolute nature of this
maiden, who numbered two and twenty years.

Fair-haired Myrtilus seemed to pay little heed to the game which Gras,
Archias's Bithynian house steward, was counting, but black-bearded
Hermon had given it more attention, and when Daphne drew back he nodded
approvingly, and pointing to the heap of motionless inhabitants of the
air, exclaimed with sincere regret: "Fie upon us human wretches! Would
the most bloodthirsty hyena destroy such a number of living creatures in
a few hours? Other beasts of prey do not kill even one wretched
sparrow more than they need to appease their hunger. But we and you,
tender-hearted priestess of a gracious goddess--leading us friends of
the Muse--we pursue a different course! What a mound of corpses! And
what will become of it? Perhaps a few geese and ducks will go into the
kitchen; but the rest--the red flamingoes and the brave pelicans who
feed their young with their own blood? They are only fit to throw away,
for the Biamites eat no game that is shot, and your black slaves, too,
would refuse to taste it. So we destroy hundreds of lives for pastime.
Base word! As if we had so many superfluous hours at our disposal ere we
descend into Hades. A philosopher among brutes would be entitled to cry
out, 'Shame upon you, raging monster!'"

"Shame on you, you perpetual grumbler," interrupted Daphne in an
offended tone. "Who would ever have thought it cruel to test the steady
hand and the keen eye upon senseless animals in the joyous chase? But
what shall we call the fault-finder, who spoils his friend's innocent
enjoyment of a happy morning by his sharp reproaches?"

Hermon shrugged his shoulders, and, in a voice which expressed far
more compassion than resentment, answered: "If this pile of dead birds
pleases you, go on with the slaughter. You can sometimes save the arrows
and catch the swarming game with your hands. If your lifeless victims
yonder were human beings, after all, they would have cause to thank you;
for what is existence?"

"To these creatures, everything," said Myrtilus, the Alexandrian's
other cousin, beckoning to Daphne, who had summoned him to her aid by
a beseeching glance, to draw nearer. "Gladly as I would always and
everywhere uphold your cause, I can not do so this time. Only look here!
Your arrow merely broke the wing of yonder sea eagle, and he is just
recovering from the shock. What a magnificent fellow! How wrathfully and
vengefully his eyes sparkle! How fiercely he stretches his brave head
toward us in helpless fury, and--step back!--how vigorously, spite of
the pain of his poor, wounded, drooping pinion, he flaps the other, and
raises his yellow claws to punish his foes! His plumage glistens and
shines exquisitely where it lies smooth, and how savagely he puffs
out the feathers on his neck! A wonderful spectacle! The embodiment
of powerful life! And the others by his side. We transformed the poor
creatures into a motionless, miserable mass, and just now they were
cleaving the air with their strong wings, proclaiming by proud, glad
cries to their families among the reeds their approach with an abundant
store of prey. Every one was a feast to the eyes before our arrows
struck it, and now? When Hermon, with his pitying heart, condemns this
kind of hunting, he is right. It deprives free, harmless creatures of
their best possession--life--and us thereby of a pleasant sight. In
general, a bird's existence seems to me also of little value, but
beauty, to me as to you, transcends everything else. What would
existence be without it? and wherever it appears, to injure it is
infamous."

Here a slight cough interrupted the young artist, and the moist glitter
of his blue eyes also betrayed that he was suffering from an attack of
severe pain in his lungs; but Daphne nodded assent to him, and to Hermon
also, and commanded the steward Gras to take the birds out of her sight.

"But," said the Bithynian, "our mistress will doubtless allow us at
least to take the hard lower part of the pelicans' beaks, and the wing
feathers of the flamingoes and birds of prey, to show our master on our
return as trophies."

"Trophies?" repeated the girl scornfully. "Hermon, you are better than
I and the rest of us, and I see that you are right. Where game flies
toward us in such quantities, hunting becomes almost murder. And
successes won by so slight an exertion offer little charm. The second
expedition before sunset, Gras, shall be given up. The master of the
hounds, with his men and the dogs, will return home on the transports
this very day. I am disgusted with sport here. Birds of prey, and those
only when brought down from the air, would probably be the right game in
this place."

"Those are the very ones to which I would grant life," said Hermon,
smiling, "because they enjoy it most."

"Then we will at least save the sea eagle," cried Daphne, and ordered
the steward, who was already having the dead fowl carried off, to care
for the wounded bird of prey; but when the latter struck furiously with
his beak at the Biamite who attempted to remove it, Hermon again turned
to the girl, saying: "I thank you in the eagle's name for your good
will, you best of women; but I fear even the most careful nursing will
not help this wounded creature, for the higher one seeks to soar, the
more surely he goes to destruction if his power of flight is broken.
Mine, too, was seriously injured."

"Here?" asked Daphne anxiously. "At this time, which is of such great
importance to you and your art?"

Then she interrupted herself to ask Myrtilus's opinion, but as he had
gone away coughing, she continued, in a softer tone: "How anxious you
can make one, Hermon! Has anything really happened which clouds your
pleasure in creating, and your hope of success?"

"Let us wait," he answered, hastily throwing back his head, with its
thick, waving raven locks. "If, in leaping over the ditch, I should fall
into the marsh, I must endure it, if thereby I can only reach the shore
where my roses bloom!"

"Then you fear that you have failed in the Demeter?" asked Daphne.

"Failed?" repeated the other. "That seems too strong. Only the work is
not proving as good as I originally expected. For the head we both used
a model--you will see--whose fitness could not be surpassed. But the
body! Myrtilus knows how earnestly I laboured, and, without looking to
the right or the left, devoted all my powers to the task of creation.
True, the models did not remain. But even had a magic spell doubled my
ability, the toil would still have been futile. The error is there; yet
I am repairing it. To be sure, many things must aid me in doing so, for
which I now hope; who knows whether it will not again be in vain? You
are acquainted with my past life. It has never yet granted me any great,
complete success, and if I was occasionally permitted to pluck a flower,
my hands were pricked by thorns and nettles!"

He pursed up his lips as if to hiss the unfriendly fate, and Daphne felt
that he, whose career she had watched from childhood with the interest
of affection, and to whom, though she did not confess it even to
herself, she had clung for years with far more than sisterly love,
needed a kind word.

Her heart ached, and it was difficult for her to assume the cheerful
tone which she desired to use; but she succeeded, and her voice sounded
gay and careless enough as she exclaimed to the by no means happy artist
and Myrtilus, who was just returning: "Give up your foolish opposition,
you obstinate men, and let me see what you have accomplished during this
long time. You promised my father that you would show your work to no
one before him, but believe my words, if he were here he would give
you back the pledge and lead me himself to the last production of your
study. Compassion would compel you disobliging fellows to yield, if you
could only imagine how curiosity tortures us women. We can conquer it
where more indifferent matters are concerned. But here!--it need not
make you vainer than you already are, but except my father, you are
dearest in all the world to me. And then, only listen! In my character
as priestess of Demeter I hereby release you from your vow, and thus
from any evil consequences of your, moreover, very trivial guilt; for a
father and daughter who live together, as I do with your uncle, are
just the same as one person. So come! Wearied as I am by the miserable
hunting excursion which caused me such vexation, in the presence of your
works--rely upon it--I shall instantly be gay again, and all my life
will thank you for your noble indulgence."

While speaking, she walked toward the white house, beckoning to the
young men with a winning, encouraging smile.

It seemed to produce the effect intended, for the artists looked at
each other irresolutely, and Hermon was already asking himself whether
Daphne's arguments had convinced Myrtilus also, when the latter, in
great excitement, called after her: "How gladly we would do it, but we
must not fulfil your wish, for it was no light promise--no, your father
exacted an oath. He alone can absolve us from the obligation of showing
him, before any one else, what we finish here. It is not to be submitted
to the judges until after he has seen it."

"Listen to me!" Daphne interrupted with urgent warmth, and began to
assail the artists with fresh entreaties.

For the second time black-bearded Hermon seemed inclined to give up his
resistance, but Myrtilus cried in zealous refusal: "For Hermon's sake,
I insist upon my denial. The judges must not talk about the work until
both tasks are completed, for then each of us will be as good as certain
of a prize. I myself believe that the one for Demeter will fall to me."

"But Hermon will succeed better with the Arachne?" asked Daphne eagerly.

Myrtilus warmly assented, but Hermon exclaimed: "If I could only rely
upon the good will of the judges!"

"Why not?" the girl interrupted. "My father is just, the king is an
incorruptible connoisseur, and certainly yesterday evening you, too,
believed the others to be honest men; as for your fellow-candidate
Myrtilus, he will no more grudge a prize to you than to himself."

"Why should he?" asked Hermon, as if he, too, was perfectly sure of his
friend. "We have shared many a bit of bread together. When we determined
upon this competition each knew the other's ability. Your father
commissioned us to create peaceful Demeter, the patroness of
agriculture, peace, marriage, and Arachne, the mortal who was the most
skilful of spinners; for he is both a grain dealer and owner of spinning
factories. The best Demeter is to be placed in the Alexandrian temple of
the goddess, to whose priestesses you belong; the less successful one
in your own house in the city, but whose Demeter is destined for the
sanctuary, I repeat, is now virtually decided. Myrtilus will add this
prize to the others, and grant me with all his heart the one for the
Arachne. The subject, at any rate, is better adapted to my art than to
his, and so I should be tolerably certain of my cause. Yet my anxiety
about the verdict of the judges remains, for surely you know how much
the majority are opposed to my tendency. I, and the few Alexandrians
who, following me, sacrifice beauty to truth, swim against the stream
which bears you, Myrtilus, and those who are on your side, smoothly
along. I know that you do it from thorough conviction, but with
other acknowledged great artists and our judges, you, too, demand
beauty--always beauty. Am I right, or wrong? Is not any one who refuses
to follow in the footsteps left by the ancients of Athens as certain of
condemnation as the convicted thief or murderer? But I will not follow
the lead of the Athenians, inimitably great though they are in their
own way, because I would fain be more than the ancients of Ilissus: a
disciple and an Alexandrian."

"The never-ending dispute," Myrtilus answered his fellow-artist, with a
cordiality in which, nevertheless, there was a slight accent of pity.

"Surely you know it, Daphne. To me the ideal and its embodiment
within the limits of the natural, according to the models of Phidias,
Polycletus, and Myron is the highest goal, but he and his co-workers
seek objects nearer at hand."

"Or rather we found them," cried Hermon, interrupting his companion
with angry positiveness. "The city of Alexandria, which is growing with
unprecedented vigour, is their home. There, the place to which every
race on earth sends a representative, the pulse of the whole world is
throbbing. There, whoever does not run with the rest is run over; there,
but one thing is important--actual life. Science has undertaken to
fathom it, and the results which it gains with measures and numbers is
of a different value and more lasting than that which the idle sport of
the intellects of the older philosophers obtained. But art, her nobler
sister, must pursue the same paths. To copy life as it is, to reproduce
the real as it presents itself, not as it might or must be, is the task
which I set myself. If you would have me carve gods, whom man can not
represent to himself except in his own form, allow me also to represent
them as reality shows me mortals. I will form them after the models of
the greatest, highest, and best, and also, when the subject permits, in
powerful action in accordance with my own power, but always as real men
from head to foot. We must also cling to the old symbols which those
who order demand, because they serve as signs of recognition, and my
Demeter, too, received the bundle of wheat."

As the excited artist uttered this challenge a defiant glance rested
upon his comrade and Daphne. But Myrtilus, with a soothing gesture of
the hand, answered: "What is the cause of this heat? I at least watch
your work with interest, and do not dispute your art so long as it does
not cross the boundaries of the beautiful, which to me are those of
art."

Here the conversation was interrupted; the steward Gras brought a letter
which a courier from Pelusium had just delivered.

Thyone, the wife of Philippus, the commander of the strong border
fortress of Pelusium, near Tennis, had written it. She and her husband
had been intimate friends of Hermon's father, who had served under the
old general as hipparch, and through him had become well acquainted with
his wealthy brother Archias and his relatives.

The Alexandrian merchant had informed Philippus--whom, like all the
world, he held in the highest honour as one of the former companions
of Alexander the Great--of his daughter's journey, and his wife now
announced her visit to Daphne. She expected to reach Tennis that evening
with her husband and several friends, and mentioned especially her
anticipation of meeting Hermon, the son of her beloved Erigone and her
husband's brave companion in arms.

Daphne and Myrtilus received the announcement with pleasure; but
Hermon, who only the day before had spoken of the old couple with great
affection, seemed disturbed by the arrival of the unexpected guests. To
avoid them entirely appeared impossible even to him, but he declared
in an embarrassed tone, and without giving any reason, that he should
scarcely be able to devote the entire evening to Daphne and the
Pelusinians.

Then he turned quickly toward the house, to which a signal from his
slave Bias summoned him.




CHAPTER VI.

As soon as Hermon had disappeared behind the door Daphne begged Myrtilus
to accompany her into the tent.

After taking their seats there, the anxious exclamation escaped her
lips: "How excited he became again! The stay in Tennis does not seem to
agree with you--you are coughing, and father expected so much benefit to
your ailment from the pure moist air, and to Hermon still more from
the lonely life here in your society. But I have rarely seen him more
strongly enlisted in behalf of the tendency opposed to beauty."

"Then your father must be satisfied with the good effect which our
residence here has exerted upon me," replied Myrtilus. "I know that
he was thinking of my illness when he proposed to us to complete his
commissions here. Hermon--the good fellow!--could never have been
induced to leave his Alexandria, had not the hope of thereby doing me a
kindness induced him to follow me. I will add it to the many for which
I am already indebted to his friendship. As for art, he will go his
own way, and any opposition would be futile. A goddess--he perceives it
himself--was certainly the most unfortunate subject possible for his--"

"Is his Demeter a complete failure?" asked Daphne anxiously.

"Certainly not," replied Myrtilus eagerly.

"The head is even one of his very best. Only the figure awakens grave
doubts. In the effort to be faithful to reality, the fear of making
concessions to beauty, he lapsed into ungraceful angularity and a
sturdiness which, in my opinion, would be unpleasing even in a mortal
woman. The excess of unbridled power again makes it self visible in the
wonderfully gifted man. Many things reached him too late, and others too
soon."

Daphne eagerly asked what he meant by these words, and Myrtilus replied:
"Surely you know how he became a sculptor. Your father had intended him
to be his successor in business, but Hermon felt the vocation to become
an artist--probably first in my studio--awake with intense force. While
I early placed myself under the instruction of the great Bryaxis, he was
being trained for a merchant's life. When he was to guide the reed in
the counting-house, he sketched; when he was sent to the harbour to
direct the loading of the ships, he became absorbed in gazing at the
statues placed there. In the warehouse he secretly modelled, instead
of attending to the bales of goods. You are certainly aware what a
sad breach occurred then, and how long Hermon was restrained before he
succeeded in turning his back upon trade."

"My father meant so kindly toward him," Daphne protested. "He was
appointed guardian to you both. You are rich, and therefore he aided in
every possible way your taste for art; but Hermon did not inherit from
his parents a single drachm, and so my father saw the most serious
struggles awaiting him if he devoted himself to sculpture. And, besides,
he had destined his nephew to become his successor, the head of one of
the largest commercial houses in the city."

"And in doing so," Myrtilus responded, "he believed he had made the best
provision for his happiness. But there is something peculiar in art.
I know from your father himself how kind his intentions were when he
withdrew his assistance from Hermon, and when he had escaped to the
island of Rhodes, left him to make his own way during the first period
of apprenticeship through which he passed there. Necessity, he thought,
would bring him back to where he had a life free from anxiety awaiting
him. But the result was different. Far be it from me to blame the
admirable Archias, yet had he permitted his ward to follow his true
vocation earlier, it would have been better for him."

"Then you think that he began to study too late?" asked Daphne eagerly.

"Not too late," was the reply, "but with his passionate struggle to
advance, an earlier commencement would have been more favourable. While
the companions of his own age were already doing independent work, he
was still a student, and so it happened that he began for himself too
soon."

"Yet," Daphne answered, "can you deny that, directly after Hermon
produced his first work which made his talent undeniable, my father
again treated him like his own son?"

"On the contrary," replied Myrtilus, "I remember only too well how
Archias at that time, probably not entirely without your intercession,
fairly showered gold upon his nephew, but unfortunately this abundance
was by no means to his advantage."

"What do you mean?" asked Daphne. "Were not you, at that very time,
in full possession of the great wealth inherited from your father and
mother, and yet did you not work far beyond your strength? Bryaxis--I
heard him--was full of your praises, and yet entreated my father to use
all his influence, as guardian, to warn you against overwork."

"My kind master!" cried Myrtilus, deeply moved. "He was as anxious about
me as a father."

"Because he perceived that you were destined for great achievements."

"And because it did not escape his penetration how much I needed care.
My lungs, Daphne, my lungs--surely you know how the malicious disease
became fatal to my clear mother, and to my brother and sister also. All
three sank prematurely into the grave, and for years the shades of my
parents have been beckoning to me too. When the cough shakes my chest, I
see Charon raise his oar and invite me also to enter his sable boat."

"But you just assured me that you were doing well," observed the girl.
"The cough alone makes me a little anxious. If you could only see for
yourself what a beautiful colour the pure air has given your cheeks!"

"This flush," replied Myrtilus gravely, "is the sunset of life's closing
day, not the dawn of approaching convalescence. But let us drop the
subject. I allude to these sorrowful things only to prevent your praises
of me at Hermon's expense. True, even while a student I possessed wealth
far beyond my needs, but the early deaths of my brother and sister had
taught me even then to be economical of the brief span of life allotted
to me. Hermon, on the contrary, was overflowing with manly vigour, and
the strongest among the Ephebi in the wrestling school. After three
nights' revel he would not even feel weary, and how difficult the women
made it for the handsome, black-bearded fellow to commence his work
early! Did you ever ask yourself why young steeds are not broken in
flowery meadows, but upon sand? Nothing which attracts their attention
and awakens their desires must surround them; but your father's gold
led Hermon, ere the season of apprenticeship was over, into the most
luxuriant clover fields. Honour and respect the handsome, hot-blooded
youth that, nevertheless, he allowed himself to be diverted from work
only a short time and soon resumed it with ardent zeal, at first in
superabundance, and then amid fresh need and privation."

"O Myrtilus," the girl interrupted, "how terribly I suffered in those
days! For the first time the gods made me experience that there are
black clouds, as well as bright sunshine, in the human soul. For weeks
an impassable gulf separated me from my father, with whom I had always
had one heart and soul. But I never saw him as he was then. The first
prize had been awarded to you for your Aphrodite, radiant in marvellous
beauty, and your brow had also been already crowned for your statue of
Alexander, when Hermon stepped forward with his works. They were at the
same time the first which were to show what he believed to be the true
mission of art--a hideous hawker, hide in hand, praising his wares with
open mouth, and the struggling Maenads. Surely you know the horrible
women who throw one another on the ground, tearing and rending with
bestial fury. The spectacle of these fruits of the industry of one dear
to me grieved me also, and I could not understand how you and the others
saw anything to admire in them. And my father! At the sight of these
things the colour faded from his cheeks and lips, and, as if by virtue
of his guardianship he had a right to direct Hermon in the paths of
art also, he forbade his ward to waste any more time in such horrible
scarecrows, and awaken loathing and wrath instead of gratification,
exultation, and joy. You know the consequences, but you do not know how
my heart ached when Hermon, frantic with wounded pride and indignation,
turned his back upon my father and severed every tie that united him to
us. In spite of his deep vexation and the unbridled violence with which
the nephew had allowed himself to address his uncle, my father did not
dream of withholding his assistance from him. But Hermon no longer
came to our house, and when I sent for him to bring him to reason, he
positively declared that he would not accept another obolus from my
father--he would rather starve than permit any one to dictate to him
in the choice of his subjects. Liberty was worth more than his uncle's
gold. Yet my father sent him his annual allowance."

"But he refused it," added Myrtilus. "I remember that day well, how I
tried to persuade him, and, when he persisted in his intention, besought
him to accept from my abundance what he needed. But this, too, he
resolutely refused, though at that time I was already so deeply in his
debt that I could not repay him at all with paltry money."

"You are thinking of the devotion with which he nursed you when you were
so ill?" asked Daphne.

"Certainly; yet not of that alone," was the reply. "You do not know how
he stood by me in the worst days. Who was it that after my first great
successes, when base envy clouded many an hour of my life, rejoiced with
me as though he himself had won the laurel? It was he, the ambitious
artist, though recognition held even farther aloof from his creations
than success. And when, just at that time, the insidious disease
attacked me more cruelly than ever, he devoted himself to me like a
loving brother. While formerly, in the overflowing joy of existence, he
had revelled all day and caroused all night, how often he paused in the
rush of gaiety to exchange the festal hall for a place beside my couch,
frequently remaining there until Eos dyed the east, that he might
hold my fevered hand and support my shaken frame! Frequently too, when
already garlanded for some gay banquet, he took the flowers from his
head and devoted the night to his friend, that he might not leave him to
the attendance of the slaves. It is owing to him, and the care and skill
of the great leech Erasistratus, that I am still standing before you
alive and can praise what my Hermon was and proved himself to me in
those days. Yet I must also accuse him of a wrong; to this hour I bear
him a grudge for having, in those sorrowful hours, refused to share my
property with me fraternally. What manly pride would have cheerfully
permitted him to accept was opposed by the defiant desire to show me,
your father, you, the whole world, that he would depend upon himself,
and needed assistance neither from human beings nor even the gods. In
the same way, while working, he obstinately rejected my counsel and
my help, though the Muse grants me some things which he unfortunately
lacks. Great as his talent is, firmly as I believe that he will yet
succeed some day in creating something grand, nay, perhaps something
mighty, the unbelieving disciple of Straton lacks the power of
comprehending the august dignity, the superhuman majesty of the divine
nature, and he does not succeed in representing the bewitching charm
of woman, because he hates it as the bull hates a red rag. Only once
hitherto has he been successful, and that was with your bust."

Daphne's cheeks suddenly flamed with a burning flush, and feeling it
she raised her feather fan to her eyes, and with forced indifference
murmured: "We were good friends from our earliest childhood. And,
besides, how small is the charm with which the artist who chooses me for
a model has to deal!"

"It is rather an unusually fascinating one," Myrtilus asserted
resolutely. "I have no idea of flattering you, and you are certainly
aware that I do not number you among the beauties of Alexandria. But
instead of the delicate, symmetrical features which artists need, the
gods bestowed upon you a face which wins all hearts, even those of
women, because it is a mirror of genuine, helpful, womanly kindness, a
sincere disposition, and a healthy, receptive mind. To reproduce such a
face, not exactly beautiful, and yet bewitching, is the hardest possible
task, and Hermon, I repeat it, has succeeded. You are the only one of
your noble sex who inspires the motherless man with respect, and for
whom he feels more than a fleeting fancy. What does he not owe you?
After the bridge which united him to his uncle and paternal friend had
been so suddenly broken, it was you who rebuilt it. Now, I think, it is
stronger than ever. I could not imagine anything that would induce him
to give you up; and all honour to your father, who, instead of bearing
the insubordinate fellow a grudge, only drew him more warmly to his
heart, and gave us two commissions which will permit each to do his
best. If I see clearly, the daughter of Archias is closely connected
with this admirable deed."

"Of course," replied Daphne, "my father discussed his intention with me,
but the thought was entirely his own. True, Hermon's Street-Boy eating
Figs was not exactly according to his taste, but it pleased him better
than his former works, and I agree with Euphranor, it is remarkably true
to nature. My father perceived this too. Besides, he is a merchant who
sets a high value upon what he has earned, and Hermon's refusal of his
gold startled him. Then the good man also saw how nobly, in spite of his
wild life, his obstinacy, and the work so unpleasing to him, his nephew
always showed the noble impulses inherited from his brave father, and
thus Hermon gained the day."

"But what would have become of him last year, after the mortifying
rejection of his model of The Happy Return Home for the harbour of
Eunostus," asked Myrtilus, "if you and your encouragement had not
cheered him?"

"That verdict, too, was abominable!" exclaimed Daphne indignantly. "The
mother opening her arms to the returning son was unlovely, it is true,
and did not please me either; but the youth with the travelling hat and
staff is magnificent in his vigour and natural action."

"That opinion, as you know, is mine also," replied Myrtilus. "In the
mother the expression was intended to take the place of beauty. For the
returning son, as well as for the fig-eater, he found a suitable model.
True, the best was at his disposal for his Demeter."

Here he hesitated; but Daphne so urgently asked to know what he, who had
already denied her admission to the studios, was now again withholding
from her, that, smiling indulgently, he added: "Then I must probably
consent to tell in advance the secret with which you were to be
surprised. Before him, as well as before me, hovered--since you wish
to know it--in Alexandria, when we first began to model the head of
the goddess, a certain charming face which is as dear to one as to the
other."

Daphne, joyously excited, held out her hand to the artist, exclaiming:
"Oh, how kind that is! Yet how was it possible, since I posed neither to
him nor to you?"

"Hermon had finished your bust only a short time before, and you
permitted me to use your head for my statue of the goddess of Peace,
which went down with the ship on the voyage to Ostia. This was at the
disposal of us both in three or four reproductions, and, besides, it
hovered before our mental vision clearly enough. When the time to show
you our work arrives, you will be surprised to discover how differently
two persons see and copy the same object."

"Now that I know so much, and have a certain share in your works, I
insist upon seeing them!" cried Daphne with far greater impetuosity than
usual. "Tell Hermon so, and remind him that I shall at any rate expect
him to meet the Pelusinian guests at the banquet. Threaten him seriously
with my grave displeasure if he persists in leaving it speedily."

"I will not fail to do my part," replied Myrtilus; "but as to your wish
to see the two Demeters--"

"That will come to pass," interrupted Daphne, "as soon as we three are
together again like a clover leaf." She returned the sculptor's farewell
greeting as she spoke, but before he reached the entrance to the tent
she again detained him with the exclamation: "Only this one thing more:
Does Hermon deceive himself when he hopes so confidently for success
with the weaver, Arachne?"

"Hardly--if the model whom he desires does not fail him."

"Is she beautiful, and did he find her here in Tennis?" asked Daphne,
trying to assume an indifferent manner; but Myrtilus was not deceived,
and answered gaily: "That's the way people question children to find out
things. Farewell until the banquet, fair curiosity!"




CHAPTER VII.

The slave Bias had not gone to the hunting party with his master. He had
never been fit for such expeditions, since the Egyptian guard who took
him to the slave market for sale crippled the arch-traitor's son's left
leg by a blow, but he was all the more useful in the house, and even the
keenest eye could scarcely now perceive the injury which lessened his
commercial value.

He had prepared everything his master would need to shoot the birds very
early in the morning, and after helping the men push the boats into the
water, he, too, remained out of doors.

The old Nubian doorkeeper's little badger dog ran to meet him, as usual,
barking loudly, and startled a flock of sparrows, which flew up directly
in front of Bias and fluttered to and fro in confusion.

The slave regarded this as an infallible omen, and when Stephanion,
Daphne's maid, who had grown gray in the household of Archias, and
though a freed woman still worked in the old way, came out of the tent,
he called to her the gay Greek greeting, "Rejoice!" pointed to the
sparrows, and eagerly continued: "How one flies above another! how they
flutter and chirp and twitter! It will be a busy day."

Stephanion thought this interpretation of the ordinary action of the
birds very consistent with Bias's wisdom, which was highly esteemed in
the household of Archias, and it also just suited her inclination to
chat with him for a while, especially as she had brought a great deal of
news from Alexandria.

By way of introduction she mentioned the marriages and deaths in their
circle of acquaintances, bond and free, and then confided to the slave
what had induced her mistress to remain so long absent from her father,
whom she usually left alone for only a few hours at the utmost.

Archias himself had sent her here, after young Philotas, who was now
apparently wooing her with better success than other suitors, had
spoken of the enormous booty which one of his friends had brought from a
shooting expedition at Tennis, and Daphne had expressed a wish to empty
her quiver there too.

True, Philotas himself had been eager to guide the hunting party, but
Daphne declined his escort because--so the maid asserted--she cared far
more about meeting her cousins, the sculptors, than for the chase. Her
mistress had frankly told her so, but her father was delighted to hear
her express a wish, because for several months she had been so quiet and
listless that she, Stephanion, had become anxious about her. Meanwhile,
Daphne had tried honestly to conceal her feelings from the old man,
but such games of hide and seek were useless against the master's keen
penetration. He spared no pains in the preparations for the journey,
and the girl now seemed already transformed. This was caused solely by
meeting her cousins again; but if any one should ask her whether Daphne
preferred Myrtilus or Hermon, she could not give a positive answer.

"Cautious inquiry saves recantation," replied Bias importantly. "Yet you
may believe my experience, it is Myrtilus. Fame inspires love, and what
the world will not grant my master, in spite of his great talent, it
conceded to the other long ago. And, besides, we are not starving; but
Myrtilus is as rich as King Croesus of Sardis. Not that Daphne, who is
stifling in gold herself, would care about that, but whoever knows life
knows--where doves are, doves will fly."

Stephanion, however, was of a different opinion, not only because Daphne
talked far more about the black-bearded cousin than the fair one, but
because she knew the girl, and was seldom mistaken in such matters.
She would not deny that Daphne was also fond of Myrtilus. Yet probably
neither of the artists, but Philotas, would lead home the bride, for he
was related to the royal family--a fine, handsome man; and, besides,
her father preferred him to the other suitors who hovered around her as
flies buzzed about honey. Of course, matters would be more favourable
to Philotas in any other household. Who else in Alexandria would consult
the daughter long, when he was choosing her future husband? But Archias
was a white raven among fathers, and would never force his only child to
do anything.

Marrying and loving, however, were two different affairs. If Eros had
the final decision, her choice might perhaps fall on one of the artists.

Here she was interrupted by the slave's indignant exclamation: "What
contradictions! 'Woman's hair is long, but her wit is short,' says the
proverb. 'Waiting is the merchant's wisdom,' I have heard your master
say more than once, and to obey the words of shrewd people is the best
plan for those who are not so wise. Meanwhile, I am of the opinion that
curiosity alone brought Daphne--who, after all, is only a woman--to this
place. She wants to see the statues of Demeter which her father ordered
from us."

"And the Arachne?" asked the maid. This was an opportune question to the
slave--how often he had heard the artists utter the word "Arachne!"--and
his pride of education had suffered from the consciousness that he knew
nothing about her except the name, which in Greek meant "the spider."

Some special story must surely be associated with this Arachne, for
which his master desired to use his young countrywoman, Ledscha, as
a model, and whose statues Archias intended to place in his house in
Alexandria and in the great weaving establishment at Tennis beside the
statue of Demeter.

Stephanion, a Greek woman who grew up in a Macedonian household, must
know something about her.

So he cautiously turned the conversation to the spinner Arachne, and
when Stephanion entered into it, admitted that he, too, was curious to
learn in what way the sculptors would represent her.

"Yes," replied the maid, "my mistress has more than once racked her
brains over that, and Archias too. Perhaps they will carve her as a girl
at work in the house of her father Idmon, the purple dyer of Colophon."

"Never," replied Bias in a tone of dissent. "Just imagine how the loom
would look wrought in gold and ivory!"

"I thought so too," said Stephanion, in apology for the foolish idea.
"Daphne thinks that the two will model her in different ways: Myrtilus,
as mistress in the weaving room, showing with proud delight a piece just
completed to the nymphs from the Pactolus and other rivers, who sought
her at Colophon to admire her work; but Hermon, after she aroused the
wrath of Athene because she dared to weave into the hangings the love
adventures of the gods with mortal women."

"Father Zeus as a swan toying with Leda," replied Bias as confidently
as if Arachne's works were before his eyes, "and in the form of a
bull bearing away Europa, the chaste Artemis bending over the sleeping
Endymion."

"How that pleases you men!" interrupted the maid, striking him lightly
on the arm with the duster which she had brought from the tent. "But
ought the virgin Athene to be blamed because she punished the weaver
who, with all her skill, was only a mortal woman, for thus exposing her
divine kindred?"

"Certainly not," replied Bias, and Stephanion went on eagerly: "And
when the great Athene, who invented weaving and protects weavers,
condescended to compete with Arachne, and was excelled by her, surely
her gall must have overflowed. Whoever is just will scarcely blame
her for striking the audacious conqueror on the brow with the weaver's
shuttle."

"It is that very thing," replied Bias modestly, "which to a
short-sighted fool like myself--may the great goddess not bear me a
grudge for it!--never seemed just in her. Even the mortal who succumbs
in a fair fight ought not to be enraged against the victor. At least, so
I was taught. But what, I ask myself, when I think of the stones which
were flung at Hermon's struggling Maenads, could be less suited for
imitation than two women, one of whom strikes the other?"

"The woman who in her desperation at that blow desires to hang herself,
must produce a still more horrible impression," replied Stephanion.
"Probably she will be represented as Athene releases her from the noose
rather than when, as a punishment for her insolence, she transforms
Arachne into a spider."

"That she might be permitted, in the form of an insect, to make artistic
webs until the end of her life," the slave, now sufficiently well
informed, added importantly. "Since that transformation, as you know,
the spider has been called by the Greeks Arachne. Perhaps--I always
thought so--Hermon will represent her twisting the rope with which she
is to kill herself. You have seen many of our works, and know that we
love the terrible."

"Oh, let me go into your studio!" the maid now entreated no less
urgently than her mistress had done a short time before, but her wish,
too, remained ungratified.

"The sculptors," Bias truthfully asserted, "always kept their workrooms
carefully locked." They were as inaccessible as the strongest fortress,
and it was wise, less on account of curious spectators, from whom there
was nothing to fear, than of the thievish propensities of the
people. The statues, by Archias's orders, were to be executed in
chryselephantine work, and the gold and ivory which this required might
only too easily awaken the vice of cupidity in the honest and frugal
Biamites. So nothing could be done about it, not to mention the fact
that he was forbidden, on pain of being sold to work in a stone quarry,
to open the studio to any one without his master's consent.

So the maid, too, was obliged to submit, and the sacrifice was rendered
easier for her because, just at that moment, a young female slave called
her back to the tent where Chrysilla, Daphne's companion, a matron who
belonged to a distinguished Greek family, needed her services.

Bias, rejoicing that he had at last learned, without exposing his own
ignorance, the story of the much-discussed Arachne, returned to the
house, where he remained until Daphne came back from shooting with
her companions. While the latter were talking about the birds they had
killed, Bias went out of doors; but he was forced to give up his desire
to listen to a conversation which was exactly suited to arrest his
attention, for after the first few sentences he perceived behind the
thorny acacias in the "garden" his countrywoman Ledscha.

So she was keeping her promise. He recognised her plainly, in spite of
the veil which covered the back of her head and the lower portion of her
face. Her black eyes were visible, and what a sinister light shone in
them as she fixed them sometimes on Daphne, sometimes on Hermon, who
stood talking together by the steps!

The evening before Bias had caught a glimpse of this passionate
creature's agitated soul. If anything happened here that incensed or
wounded her she would be capable of committing some unprecedented act
before the very master's honoured guest.

To prevent this was a duty to the master whom he loved, and against whom
he had only warned Ledscha because he was reluctant to see a free maiden
of his own race placed on a level with the venal Alexandrian models,
but still more because any serious love affair between Hermon and the
Biamite might bring disastrous consequences upon both, and therefore
also on himself. He knew that the free men of his little nation would
not suffer an insult offered by a Greek to a virgin daughter of their
lineage to pass unavenged.

True, in his bondage he had by no means remained free from all the bad
qualities of slaves, but he was faithfully devoted to his master, who
had imposed upon him a great debt of gratitude; for though, during the
trying period of variance with his rich and generous uncle, Hermon had
often been offered so large a sum for him that it would have relieved
the artist from want, he could not be induced to yield his "wise and
faithful Bias" to another. The slave had sworn to himself that he would
never forget this, and he kept his oath.

Freedmen and slaves were moving to and fro in the large open square
before him, amid the barking of the dogs and the shouts of the male and
female venders of fruit, vegetables, and fish, who hoped to dispose of
their wares in the kitchen tent of the wealthy strangers.

The single veiled woman attracted no attention here, but Bias kept his
gaze fixed steadily upon her, and as she curved her little slender hand
above her brow to shade her watchful eyes from the dazzling sunlight,
and set her beautifully arched foot on a stone near one of the trees in
order to gain a better view, he thought of the story of the weaver which
he had just heard.

Though the stillness of the hot noontide was interrupted by many sounds,
it exerted a bewitching influence over him.

Ledscha seemed like the embodiment of some great danger, and when she
lowered one arm and raised the other to protect herself again from the
radiance of the noonday sun, he started; for through the brain of the
usually fearless man darted the thought that now the nimble spider-legs
were moving to draw him toward her, entwine him, and suck his heart's
blood.

The illusion lasted only a few brief moments, but when it vanished and
the girl had regained the figure of an unusually slender, veiled Biamite
woman, he shook his head with a sigh of relief, for never had such a
vision appeared to him in broad noonday and while awake, and it must
have been sent to warn him and his master against this uncanny maiden.

It positively announced some approaching misfortune which proceeded from
this beautiful creature.

The Biamite now advanced hesitatingly toward Hermon and Daphne, who were
still a considerable distance from her. But Bias had also quitted his
post of observation, and after she had taken a few steps forward, barred
her way.

With a curt "Come," he took her hand, whispering, "Hermon is joyously
expecting your visit."

Ledscha's veil concealed her mouth, but the expression of her eyes made
him think that it curled scornfully.

Yet she silently followed him.

At first he led her by the hand, but on the way he saw at the edge of
her upper veil the thick, dark eyebrows which met each other, and her
fingers seemed to him so strangely cold and tapering that a shudder ran
through his frame and he released them.

Ledscha scarcely seemed to notice it, and, with bowed head, walked
beside him through the side entrance to the door of Hermon's studio.

It was a disappointment to her to find it locked, but Bias did not
heed her angry complaint, and led her into the artist's sitting room,
requesting her to wait for his master there.

Then he hurried to the steps, and by a significant sign informed the
sculptor that something important required his attention.

Hermon understood him, and Bias soon had an opportunity to tell the
artist who it was that desired to speak to him and where he had taken
Ledscha. He also made him aware that he feared some evil from her,
and that, in an alarming vision, she had appeared to him as a hideous
spider.

Hermon laughed softly. "As a spider? The omen is appropriate. We will
make her a woman spider--an Arachne that is worth looking at. But this
strange beauty is one of the most obstinate of her sex, and if I let her
carry out her bold visit in broad daylight she will get the better of
me completely. The blood must first be washed from my hands here. The
wounded sea eagle tore the skin with its claw, and I concealed the
scratch from Daphne. A strip of linen to bandage it! Meanwhile, let
the impatient intruder learn that her sign is not enough to open every
door."

Then he entered his sitting room, greeted Ledscha curtly, invited her to
go into the studio, unlocked it, and left her there alone while he
went to his chamber with the slave and had the slight wound bandaged
comfortably.

While Bias was helping his master he repeated with sincere anxiety his
warning against the dangerous beauty whose eyebrows, which had grown
together, proved that she was possessed by the demons of the nether
world.

"Yet they increase the austere beauty of her face," assented the artist.
"I should not want to omit them in modelling Arachne while the goddess
is transforming her into a spider! What a subject! A bolder one was
scarcely ever attempted and, like you, I already see before me the
coming spider."

Then, without the slightest haste, he exchanged the huntsman's chiton
for the white chlamys, which was extremely becoming to his long, waving
beard, and at last, exclaiming gaily, "If I stay any longer, she will
transform herself into empty air instead of the spider," he went to her.




CHAPTER VIII.

While waiting in the studio Ledscha had used the time to satisfy her
curiosity.

What was there not to be seen!

On pedestals and upon the boards of the floor, on boxes, racks, and
along the wall, stood, lay, or hung the greatest variety of articles:
plaster casts of human limbs and parts of the bodies of animals, male
and female, of clay and wax, withered garlands, all sorts of sculptor's
tools, a ladder, vases, cups and jars for wine and water, a frame over
which linen and soft woollen materials were spread, a lute and a zither,
several seats, an armchair, and in one corner a small table with three
dilapidated book rolls, writing tablets, metal styluses, and reed pens.

All these articles were arranged haphazard, and showed that Bias
possessed more wisdom than care in the use of duster and broom.

It would have been difficult to count the number of things brought
together here, but the unusually long, wide room was by no means
crowded.

Ledscha cast a wondering glance sometimes at one object, sometimes at
another, but without understanding its meaning or its use.

The huge figure on the pedestal in the middle of the studio, upon which
the full glare of light fell through the open windows, was certainly
the statue of the goddess on which Hermon was working; but a large gray
cloth concealed it from her gaze.

How tall it was!

When she looked at it more closely she felt small and oppressed by
comparison.

A passionate longing urged her to remove the cloth, but the boldness
of the act restrained her. After she had taken another survey of
the spacious apartment, which she was visiting for the first time by
daylight, the torturing feeling of being neglected gained possession of
her.

She clinched her white teeth more firmly, and when there was a noise at
the door that died away again without bringing the man she expected, she
went up to the statue which she had already walked past quietly several
times and, obeying an impatient impulse, freed it from its covering.

The goddess, now illumined by the sunlight, shone before her in gleaming
yellow gold and snowy ivory.

She had never seen such a statue, and drew back dazzled.

What a master was the man who had deceived her trusting heart!

He had created a Demeter; the wheat in her hand showed it.

How beautiful this work was--and how valuable! It produced a powerful
impression upon her mind, wholly unaccustomed to the estimate of such
things.

The goddess before her was the very one whose statue stood in the temple
of Demeter, and to whom she also sacrificed, with the Greeks in Tennis,
when danger threatened the harvest. Involuntarily she removed the lower
veil from her face and raised her hand in prayer.

Meanwhile she gazed into the pallid face, carved from ivory, of the
immortal dispenser of blessings, and suddenly the blood crimsoned her
cheeks, the nostrils of her delicate, slightly arched nose rose and
fell more swiftly, for the countenance of the goddess--she was not
mistaken--was that of the Alexandrian whom she had just watched so
intently, and for whose sake Hermon had left her in the lurch the
evening before.

Now, too, she remembered for what purpose the sculptor was said to have
lured Gula, the sailor's wife, and her own young sister Taus, to his
studio, and in increasing excitement she drew the cloth also from the
bust beside the Demeter.

Again the Alexandrian's face--the likeness was even more unmistakable
than in the goddess.

The Greek girl alone occupied his thoughts. Hermon had disdained to
model the Biamite's head.

What could the others, or she herself, be to him, since he loved the
rich foreigner in the tent outside, and her alone? How firmly her image
must have been impressed upon his soul, that he could reproduce the
features of the absent one with such lifelike fidelity!

Yet with what bold assurance he had protested that his heart belonged
solely to her. But she thought that she now perceived his purpose. If
the slave was right, it was done that she might permit him to model
what he admired in her figure, only not the head and face, whose beauty,
nevertheless, he praised so extravagantly.

Had he attracted Gula and her sister with similar sweet flatteries?
Had the promise to bestow their charms upon a goddess been made to them
also?

The swift throbbing of her indignant heart made it impossible for her to
think calmly, but its vehement pulsation reminded her of the object of
her presence here.

She had come to obtain a clear understanding between him and herself.

She stood here as a judge.

She must know whether she had been betrayed or deceived.

He should confess what his intentions toward her were. The next moments
must decide the fate of her life, and she added, drawing a long breath,
perhaps of his also.

Suddenly Ledscha started. She had not heard Hermon enter the studio, and
was now startled by his greeting.

It was not positively unkind, but certainly not a lover's.

Perhaps the words might have been warmer, but for his annoyance at the
insolent boldness with which she had removed the coverings from his
works. He restrained himself from openly blaming her, it is true, but he
exclaimed, with a tinge of gay sarcasm: "You seem to feel very much at
home here already, fairest of the fair. Or was it the goddess herself
who removed the curtain from her image in order to show herself to her
successor upon this pedestal?"

But the question was to remain unanswered, for under the spell of the
resentment which filled her heart, and in the effort not to lose sight
of the object that brought her here, Ledscha had only half understood
its meaning, and pointing her slender forefinger at the face of his
completed work, she demanded to know whom she recognised in this statue.

"The goddess Demeter," he answered quietly; "but if it pleases you
better, as you seem to be on the right track, also the daughter of
Archias."

Then, angered by the wrathful glance she cast at him, he added more
sternly: "She is kind-hearted, free from disagreeable whims and the
disposition to torture others who are kindly disposed toward her. So I
adorned the goddess with her pleasant features."

"Mine, you mean to say," Ledscha answered bitterly, "would be less
suitable for this purpose. Yet they, too, can wear a different
expression from the present one. You, I think, have learned this. Only I
shall never acquire the art of dissimulation, not even in your society."

"You seem to be angry on account of my absence yesterday evening?"
Hermon asked in an altered tone, clasping her hand; but Ledscha snatched
it from him, exclaiming: "The model of the Demeter, the daughter of the
wealthy Archias, detained you, you were going to tell me, and you think
that ought to satisfy the barbarian maiden."

"Folly!" he answered angrily. "I owe a debt of gratitude to her father,
who was my guardian, and custom commands you also to honour a guest. But
your obstinacy and jealousy are unbearable. What great thing is it that
I ask of your love? A little patience. Practise it. Then your turn will
come too."

"Of course, the second and third will follow the first," she answered
bitterly. "After Gula, the sailor's wife, you lured my innocent young
sister, Taus, to this apartment; or am I mistaken in the order, and was
Gula the second?"

"So that's it!" cried Hermon, who was surprised rather than alarmed by
this betrayal of his secret. "If you want confirmation of the fact, very
well--both were here."

"Because you deluded them with false vows of love."

"By no means. My heart has nothing what ever to do with these visits.
Gula came to thank me because I rendered her a service--you know
it--which to every mother seems greater than it is."

"But you certainly did not underestimate it," Ledscha impetuously
interrupted, "for you demanded her honour in return."

"Guard your tongue!" the artist burst forth angrily. "The woman visited
me unasked, and I let her leave me as faithful or as unfaithful to her
husband as she came. If I used her as a model--"

"Gula, whom the sculptor transforms into a goddess," Ledscha
interrupted, with a sneering laugh.

"Into a fish-seller, if you wish to know it," cried Hermon indignantly.
"I saw in the market a young woman selling shad. I took the subject, and
found in Gula a suitable model. Unfortunately, she ventured here far too
seldom. But I can finish it with the help of the sketch--it stands in
yonder cupboard."

"A fish-seller," Ledscha repeated contemptuously. "And for what did my
Taus, poor lovely child, seem desirable?"

"Over opposite," Hermon answered quickly, as if he wished to get rid of
a troublesome duty, pointing through the window out of doors, "the free
maidens, during the hot days, took off their sandals and waded through
the water. There I saw your sister's feet. They were the prettiest
of all, and Gula brought the young girl to me. I had commenced in
Alexandria a figure of a girl holding her foot in her hand to take out a
thorn, so I used your sister's for it."

"And when my turn comes?" Ledscha demanded.

"Then," he replied, freshly captivated by the magic of her beauty, in a
kinder, almost tender tone, "then I will make of you, in gold and ivory,
you wonderfully lovely creature, the counterpart of this goddess."

"And you will need a long time for it?"

"The oftener you come the faster the work will advance."

"And the more surely the Biamite women will point their fingers at me."

"Yet you ventured here to-day, unasked, in the broad light of noon."

"Because I wish to remind you myself that I shall expect you this
evening. Yesterday you did not appear; but to-day-I am right, am I
not?--to-day you will come."

"With the greatest delight, if it is possible," he answered eagerly.

A warmer glance from her dark eyes rested upon him. The blood seethed in
his veins, and as he extended both hands to her and ardently uttered her
name, she rushed forward, clinging to him with passionate devotion, as
if seeking assistance, but when his lips touched hers she shrank back
and loosed her soft arms from his neck.

"What does this mean?" asked the sculptor in surprise, trying to draw
her toward him again; but Ledscha would not permit it, pleading in a
softer tone than before: "Not now; but--am I not right, dearest--I may
expect you this evening? Just this once let the daughter of Archias
yield to me, who loves you better. We shall have a full moon to-night,
and you have heard what was predicted to me--to-night the highest bliss
which the gods can bestow upon a mortal awaits me."

"And me also," cried Hermon, "if you will permit me to share it with
you."

"Then I will expect you on the Pelican Island--just when the full moon
is over the lofty poplars there. You will come? Not to the Owl's Nest:
to the Pelican Island. And though your love is far less, far cooler than
mine, yet you will not defraud me of the best happiness of my life?"

"How could I?" he asked, as if he felt wounded by such distrust. "What
detains me must be something absolutely unavoidable."

Ledscha's eyebrows contracted sharply, and in a choked voice she
exclaimed: "Nothing must detain you--nothing, whatever it may be! Though
death should threaten, you will be with me just at midnight."

"I will, if it is possible," he protested, painfully touched by the
vehemence of her urging. "What can be more welcome to me also than to
spend happy hours with you in the silence of a moonlight night? Besides,
my stay in Tennis will not be long."

"You are going?" she asked in a hollow tone.

"In three or four days," he answered carelessly; "then Myrtilus and I
will be expected in Alexandria. But gently--gently--how pale you are,
girl! Yes, the parting! But in six weeks at latest I shall be here
again; then real life will first begin, and Eros will make the roses
bloom for us."

Ledscha nodded silently, and gazing into his face with a searching look
asked, "And how long will this season of blossoming last?"

"Several months, girl; three, if not six."

"And then?"

"Who looks so far into the future?"

She lowered her glance, and, as if yielding to the inevitable, answered:
"What a fool I was! Who knows what the morrow may bring? Are we even
sure whether, six months hence, we shall not hate, instead of loving,
each other?"

She passed her hand across her brow as she spoke, exclaiming: "You said
just now that only the present belonged to man. Then let us enjoy it
as though every moment might be the last. By the light of the full moon
to-night, the happiness which has been predicted to me must begin. After
it, the orb between the horns of Astarte will become smaller; but when
it fulls and wanes again, if you keep your promise and return, then,
though they may curse and condemn me, I will come to your studio and
grant what you ask. But which of the goddesses do you intend to model
from me as a companion statue to the Demeter?"

"This time it can not be one of the immortelles," he answered
hesitatingly, "but a famous woman, an artist who succeeded in a
competition in vanquishing even the august Athene."

"So it is no goddess?" Ledscha asked in a disappointed tone.

"No, child, but the most skilful woman who ever plied the weaver's
shuttle."

"And her name?"

"Arachne."

The young girl started, exclaiming contemptuously: "Arachne? That
is--that is what you Greeks call the most repulsive of creatures--the
spider."

"The most skilful of all creatures, that taught man the noble art of
weaving," he eagerly retorted.

Here he was interrupted; his friend Myrtilus put his fair head into the
room, exclaiming: "Pardon me if I interrupt you--but we shall not see
each other again for some time. I have important business in the city,
and may be detained a long while. Yet before I go I must perform the
commission Daphne gave me for you. She sends word that she shall expect
you without fail at the banquet for the Pelusinian guests. Your absence,
do you hear?--pardon the interruption, fairest Ledscha--your absence
would seriously anger her."

"Then I shall be prepared for considerable trouble in appeasing her,"
replied Hermon, glancing significantly at the young girl.

Myrtilus crossed the threshold, turned to the Biamite, and said in his
quiet, cheerful manner: "Where beautiful gifts are to be brought to
Eros, it beseems the friend to strew with flowers the path of the one
who is offering the sacrifices; and you, if everything does not deceive
me, would fain choose to-night to serve him with the utmost devotion.
Therefore, I shall need forgiveness from you and the god, if I beseech
you to defer the offering, were it only until to-morrow."

Ledscha silently shrugged her shoulders and made no answer to the
inquiring glance with which Hermon sought hers, but Myrtilus changed his
tone and addressed a grave warning to his friend to consider well that
it would be an insult to the manes of his dead parents if he should
avoid the old couple from Pelusium, who had been their best friends and
had taken the journey hither for his sake.

Hermon looked after him in painful perplexity, but the Biamite also
approached the threshold, and holding her head haughtily erect, said
coldly: "The choice is difficult for you, as I see. Then recall to your
memory again what this night of the full moon means--you are well
aware of it--to me. If, nevertheless, you still decide in favour of the
banquet with your friends, I can not help it; but I must now know: Shall
this night belong to me, or to the daughter of Archias?"

"Is it impossible to talk with you, unlucky girl, as one would with
other sensible people?" Hermon burst forth wrathfully. "Everything is
carried to extremes; you condemn a brief necessary delay as breach of
faith and base treachery. This behaviour is unbearable."

"Then you will not come?" she asked apathetically, laying her hand
upon the door; but Hermon cried out in a tone half beseeching, half
imperious: "You must not go so! If you insist upon it, surely I will
come. There is no room in your obstinate soul for kind indulgence. No
one, by the dog, ever accused me of being specially skilled in this
smooth art; yet there may be duties and circumstances--"

Here Ledscha gently opened the door; but, seized with a fear of losing
this rare creature, whose singular beauty attracted him powerfully,
even now, this peerless model for a work on which he placed the highest
hopes, he strode swiftly to her side, and drawing her back from the
threshold, exclaimed: "Difficult as it is for me on this special day, I
will come, only you must not demand what is impossible. The right course
often lies midway. Half the night must belong to the banquet with my old
friends and Daphne; the second half--"

"To the barbarian, you think--the spider," she gasped hoarsely. "But my
welfare as well as yours depends on the decision. Stay here, or come to
the island--you have your choice."

Wrenching herself from his hold as she spoke, she slipped through the
doorway and left the room.

Hermon, with a muttered oath, stood still, shrugging his shoulders
angrily.

He could do nothing but yield to this obstinate creature's will.

In the atrium Ledscha met the slave Bias, and returned his greeting only
by a wave of the hand; but before opening the side door which was
to lead her into the open air, she paused, and asked bluntly in the
language of their people: "Was Arachne--I don't mean the spider, but the
weaver whom the Greeks call by that name--a woman like the rest of us?
Yet it is said that she remained victor in a contest with the goddess
Athene."

"That is perfectly true," answered Bias, "but she had to atone cruelly
for this triumph; the goddess struck her on the forehead with the
weaver's shuttle, and when, in her shame and rage, she tried to hang
herself, she was transformed into the spider."

Ledscha stood still, and, while drawing the veil over her pallid face,
asked with quivering lips, "And is there no other Arachne?"

"Not among mortals," was the reply, "but even here in this house there
are more than enough of the disagreeable, creeping creatures which bear
the same name."

Ledscha now went clown the steps which led to the lawn, and Bias saw
that she stumbled on the last one and would have fallen had not her
lithe body regained its balance in time.

"A bad omen!" thought the slave. "If I had the power to build a wall
between my master and the spider yonder, it should be higher than the
lighthouse of Sostratus. To heed omens guides one safely through life. I
know what I know, and will keep my eyes open, for my master too."




CHAPTER IX.

Hermon had intended to add a few more touches to his Demeter, but he
could not do it. Ledscha, her demand, and the resentment with which she
had left him, were not to be driven from his mind.

There was no doubt that he must seek her if he was not to lose her, yet
he reproached himself for having acted like a thoughtless fool when he
proposed to divide the night between her and Daphne.

There was something offensive in the proposal to so proud a creature.
He ought to have promised positively to come, and then left the banquet
somewhat earlier. It would have been easy to apologize for his late
arrival, and Ledscha would have had no cause to be angry with him.

Now she had, and her resentment awakened in him--though he certainly
did not lack manly courage--an uncomfortable feeling closely allied to
anxiety.

Angered by his own conduct, he asked himself whether he loved the
barbarian, and could find no satisfactory answer.

At their first meeting he had felt that she was far superior to the
other Biamite maidens, not only in beauty but in everything else. The
very acerbity of her nature had seemed charming. To win this wonderful,
pliant creature, slender as a cypress, whose independence merged into
fierce obstinacy, had appeared to him worth any sacrifice; and having
perceived in her an admirable model for his Arachne, he had also
determined to brave the dangers which might easily arise for the Greek
from a love affair with a Biamite girl, whose family was free and
distinguished.

It had been easier for him to win her heart than he expected; yet at
none of the meetings which she granted him had he rejoiced in the secret
bond between them.

Hitherto her austere reserve had been invincible, and during the
greater part of their interviews he had been compelled to exert all his
influence to soothe, appease her, and atone for imprudent acts which he
had committed.

True, she, too, had often allowed herself to display passionate
tenderness, but always only to torture him with reproaches and demands
inspired by her jealousy, suspicion, and wounded pride.

Yet her beauty, and the strong power of resistance which she offered to
his wooing, exerted so bewitching a thrall over him that he had been led
into conceding far too much, and making vows which he could not and did
not desire to fulfil.

Love had usually been to him a richly flowing well-spring of gay
delight, but this bond had plunged him from one vexation into another,
one anxiety to another, and now that he had almost reached the goal of
his wishes, he could not help fearing that he had transformed Ledscha's
love to hate.

Daphne was dear to him. He esteemed her highly, and owed her a great
debt of gratitude. Yet in this hour he anathematized her unexpected
journey to Tennis; for without it he would have obtained from Ledscha
that very day what he desired, and could have returned to Alexandria
with the certainty of finding her ready later to pose as the model for
his Arachne.

Never could he find anywhere a more fitting one.

He had devoted himself with passionate love to his art, and even his
enemies numbered him among its most promising disciples. Yet hither to
he had not succeeded in obtaining a great and undisputed success. On
the other hand, he had experienced what were termed failures in abundant
measure.

The art to which he had gained entrance by so severe a struggle, and on
whose soil he had laboured diligently enough, proved, so far as outward
recognition was concerned, cruel to the enthusiastic disciple. Yet even
now he would not have abandoned it at any price; the joy of creation
compensated him richly for suffering and disappointment. Confidence in
his own powers and the final triumph of his conviction had deserted him
only occasionally, and for a few brief hours.

He was born for conflicts. What ill-success, what antagonism and
difficulties he had encountered! Some day the laurel which had so long
adorned the brow of Myrtilus must also grow green for him and the
great talent whose possession he felt. With the Arachne--he was sure of
this--he would compel even his opponents to accord him the recognition
for which hitherto he had striven in vain.

While pacing restlessly up and down the spacious apartment, stopping
from time to time before his work to fix his eyes angrily upon it, he
thought of his friend's Demeter, whose head also had Daphne's features,
who also bore in her hand a bundle of wheat, and even in attitude
did not differ very widely from his own. And yet--eternal gods!--how
thoroughly dissimilar the two were!

In the figure created by Myrtilus, supernatural dignity blended with
the utmost womanly charm; in his, a pleasing head rested upon a body
in whose formation he had used various models without striving to
accomplish anything except to depart as far as possible from established
custom, with which he was at variance.

Yet had he not found himself, nevertheless, compelled to follow the old
rules? One arm was raised, the other hung down; the right foot was put
forward, the left one back.

Exactly the same as in Myrtilus's statue, and thousands of other figures
of Demeter!

If he could have used the hammer and chisel, the thing might have become
more powerful; but how many things he had had to consider in employing
the accursed gold and ivory upon which Archias obstinately insisted!

This hammering, chipping, and filing told unfavourably upon his power
and his aspiration toward grandeur.

This time the battle seemed to be lost.

It was fortunate that the conqueror was no other than Myrtilus. Often
as he had gone astray in his young life, many as were the errors he had
committed, not even the faintest shadow of an envious feeling concerning
his friend's more successful work had ever stained his soul.

True, the fact that fate, in addition to such abundant gifts of mind
and spirit, had also endowed the latter with great worldly possessions,
while he, but for the generosity of his uncle Archias, must have
starved, had often led Hermon to inveigh angrily against the injustice
of the gods. Yet he did not grudge Myrtilus the wealth without which he
could not imagine him, and which his invalid friend needed to continue
successfully the struggle against the insidious disease inherited with
the gold. And his sufferings! Hermon could not have endured keener pain
had they been his own. He must even rejoice over the poor dear fellow's
victory; for if he, Hermon, succeeded with his Arachne as he hoped, it
would make Myrtilus--he could swear to it--happier than his own triumph.

After these reflections, which again reminded him of the second
appointment and of Ledscha, the sculptor turned away from his work and
went to the window to look across at Pelican Island, where she must not
await him in vain.

The boat which was to convey him over to it lay ready in the little
flotilla, where a magnificently equipped galley had just been moored to
the shore, undoubtedly the one that had brought the guests from Pelusium
hither. The best thing he could do was to greet them at once, share
the banquet with them, and, before the dessert was served, seek the
beautiful woman whom his absence threatened to make his foe. And she
was certainly justified in resenting it if, with cruel lack of
consideration, he paid no heed to what had been prophesied for her on
this night of the full moon.

For the first time compassion mingled with his feelings for Ledscha.
If to avoid the fleeting censure of aristocratic friends he left in the
lurch the simple barbarian maiden who loved him with ardent passion,
it was no evidence of resolute strength of soul, but of pitiful,
reprehensible weakness. No, no! He must take the nocturnal voyage in
order not to grieve Ledscha.

Soon after the girl's abrupt departure he dressed himself in festal
garments for the banquet. It would flatter Ledscha also if he went to
her in this attire and, with his figure drawn up to its full height, he
walked toward the door to go to the Alexandrian's tent.

But what did this mean? Myrtilus was standing before his Demeter,
scanning it intently with his keen artist eyes. Hermon had not noticed
his entrance, and did not disturb him now, but fixed his gaze upon his
mobile features in intense expectation.

There were few of his fellow-artists whose opinion he valued as highly
as that of this darling of the Muse.

At a slight shake of the head, which Hermon interpreted as disapproval,
he clinched his teeth; but soon his lips relaxed and his breast heaved
with a sigh of relief, for the sunny glance that Myrtilus bent upon the
face of the goddess seemed to show Hermon that it aroused his approval,
and, as if relieved from an oppressive nightmare, he approached his
friend.

The latter turned toward him, exclaiming: "Daphne! As in the case
of yonder bust, you have succeeded most perfectly with this dear
face--only--"

"Only," Hermon repeated slowly; "I am familiar with that evil word.
Doubts knock at the door with it. Out with them honestly. I gave up my
last hope of the prize yesterday while looking at your Demeter. Besides,
careful scrutiny has just destroyed the last gleam of satisfaction with
my own work. But if you like the head, what seem to you the greatest
defects in the figure?"

"It has nothing to do with defects, which, with your rare ability,
can scarcely exist," replied the other, the faint pink flush in his
beardless cheeks deepening to a more vivid hue. "It refers rather to
the expression which you have given the divinity in yonder statue."
Here Myrtilus hesitated, and, turning so that he stood face to face
with Hermon, asked frankly, "Did you ever seek the goddess and, when you
found her, did you feel any supernatural power and beauty?"

"What a question!" exclaimed Hermon in astonishment. "A pupil of
Straton, and go in search of beings and powers whose existence he
denies! What my mother instilled into my heart I lost with my childhood,
and you address your question only to the artist who holds his own
ground, not to the boy. The power that calls creation to life, and
maintains it, has for me long had nothing in common with those beings
like mortals whom the multitude designates by the name of divinities."

"I think differently," replied Myrtilus. "While I numbered myself among
the Epicureans, whose doctrine still possesses the greatest charm for
me, I nevertheless shared the master's opinion that it is insulting the
gods to suppose that they will disturb their blissful repose for the
sake of us insignificant mortals. Now my mind and my experience rebel
against holding to this view, yet I believe with Epicurus, and with you,
that the eternal laws of Nature bow to neither divine nor human will."

"And yet," said Hermon, "you expect me to trouble myself about those who
are as powerless as myself!"

"I only wished that you might do so," answered Myrtilus; "for they
are not powerless to those who from the first assumed that they can do
nothing in opposition to those changeless laws. The state, too, rules
according to them, and the wise king who refrains from interfering with
them in the smallest trifle can therefore wield the sceptre with mighty
power. So, in my opinion, it is perfectly allowable to expect aid from
the gods. But we will let that pass. A healthy man, full of exuberant
vigour like yourself, rarely learns early what they can bestow in
suffering and misfortune; yet where the great majority believe in them,
he, too, will be unable to help forming some idea of them; nay, even you
and I have experienced it. By a thousand phenomena they force themselves
into the world which surrounds us and our emotional life. Epicurus, who
denied their power, saw in them at least immortal beings who possess
in stainless perfection everything which in mortals is disfigured by
errors, weaknesses, and afflictions. To him they are the intensified,
reflected image of our own nature, and I think we can do nothing wiser
than to cling to that, because it shows us to what heights of beauty and
power, intellect, goodness, and purity we may attain. To completely deny
their existence would hardly be possible even for you, because their
persons have found a place in your imagination. Since this is the case,
it can only benefit you to recognise in them magnificent models, by
whose means we artists, if we imitate, perfect, and model them, will
create works far more sublime and beautiful than anything visible to our
senses which we meet here beneath the sun."

"It is this very superiority in sublimity and beauty which I, and those
who pursue the same path with me, oppose," replied Hermon. "Nature
is sufficient for us. To take anything from her, mutilates; to add
anything, disfigures her."

"But not," replied Myrtilus firmly, "when it is done only in a special
sense, and within the limits of Nature, to which the gods also belong.
The final task of art, fiercely as you and your few followers contend
against it, lies in the disentanglement, enhancing, and ennobling of
Nature. You, too, ought not to overlook it when you undertake to model
a Demeter; for she is a goddess, no mortal like yourself. The rest or I
ought rather to say the alteration which converts the mortal woman into
the immortal one, the goddess--I miss, and with special regret, because
you do not even deem it worth consideration."

"That I shall never do," retorted Hermon irritably, "so long as it is a
changing chimera which presents itself differently to every mind."

"Yet, should it really be a chimera, it is at any rate a sublime one,"
Myrtilus protested, "and whoever among us artists wanders through Nature
with open eyes and heart, and then examines his own soul, will find it
worth while to attempt to give his ideal form."

"Whatever stirs my breast during such walks, unless it is some unusual
human being, I leave to the poet," replied Hermon. "I should be
satisfied with the Demeter yonder, and you, too, probably, if--entirely
apart from that--I had only succeeded fully and entirely in making her
an individual--that is, a clearly outlined, distinct personality. This,
you have often told me, is just wherein I am usually most successful.
But here, I admit, I am baffled. Demeter hovered before me as a
kindly dispenser of good gifts, a faithful, loving wife. Daphne's head
expresses this; but in modelling the body I lost sight of the whole
creation. While, for instance, in my fig-eater, every toe, every scrap
of the tattered garments, belongs to the street urchin whom I wished
to represent, in the goddess everything came by chance as the model
suggested it, and you know that I used several. Had the Demeter from
head to foot resembled Daphne, who has so much in common with our
goddess, the statue would have been harmonious, complete, and you would
perhaps have been the first to acknowledge it."

"By no means," Myrtilus eagerly interrupted. "What our statues of the
gods are we two know best: a wooden block, covered with gold and sheets
of ivory. But to tens of thousands the statue of the divinity must be
much more. When they raise their hearts, eyes, hands to it in prayer,
they must be possessed by the idea of the deity which animated us while
creating it, and with which we, as it were, permeated it. If it shows
them only a woman endowed with praiseworthy qualities--"

"Then," interrupted Hermon, "the worshipper should thank the sculptor;
for is it not more profitable to him to be encouraged by the statue to
emulate the human virtues whose successful embodiment it shows him than
to strive for the aid of the botchwork of human hands, which possesses
as much or as little power as the wood, gold, and ivory that compose it?
If the worshipper does not appeal to the statue, but to the goddess, I
fear it will be no less futile. So I shall consider it no blemish if you
see in my Demeter a mortal woman, and no goddess; nay, it reconciles me
in some degree to her weaknesses, to which I by no means close my eyes.
I, too--I confess it--often feel a great desire to give the power of
imagination greater play, and I know the divinities in whom I have lost
faith as well as any one; for I, too, was once a child, and few have
ever prayed to them more fervently, but with the increasing impulse
toward liberty came the perception: There are no gods, and whoever bows
to the power of the immortals makes himself a slave. So what I banished
from life I will also remove from art, and model nothing which might not
meet me to-day or to-morrow."

"Then, as an honest man, abstain altogether from making statues of the
gods," interrupted his friend.

"That was my intention long ago, as you are aware," the other answered.

"You could not commit a worse robbery upon yourself," cried Myrtilus. "I
know you; nay, perhaps I see farther into your soul than you yourself.
By ingenious fetters you force the mighty winged intellect to content
itself within the narrow world of reality. But the time when you will
yourself rend the bonds and find the divinity you have lost, will come,
and then, with your mighty power once more free, you will outstrip most
of us, and me also if I live to see it."

Then he pressed his hand upon his rattling chest and walked slowly
to the couch; but Hermon followed, helped him to lie down, and with
affectionate solicitude arranged his pillows.

"It is nothing," Myrtilus said soothingly, after a few minutes' silence.
"My undermined strength has been heavily taxed to-day. The Olympians
know how calmly I await death. It ends all things. Nothing will be left
of me except the ashes, to which you will reduce my body, and what you
call 'possession.' But even this can no longer belong to me after death,
because I shall then be no more, and the idea of possession requires a
possessor. My estate, too, is now disposed of. I have just been to the
notary, and sixteen witnesses--neither more nor less--have signed my
will according to the custom of this ceremonious country. There, now,
if you please, go before me, and let me stay here alone a little while.
Remember me to Daphne and the Pelusinians. I will join you in an hour."




CHAPTER X.

"When the moon is over Pelican Island." How often Ledscha had repeated
this sentence to herself while Hermon was detained by Daphne and her
Pelusinian guests!

When she entered the boat after nightfall she exclaimed hopefully, sure
of her cause, "When the moon is over Pelican Island he will come."

Her goal was quickly reached in the skiff; the place selected for the
nocturnal meeting was a familiar one to her.

The pirates had remained absent from it quite two years. Formerly
they had often visited the spot to conceal their arms and booty on the
densely wooded island. The large papyrus thicket on the shore also hid
boats from spying eyes, and near the spot where Ledscha landed was a
grassy seat which looked like an ordinary resting place, but beneath
it the corsairs had built a long, walled passage, that led to the other
side of the island, and had enabled many a fugitive to vanish from the
sight of pursuers, as though the earth had swallowed them.

"When the moon is over the island," Ledscha repeated after she had
waited more than an hour.

The time had not yet come; the expanse of water lay before her
motionless, in hue a dull, leaden gray, and only the dimly illumined air
and a glimmering radiance along the edges of the waves that washed the
island showed that the moon was already brightening the night.

When its full orb floated above the island Hermon, too, would appear,
and the happiness which had been predicted to Ledscha would begin.

Happiness?

A bitter smile hovered around her delicately cut lips as she repeated
the word.

Hitherto no feeling was more distant from her; for when love and longing
began to stir in her heart, it seemed as though a hideous spider was
weaving its web about her, and vague fears, painful memories, and in
their train fierce hate would force glad expectation into the shadow.

Yet she yearned with passionate fervour to see Hermon again, and when
he was once there all must be well between them. The prediction of old
Tabus, who ruled as mistress over so many demons, could not deceive.

After Ledscha had so lately reminded the lover who so vehemently roused
her jealous wrath what this night of the full moon meant to her, she
could rely upon his appearance in spite of everything.

Various matters undoubtedly held him firmly enough in Tennis--she
admitted this to herself after she grew calmer--but he had promised to
come; he would surely enter the boat, and she--she would submit to share
the night with the Hellene.

Her whole being longed for the bliss awaiting her, and it could come
from no one save the man whose lips would seek hers when the moon rose
over the Pelican Island.

How tardily and sluggishly the cow-headed goddess who bore the silver
orb between her horns rose to-night! how slowly the time passed, yet she
did not move forward more certainly that the man whom Ledscha expected
must arrive.

Of the possibility of his non-appearance she would not think; but when
the fear that she was perhaps looking for him in vain assailed her,
the blood crimsoned her face as if she felt the shame of a humiliating
insult. Yet why should she make the period of waiting more torturing
than it was already?

Surely he must come!

Sometimes she rested on the grassy seat and gazed across the dull gray
surface of the water into the distance; sometimes she walked to and fro,
stopping at every turn to look across at Tennis and the bright torches
and lights which surrounded the Alexandrian's tent.

So one quarter of an hour after another passed away.

A light breeze rose, and gradually the tops of the rushes began to
shine, and the leafage before, beside, and above her to glitter in the
silvery light.

The water was no longer calm, but furrowed by countless little ripples,
on whose crests the rays from above played, sparkling and flashing
restlessly. A web of shimmering silvery radiance covered the edges of
every island, and suddenly the brilliant full moon was reflected in
argent lustre like a magnificent quivering column upon the surface of
the water, now rippled by the evening breeze.

The time during which Ledscha could repeat "When the moon is over
Pelican Island" was past; already its course had led it beyond.

The island lay behind it, and it continued its pilgrimage before the
young girl's eyes.

The glittering column of light upon the water proved that she was
not mistaken; the time which she had appointed for Hermon had already
expired.

The moon in calm majesty sailed farther and farther onward in its
course, and with it minute after minute elapsed, until they became a
half hour, then a whole one.

"How long is it since the moon was over Pelican Island?" was the
question which now pressed itself upon her again and again, and to
which she found an answer at every glance upward, for she had learned to
estimate time by the position of the stars.

Rarely was the silence of the night interrupted by the call of a human
being or the barking of a dog from the city, or even the hooting of an
owl at a still greater distance; but the farther the moon moved on above
her the fiercer grew the uproar in Ledscha's proud, cruelly wronged
soul. She felt offended, scorned, insulted, and at the same time
defrauded of the happiness which this night of the full moon contained
for her. Or had the demons who promised happiness meant something else
in their prediction than Hermon's love? Was she to owe the bliss they
had foretold to hate and pitiless retribution?

When the midnight hour had nearly arrived she prepared to depart, but
after she had already set her foot on the edge of the boat she returned
to the grassy seat. She would wait a little longer yet. Then there would
be nothing which could give Hermon a right to consideration; then she
might let loose upon him the avenging powers at her command.

Ledscha again gazed over the calm landscape, but in the wild tumult of
her heart she no longer distinguished the details upon which her eyes
rested. Doubtless she saw the light mists hovering like ghosts, or the
restless shades of the unburied dead, over the shining expanse before
her, and the filmy vapours that veiled the brightness of the stars, but
she had ceased to question the heavenly bodies about the time.

What did she care for the progress of the hours, since the constellation
of Charles's Wain showed her that it was past midnight?

The moon no longer stood forth in sharp outlines against the deep azure
of the vaulted sky, but, robbed of its radiance, floated in a circle of
dimly illumined mists.

Not only the feelings which stirred Ledscha's soul, but the scene around
her, had gained a totally different aspect.

Since every hope of the happiness awaiting her was destroyed, she no
longer sought to palliate the wrongs Hermon had inflicted upon her.
While dwelling on them, she by no means forgot the trivial purpose for
which the artist intended to use her charms; and when she again gazed up
at the slightly-clouded sky, the shrouded moon no longer reminded her of
the silver orb between the horns of Astarte.

She did not ask herself how the transformation had occurred, but in its
place, high above her head, hung a huge gray spider. Its gigantic limbs
extended over the whole firmament, and seemed striving to clutch and
stifle the world beneath. The enormous monster was weaving its gray net
over Tennis, and all the islands in the water, the Pelican Island, and
she herself upon the seat of turf, and held them all prisoned in it.

It was a horrible vision, fraught with terrors which, even when she shut
her eyes in order to escape it, showed very little change.

Assailed by anxious fears, Ledscha started up, and a few seconds later
was urging her boat with steady strokes toward the Owl's Nest.

Even now lights were still shining from the Alexandrian's tent through
the sultry, veiled night.

There seemed to be no waking life on the pirates' island. Even old Tabus
had probably put out the fire and gone to sleep, for deathlike silence
and deep darkness surrounded it.

Had Hanno, who agreed to meet her here after midnight, also failed to
come? Had the pirate learned, like the Greek, to break his promise?

Only half conscious what she was doing, she left the boat; but her
slender foot had scarcely touched the land when a tall figure emerged
from the thicket near the shore and approached her through the darkness.

"Hanno!" she exclaimed, as if relieved from a burden, and the young
pirate repeated "Hanno" as if the name was the watchword of the night.

Her own name, uttered in a tone of intense yearning, followed. Not
another syllable accompanied it, but the expression with which it fell
upon her ear revealed so plainly what the young pirate felt for and
expected from her that, in spite of the darkness which concealed her,
she felt her face flush.

Then he tried to clasp her hand, and she dared not withdraw it from the
man whom she had chosen for her tool. So she unresistingly permitted him
to hold her right hand while he whispered his desire to take the place
of the fallen Abus and make her his wife.

Ledscha, in hurried, embarrassed tones, answered that she appreciated
the honour of his suit, but before she gave full consent she must
discuss an important matter with him.

Then Hanno begged her to go out on the water.

His father and his brother Labaja were sitting in the house by the
fire with his grandmother. They had learned, in following the trade of
piracy, to hide the glimmer of lights. The old people had approved his
choice, but the conversation in the dwelling would soon be over, and
then the opportunity of seeing each other alone would be at an end.

Without uttering a word in reply, Ledscha stepped back into the boat,
but Hanno plied the oars with the utmost caution and guided the skiff
without the slightest sound away from the island to an open part of the
water far distant from any shore.

Here he took in the oars and asked her to speak. They had no cause to
fear being overheard, for the surrounding mists merely subdued the
light of the full moon, and no other boat could have approached them
unobserved.

The few night birds, sweeping swiftly on their strong pinions from one
island to another, flew past them like flitting shadows. One hawk only,
in search of nocturnal booty, circled around the motionless skiff, and
sometimes, with expanded wings, swooped down close to the couple who
were talking together so eagerly; but both spoke so low that it would
have been impossible, even for the bird's keen hearing, to follow the
course of their consultation. Merely a few louder words and exclamations
reached the height where it hovered.

The young pirate himself was obliged to listen with the most strained
attention while Ledscha, in low whispers, accused the Greek sculptor of
having basely wronged and deceived her; but the curse with which Hanno
received this acknowledgment reached even the bird circling around
the boat, and it seemed as if it wished to express its approval to the
corsair, for this time its fierce croak, as it suddenly swooped down to
the surface of the water behind the boat, sounded shrilly through the
silent night. But it soon soared again, and now Ledscha's declaration
that she would become Hanno's bride only on condition that he would aid
her to punish the Hellenic traitor also reached him.

Then came the words "valuable booty," "slight risk," "thanks and
reward."

The girl's whispered allusion to two colossal statues made of pure gold
and genuine ivory was followed by a laugh of disagreeable meaning from
the pirate.

At last he raised his deep voice to ask whether Ledscha, if the venture
in which he would willingly risk his life were successful, would
accompany him on board the Hydra, the good ship whose command his
father intrusted to him. The firm "Yes" with which she answered, and
her indignant exclamation as she repulsed Hanno's premature attempt
at tenderness, might have been heard by the hawk even at a greater
distance.

Then the pirate's promised bride lowered her voice again, and did not
raise her tones until she saw in imagination the fulfilment of the
judgment which she was calling down upon the man who had torn her heart
with such pitiless cruelty.

Was this the happiness predicted for her on the night of the full moon?
It might be, and, radiant with secret joy, her eyes sparkling and her
bosom heaving as if her foot was already on the breast of the fallen
foe, she assured Hanno that the gold and the ivory should belong to him,
and to him alone; but not until he had delivered the base traitor to her
alive, and left his punishment in her hands, would she be ready to go
with him wherever he wished--not until then, and not one moment earlier.

The pirate, with a proud "I'll capture him!" consented to this
condition; but Ledscha, in hurried words, now described how she had
planned the attack, while the corsair, at her bidding, plied the oars so
as to bring the boat nearer to the scene of the assault.

The vulture followed the skiff; but when it stopped opposite to the
large white building, one side of which was washed by the waves, Ledscha
pointed to the windows of Hermon's studio, exclaiming hoarsely to the
young pirate: "You will seize him there--the Greek with the long, soft
black beard, and the slender figure, I mean. Then you will bind and gag
him, but, you hear, without killing him, for I can only inflict what he
deserves upon the living man. I am not bargaining for a dead one."

Just at that instant the bird of prey, with a shrill, greedy cry, as if
it were invited to a delicious banquet, flew far away into the distance
and did not return. It flew toward the left; the girl noticed it, and
her heavy black eyebrows, which already met, contracted still more. The
direction taken by the bird, which soon vanished in the darkness of the
night, indicated approaching misfortune; but she was here only to sow
destruction, and the more terrible growth it attained the better!

With an acuteness which aroused the admiration of the young corsair, who
was trained to similar plots, she explained hers.

That they must wait until after the departure of the Alexandrian with
her numerous train, and for the first dark night, was a matter of
course.

One signal was to notify Hanno to hold himself in readiness, another to
inform him that every one in the white house had gone to rest, and
that Hermon was there too. The pirates were to enter the black-bearded
Greek's studio. While some were shattering his statues to carry away
in sacks the gold and ivory which they contained, others were to force
their way into Myrtilus's workroom, which was on the opposite side of
the house. There they would find the second statue; but this they must
spare, because, on account of the great fame of its creator, it was more
valuable than the other. The fair-haired artist was ill, and it would be
no difficult matter to take him alive, even if he should put himself on
the defensive. Hermon, on the contrary, was a strong fellow, and to bind
him without injuring him severely would require both strength and skill.
Yet it must be done, for only in case Hanno succeeded in delivering both
sculptors to her alive would she consider herself--she could not repeat
it often enough--bound to fulfil what she had promised him.

With the exception of the two artists, only Myrtilus's servant, the old
doorkeeper, and Bias, Hermon's slave, remained during the night in the
house which was to be attacked, and Hanno would undertake the assault
with twenty-five sturdy fellows whom he commanded on the Hydra if his
brother Labaja consented to share in the assault, this force could be
considerably increased.

To take the old corsair into their confidence now would not be
advisable, for, on account of his mother's near presence, he would
scarcely consent to enter into the peril. Should the venture fail,
everything would be over; but if it succeeded, the old man could only
praise the courage and skill with which it had been executed.

Nothing was to be feared from the coast guard, for since Abus's death
the authorities believed that piracy had vanished from these waters,
and the ships commanded by Satabus and his sons had been admitted from
Pontus into the Tanite arm of the Nile as trading vessels.




CHAPTER XI.

While Hanno was discussing these considerations, he rowed the boat past
the landing place from which the "garden" with the Alexandrian's tent
could be seen.

The third hour after midnight had begun. Smoking flames were still
rising from the pitch pans and blazing torches, and long rows of
lanterns also illumined the broad space.

It was as light as day in the vicinity of the tent, and Biamite huntsmen
and traders were moving to and fro among the slaves and attendants as
though it was market time.

"Your father, too," Hanno remarked in his awkward fashion, "will
scarcely make life hard for us. We shall probably find him in Pontus.
He is getting a cargo of wood for Egypt there. We have had dealings with
him a long time. He thought highly of Abus, and I, too, have already
been useful to him. There were handsome young fellows on the Pontine
coast, and we captured them. At the peril of our lives we took them to
the mart. He may even risk it in Alexandria. So the old man makes
over to him a large number of these youths, and often a girl into
the bargain, and he does it far too cheaply. One might envy him the
profit--if it were not your father! When you are once my wife, I'll make
a special contract with him about the slaves. And, besides, since the
last great capture, in which the old man allowed me a share of my own,
I, too, need not complain of poverty. I shall be ready for the dowry. Do
you want to know what you are worth to me?"

But Ledscha's attention was attracted by other things, and even after
Hanno, with proud conceit, repeated his momentous question, he waited in
vain for a reply.

Then he perceived that the girl was gazing at the brilliantly lighted
square as if spellbound, and now he himself saw before the tent a shed
with a canopied roof, and beneath it cushioned couches, on which several
Greeks--men and women--were half sitting, half lying, watching with
eager attention the spectacle which a slender young Hellenic woman was
presenting to them.

The tall man with the magnificent black beard, who seemed fairly
devouring her with his eyes, must be the sculptor whom Ledscha commanded
him to capture.

To the rude pirate the Greek girl, who in a light, half-transparent
bombyx robe, was exhibiting herself to the eyes of the men upon a
pedestal draped with cloths, seemed bold and shameless.

Behind her stood two female attendants, holding soft white garments
ready, and a handsome Pontine boy with black, waving locks, who gazed up
at her waiting for her signs.

"Nearer," Ledscha ordered the pirate in a stifled voice, and he rowed
the boat noiselessly under the shadow of a willow on the bank. But the
skiff had scarcely been brought to a stop there when an elderly matron,
who shared the couch of an old Macedonian man of a distinguished,
soldierly appearance, called the name "Niobe."

The Hellene on the pedestal took a cloth from the hand of one of the
female attendants, and beckoned to the boy, who obediently drew through
his girdle the short blue chiton which hung only to his knees, and
sprang upon the platform.

There the Greek girl manipulated in some way the red tresses piled high
upon her head, and confined above the brow by a costly gold diadem,
flung the white linen fabric which the young slave handed to her over
her head, wound her arm around the shoulders of the raven-locked boy,
and drew him toward her with passionate tenderness. At the same time
she raised the end of the linen drapery with her left hand, spreading it
over him like a protecting canopy.

The mobile features which had just smiled so radiantly expressed mortal
terror, and the pirate, to whom even the name "Niobe" was unfamiliar,
looked around him for the terrible danger threatening the innocent
child, from which the woman on the pedestal was protecting it with
loving devotion.

The mortal terror of a mother robbed by a higher power of her child
could scarcely be more vividly depicted, and yet haughty defiance
hovered around her slightly pouting lips; the uplifted hands seemed
not only anxiously to defend, but also to defy an invisible foe with
powerless anger.

The pirate's eyes rested on this spectacle as if spellbound, and the
man who in Pontus had dragged hundreds of young creatures--boys and
girls--on his ship to sell them into slavery, never thinking of the
tears which he thereby caused in huts and mansions, clinched his rough
hand to attack the base wretch who was robbing the poor mother of her
lovely darling.

But just as Hanno was rising to look around him for the invisible
evildoer, the loud shouts of many voices startled him. He glanced toward
the pedestal; but now, instead of the hapless mother, he found there
the bold woman whom he had previously seen, as radiant as if some great
piece of good fortune had befallen her, bowing and waving her hand to
the other Greeks, who were thanking her with loud applause.

The sorely threatened boy, bowing merrily, sprang to the ground; but
Hanno put his hand on Ledscha's arm, and in great perplexity whispered,
"What did that mean?"

"Hush!" said the girl softly, stretching her slender neck toward the
illuminated square, for the performer had remained standing upon the
pedestal, and Chrysilla, Daphne's companion, sat erect on her couch,
exclaiming, "If it is agreeable to you, beautiful Althea, show us Nike
crowning the victor."

Even the Biamite's keen ear could not catch the reply and the purport
of the rapid conversation which followed; but she guessed the point in
question when the young men who were present rose hastily, rushed toward
the pedestal, loosed the wreaths from their heads, and offered them to
the Greek girl whom Chrysilla had just called "beautiful Althea."

Four Hellenic officers in the strong military force under Philippus,
the commandant of the "Key of Egypt," as Pelusium was justly called,
had accompanied the old Macedonian general to visit his friend
Archias's daughter at Tennis; but Althea rejected their garlands with an
explanation which seemed to satisfy them.

Ledscha could not hear what she said, but when only Hermon and Myrtilus
still stood with their wreaths of flowers opposite the "beautiful
Althea," and she glanced hesitatingly from one to the other, as if she
found the choice difficult, and then drew from her finger a sparkling
ring, the Biamite detected the swift look of understanding which Hermon
exchanged with her.

The girl's heart began to throb faster, and, with the keen premonition
of a jealous soul, she recognised in Althea her rival and foe.

Now there was no doubt of it; now, as the actress, skilled in every
wile, hid the hand holding the ring, as well as the other empty one,
behind her back, she would know how to manage so that she could use the
garland which Hermon handed her.

Ledscha's foreboding was instantly fulfilled, for when Althea held out
her little tightly clinched fist to the artists and asked Myrtilus to
choose, the hand to which he pointed and she then opened was empty, and
she took from the other the ring, which she displayed with well-feigned
regret to the spectators.

Then Hermon knelt before her, and, as he offered Althea his wreath,
his dark eyes gazed so ardently into the blue ones of the red-haired
Greek-like Queen Arsinoe, she was of Thracian descent--that Ledscha was
now positively certain she knew for whose sake her lover had so basely
betrayed her.

How she hated this bold woman!

Yet she was forced to keep quiet, and pressed her lips tightly together
as Althea seized the white sheet and with marvellous celerity wound it
about her until it fell in exquisite folds like a long robe.

Surprise, curiosity, and a pleasant sense of satisfaction in seeing
what seemed to her a shameless display withdrawn from her lover's eyes,
rendered it easier for Ledscha to maintain her composure; yet she felt
the blood throbbing in her temples as Hermon remained kneeling before
the Hellene, gazing intently into her expressive face.

Was it not too narrow wholly to please the man who had known how to
praise her own beauty so passionately? Did not the outlines of Althea's
figure, which the bombyx robe only partially concealed, lack roundness
even more than her own?

And yet! As soon as Althea had transformed the sheet into a robe,
and held the wreath above him, Hermon's gaze rested on hers as though
enraptured, while from her bright blue eyes a flood of ardent admiration
poured upon the man for whom she held the victor's wreath.

This was done with the upper portion of her body bending very far
forward. The slender figure was poised on one foot; the other, covered
to the ankle with the long robe, hovered in the air. Had not the wings
which, as Nike, belonged to her been lacking, every one would have been
convinced that she was flying--that she had just descended from the
heights of Olympus to crown the kneeling victor. Not only her hand, her
gaze and her every feature awarded the prize to the man at her feet.

There was no doubt that, if Nike herself came to the earth to make the
best man happy with the noblest of crowns, the spectacle would be a
similar one.

And Hermon! No garlanded victor could look up to the gracious divinity
more joyously, more completely enthralled by grateful rapture.

The applause which now rang out more and more loudly was certainly
not undeserved, but it pierced Ledscha's soul like a mockery, like the
bitterest scorn.

Hanno, on the contrary, seemed to consider the scene scarcely worth
looking at. Something more powerful was required to stir him. He was
particularly averse to all exhibitions. The utmost which his relatives
could induce the quiet, reserved man to do when they ventured into the
great seaports was to attend the animal fights and the games of the
athletes. He felt thoroughly happy only when at sea, on board of his
good ship. His best pleasure was to gaze up at the stars on calm nights,
guide the helm, and meanwhile dream--of late most gladly of making the
beautiful girl who had seemed to him worthy of his brave brother Abus,
his own wife.

In the secluded monotony of his life as a scar over memory had exalted
Ledscha into the most desirable of all women, and the slaughtered Abus
into the greatest of heroes.

To win the love of this much-praised maiden seemed to Hanno peerless
happiness, and the young corsair felt that he was worthy of it; for
on the high seas, when a superior foe was to be opposed by force and
stratagem, when a ship was to be boarded and death spread over her deck,
he had proved himself a man of unflinching courage.

His suit had progressed more easily than he expected. His father would
rejoice, and his heart exulted at the thought of encountering a serious
peril for the girl he loved. His whole existence was a venture of life,
and, had he had ten to lose, they would not have been too dear a price
to him to win Ledscha.

While Althea, as the goddess of Victory, held the wreath aloft, and loud
applause hailed her, Hanno was thinking of the treasures which he had
garnered since his father had allowed him a share of the booty, and of
the future.

When he had accumulated ten talents of gold he would give up piracy,
like Abus, and carry on his own ships wood and slaves from Pontus to
Egypt, and textiles from Tennis, arms and other manufactured articles
from Alexandria to the Pontine cities. In this way Ledscha's father had
become a rich man, and he would also, not for his own sake--he needed
little--but to make life sweet for his wife, surround her with splendour
and luxury, and adorn her beautiful person with costly jewels. Many a
stolen ornament was already lying in the safe hiding place that even his
brother Labaja did not know.

At last the shouts died away, and as the stopping of the clattering
wheel wakes the miller, so the stillness on the shore roused Hanno from
his dream.

What was it that Ledscha saw there so fascinating that she did not
even hear his low call? His father and Labaja had undoubtedly left his
grandmother's house long ago, and were looking for him in vain.

Yes, he was right; the old pirate's shrill whistle reached his ear from
the Owl's Nest, and he was accustomed to obedience.

So, lightly touching Ledscha on the shoulder, he whispered that he must
return to the island at once. His father would be rejoiced if she went
with him.

"To-morrow," she answered in a tone of resolute denial. Then, reminding
him once more of the meaning of the signals she had promised to give,
she waved her hand to him, sprang swiftly past him to the prow of the
boat, caught an overhanging bough of the willow on the shore, and, as
she had learned during the games of her childhood, swung herself as
lightly as a bird into the thicket at the water's edge, which concealed
her from every eye.




CHAPTER XII.

Without even vouchsafing Hanno another glance, Ledscha glided forward in
the shadow of the bushes to the great sycamore, whose thick, broad top
on the side toward the tents was striped with light from the flood of
radiance streaming from them. On the opposite side the leafage vanished
in the darkness of the night, but Myrtilus had had a bench placed there,
that he might rest in the shade, and from this spot the girl could
obtain the best view of what she desired to see.

How gay and animated it was under the awning!

A throng of companions had arrived with the Pelusinians, and some also
had probably been on the ship which--she knew it from Bias--had come to
Tennis directly from Alexandria that afternoon. The galley was said to
belong to Philotas, an aristocratic relative of King Ptolemy. If she was
not mistaken, he was the stately young Greek who was just picking up the
ostrich-feather fan that had slipped from Daphne's lap.

The performance was over.

Young slaves in gay garments, and nimble female servants with glittering
gold circlets round their upper arms and on their ankles, were
passing from couch to couch, and from one guest to another, offering
refreshments. Hermon had risen from his knees, and the wreath of bright
flowers again adorned his black curls. He held himself as proudly erect
as if the goddess of Victory herself had crowned him, while Althea was
reaping applause and thanks. Ledscha gazed past her and the others to
watch every movement of the sculptor.

It was scarcely the daughter of Archias who had detained Hermon, for he
made only a brief answer--Ledscha could not hear what it was--when she
accosted him pleasantly, to devote himself to Althea, and--this could be
perceived even at a distance--thank her with ardent devotion.

And now--now he even raised the hem of her peplos to his lips.

A scornful smile hovered around Ledscha's mouth; but Daphne's guests
also noticed this mark of homage--an unusual one in their circle--and
young Philotas, who had followed Daphne from Alexandria, cast a
significant glance at a man with a smooth, thin, birdlike face, whose
hair was already turning gray. His name was Proclus, and, as grammateus
of the Dionysian games and high priest of Apollo, he was one of the most
influential men in Alexandria, especially as he was one of the favoured
courtiers of Queen Arsinoe.

He had gone by her command to the Syrian court, had enjoyed on
his return, at Pelusium, with his travelling companion Althea, the
hospitality of Philippus, and accompanied the venerable officer to
Tennis in order to win him over to certain plans. In spite of his
advanced age, he still strove to gain the favour of fair women, and the
sculptor's excessive ardour had displeased him.

So he let his somewhat mocking glance wander from Althea to Hermon,
and called to the latter: "My congratulations, young master; but I need
scarcely remind you that Nike suffers no one--not even goodness and
grace personified--to take from her hand what it is her sole duty to
bestow."

While speaking he adjusted the laurel on his own thin hair; but Thyone,
the wife of Philippus, answered eagerly: "If I were a young man like
Hermon, instead of an old woman, noble Proclus, I think the wreath which
Beauty bestows would render me scarcely less happy than stern Nike's
crown of victory."

While making this pleasant reply the matron's wrinkled face wore an
expression of such cordial kindness, and her deep voice was so winning
in its melody, that Hermon forced himself to heed the glance of urgent
warning Daphne cast at him, and leave the sharp retort that hovered on
his lips unuttered. Turning half to the grammateus, half to the matron,
he merely said, in a cold, self-conscious tone, that Thyone was right.
In this gay circle, the wreath of bright flowers proffered by the hands
of a beautiful woman was the dearest of all gifts, and he would know how
to value it.

"Until other more precious ones cast it into oblivion," observed Althea.
"Let me see, Hermon: ivy and roses. The former is lasting, but the
roses--" She shook her finger in roguish menace at the sculptor as she
spoke.

"The roses," Proclus broke in again, "are of course the most welcome to
our young friend from such a hand; yet these flowers of the goddess of
Beauty have little in common with his art, which is hostile to beauty.
Still, I do not know what wreath will be offered to the new tendency
with which he surprised us."

At this Hermon raised his head higher, and answered sharply: "Doubtless
there must have been few of them, since you, who are so often among the
judges, do not know them. At any rate, those which justice bestows have
hitherto been lacking."

"I should deplore that," replied Proclus, stroking his sharp chin with
his thumb and forefinger; "but I fear that our beautiful Nike also
cared little for this lofty virtue of the judge in the last coronation.
However, her immortal model lacks it often enough."

"Because she is a woman," said one of the young officers, laughing; and
another added gaily: "That very thing may be acceptable to us soldiers.
For my part, I think everything about the goddess of Victory is
beautiful and just, that she may remain graciously disposed toward
us. Nay, I accuse the noble Althea of withholding from Nike, in her
personation, her special ornament--her swift, powerful wings."

"She gave those to Eros, to speed his flight," laughed Proclus, casting
a meaning look at Althea and Hermon.

No one failed to notice that this jest alluded to the love which seemed
to have been awakened in the sculptor as quickly as in the personator
of the goddess of Victory, and, while it excited the merriment of the
others, the blood mounted into Hermon's cheeks; but Myrtilus perceived
what was passing in the mind of his irritable friend, and, as the
grammateus praised Nike because in this coronation she had omitted the
laurel, the fair-haired Greek interrupted him with the exclamation:

"Quite right, noble Proclus, the grave laurel does not suit our gay
pastime; but roses belong to the artist everywhere, and are always
welcome to him. The more, the better!"

"Then we will wait till the laurel is distributed in some other place,"
replied the grammateus; and Myrtilus quickly added, "I will answer for
it that Hermon does not leave it empty-handed."

"No one will greet the work which brings your friend the wreath of
victory with warmer joy," Proclus protested. "But, if I am correctly
informed, yonder house hides completed treasures whose inspection would
give the fitting consecration to this happy meeting. Do you know what
an exquisite effect gold and ivory statues produce in a full glow of
lamplight? I first learned it a short time ago at the court of King
Antiochus. There is no lack of lights here. What do you say, gentlemen?
Will you not have the studios lighted till the rooms are as bright as
day, and add a noble enjoyment of art to the pleasures of this wonderful
night?"

But Hermon and Myrtilus opposed this proposal with equal decision.

Their refusal awakened keen regret, and the old commandant of Pelusium
would not willingly yield to it.

Angrily shaking his large head, around which, in spite of his advanced
age, thick snowwhite locks floated like a lion's mane, he exclaimed,
"Must we then really return to our Pelusium, where Ares restricts the
native rights of the Muses, without having admired the noble works which
arose in such mysterious secrecy here, where Arachne rules and swings
the weaver's shuttle?"

"But my two cruel cousins have closed their doors even upon me, who came
here for the sake of their works," Daphne interrupted, "and, as rather
Zeus is threatening a storm--just see what black clouds are rising!--we
ought not to urge our artists further; a solemn oath forbids them to
show their creations now to any one."

This earnest assurance silenced the curious, and, while the conversation
took another turn, the gray-haired general's wife drew Myrtilus aside.

Hermon's parents had been intimate friends of her own, as well as of
her husband's, and with the interest of sincere affection she desired
to know whether the young sculptor could really hope for the success of
which Myrtilus had just spoken.

It was years since she had visited Alexandria, but what she heard of
Hermon's artistic work from many guests, and now again through Proclus,
filled her with anxiety.

He had succeeded, it was said, in attracting attention, and his great
talent was beyond question; but in this age, to which beauty was as much
one of the necessities of life as bread and wine, and which could not
separate it from art, he ventured to deny it recognition. He headed a
current in art which was striving to destroy what had been proved and
acknowledged, yet, though his creations were undeniably powerful,
and even showed many other admirable qualities, instead of pleasing,
satisfying, and ennobling, they repelled.

These opinions had troubled the matron, who understood men, and was the
more disposed to credit them the more distinctly she perceived traces
of discontent and instability in Hermon's manner during the present
meeting.

So it afforded her special pleasure to learn from Myrtilus his firm
conviction that, in Arachne, Hermon would produce a masterpiece which
could scarcely be excelled.

During this conversation Althea had come to Thyone's side, and, as
Hermon had already spoken to her of the Arachne, she eagerly expressed
her belief that this work seemed as if it were specially created for
him.

The Greek matron leaned back comfortably upon her cushions, her
wrinkled, owl-like face assumed a cheerful expression, and, with the
easy confidence conferred by aristocratic birth, a distinguished social
position, and a light heart, she exclaimed: "Lucifer is probably already
behind yonder clouds, preparing to announce day, and this exquisite
banquet ought to have a close worthy of it. What do you say, you
wonder-working darling of the Muses"--she held out her hand to Althea as
she spoke--"to showing us and the two competing artists yonder the model
of the Arachne they are to represent in gold and ivory?"

Althea fixed her eyes upon the ground, and, after a short period of
reflection, answered hesitatingly: "The task which you set before me is
certainly no easy one, but I shall rely upon your indulgence."

"She will!" cried the matron to the others.

Then, clapping her hands, she continued gaily, in the tone of the
director of an entertainment issuing invitations to a performance: "Your
attention is requested! In this city of weavers the noble Thracian,
Althea, will depict before you all the weaver of weavers, Arachne, in
person."

"Take heed and follow my advice to sharpen your eyes," added Philotas,
who, conscious of his inferiority in intellect and talents to the men
and women assembled here, took advantage of this opportunity to assert
himself in a manner suited to his aristocratic birth. "This artistic yet
hapless Arachne, if any one, teaches the lesson how the lofty Olympians
punish those who venture to place themselves on the same level; so
let artists beware. We stepchildren of the Muse can lull ourselves
comfortably in the assurance of not giving the jealous gods the
slightest cause for the doom which overtook the pitiable weaver."

Not a word of this declaration of the Macedonian aristocrat escaped the
listening Ledscha. Scales seemed to fall from her eyes. Hermon had won
her love in order to use her for the model of his statue of Arachne,
and, now that he had met Althea, who perhaps suited his purpose even
better, he no longer needed the barbarian. He had cast her aside like
a tight shoe as soon as he found a more acceptable one in this female
juggler.

The girl had already asked herself, with a slight thrill of horror,
whether she had not prematurely called down so terrible a punishment
upon her lover; now she rejoiced in her swift action. If anything else
remained for her to do, it was to make the vengeance with which she
intended to requite him still more severe.

There he stood beside the woman she hated. Could he bestow even one poor
thought upon the Biamite girl and the wrong he had inflicted?

Oh, no! His heart was filled to overflowing by the Greek--every look
revealed it.

What was the shameless creature probably whispering to him now?

Perhaps a meeting was just being granted. The rapture which had been
predicted to her for this moonlight night, and of which Hermon had
robbed her, was mirrored in his features. He could think of everything
except her and her poor, crushed heart.

But Ledscha was mistaken. Althea had asked the sculptor whether he
still regretted having been detained by her before midnight, and he had
confessed that his remaining at the banquet had been connected with a
great sacrifice--nay, with an offence which weighed heavily on his
mind. Yet he was grateful to the favour of the gods that had guided his
decision, for Althea had it in her power to compensate him richly for
what he had lost.

A glance full of promise flashed upon him from her eloquent eyes, and,
turning toward the pedestal at the same instant, she asked softly, "Is
the compensation I must and will bestow connected with the Arachne?"

An eager "Yes" confirmed this question, and a swift movement of her
expressive lips showed him that his boldest anticipations were to be
surpassed.

How gladly he would have detained her longer!--but she was already the
object of all eyes, and his, too, followed her in expectant suspense as
she gave an order to the female attendant and then stood thoughtfully
for some time before the platform.

When she at last ascended it, the spectators supposed that she would
again use a cloth; but, instead of asking anything more from the
assistants, she cast aside even the peplos that covered her shoulders.

Now, almost lean in her slenderness, she stood with downcast eyes; but
suddenly she loosed the double chain, adorned with flashing gems, from
her neck, the circlets from her upper arms and wrists, and, lastly, even
the diadem, a gift bestowed by her relative, Queen Arsinoe, from her
narrow brow.

The female slaves received them, and then with swift movements Althea
divided her thick long tresses of red hair into narrower strands, which
she flung over her back, bosom, and shoulders.

Next, as if delirious, she threw her head so far on one side that it
almost touched her left shoulder, and stared wildly upward toward the
right, at the same time raising her bare arms so high that they extended
far above her head.

It was again her purpose to present the appearance of defending herself
against a viewless power, yet she was wholly unlike the Niobe whom she
had formerly personated, for not only anguish, horror, and defiance,
but deep despair and inexpressible astonishment were portrayed by her
features, which obediently expressed the slightest emotion.

Something unprecedented, incomprehensible even to herself, was
occurring, and to Ledscha, who watched her with an expectation as
passionate as if her own weal and woe depended upon Althea's every
movement, it seemed as if an unintelligible marvel was happening before
her eyes, and a still greater one was impending; for was the woman up
there really a woman like herself and the others whose eyes were now
fixed upon the hated actress no less intently than her own?

Did her keen senses deceive her, or was not what was occurring actually
a mysterious transformation?

As Althea stood there, her delicate arms seemed to have lengthened and
lost even their slight roundness, her figure to have become even more
slender and incorporeal, and how strangely her thin fingers spread
apart! How stiffly the strands of the parted, wholly uncurled locks
stood out in the air!

Did it not seem as if they were to help her move?

The black shadow which Althea's figure and limbs cast upon the surface
of the brightly lighted pedestal-no, it was no deception, it not only
resembled the spinner among insects, it presented the exact picture of a
spider.

The Greek's slender body had contracted, her delicate arms and narrow
braids of hair changed into spider legs, and the many-jointed hands were
already grasping for their prey like a spider, or preparing to wind the
murderous threads around another living creature.

"Arachne, the spider!" fell almost inaudibly from her quivering lips,
and, overpowered by torturing fear, she was already turning away from
the frightful image, when the storm of applause which burst from the
Alexandrian guests soothed her excited imagination.

Instead of the spider, a slender, lank woman, with long, outstretched
bare arms, and fingers spread wide apart, fluttering hair, and wandering
eyes again stood before Ledscha.

But no peace was yet granted to her throbbing heart, for while Althea,
with perspiring brow and quivering lips, descended from the pedestal,
and was received with loud demonstrations of astonishment and delight,
the glare of a flash of lightning burst through the clouds, and a loud
peal of thunder shook the night air and reverberated a long time over
the water.

At the same instant a loud cry rang from beneath the canopy.

Thyone, the wife of Alexander the Great's comrade, though absolutely
fearless in the presence of human foes, dreaded the thunder by which
Zeus announced his anger. Seized with sudden terror, she commanded a
slave to obtain a black lamb for a sacrifice, and earnestly entreated
her husband and her other companions to go on board the ship with her
and seek shelter in its safe, rain-proof cabin, for already heavy drops
were beginning to fall upon the tensely drawn awning.

"Nemesis!" exclaimed the grammateus.

"Nemesis!" whispered young Philotas to Daphne in a confidential murmur,
throwing his own costly purple cloak around her to shield her from the
rain. "Nowhere that we mortals overstep the bounds allotted to us do we
await her in vain."

Then bending down to her again, he added, by way of explanation: "The
winged daughter of Night would prove herself negligent if she allowed
me to enjoy wholly without drawback the overwhelming happiness of being
with you once more."

"Nemesis!" remarked Thoas, an aristocratic young hipparch of the
guards of the Diadochi, who had studied in Athens and belonged to the
Peripatetics there. "The master sees in the figure of this goddess the
indignation which the good fortune of the base or the unworthy use of
good fortune inspires in us. She keeps the happy mean between envy and
malicious satisfaction." The young soldier looked around him, expecting
applause, but no one was listening; the tempest was spreading terror
among most of the freedmen and slaves.

Philotas and Myrtilus were following Daphne and her companion Chrysilla
as they hurried into the tent. The deep, commanding tones of old
Philippus vainly shouted the name of Althea, whom, as he had bestowed
his hospitality upon her in Pelusium, he regarded as his charge, while
at intervals he reprimanded the black slaves who were to carry his wife
to the ship, but at another heavy peal of thunder set down the litter to
throw themselves on their knees and beseech the angry god for mercy.

Gras, the steward whom Archias had given to his daughter, a Bithynian
who had attached himself to one school of philosophy after an other, and
thereby ceased to believe in the power of the Olympians, lost his quiet
composure in this confusion, and even his usual good nature deserted
him. With harsh words, and no less harsh blows, he rushed upon the
servants, who, instead of carrying the costly household utensils and
embroidered cushions into the tent, drew out their amulets and idols to
confide their own imperilled lives to the protection of higher powers.

Meanwhile the gusts of wind which accompanied the outbreak of the storm
extinguished the lamps and pitch-pans. The awning was torn from the
posts, and amid the wild confusion rang the commandant of Pelusium's
shouts for Althea and the screams of two Egyptian slave women, who, with
their foreheads pressed to the ground, were praying, while the angry
Gras was trying, by kicks and blows, to compel them to rise and go to
work.

The officers were holding a whispered consultation whether they should
accept the invitation of Proclus and spend the short remnant of the
night on his galley over the wine, or first, according to the counsel
of their pious commandant, wait in the neighbouring temple of Zeus until
the storm was over.

The tempest had completely scattered Daphne's guests. Even Ledscha
glanced very rarely toward the tents. She had thrown her self on the
ground under the sycamore to beseech the angry deity for mercy, but,
deeply as fear moved her agitated soul, she could not pray, but listened
anxiously whenever an unexpected noise came from the meeting place of
the Greeks.

Then the tones of a familiar voice reached her. It was Hermon's, and
the person to whom he was speaking could be no one but the uncanny
spider-woman, Althea.

They were coming to have a secret conversation under the shade of the
dense foliage of the sycamore. That was easily perceived, and in an
instant Ledscha's fear yielded to a different feeling.

Holding her breath, she nestled close to the trunk of the ancient tree
to listen, and the first word she heard was the name "Nemesis," which
had just reached her from the tent.

She knew its meaning, for Tennis also had a little temple dedicated to
the terrible goddess, which was visited by the Egyptians and Biamites as
well as the Greeks.

A triumphant smile flitted over her unveiled features, for there was no
other divinity on whose aid she could more confidently rely. She could
unchain the vengeance which threatened Hermon with a far more terrible
danger than the thunder clouds above, under the protection--nay, as it
were at the behest of Nemesis.

To-morrow she would be the first to anoint her altar.

Now she rejoiced that her wealthy father imposed no restriction upon her
in the management of household affairs, for she need spare no expense in
choosing the animal she intended to offer as a sacrifice.

This reflection flashed through her mind with the speed of lightning
while she was listening to Althea's conversation with the sculptor.

"The question here can be no clever play upon the name and the nature
of the daughter of Erebus and Night," said the Thracian gravely. "I
will remind you that there is another Nemesis besides the just being who
drives from his stolen ease the unworthy mortal who suns himself in
good fortune. The Nemesis whom I will recall to-day, while angry Zeus
is hurling his thunderbolts, is the other, who chastises sacrilege--Ate,
the swiftest and most terrible of the Erinyes. I will invoke her wrath
upon you in this hour if you do not confess the truth to me fully and
entirely."

"Ask," Hermon interrupted in a hollow tone. "Only, you strange woman--"

"Only," she hastily broke in, "whatever the answer may be, I must
pose to you as the model for your Arachne--and perhaps it may come
to that--but first I must know, briefly and quickly, for they will be
looking for me immediately. Do you love Daphne?"

"No," he answered positively. "True, she has been dear to me from
childhood--"

"And," Althea added, completing the sentence, "you owe her father a debt
of gratitude. But that is not new to me; I know also how little reason
you gave her for loving you. Yet her heart belongs neither to Philotas,
the great lord with the little brain, nor to the famous sculptor
Myrtilus, whose body is really too delicate to bear all the laurels with
which he is overloaded, but to you, and you alone--I know it."

Hermon tried to contradict her, but Althea, without allowing him to
speak, went on hurriedly: "No matter! I wished to know whether you loved
her. True, according to appearances, your heart does not glow for her,
and hitherto you have disdained to transform by her aid, at a single
stroke, the poverty which ill suits you into wealth. But it was not
merely to speak of the daughter of Archias that I accompanied you into
this tempest, from which I would fain escape as quickly as possible. So
speak quickly. I am to serve you in your art, and yet, if I understood
you correctly, you have already found here another excellent model."

"A native of the country," answered Hermon in an embarrassed tone.

"And for my sake you allowed her to wait for you in vain?"

"It is as you say."

"And you had promised to seek her?"

"Certainly; but before the appointed hour came I met you. You rose
before me like a new sun, shedding a new light that was full of promise.
Everything else sank into darkness, and, if you will fulfil the hope
which you awakened in this heart--"

Just at that moment another flash of lightning blazed, and, while
the thunder still shook the air, Althea continued his interrupted
protestation: "Then you will give yourself to me, body and soul--but
Zeus, who hears oaths, is reminding us of his presence--and what will
await you if the Biamite whom you betrayed invokes the wrath of Nemesis
against you?"

"The Nemesis of the barbarians!" he retorted contemptuously. "She only
placed herself at the service of my art reluctantly; but you, Althea,
if you will loan yourself to me as a model, I shall succeed in doing my
very best; for you have just permitted me to behold a miracle, Arachne
herself, whom you became, you enchantress. It was real, actual life, and
that--that is the highest goal."

"The highest?" she asked hesitatingly. "You will have to represent the
female form, and beauty, Hermon, beauty?"

"Will be there, allied with truth," flamed Hermon, "if you, you
peerless, more than beautiful creature, keep your word to me. But you
will! Let me be sure of it. Is a little love also blended with the wish
to serve the artist?"

"A little love?" she repeated scornfully.

"This matter concerns love complete and full--or none. We will see each
other again to-morrow. Then show me what the model Althea is worth to
you."

With these words she vanished in the darkness, while the call of her
name again rang from the tents.

"Althea!" he cried in a tone of mournful reproach as he perceived her
disappearance, hurrying after her; but the dense gloom soon forced him
to give up the pursuit.

Ledscha, too, left her place beneath the sycamore.

She had seen and heard enough.

Duty now commanded her to execute vengeance, and the bold Hanno was
ready to risk his life for her.




CHAPTER XIII.

The following day the sun shone radiantly, with scorching brilliancy,
upon Tennis and the archipelago, which at this season of the year
surrounded the little city of weavers.

Young Philotas, without going to rest, had set out at dawn in pursuit of
game, accompanied by a numerous hunting party, to which several of the
Pelusinian officers belonged. He, too, had brought home a great quantity
of booty, with which he had expected to awaken Daphne's admiration, and
to lay as a token of homage at her feet. He had intended to lead before
her garlanded slaves bearing, tied by ropes, bunches of slaughtered wild
fowl, but his reception was very different from what he had anticipated.

Instead of praising his exploit, he had been indignantly requested to
remove the poor, easily killed victims from her presence; and, wounded
and disappointed, he had retired to his magnificent Nile boat, where,
spent by his sleepless night, he slumbered so soundly on his soft
cushions that he did not appear at the breakfast which the gray-haired
commander of Pelusium had invited him to attend on his galley.

While the others were still feasting there, Daphne was enjoying an hour
alone with her companion Chrysilla.

She had remained absent from Philippus's banquet, and her pale cheeks
showed the ill effects produced by the excitement of the previous night.

A little before noon Hermon came to see her. He, too, had not gone to
the Pelusinian's breakfast.

After Althea had left him the evening before he went directly back
to the white house, and, instead of going to rest, devoted himself to
Myrtilus; for the difficulty of breathing, which during his industrious
life in quiet seclusion had not troubled him for several months,
attacked him with twofold violence after the gaiety of the previous
night. Hermon had not left him an instant until day brought the sufferer
relief, and he no longer needed the supporting hand of his kind nurse.

While Hermon, in his own sleeping room, ordered Bias to anoint his hair
and beard and put on festal garments, the slave told him certain things
that destroyed the last remnant of composure in his easily agitated
soul.

With the firm resolution to keep the appointment on Pelican Island,
Hermon had gone at sunset, in response to the Alexandrian's invitation,
to attend her banquet, and by no means unwillingly, for his parents'
old friends were dear to him, and he knew by experience the beneficial
influence Daphne's sunny, warmhearted nature exerted upon him.

Yet this time he did not find what he expected.

In the first place, he had been obliged to witness how earnestly
Philotas was pressing his suit, and perceived that her companion
Chrysilla was most eagerly assisting him. As she saw in the young
aristocrat a suitable husband for the daughter of Archias, and it was
her duty to assign the guests their seats at the banquet, she had given
the cushion beside Daphne to Philotas, and also willingly fulfilled
Althea's desire to have Hermon for her neighbour.

When Chrysilla presented the black-bearded artist to the Thracian, she
would have sworn that Althea found an old acquaintance in the sculptor;
but Hermon treated the far-famed relative of Queen Arsinoe as coldly
and distantly as if he now saw her for the first time, and with little
pleasure.

In truth, he was glad to avoid women of Althea's stamp. For some time he
had preferred to associate with the common people, among whom he found
his best subjects, and kept far aloof from the court circles to which
Althea belonged, and which, thanks to his birth and his ability as an
artist, would easily have been accessible to him also.

The over-refined women who gave themselves airs of avoiding everything
which imposes a restraint upon Nature, and therefore, in their
transparent robes, treated with contempt all that modest Macedonian
dames deemed worthy of a genuine woman's consideration, were repulsive
to him--perhaps because they formed so rude a contrast to his noble dead
mother and to Daphne.

Although he had been very frequently in feminine society, Althea's
manner at first caused him a certain degree of embarrassment; for, in
spite of the fact that he believed he met her here for the first time,
there was something familiar about her, especially in the tone of her
voice, and he fancied that her first words were associated with some
former ones.

Yet no! If he had ever met her, he would surely have remembered her
red-gold hair and the other peculiarities of a personality which was
remarkable in every respect.

It soon proved that they were total strangers, and he wished matters to
remain so.

He was glad that she attracted him so little, for at least she would
scarcely make the early departure to the Biamite, which he considered
his duty, a difficult task.

True, he admired from the first the rare milk-white line of her delicate
skin, which was wholly free from rouge--his artist eye perceived that
and the wonderfully beautiful shape of her hands and feet. The pose of
the head on the neck, too, as she turned toward him seemed remarkably
fine. This slender, pliant woman would have been an admirable model!

Again and again she reminded him of a gay Lesbian with whom he had
caroused for a night during the last Dionysia in Alexandria, yet, on
closer inspection, the two were as different as possible.

The former had been as free and reckless in her conduct as Althea was
reserved. The hair and eyebrows of the Lesbian, instead of reddish
gold, were the deepest black, and her complexion--he remembered it
perfectly--was much darker. The resemblance probably consisted merely in
the shape of the somewhat too narrow face, with its absolutely straight
nose, and a chin which was rather too small, as well as in the sound of
the high voice.

Not a serious word had reached his ears from the wanton lips of the
Lesbian, while Althea at once desired information concerning his art,
and showed that she was thoroughly familiar with the works and the
aspirations of the Alexandrian sculptors. Although aware that Hermon had
begun his career as an artist, and was the leader of a new tendency,
she pretended to belong to the old school, and thereby irritated him to
contradiction and the explanation of his efforts, which were rooted in
the demands of the present day and the life of the flourishing capital.

The Thracian listened to the description of the new art struggling
to present truth, as if these things were welcome surprises, grand
revelations, for which she had waited with eager longing. True, she
opposed every statement hostile to the old beliefs; but her extremely
expressive features soon betrayed to him that he was stirring her to
reflect, shaking her opinions, and winning her to his side.

Already, for the sake of the good cause, he devoted himself with the
utmost zeal to the task of convincing Althea; she, however, did not make
it an easy one, but presented clever arguments against his assertions.

Whenever he or she, by way of example, mentioned any well-known work
of art, she imitated, as if involuntarily, its pose and action with
surprising fidelity, frequently also in admirable caricature, whose
effect was extremely comical. What a woman!

She was familiar with whatever Grecian art had created, and the animated
conversation became a bewitching spectacle. When the grammateus Proclus,
who as Althea's travelling companion had a certain claim upon her
attention, mingled for a while in the discussion and attracted Althea's
notice, Hermon felt injured, and answered his sensible remarks with such
rudeness that the elder man, whose social position was so much higher,
angrily turned his back upon him.

Althea had imposed a certain degree of restraint upon herself while
talking to the grammateus, but during the further conversation with
Hermon she confessed that she was decidedly of his opinion, and added to
the old reasons for the deposition of beauty and ideality in favour of
truth and reality new ones which surprised the sculptor. When she at
last offered him her hand for a firm alliance, his brain was fevered,
and it seemed a great honour when she asked eagerly what would occupy
him in the immediate future.

Passionate sympathy echoed in every word, was expressed in every
feature, and she listened as if a great happiness was in store for
herself when he disclosed the hopes which he based upon the statue of
Arachne.

True, as time passed he had spoken more than once of the necessity of
retiring, and before midnight really tried to depart; but he had fallen
under Althea's thrall, and, in reply to her inquiry what must shorten
these exquisite hours, had informed her, in significant words, what drew
him away, and that his delay threatened him with the loss of a model
such as the favour of fate rarely bestowed upon an artist.

Now the Thracian for the first time permitted her eyes to make frank
confessions. She also bent forward with a natural movement to examine
the artistic work on a silver vase, and as while doing so her peplos
fell over his hand, she pressed it tenderly.

He gazed ardently up at her; but she whispered softly: "Stay! You will
gain through me something better than awaits you there, and not only for
to-day and to-morrow. We shall meet again in Alexandria, and to serve
your art there shall be a beloved duty."

His power of resistance was broken; yet he beckoned to his slave Bias,
who was busied with the mixing jars, and ordered him to seek Ledscha and
tell her not to wait longer; urgent duties detained him.

While he was giving this direction, Althea had become engaged in the
gay conversation of the others, and, as Thyone called Hermon, and he
was also obliged to speak to Daphne, he could not again obtain an
opportunity for private talk with the wonderful woman who held out far
grander prospects for his art than the refractory, rude Biamite maiden.

Soon Althea's performance seemed to prove how fortunate a choice he had
made. Her Arachne appeared like a revelation to him. If she kept her
promise, and he succeeded in modelling her in the pose assumed while
imagining the process of transformation, and presented her idea to the
spectators, the great success which hitherto--because he had not
yielded to demands which were opposed to his convictions--he had vainly
expected, could no longer escape him. The Alexandrian fellow-artists who
belonged to his party would gratefully welcome this special work; for
what grew out of it would have nothing in common with the fascination
of superhuman beauty, by which the older artists ensnared the hearts and
minds of the multitude. He would create a genuine woman, who would not
lack defects, yet who, though she inspired neither gratification nor
rapture, would touch, perhaps even thrill, the heart by absolute truth.

While Althea was standing on the pedestal, she had not only represented
the transformation into the spider, but experienced it, and the features
of the spectators revealed that they believed they were witnessing
the sinister event. His aim was now to awaken the same feeling in the
beholders of his Arachne. Nothing, nothing at all must be changed in
the figure of the model, in which many might miss the roundness and
plumpness so pleasing to the eye. Althea's very defects would perfect
the figure of the restless, wretched weaver whom Athene transformed into
the spider.

While devoting himself to nursing his friend, he had thought far less of
the new love-happiness which, in spite of her swift flight, was probably
awaiting him through Althea than of the work which was to fill his
existence in the immediate future.

His healthy body, steeled in the palaestra, felt no fatigue after the
sleepless night passed amid so many powerful excitements when he retired
to his chamber and committed himself to the hands of his slave.

It had not been possible to hear his report before, but when he at last
received it Hermon was to learn something extremely unpleasant, and not
only because no word of apology or even explanation of his absence had
reached Ledscha.

Bias was little to blame for this neglect, for, in the first place, he
had found no boat to reach the Pelican Island, because half Tennis
was on the road to Tanis, where, on the night of the full moon, the
brilliant festivals of the full eye of Horns and the great Astarte were
celebrated by the mixed population of this place. When a boat which
belonged to Daphne's galley was finally given to him, the Biamite girl
was no longer at the place appointed for the meeting.

Hoping to find her on the Owl's Nest with old Tabus, he then landed
there, but had been so uncivilly rebuffed on the shore by a rough fellow
that he might be glad to have escaped with sound limbs. Lastly, he stole
to Ledscha's home, and, knowing that her father was absent, had ventured
as far as the open courtyard in the centre of the stately dwelling. The
dogs knew him, and as a light was shining from one of the rooms that
opened upon the courtyard, he peeped in and saw Taus, Ledscha's younger
sister. She was kneeling before the statue of a god at the back of the
room, weeping, while the old housekeeper had fallen asleep with the
distaff in her lap.

He called cautiously to the pretty child. She was awaiting the return of
her sister, who, she supposed, was still detained on the Owl's Nest by
old Tabus's predictions; she had sorrowful tidings for her.

The husband of her friend Gula had returned on his ship and learned that
his wife had gone to the Greek's studio. He had raged like a madman, and
turned the unfortunate woman pitilessly out of doors after sunset. Her
own parents had only been induced to receive her with great difficulty.
Paseth, the jealous husband, had spared her life and refrained from
going at once to kill the artist solely because Hermon had saved his
little daughter at his own peril from the burning house.

"Now," said Ledscha's pretty little sister, "it would also be known that
she had gone with Gula to his master, who was certainly a handsome man,
but for whom, now that young Smethis was wooing her, she cared no more
than she did for her runaway cat. All Tennis would point at her, and she
dared not even think what her father would do when he came home."

These communications had increased Hermon's anxiety.

He was a brave man, and did not fear the vengeance of the enraged
husband, against whom he was conscious of no guilt except having
persuaded his wife to commit an imprudence. What troubled him was only
the consciousness that he had given her and innocent little Taus every
reason to curse their meeting.

The ardent warmth with which Gula blessed him as the preserver of her
child had given him infinite pleasure. Now it seemed as if he had been
guilty of an act of baseness by inducing her to render a service which
was by no means free from danger, as though he wished to be paid for a
good deed.

Besides, the slave had represented the possible consequences of his
imprudence in the most gloomy light, and, with the assurance of knowing
the disposition of his fellow-countrymen, urged his master to leave
Tennis at once; the other Biamite men, who would bear anything rather
than the interference of a Greek in their married lives, might force
Gula's husband to take vengeance on him.

He said nothing about anxiety concerning his own safety, but he had good
reason to fear being regarded as a go-between and called to account for
it.

But his warnings and entreaties seemed to find deaf ears in Hermon.
True, he intended to leave Tennis as soon as possible, for what
advantage could he now find here? First, however, he must attend to the
packing of the statues, and then try to appease Ledscha, and make Gula's
husband understand that he was casting off his pretty wife unjustly.

He would not think of making a hasty departure, he told the slave,
especially as he was to meet Althea, Queen Arsinoe's art-appreciating
relative, in whom he had gained a friend, later in Alexandria.

Then Bias informed him of a discovery to which one of the Thracian's
slave women had helped him, and what he carelessly told his master drove
the blood from his cheeks, and, though his voice was almost stifled by
surprise and shame, made him assail him with questions.

What great thing had he revealed? There had been reckless gaiety at
every festival of Dionysus since he had been in the artist's service,
and the slaves had indulged in the festal mirth no less freely than the
masters. To intoxicate themselves with wine, the gift of the god to whom
they were paying homage, was not only permitted, but commanded, and the
juice of the grape proved its all-equalizing power.

There had been no lack of pretty companions even for him, the bondman,
and the most beautiful of all had made eyes at his master, the tall,
slender man with the splendid black beard.

The reckless Lesbian who had favoured Hermon at the last Dionysia had
played pranks with him madly enough, but then had suddenly vanished. By
his master's orders Bias had tried to find her again, but, in spite of
honest search, in vain.

Just now he had met, as Althea's maid, the little Syrian Margula, who
had been in her company, and raced along in the procession of bacchanals
in his, Bias's, arms. True, she could not be persuaded to make a frank
confession, but he, Bias, would let his right hand wither if Hermon's
companion at the Dionysia was any other than Althea. His master would
own that he was right if he imagined her with black hair instead of red.
Plenty of people in Alexandria practised the art of dyeing, and it was
well known that Queen Arsinoe herself willingly mingled in the throng at
the Dionysia with a handsome Ephebi, who did not suspect the identity of
his companion.

This was the information which had so deeply agitated Hermon, and then
led him, after pacing to and fro a short time, to go first to Myrtilus
and then to Daphne.

He had found his friend sleeping, and though every fibre of his being
urged him to speak to him, he forced himself to leave the sufferer
undisturbed.

Yet so torturing a sense of dissatisfaction with himself, so keen a
resentment against his own adverse destiny had awaked within him, that
he could no longer endure to remain in the presence of his work, with
which he was more and more dissatisfied.

Away from the studio!

There was a gay party on board the galley of his parents' old friends.
Wine should bring him forgetfulness, too, bless him again with the sense
of joyous existence which he knew so well, and which he now seemed on
the point of losing.

When he had once talked and drunk himself into the right mood, life
would wear a less gloomy face.

No! It should once more be a gay and reckless one.

And Althea?

He would meet her, with whom he had once caroused and revelled madly
enough in the intoxication of the last Dionysia, and, instead of
allowing himself to be fooled any longer and continuing to bow
respectfully before her, would assert all the rights she had formerly so
liberally granted.

He would enjoy to-day, forget to-morrow, and be gay with the gay.

Eager for new pleasure, he drew a long breath as he went out into the
open air, pressed his hands upon his broad chest, and with his eyes
fixed upon the commandant of Pelusium's galley, bedecked with flags,
walked swiftly toward the landing place.

Suddenly from the deck, shaded by an awning, the loud laugh of a woman's
shrill voice reached his ear, blended with the deeper tones of
the grammateus, whose attacks on the previous night Hermon had not
forgotten.

He stopped as if the laugh had pierced him to the heart. Proclus
appeared to be on the most familiar terms with Althea, and to meet
him with the Thracian now seemed impossible. He longed for mirth and
pleasure, but was unwilling to share it with these two. As he dared not
disturb Myrtilus, there was only one place where he could find what he
needed, and this was--he had said so to himself when he turned his back
on his sleeping friend--in Daphne's society.

Only yesterday he would have sought her without a second thought, but
to-day Althea's declaration that he was the only man whom the daughter
of Archias loved stood between him and his friend.

He knew that from childhood she had watched his every step with sisterly
affection. A hundred times she had proved her loyalty; yet, dear as she
was to him, willingly as he would have risked his life to save her from
a danger, it had never entered his mind to give the tie that united them
the name of love.

An older relative of both in Alexandria had once advised him, when
he was complaining of his poverty, to seek her hand, but his pride of
manhood rebelled against having the wealth which fate denied flung into
his lap by a woman. When she looked at him with her honest eyes, he
could never have brought himself to feign anything, least of all a
passion of which, tenderly attached to her though he had been for years,
hitherto he had known nothing.

"Do you love her?" Hermon asked himself as he walked toward Daphne's
tent, and the anticipated "No" had pressed itself upon him far less
quickly than he expected.

One thing was undeniably certain: whoever won her for a wife--even
though she were the poorest of the poor--must be numbered among the most
enviable of men. And should he not recognise in his aversion to every
one of her suitors, and now to the aristocratic young Philotas, a
feeling which resembled jealousy?

No! He did not and would not love Daphne. If she were really his, and
whatever concerned him had become hers, with whom could he have sought
in hours like these soothing, kind, and sensible counsel, comfort that
calmed the heart, and the refreshing dew which his fading courage and
faltering creative power required?

The bare thought of touching clay and wax with his fingers, or taking
hammer, chisel, and file in his hands, was now repulsive; and when, just
outside of the tent, a Biamite woman who was bringing fish to the cook
reminded him of Ledscha, and that he had lost in her the right model for
his Arachne, he scarcely regretted it.




CHAPTER XIV.

Outside the door of the tent Hermon was trying to banish Althea's image
from his mind. How foolishly he had overestimated last night the
value of this miserable actress, who as a woman had lost all charm for
him--even as a model for his Arachne!

He would rather have appeared before his pure friend with unsightly
stains on his robe than while mastered by yearning for the Thracian.

The first glance at Daphne's beloved face, the first words of her
greeting, taught him that he should find with her everything for which
he longed.

In simple, truthful words she reproached him for having neglected her
to the verge of incivility the evening before, but there was no trace of
bitterness or resentment in the accusation, and she gave Hermon little
time for apology, but quickly gladdened him with words of forgiveness.

In the opinion of her companion Chrysilla, Daphne ought to have kept
the capricious artist waiting much longer for pardon. True, the cautious
woman took no part in the conversation afterward, but she kept her
charge in sight while she was skilfully knotting the fringe into a cloth
which she had woven herself. On account of her favourite Philotas, it
was well for Daphne to be aware that she was watched.

Chrysilla was acquainted with life, and knew that Eros never mingles
more arbitrarily in the intercourse of a young couple than when, after a
long separation, there is anything whatever to forgive.

Besides, many words which the two exchanged escaped her hearing, for
they talked in low tones, and it was hot in the tent. Often the fatigue
she felt after the sleepless night bowed her head, still comely with its
unwrinkled face, though she was no longer young; then she quickly raised
it again.

Neither Daphne nor Hermon noticed her. The former at once perceived that
something was weighing on the sculptor's mind, but he did not need any
long inquiry. He had come to confide his troubles to her, and she kindly
lightened the task for him by asking why he had not gone to breakfast
with the Pelusinians.

"Because I am not fit for gay company today," was the reply.

"Again dissatisfied with Fate?"

"True, it has given me small cause for contentment of late."

"Put in place of Fate the far-seeing care of the gods, and you will
accept what befalls you less unkindly."

"Let us stick to us mortals, I entreat you."

"Very well, then. Your Demeter does not fully satisfy you."

A discontented shrug of the shoulders was the reply.

"Then work with twofold zeal upon the Arachne."

"Although one model I hoped to obtain forsook me, and my soul is
estranged from the other."

"Althea?" she asked eagerly, and he nodded assent.

Daphne clapped her hands joyfully, exclaiming so loudly that Chrysilla's
head sprang up with a jerk. "It could not help being so! O Hermon!
how anxious I have been! Now, I thought, when this horrible woman
represented the transformation into the spider with such repulsive
accuracy, Hermon will believe that this is the true, and therefore the
right, ideal; nay, I was deceived myself while gazing. But, eternal
gods! as soon as I imagined this Arachne in marble or chryselephantine
work, what a painful feeling overpowered me!"

"Of course!" he replied in an irritated tone. "The thirst for beauty, to
which you all succumb, would not have much satisfaction to expect from
this work."

"No, no, no!" Daphne interrupted in a louder tone than usual, and with
the earnest desire to convince him. "Precisely because I transported
myself into your tendency, your aspirations, I recognised the danger. O
Hermon! what produced so sinister an effect by the wavering light of
the lamps and torches, while the thunderstorm was rising--the strands of
hair, the outspread fingers, the bewildered, staring blue eyes--do
you not feel yourself how artificial, how unnatural it all was? This
transformation was only a clever trick of acting, nothing more. Before
a quiet spectator, in the pure, truthful light of Apollo, the foe of
all deception, what would this Arachne probably become? Even now--I have
already said so--when I imagine her executed in marble or in gold
and ivory! Beauty? Who would expect to find in the active, constantly
toiling weaver, the mortal daughter of an industrious dyer in purple,
the calm, refreshing charm of divine women? I at least am neither
foolish nor unjust enough to do so. The degree of beauty Althea
possesses would entirely satisfy me for the Arachne. But when I imagine
a plastic work faithful to the model of yesterday evening--though I
have seen a great deal with my own eyes, and am always ready to defer to
riper judgment--I would think, while looking at it: This statue came to
the artist from the stage, but never from Nature. Such would be my view,
and I am not one of the initiated. But the adepts! The King, with his
thorough connoisseurship and fine taste, my father, and the other famous
judges, how much more keenly they would perceive and define it!"

Here she hesitated, for the blood had left Hermon's cheeks, and she saw
with surprise the deep impression which the candid expression of
her opinion had produced upon the artist, usually so independent and
disposed to contradiction. Her judgment had undoubtedly disturbed, nay,
perhaps convinced him; but at the same time his features revealed such
deep depression that, far from rejoicing in so rare a success, she
patted his arm like an affectionate sister, saying: "You have not yet
found time to realize calmly what yesterday dazzled us all--and you,"
she added in a lower tone, "the most strongly."

"But now," he murmured sadly, half to himself, half to, her, "my vision
is doubly clear. Close before the success of which I dreamed failure and
bitter disappointment."

"If this 'doubly' refers to your completed work, and also to the
Arachne," cried Daphne in the affectionate desire to soothe him, "a
pleasant surprise will perhaps soon await you, for Myrtilus judges your
Demeter much more favourably than you yourself do, and he also betrayed
to me whom it resembles."

She blushed slightly as she spoke, and, as her companion's gloomy face
brightened for a short time, went on eagerly: "And now for the Arachne.
You will and must succeed in what you so ardently strive to accomplish,
a subject so exactly adapted to your magnificent virile genius and so
strangely suited to the course which your art has once entered upon.
And you can not fail to secure the right model. You had not found it
in Althea, no, certainly not! O Hermon! if I could only make you see
clearly how ill suited she, in whom everything is false, is to you--your
art, your only too powerful strength, your aspiration after truth--"

"You hate her," he broke in here in a repellent tone; but Daphne dropped
her quiet composure, and her gray eyes, usually so gentle, flashed
fiercely as she exclaimed: "Yes, and again yes! From my inmost soul I
do, and I rejoice in it. I have long disliked her, but since yesterday I
abhor her like the spider which she can simulate, like snakes and toads,
falsehood and vice."

Hermon had never seen his uncle's peaceful daughter in this mood. The
emotions that rendered this kindly soul so unlike itself could only be
the one powerful couple, love and jealousy; and while gazing intently
at her face, which in this moment seemed to him as beautiful as Dallas
Athene armed for battle, he listened breathlessly as she continued:
"Already the murderous spider had half entangled you in her net. She
drew you out into the tempest--our steward Gras saw it--in order, while
Zeus was raging, to deliver you to the wrath of the other gods also
and the contempt of all good men; for whoever yields himself to her she
destroys, sucks the marrow from his bones like the greedy harpies, and
all that is noble from his soul."

"Why, Daphne," interrupted Chrysilla, raising herself from her cushions
in alarm, "must I remind you of the moderation which distinguishes the
Greeks from the barbarians, and especially the Hellenic woman--"

Here Daphne indignantly broke in: "Whoever practises moderation in the
conflict against vice has already gone halfway over to evil. She utterly
ruined--how long ago is it?--the unfortunate Menander, my poor Ismene's
young husband. You know them both, Hermon. Here, of course, you scarcely
heard how she lured him from his wife and the lovely little girl who
bears my name. She tempted the poor fellow to her ship, only to cast him
off at the end of a month for another. Now he is at home again, but he
thinks Ismene is the statue from the Temple of Isis, which has gained
life and speech; for he has lost his mind, and when I saw him I felt as
if I should die of horror and pity. Now she is coming home with Proclus,
and, as the way led through Pelusium, she attached herself to our
friends and forces herself in here with them. What does she care about
her elderly travelling companion? But you--yes, you, Hermon--are the
next person whom she means to capture. Just now, when my eyes closed But
no! It is not only in my dreams; the hideous gray threads which proceed
from this greedy spider are continually floating before me and dim the
light." Here she paused, for the maid Stephanion announced the coming of
visitors, and at the same time loud voices were heard outside, and the
merry party who had been attending the breakfast given by the commandant
of Pelusium entered the tent.

Althea was among the guests, but she took little notice of Hermon.

Proclus, her associate in Queen Arsinoe's favour, was again asserting
his rights as her travelling companion, and she showed him plainly that
the attention which he paid her was acceptable.

Meanwhile her eager, bright blue eyes were roving everywhere, and
nothing that was passing around her escaped her notice.

As she greeted Daphne she perceived that her cheeks had flushed during
her conversation with Hermon.

How reserved and embarrassed the sculptor's manner was now to his
uncle's daughter, whom only yesterday he had treated with as much
freedom as though she were his sister! What a bungler in dissimulation!
how short-sighted was this big, strong man and remarkable artist! He had
carried her, Althea, in his arms like a child for a whole quarter of an
hour at the festival of Dionysus, and, in spite of the sculptor's keen
eye, he did not recognise her again!

What would not dyes and a change of manner accomplish!

Or had the memory of those mad hours revived and caused his
embarrassment? If he should know that her companion, the Milesian Nanno,
whom he had feasted with her on oyster pasties at Canopus after she
had given the slip to her handsome young companion was Queen Arsinoe!
Perhaps she would inform him of it some day if he recognised her.

Yet that could scarcely have happened. He had only been told what she
betrayed to him yesterday, and was now neglecting her for Daphne's sake.
That was undoubtedly the way the matter stood. How the girl's cheeks
were glowing when she entered!

The obstacle that stood between her and Hermon was the daughter of
Archias, and she, fool that she was, had attracted Hermon's attention to
her.

No matter!

He would want her for the Arachne, and she needed only to stretch out
her hand to draw him to her again if she found no better amusement in
Alexandria. Now she would awaken his fears that the best of models would
recall her favour. Besides, it would not do to resume the pleasant game
with him under the eyes of Philippus and his wife, who was a follower
of the manners of old times. The right course now was to keep him until
later.

Standing at Proclus's side, she took part gaily in the general
conversation; but when Myrtilus and Philemon had joined the others, and
Daphne had consented to go with Philippus and Thyone that evening,
in order, after offering sacrifice together to Selene, to sail for
Pelusium, Althea requested the grammateus to take her, into the open
air.

Before leaving the tent, however, she dropped her ostrich-feather fan
as she passed Hermon, and, when he picked it up, whispered with a
significant glance at Daphne, "I see that what was learned of her heart
is turned to account promptly enough."

Then, laughing gaily, she continued loudly enough to be heard by her
companion also: "Yesterday our young artist maintained that the
Muse shunned abundance; but the works of his wealthy friend Myrtilus
contradicted him, and he changed his view with the speed of lightning."

"Would that this swift alteration had concerned the direction of his
art," replied Proclus in a tone audible to her alone.

Both left the tent as he spoke, and Hermon uttered a sigh of relief
as he looked after them. She attributed the basest motives to him, and
Daphne's opinion of her was scarcely too severe.

He no longer needed to fear her power of attraction, though, now that he
had seen her again, he better understood the spell which she had exerted
over him. Every movement of her lithe figure had an exquisite grace,
whose charm was soothing to the artist's eye. Only there was something
piercing in her gaze when it did not woo love, and, while making the
base charge, her extremely thin lips had showed her sharp teeth in a
manner that reminded him of the way the she-wolf among the King's wild
beasts in the Paneum gardens raised her lips when any one went near her
cage.

Daphne was right. Ledscha would have been infinitely better as a model
for the Arachne. Everything in this proud creature was genuine and
original, which was certainly not the case with Althea. Besides, stern
austerity was as much a part of the Biamite as her hair and her hands,
yet what ardent passion he had seen glow in her eyes! The model so
long sought in vain he had found in Ledscha, who in so many respects
resembled Arachne. Fool that he was to have yielded to a swift and false
ebullition of feeling!

Since Myrtilus was again near him Hermon had devoted himself with fresh
eagerness to his artistic task, while a voice within cried more and more
loudly that the success of his new work depended entirely upon Ledscha.
He must try to regain her as a model for the Arachne! But while
pondering over the "how," he felt a rare sense of pleasure when Daphne
spoke to him or her glance met his.

At first he had devoted himself eagerly to his father's old friends,
and especially to Thyone, and had not found it quite easy to remain firm
when, in her frank, kindly, cordial manner, she tried to persuade him
to accompany her and the others to Pelusium. Yet he had succeeded in
refusing the worthy couple's invitation. But when he saw Philotas, whose
resemblance to the King, his cousin, had just been mentioned by one of
the officers, become more and more eager in his attentions to Daphne,
and heard him also invited by Philippus to share the nocturnal
voyage, he felt disturbed, and could not conceal from himself that the
uneasiness which constantly obtained a greater mastery over him arose
from the fear of losing his friend to the young aristocrat.

This was jealousy, and where it flamed so hotly love could scarcely
be absent. Yet, had the shaft of Eros really struck him, how was it
possible that the longing to win Ledscha back stirred so strongly within
him that he finally reached a resolution concerning her?

As soon as the guests left Tennis he would approach the Biamite again.
He had already whispered this intention to Myrtilus, when he heard
Daphne's companion say to Thyone, "Philotas will accompany us, and on
this voyage they will plight their troth if Aphrodite's powerful son
accepts my sacrifice."

He involuntarily looked at the pair who were intended for each other,
and saw Daphne lower her eyes, blushing, at a whisper from the young
Macedonian.

His blood also crimsoned his cheeks, and when, soon after, he asked his
friend whether she cared for his companionship, and Daphne assented in
the most eager way, he said that he would share the voyage to Pelusium.
Daphne's eyes had never yet beamed upon him so gladly and graciously.
Althea was right. She must love him, and it seemed as if this conviction
awoke a new star of happiness in his troubled soul.

If Philotas imagined that he could pluck the daughter of Archias like a
ripe fruit from a tree, he would find himself mistaken.

Hermon did not yet exactly understand himself, only he felt certain that
it would be impossible to surrender Daphne to another, and that for her
sake he would give up twenty Ledschas, though he cherished infinitely
great expectations from the Biamite for his art, which hitherto had been
more to him than all else.

Everything that he still had to do in Tennis he could intrust to his
conscientious Bias, to Myrtilus, and his slaves.

If he returned to the city of weavers, he would earnestly endeavour
to palliate the offence which he had inflicted on Ledscha, and, if
possible, obtain her forgiveness. Only one thing detained him--anxiety
about his friend, who positively refused to share the night voyage.

He had promised his uncle Archias to care for him like a brother, and
his own kind heart bade him stay with Myrtilus, and not leave him to the
nursing of his very skilful but utterly unreliable body-servant, after
the last night had proved to what severe attacks of his disease he was
still liable.

Myrtilus, however, earnestly entreated him not to deprive himself on
his account of a pleasure which he would gladly have shared. There was
plenty of time to pack the statues. As for himself, nothing would do him
more good just now than complete rest in his beloved solitude, which,
as Hermon knew, was more welcome to him than the gayest society. Nothing
was to be feared for him now. The thunderstorm had purified the air,
and another one was not to be expected soon in this dry region. He had
always been well here in sunny weather. Storms, which were especially
harmful to him, never came at this season of the year.

Myrtilus secretly thought that Hermon's departure would be desirable,
because the slave Bias had confided to him what dangers threatened his
friend from the incensed Biamite husbands.

Finally, Myrtilus turned to the others and begged them not to let Hermon
leave Pelusium quickly.

When, at parting, he was alone with him, he embraced him and said more
tenderly than usual: "You know how easy it will be for me to depart from
life; but it would be easier still if I could leave you behind without
anxiety, and that would happen if the hymeneal hymns at your marriage
to Daphne preceded the dirges which will soon resound above my coffin.
Yesterday I first became sure that she loves you, and, much good as you
have in your nature, you owe the best to her."

Hermon clasped him in his arms with passionate affection, and after
confessing that he, too, felt drawn with the utmost power toward Daphne,
and urging him to anticipate complete recovery instead of an early
death, he held out his hand to his friend; but Myrtilus clasped it a
long time in his own, saying earnestly: "Only this one frank warning:
An Arachne like the model which Althea presented yesterday evening would
deal the past of your art a blow in the face. No one at Rhodes--and this
is just what I prize in you--hated imitation more, yet what would using
the Arachne on the pedestal for a model be except showing the world not
how Hermon, but how Althea imagines the hapless transformed mortal? Even
if Ledscha withdraws from you, hold fast to her image. It will live on
in your soul. Recall it there, free it from whatever is superfluous,
supply whatever it lacks, animate it with the idea of the tireless
artist, the mocking, defiant mortal woman who ended her life as the
weaver of weavers in the insect world, as you have so often vividly
described her to me. Then, my dear fellow, you will remain loyal to
yourself, and therefore also to the higher truth, toward which every one
of us who labours earnestly strives, and, myself included, there is no
one who wields hammer and chisel in Greece who could contest the prize
with you."




CHAPTER XV.

When the sun was approaching the western horizon the travellers started.

Light mists veiled the radiant right eye of the goddess of heaven. The
blood of the contending spirits of light and darkness, which usually
dyed the west of Egypt crimson at the departure of the great sun god,
to-day vanished from sight.

The sultry air was damp and oppressive, and experienced old Philippus,
who had commanded a fleet of considerable size under the first
Ptolemies, agreed with the captain of the vessel, who pointed to several
small dark clouds under the silvery stratus, and expressed the fear that
Selene would hardly illumine the ship's course during the coming night.

But before the departure the travellers had offered sacrifices to
the foam-born Cyprian Aphrodite and the Dioscuri, the protectors of
mariners, and the conversation took the gayest turn.

In the harbour of the neighbouring seaport Tanis they went aboard of the
commandant's state galley, one of the largest and finest in the royal
fleet, where a banquet awaited them.

Cushions were arranged on the high poop, and the sea was as smooth as
the silver dishes in which viands were offered to the guests.

True, not a breath stirred the still, sultry air, but the three long
double ranks of rowers in the hold of the ship provided for her swift
progress, and if no contrary wind sprang up she would run into the
harbour of Pelusium before the last goblet was emptied.

Soon after the departure it seemed as if the captain of the little
vessel had erred in his prediction, for the moon burst victoriously
through the black clouds, only its shining orb was surrounded by a dull,
glimmering halo.

Doubtless many a guest longed for a cool breeze, but when the mixed wine
had moistened the parched tongues the talk gained fresh animation.

Every one did his or her part, for the point in question was to induce
Philippus and his wife to visit Alexandria again and spend some time
there as beloved guests with Daphne in her father's house or in the
palace of Philotas, who jestingly, yet with many reasons, contested the
honour with the absent Archias.

The old warrior had remained away from the capital for several years;
he alone knew why. Now the act which had incensed him and the offence
inflicted upon him were forgotten, and, having passed seventy four
years, he intended to ask the commander in chief once more for the
retirement from the army which the monarch had several times refused,
in order, as a free man, to seek again the city which in his present
position he had so long avoided.

Thyone, it is true, thought that her husband's youthful vigour rendered
this step premature, but the visit to Alexandria harmonized with her own
wishes.

Proclus eagerly sided with her. "To him," said the man of manifold
knowledge, who as high priest of Apollo was fond of speaking in an
instructive tone, "experience showed that men like Philippus, who solely
on account of the number of their years withdrew their services from
the state, felt unhappy, and, like the unused ploughshare, became
prematurely rusty. What they lacked, and what Philippus would also
miss, was not merely the occupation, which might easily be supplied by
another, but still more the habit of command. One who had had thousands
subject to his will was readily overcome by the feeling that he was
going down hill, when only a few dozen of his own slaves and his wife
obeyed him."

This word aroused the mirth of old Philippus, who praised all the good
qualities of Macedonian wives except that of obedience, while Thyone
protested that during her more than forty years of married life her
husband had become so much accustomed to her complete submission than he
no longer noticed it. If Philippus should command her to-morrow to leave
their comfortable palace in Pelusium to accompany him to Alexandria,
where they possessed no home of their own, he would see how willingly
she obeyed him.

While speaking, her bright, clear eyes, which seemed to float in the
deep hollows sunk by age, sparkled so merrily in her wrinkled face that
Philippus shook his finger gaily at her and showed plainly how much
pleasure the jest of the old companion of his wanderings gave him.

Yet he insisted upon his purpose of not entering Alexandria again until
he had resigned his office, and to do this at present was impossible,
since he was bound just now, as if with chains, to the important
frontier fortress. Besides, there had probably been little change in the
capital since the death of his beloved old companion in arms and master,
the late King.

This assertion evoked a storm of contradiction, and even the younger
officers, who usually imposed severe restraint upon themselves in the
general's presence, raised their voices to prove that they, too, had
looked around the flourishing capital with open eyes.

Yet it was not six decades since Philippus, then a lad of seventeen, had
been present at its foundation.

His father, who had commanded as hipparch a division of cavalry in the
army of Alexander the Great, had sent for the sturdy youth just at that
time to come to Egypt, that he might enter the army. The conqueror
of the world had himself assigned him, as a young Macedonian of good
family, to the corps of the Hetairoi; and how the vigorous old man's
eyes sparkled as, with youthful enthusiasm, he spoke of the divine
vanquisher of the world who had at that time condescended to address
him, gazed at him keenly yet encouragingly with his all-discerning but
kindly blue eyes, and extended his hand to him!

"That," he cried, "made this rough right hand precious to me. Often
when, in Asia, in scorching India, and later here also, wounded or
exhausted, it was ready to refuse its service, a spirit voice within
cried, 'Do not forget that he touched it'; and then, as if I had drunk
the noble wine of Byblus, a fiery stream flowed from my heart into the
paralyzed hand, and, as though animated with new life, I used it again
and kept it worthy of his touch. To have seen a darling of the gods like
him, young men, makes us greater. It teaches us how even we human beings
are permitted to resemble the immortals. Now he is transported among the
gods, and the Olympians received him, if any one, gladly. Whoever shared
the deeds of such a hero takes a small portion of his renown with him
through life and into the grave, and whom he touched, as befell me,
feels himself consecrated, and whatever is petty and base flows away
from him like water from the anointed body of the wrestler. Therefore
I consider myself fortunate above thousands of others, and if there is
anything which still tempts me to go to Alexandria, it is the desire to
touch his dead body once more. To do that before I die is my most ardent
desire."

"Then gratify it!" cried Thyone with urgent impatience; but Proclus
turned to the matron, and, after exchanging a hasty glance with Althea,
said: "You probably know, my venerable friend, that Queen Arsinoe, who
most deeply honours your illustrious husband, had already arranged to
have him summoned to the capital as priest of Alexander. True, in this
position he would have had the burden of disposing of all the revenues
from the temples throughout Egypt; but, on the other hand, he would
always have his master's mortal remains near and be permitted to be
their guardian. What influences baffled the Queen's wish certainly have
not remained hidden from you here."

"You are mistaken," replied Philippus gravely. "Not the least whisper of
this matter reached my ears, and it is fortunate."

"Impossible!" Althea eagerly interrupted; "nothing else was talked of
for weeks in the royal palace. Queen Arsinoe--you might be jealous, Lady
Thyone--has been fairly in love with your hero ever since her last stay
in your house on her way home from Thrace, and she has not yet given up
her desire to see him in the capital as priest of Alexander. It seems
to her just and fair that the old companion of the greatest of the great
should have the highest place, next to her husband's, in the city
whose foundation he witnessed. Arsinoe speaks of you also with all the
affection natural to her feeling heart."

"This is as flattering as it is surprising," replied Thyone. "The
attention we showed her in Pelusium was nothing more than we owed to
the wife of the sovereign. But the court is not the principal attraction
that draws me to the capital. It would make Philippus happy--you have
just heard him say so--to remember his old master beside the tomb of
Alexander."

"And," added Daphne, "how amazed you will be when you see the present
form of the 'Soma', in which rests the golden coffin with the body
of the divine hero whom the fortunate Philippus aided to conquer the
world!"

"You are jesting," interrupted the old warrior. "I aided him only as the
drops in the stream help to turn the wheel of the mill. As to his body,
true, I marched at the head of the procession which bore it to Memphis
and thence to Alexandria. In the Soma I was permitted to think of him
with devout reverence, and meantime I felt as if I had again seen him
with these eyes--exactly as he looked in the Egyptian fishing village of
Rhacotis, which he transformed into your magnificent Alexandria. What
a youth he was! Even what would have been a defect in others became a
beauty in him. The powerful neck which supported his divine head was a
little crooked; but what grace it lent him when he turned kindly to
any one! One scarcely noticed it, and yet it was like the bend of a
petitioner, and gave the wish which he expressed resistless power. When
he stood erect, the sharpest eye could not detect it. Would that he
could appear before me thus once more! Besides, the buildings which
surrounded the golden coffin were nearly completed at the time of our
departure."

"But the statues, reliefs, and mosaic work were lacking," said Hermon.
"They were executed by Lysippus, Euphranor, and others of our greatest
artists; the paintings by Apelles himself, Antiphilus, and Nicias. Only
those who had won renown were permitted to take part in this work, and
the Ares rushing to battle, created by our Myrtilus, can be seen among
the others. The tomb of Alexander was not entirely completed until three
years ago."

"At the same time as the Paneum," added Philotas, completing the
sentence; and Althea, waving her beaker toward the old hero, remarked:
"When you have your quarters in the royal palace with your crowned
admirer, Arsinoe--which, I hope, will be very soon--I will be your
guide."

"That office is already bestowed on me by the Lady Thyone," Daphne
quietly replied.

"And you think that, in this case, obedience is the husband's duty?"
cried the other, with a sneering laugh.

"It would only be the confirmation of a wise choice," replied Philippus,
who disliked the Thracian's fawning manner.

Thyone, too, did not favour her, and had glanced indignantly at her when
Althea made her rude remark. Now she turned to Daphne, and her plain
face regained its pleasant expression as she exclaimed: "We really
promised your father to let him show us the way, child; but,
unfortunately, we are not yet in Alexandria and the Paneum."

"But you would set out to-morrow," Hermon protested, "if we could
succeed in fitly describing what now awaits you there. There is only one
Alexandria, and no city in the world can offer a more beautiful scene
than is visible from the mountain in the Paneum gardens."

"Certainly not," protested the young hipparch, who had studied in
Athens. "I stood on the Acropolis; I was permitted to visit Rhodes and
Miletus--"

"And you saw nothing more beautiful there," cried Proclus. "The
aristocratic Roman envoys, who left us a short time ago, admitted the
same thing. They are just men, for the view from the Capitol of their
growing city is also to be seen. When the King's command led me to the
Tiber, many things surprised me; but, as a whole, how shall I compare
the two cities? The older Rome, with her admirable military power:
a barbarian who is just beginning to cultivate more refined
manners--Alexandria: a rich, aristocratic Hellene who, like you, my
young friend, completed her education in Ilissus, and unites to
the elegant taste and intellect of the Athenian the mysterious
thoughtfulness of the Egyptian, the tireless industry of the Jew, and
the many-sided wisdom and brilliant magnificence of the other Oriental
countries."

"But who disdains to dazzle the eyes with Asiatic splendour,"
interrupted Philotas.

"And yet what do we not hear about the unprecedented luxury in the royal
palace!" growled the gray-haired warrior.

"Parsimony--the gods be praised!--no one need expect from our royal
pair," Althea broke in; "but King Ptolemy uses his paternal wealth for
very different purposes than glittering gems and golden chambers. If you
disdain my guidance, honoured hero, at least accept that of some genuine
Alexandrian. Then you will understand Proclus's apt simile. You ought to
begin with the royal palaces in the Brucheium."

"No, no-with the harbour of Eunostus!" interrupted the grammateus.

"With the Soma!" cried the young hipparch, while Daphne wished to have
the tour begin in the Paneum gardens.

"They were already laid out when we left Alexandria," said Thyone.

"And they have grown marvellously, as if creative Nature had doubled her
powers in their behalf," Hermon added eagerly. "But man has also wrought
amazing miracles here. Industrious hands reared an actual mountain. A
winding path leads to the top, and when you stand upon the summit and
look northward you at first feel like the sailor who steps on shore and
hears the people speak a language which is new to him. It seems like a
jumble of meaningless sounds until he learns, not only to understand
the words, but also to distinguish the sentences. Temples and palaces,
statues and columns appear everywhere in motley confusion. Each one,
if you separate it from the whole and give it a careful examination,
is worthy of inspection, nay, of admiration. Here are light, graceful
creations of Hellenic, yonder heavy, sombre ones of Egyptian art, and
in the background the exquisite azure of the eternal sea, which the
marvellous structure of the heptastadium unites to the land; while on
the island of Pharos the lighthouse of Sostratus towers aloft almost to
the sky, and with a flood of light points out the way to mariners who
approach the great harbour at night. Countless vessels are also at
anchor in the Eunostus. The riches of the whole earth flow into both
havens. And the life and movement there and in the inland harbour on
Lake Mareotis, where the Nile boats land! From early until late, what
a busy throng, what an abundance of wares--and how many of the most
valuable goods are made in our own city! for whatever useful, fine, and
costly articles industrial art produces are manufactured here. The roof
has not yet been put on many a factory in which busy workers are already
making beautiful things. Here the weaver's shuttle flies, yonder gold
is spun around slender threads of sheep guts, elsewhere costly materials
are embroidered by women's nimble fingers with the prepared gold thread.
There glass is blown, or weapons and iron utensils are forged. Finely
polished knives split the pith of the papyrus, and long rows of workmen
and workwomen gum the strips together. No hand, no head is permitted to
rest. In the Museum the brains of the great thinkers and investigators
are toiling. Here, too, reality asserts its rights. The time for
chimeras and wretched polemics is over. Now it is observing, fathoming,
turning to account, nothing more!"

"Gently, my young friend," Proclus interrupted the artist. "I know that
you, too, sat at the feet of some of the philosophers in the Museum,
and still uphold the teachings of Straton, which your fellow-pupil, King
Ptolemy, outgrew long ago. Yet he, also, recognised in philosophy, first
of all, the bond which unites the widely sundered acquisitions of the
intellect, the vital breath which pervades them, the touchstone which
proves each true or false. If the praise of Alexandria is to be sung,
we must not forget the library to which the most precious treasures of
knowledge of the East and West are flowing, and which feeds those who
thirst for knowledge with the intellectual gains of former ages and
other nations. Honour, too, to our King, and, that I may be just, to
his illustrious wife; for wherever in the Grecian world a friend of the
Muses appears, whether he is investigator, poet, architect, sculptor,
artist, actor, or singer, he is drawn to Alexandria, and, that he may
not be idle, work is provided. Palaces spring from the earth quickly
enough."

"Yet not like mushrooms," Hermon interrupted, "but as the noblest, most
carefully executed creations of art-sculpture and painting provide for
their decoration both without and within."

"And," Proclus went on, "abodes are erected for the gods as well as for
men, both Egyptian and Hellenic divinities, each in their own style, and
so beautiful that it must be a pleasure for them to dwell under the new
roof."

"Go to the gardens of the Paneum, friends!" cried young Philotas;
and Hermon, nodding to Thyone, added gaily: "Then you must climb the
mountain and keep your eyes open while you are ascending the winding
path. You will find enough to do to look at all the new sights. You
will stand there with dry feet, but your soul will bathe in eternal,
imperishable, divine beauty."

"The foe of beauty!" exclaimed Proclus, pointing to the sculptor with a
scornful glance; but Daphne, full of joyous emotion, whispered to Hermon
as he approached her: "Eternal, divine beauty! To hear it thus praised
by you makes me happy."

"Yes," cried the artist, "what else should I call what has so often
filled me with the deepest rapture? The Greek language has no more
fitting expression for the grand and lofty things that hovered before
me, and which I called by that chameleon of a word. Yet I have a
different meaning from what appears before you at its sound. Were I
to call it truth, you would scarcely understand me, but when I conjure
before my soul the image of Alexandria, with all that springs from it,
all that is moving, creating, and thriving with such marvellous freedom,
naturalness, and variety within it, it is not alone the beauty that
pleases the eye which delights me; I value more the sound natural
growth, the genuine, abundant life. To truth, Daphne, as I mean it."

He raised his goblet as he spoke and drank to her.

She willingly pledged him, but, after removing her lips from the cup,
she eagerly exclaimed: "Show it to us, with the mind which animates
it, in perfect form, and I should not know wherein it was to be
distinguished from the beauty which hitherto has been our highest goal."

Here the helmsman's loud shout, "The light of Pelusium!" interrupted
the conversation. The bright glare from the lighthouse of this city
was really piercing the misty night air, which for some time had again
concealed the moon.

There was no further connected conversation, for the sea was now rising
and falling in broad, leaden, almost imperceptible waves. The comfort of
most of Philippus's guests was destroyed, and the ladies uttered a sigh
of relief when they had descended from the lofty galley and the boats
that conveyed them ashore, and their feet once more pressed the solid
land. The party of travellers went to the commandant's magnificent
palace to rest, and Hermon also retired to his room, but sleep fled from
his couch.

No one on earth was nearer to his heart and mind than Daphne, and it
often seemed as if her kind, loyal, yet firm look was resting upon him;
but the memory of Ledscha also constantly forced itself upon his mind
and stirred his blood. When he thought of the menacing fire of her dark
eyes, she seemed to him as terrible as one of the unlovely creatures
born of Night, the Erinyes, Apate, and Eris.

Then he could not help recalling their meetings in the grove of Astarte,
her self-forgetting, passionate tenderness, and the wonderfully delicate
beauty of her foreign type. True, she had never laughed in his presence;
but what a peculiar charm there was in her smile! Had he really lost
her entirely and forever? Would it not yet be possible to obtain her
forgiveness and persuade her to pose as the model of his Arachne?

During the voyage to Pelusium he had caught Althea's eye again and
again, and rejected as an insult her demand to give her his whole love.
The success of the Arachne depended upon Ledscha, and on her alone. He
had nothing good to expect from the Demeter, and during the nocturnal
meditation, which shows everything in the darkest colours, his best plan
seemed to be to destroy the unsuccessful statue and not exhibit it for
the verdict of the judges.

But if he went to work again in Tennis to model the Arachne, did not
love for Daphne forbid him to sue afresh for Ledscha's favour?

What a terrible conflict of feelings!

But perhaps all this might gain a more satisfactory aspect by daylight.
Now he felt as though he had entangled himself in a snare. Besides,
other thoughts drove sleep from his couch.

The window spaces were closed by wooden shutters, and whenever they
moved with a low creaking or louder banging Hermon started and forgot
everything else in anxiety about his invalid friend, whose suffering
every strong wind brought on again, and often seriously increased.

Three times he sprang up from the soft wool, covered with linen sheets,
and looked out to convince himself that no storm had risen. But, though
masses of black clouds concealed the moon and stars, and the sea beat
heavily against the solid walls of the harbour, as yet only a sultry
breeze of no great strength blew on his head as he thrust it into the
night air.

This weather could scarcely be dangerous to Myrtilus, yet when the
morning relieved him from the torturing anxiety which he had found under
his host's roof instead of rest and sleep, gray and black clouds were
sweeping as swiftly over the port and the ramparts beside him as if they
were already driven by a tempest, and warm raindrops besprinkled his
face.

He went, full of anxiety, to take his bath, and, while committing the
care of the adornment of his outer man to one of the household slaves,
he determined that unless--as often happened in this country--the sun
gained the victory over the clouds, he would return to Tennis and join
Myrtilus.

In the hall of the men he met the rest of the old hero's guests.

They received him pleasantly enough, Althea alone barely noticed his
greeting; she seemed to suspect in what way he thought of her.

Thyone and Daphne extended their hands to him all the more cordially.

Philippus did not appear until after breakfast. He had been detained
by important despatches from Alexandria, and by questions and
communications from Proclus. The latter desired to ascertain whether
the influential warrior who commanded the most important fortress in
the country could be persuaded to join a conspiracy formed by Arsinoe
against her royal husband, but he seemed to have left Philippus with
very faint hopes.

Subordinate officers and messengers also frequently claimed the
commandant's attention. When the market place was filling, however, the
sturdy old soldier kindly fulfilled his duties as host by offering to
show his guests the sights of the fortified seaport.

Hermon also accompanied him at Daphne's side, but he made it easy for
Philotas to engross her attention; for, though the immense thickness of
the walls and the arrangement of the wooden towers which, crowned with
battlements, rose at long intervals, seemed to him also well worth
seeing, he gave them only partial attention.

While Philippus was showing the guests how safely the archers and
slingers could be concealed behind the walls and battlements and
discharge their missiles, and explaining the purpose of the great
catapults on the outermost dike washed by the sea, the artist was
listening to the ever-increasing roar of the waves which poured into
the harbour from the open sea, to their loud dashing against the strong
mole, to the shrill scream of the sea gulls, the flapping of the sails,
which were being taken in everywhere--in short, to all the sounds
occasioned by the rising violence of the wind.

There were not a few war ships in the port and among them perfect giants
of amazing size and unusual construction, but Hermon had already seen
many similar ones.

When, shortly after noon, the sun for a few brief moments pierced with
scorching rays the dark curtain that shrouded it from sight, and then
suddenly dense masses of clouds, driven from the sea by the tempest,
covered the day star, his eyes and cars were engrossed entirely by the
uproar of the elements.

The air darkened as if night was falling at this noontide hour, and with
savage fury the foaming mountain waves rushed like mad wild beasts in
fierce assault upon the mole, the walls, and the dikes of the fortified
port.

"Home!" cried Thyone, and again entered the litter which she had left to
inspect the new catapults.

Althea, trembling, drew her peplos together as the storm swept her light
figure before it, and, shrieking, struggled against the black slaves who
tried to lift her upon the war elephant which had borne her here.

Philotas gave his arm to Daphne. Hermon had ceased to notice her; he had
just gone to his gray-haired host with the entreaty that he would give
him a ship for the voyage to Tennis, where Myrtilus would need his
assistance.

"It is impossible in such weather," was the reply.

"Then I will ride!" cried Hermon resolutely, and Philippus scanned the
son of his old friend and companion in arms with an expression of
quiet satisfaction in his eyes, still sparkling brightly, and answered
quickly, "You shall have two horses, my boy, and a guide who knows the
road besides."

Then, turning swiftly to one of the officers who accompanied him, he
ordered him to provide what was necessary.

When, soon after, in the impluvium, the tempest tore the velarium that
covered the open space from its rings, and the ladies endeavoured to
detain Hermon, Philippus silenced them with the remark:

"A disagreeable ride is before him, but what urges him on is pleasing
to the gods. I have just ventured to send out a carrier dove," he added,
turning to the artist, "to inform Myrtilus that he may expect you before
sunset. The storm comes from the cast, otherwise it would hardly reach
the goal. Put even if it should be lost, what does it matter?"

Thyone nodded to her old husband with a look of pleasure, and her eyes
shone through tears at Hermon as she clasped his hand and, remembering
her friend, his mother, exclaimed: "Go, then, you true son of your
father, and tell your friend that we will offer sacrifices for his
welfare."

"A lean chicken to Aesculapius," whispered the grammateus to Althea.
"She holds on to the oboli."

"Which, at any rate, would be hard enough to dispose of in this wretched
place unless one were a dealer in weapons or a thirsty sailor," sighed
the Thracian. "As soon as the sky and sea are blue again, chains could
not keep me here. And the cooing around this insipid rich beauty into
the bargain!"

This remark referred to Philotas, who was just offering Daphne a
magnificent bunch of roses, which a mounted messenger had brought to him
from Alexandria.

The girl received it with a grateful glance, but she instantly separated
one of the most beautiful blossoms from its companions and handed it
to Hermon, saying, "For our suffering friend, with my affectionate
remembrances."

The artist pressed her dear hand with a tender look of love, intended
to express how difficult it was for him to leave her, and when, just
at that moment, a slave announced that the horses were waiting, Thyone
whispered: "Have no anxiety, my son! Your ride away from her through the
tempest will bring you a better reward than his slave's swift horse will
bear the giver of the roses."




CHAPTER XVI.

Hermon, with the rose for his friend fastened in the breast folds of
his chiton, mounted his horse gratefully, and his companion, a sinewy,
bronzed Midianite, who was also to attend to the opening of the fortress
gates, did the same.

Before reaching the open country the sculptor had to ride through the
whole city, with which he was entirely unfamiliar. Fiercely as the storm
was sweeping down the streets and squares, and often as the horseman
was forced to hold on to his travelling hat and draw his chlamys closer
around him, he felt the anxieties which had made his night sleepless
and saddened his day suddenly leave him as if by a miracle. Was it the
consciousness of having acted rightly? was it the friendly farewell
which Daphne had given him, and the hope Thyone had aroused, or the
expectation of seeing Ledscha once more, and at least regaining her
good will, that had restored his lost light-heartedness? He did not know
himself, nor did he desire to know.

While formerly he had merely glanced carelessly about him in Pelusium,
and only half listened to the explanations given by the veteran's deep
voice, now whatever he saw appeared in clear outlines and awakened his
interest, in spite of the annoyances caused by the storm.

Had he not known that he was in Pelusium, it would have been difficult
for him to determine whether the city he was crossing was an Egyptian,
a Hellenic, or a Syrian one; for here rose an ancient temple of the time
of the Pharaohs, with obelisks and colossal statues before the lofty
pylons, yonder the sanctuary of Poseidon, surrounded by stately rows
of Doric columns, and farther on the smaller temple dedicated to the
Dioscuri, and the circular Grecian building that belonged to Aphrodite.

In another spot, still close to the harbour, he saw the large buildings
consecrated to the worship of the Syrian Baal and Astarte.

Here he was obliged to wait awhile, for the tempest had excited the war
elephants which were returning from their exercising ground, and their
black keepers only succeeded with the utmost difficulty in restraining
them. Shrieking with fear, the few persons who were in the street
besides the soldiers, that were everywhere present, scattered before the
huge, terrified animals.

The costume and appearance of the citizens, too, gave no clew to the
country to which the place belonged; there were as many Egyptians among
them as Greeks, Syrians, and negroes. Asiatics appeared in the majority
only in the market place, where the dealers were just leaving their
stands to secure their goods from the storm. In front of the big
building where the famous Pelusinian xythus beer was brewed, the
drink was being carried away in jugs and wineskins, in ox-carts and on
donkeys. Here, too, men were loading camels, which were rarely seen in
Egypt, and had been introduced there only a short time before.

How forcibly all these things riveted Hermon's attention, now that no
one was at hand to explain them and no delay was permitted! He scarcely
had time for recollection and expectation.

Finally, the last gate was unlocked, and the ramparts and moats lay
behind him.

Thus far the wind had kept back the rain, and only scattered drops
lashed the riders' faces; but as soon as they entered the open country,
it seemed as though the pent-up floods burst the barriers which retained
them above, and a torrent of water such as only those dry regions know
rushed, not in straight or slanting lines, but in thick streams, whirled
by the hurricane, upon the marshy land which stretched from Pelusium to
Tennis, and on the horsemen.

The road led along a dike raised above fields which, at this season of
the year, were under water, and Hermon's companion knew it well.

For a time both riders allowed themselves to be drenched in silence.
The water ran down upon them from their broad-brimmed hats, and their
dripping horses trotted with drooping heads and steaming flanks one
behind the other until, at the very brick-kiln where Ledscha had
recalled her widowed sister's unruly slaves to obedience, the guide
stopped with an oath, and pointed to the water which had risen to the
top of the dam, and in some places concealed the road from their eyes.

Now it was no longer possible to trot, for the guide was obliged to seek
the traces of the dike with great caution. Meanwhile the force of the
pouring rain by no means lessened--nay, it even seemed to increase--and
the horses were already wading in water up to their fetlocks.

But if the votive stones, the little altars and statues of the gods, the
bushes and single trees along the sides of the dike road were overflowed
while the travellers were in the region of the marsh, they would be
obliged to interrupt their journey, for the danger of sinking into the
morass with their horses would then threaten them.

Even at the brick-kiln travellers, soldiers, and trains of merchandise
had stopped to wait for the end of the cloud-burst.

In front of the farmhouse, too, which Hermon and his companion next
reached, they saw dozens of people seeking shelter, and the Midianite
urged his master to join them for a short time at least. The wisest
course here was probably to yield, and Hermon was already turning his
horse's head toward the house when a Greek messenger dashed past the
beckoning refuge and also by him.

"Do you dare to ride farther?" the artist shouted in a tone of warning
inquiry to the man on the dripping bay, and the latter, without pausing,
answered: "Duty! On business for the King!"

Then Hermon turned his steed back toward the road, beat the water from
his soaked beard with the edge of his hand, and with a curt "Forward!"
announced his decision to his companion. Duty summoned him also, and
what another risked for the King he would not fail to do for his friend.

The Midianite, shaking his head, rode angrily after him; but, though
the violence of the rain was lessening, the wind began to blow with
redoubled force, beating and lashing the boundless expanse of the
quickly formed lake with such savage fury that it rolled in surges like
the sea, and sweeping over it dense clouds of foam like the sand waves
tossed by the desert tempests.

Sometimes moaning, sometimes whistling, the gusts of the hurricane drove
the water and the travellers before it, while the rain poured from the
sky to the earth, and wherever it struck splashed upward, making little
whirlpools and swiftly breaking bubbles.

What might not Myrtilus suffer in this storm! This thought strengthened
Hermon's courage to twice ride past other farmhouses which offered
shelter. At the third the horse refused to wade farther in such a
tempest, so there was nothing to be done except spring off and lead it
to the higher ground which the water had not yet reached.

The interior of the peasant hut was filled with people who had sought
shelter there, and the stifling atmosphere which the artist felt at the
door induced him to remain outside.

He had stood there dripping barely fifteen minutes when loud shouts and
yells were heard on the road from Pelusium by which he had come, and
upon the flooded dike appeared a body of men rushing forward with
marvellous speed.

The nearer they came the fiercer and more bewildering sounded the loud,
shrill medley of their frantic cries, mingled with hoarse laughter, and
the spectacle presented to the eyes was no less rough and bold.

The majority seemed to be powerful men. Their complexions were as
light as the Macedonians; their fair, red, and brown locks were thick,
unkempt, and bristling. Most of the reckless, defiantly bold faces were
smooth-shaven, with only a mustache on the upper lip, and sometimes a
short imperial. All carried weapons, and a fleece covered the shoulders
of many, while chains, ornamented with the teeth of animals, hung on
their white muscular chests.

"Galatians," Hermon heard one man near him call to another. "They came
to the fortress as auxiliary troops. Philippus forbade them to plunder
on pain of death, and showed them--the gods be thanked!--that he was
in earnest. Otherwise it would soon look here as though the plagues of
locusts, flood, and fire had visited us at once. Red-haired men are not
the only sons of Typhon!"

And Hermon thought that he had indeed never seen any human beings
equally fierce, bold to the verge of reckless madness, as these Gallic
warriors. The tempest which swept them forward, and the water through
which they waded, only seemed to increase their enjoyment, for sheer
delight rang in their exulting shouts and yells.

Oh, yes! To march amid this uproar of the elements was a pleasure to the
healthy men. It afforded them the rarest, most enlivening delight. For
a long time nothing had so strongly reminded them of the roaring of the
wind and the rushing of the rain in their northern home. It seemed a
delicious relief, after the heat and dryness of the south, which they
had endured with groans.

When they perceived the eyes fixed upon them they swung their weapons,
arched their breasts with conscious vanity, distorted their faces into
terrible threatening grimaces, or raised bugle horns to their lips, drew
from them shrill, ear-piercing notes and gloated, with childish delight,
in the terror of the gaping crowd, on whom the restraint of authority
sternly forbade them to show their mettle.

Lust of rapine and greed for booty glittered in many a fiery, longing
look, but their leaders kept them in check with the sword. So
they rushed on without stopping, like a thunderstorm pregnant with
destruction which the wind drives over a terrified village.

Hermon also had to take the road they followed, and, after giving the
Gauls a long start, he set out again.

But though he succeeded in passing the marshy region without injury,
there had been delay after delay; here the horses had left the flooded
dike road and floundered up to their knees in the morass, there trees
from the roadside, uprooted by the storm, barred the way.

As night closed in the rain ceased and the wind began to subside, but
dark clouds covered the sky, and the horsemen were still an hour's ride
from the place where the road ended at the little harbour from which
travellers entered the boat which conveyed them to Tennis.

The way no longer led through the marsh, but through tilled lands, and
crossed the ditches which irrigated the fields on wooden bridges.

On their account, in the dense darkness which prevailed, caution was
necessary, and this the guide certainly did not lack. He rode at a slow
walk in front of the artist, and had just pointed out to him the light
at the landing place of the boat which went to Tennis, when Hermon was
suddenly startled by a loud cry, followed by clattering and splashing.

With swift presence of mind he sprang from his horse and found his
conjecture verified. The bridge had broken down, and horse and rider had
fallen into the broad canal.

"The Galatians!" reached Hermon from the dark depths, and the
exclamation relieved him concerning the fate of the Midianite.

The latter soon struggled up to the road uninjured. The bridge must
have given way under the feet of the savage horde, unless the Gallic
monsters, with brutal malice, had intentionally shattered it.

The first supposition, however, seemed to be the correct one, for as
Hermon approached the canal he heard moans of pain. One of the Gauls
had apparently met with an accident in the fall of the bridge and been
deserted by his comrades. With the skill acquired in the wrestling
school, Hermon descended into the canal to look for the wounded man,
while his guide undertook to get the horses ashore.

The deep darkness considerably increased the difficulty of carrying out
his purpose, but the young Greek went up to his neck in the water he
could not become wetter than he was already. So he remained in the ditch
until he found the injured man whose groans of suffering pierced his
compassionate heart.

He was obliged to release the luckless Gaul from the broken timbers of
the bridge, and, when Hermon had dragged him out on the opposite bank
of the canal, he made no answer to any question. A falling beam had
probably struck him senseless.

His hair, which Hermon's groping fingers informed him was thick and
rough, seemed to denote a Gaul, but a full, long beard was very rarely
seen in this nation, and the wounded man wore one. Nor could anything be
discovered from the ornaments or weapons of this fierce barbarian.

But to whatever people he might belong, he certainly was not a Greek.
The thoroughly un-Hellenic wrapping up of the legs proved that.

No matter! Hermon at any rate was dealing with some one who was severely
injured, and the self-sacrificing pity with which even suffering animals
inspired him, and which in his boyhood had drawn upon him the jeers of
the companions of his own age, did not abandon him now.

Reluctantly obeying his command, the Midianite helped him bandage the
sufferer's head, in which a wound could be felt, as well as it could be
done in the darkness, and lift him on the artist's horse. During this
time fresh groans issued from the bearded lips of the injured warrior,
and Hermon walked by his side, guarding the senseless man from the
danger of falling from the back of the horse as it slowly followed the
Midianite's.

This tiresome walk, however, did not last long; the landing place
was reached sooner than Hermon expected, and the ferryboat bore the
travellers and the horses to Tennis.

By the flickering light of the captain's lantern it was ascertained that
the wounded man, in spite of his long dark beard, was probably a Gaul.
The stupor was to be attributed to the fall of a beam on his head, and
the shock, rather than to the wound. The great loss of blood sustained
by the young and powerful soldier had probably caused the duration of
the swoon.

During the attempts at resuscitation a sailor boy offered his
assistance. He carefully held the lantern, and, as its flickering light
fell for brief moments upon the artist's face, the lad of thirteen or
fourteen asked if he was Hermon of Alexandria.

A curt "If you will permit," answered the question, considered by the
Hellenes an unseemly one, especially from such a youth; but the sculptor
paid no further attention to him, for, while devoting himself honestly
to the wounded man, his anxiety about his invalid friend increased, and
Ledscha's image also rose again before him.

At last the ferryboat touched the land, and when Hermon looked around
for the lad he had already leaped ashore, and was just vanishing in the
darkness.

It was probably within an hour of midnight.

The gale was still blowing fiercely over the water, driving the black
clouds across the dark sky, sometimes with long-drawn, wailing sounds,
sometimes with sharp, whistling ones. The rain had wholly ceased, and
seemed to have exhausted itself here in the afternoon.

As Archias's white house was a considerable distance from the landing
place of the ferryboat, Hermon had the wounded warrior carried to it by
Biamite sailors, and again mounted his horse to ride to Myrtilus at as
swift a trot as the soaked, wretched, but familiar road would permit.

Considerable time had been spent in obtaining a litter for the Gaul, yet
Hermon was surprised to meet the lad who had questioned him so boldly on
the ferryboat coming, not from the landing place, but running toward
it again from the city, and then saw him follow the shore, carrying a
blazing torch, which he waved saucily. The wind blew aside the flame and
smoke which came from the burning pitch, but it shone brightly through
the gloom and permitted the boy to be distinctly seen. Whence had the
nimble fellow come so quickly? How had he succeeded, in this fierce
gale, in kindling the torch so soon into a powerful flame? Was it not
foolish to let a child amuse itself in the middle of the night with so
dangerous a toy?

Hermon hastily thought over these questions, but the supposition that
the light of the torch might be intended for a signal did not occur to
him.

Besides, the boy and the light in his hand occupied his mind only a
short time. He had better things to think of. With what longing Myrtilus
must now be expecting his arrival! But the Gaul needed his aid no less
urgently than his friend. Accurately as he knew what remedies relieved
Myrtilus in severe attacks of illness, he could scarcely dispense with
an assistant or a leech for the other, and the idea swiftly flashed
upon him that the wounded man would afford him an opportunity of seeing
Ledscha again.

She had told him more than once about the healing art possessed by old
Tabus on the Owl's Nest. Suppose he should now seek the angry girl to
entreat her to speak to the aged miracle-worker in behalf of the sorely
wounded young foreigner?

Here he interrupted himself; something new claimed his attention.

A dim light glimmered through the intense darkness from a bit of rising
ground by the wayside. It came from the Temple of Nemesis--a pretty
little structure belonging to the time of Alexander the Great, which
he had often examined with pleasure. Several steps led to the anteroom,
supported by Ionic columns, which adjoined the naos.

Two lamps were burning at the side of the door leading into the little
open cella, and at the back of the consecrated place the statue of the
winged goddess was visible in the light of a small altar fire.

In her right hand she held the bridle and scourge, and at her feet stood
the wheel, whose turning indicates the influence exerted by her power
upon the destiny of mortals. With stern severity that boded evil, she
gazed down upon her left forearm, bent at the elbow, which corresponds
with the ell, the just measure.

Hermon certainly now, if ever, lacked both time and inclination to
examine again this modest work of an ordinary artist, yet he quickly
stopped his weary horse; for in the little pronaos directly in front of
the cella door stood a slender figure clad in a long floating dark robe,
extending its hands through the cella door toward the statue in fervent
prayer. She was pressing her brow against the left post of the door,
but at her feet, on the right side, cowered another figure, which could
scarcely be recognised as a human being.

This, too, was a woman.

Deeply absorbed in her own thoughts, she was also extending her arms
toward the statue of Nemesis.

Hermon knew them both.

At first he fancied that his excited imagination was showing him a
threatening illusion. But no!

The erect figure was Ledscha, the crouching one Gula, the sailor's wife
whose child he had rescued from the flames, and who had recently been
cast out by her husband.

"Ledscha!" escaped his lips in a muttered tone, and he involuntarily
extended his hands toward her as she was doing toward the goddess.

But she did not seem to hear him, and the other woman also retained the
same attitude, as if hewn from stone.

Then he called the supplicant's name loud tone, and the next instant
still more loudly; and now she turned, and, in the faint light of the
little lamp, showed the marvellously noble outlines of her profile. He
called again, and this time Ledscha heard anguished yearning in his deep
tones; but they seemed to have lost their influence over her, for her
large dark eyes gazed at him so repellently and sternly that a cold
tremor ran down his spine.

Swinging himself from his horse, he ascended the steps of the temple,
and in the most tender tones at his command exclaimed: "Ledscha!
Severely as I have offended you, Ledscha--oh, do not say no! Will you
hear me?"

"No!" she answered firmly, and, before he could speak, continued: "This
place is ill chosen for another meeting! Your presence is hateful to me!
Do not disturb me a moment longer!"

"As you command," he began hesitatingly; but she swiftly interrupted
with the question, "Do you come from Pelusium, and are you going
directly home?"

"I did not heed the storm on account of Myrtilus's illness," he answered
quietly, "and if you demand it, I will return home at once; but first
let me make one more entreaty, which will be pleasing also to the gods."

"Get your response from yonder deity!" she impatiently interrupted,
pointing with a grand, queenly gesture, which at any other time would
have delighted his artist eye, to the statue of Nemesis in the cella.

Meanwhile Gula had also turned her face toward Hermon, and he now
addressed her, saying with a faint tone of reproach: "And did hatred
lead you also, Gula, to this sanctuary at midnight to implore the
goddess to destroy me in her wrath?"

The young mother rose and pointed to Ledscha, exclaiming, "She desires
it."

"And I?" he asked gently. "Have I really done you so much evil?"

She raised her hand to her brow as if bewildered; her glance fell on the
artist's troubled face, and lingered there for a short time. Then her
eyes wandered to Ledscha, and from her to the goddess, and finally back
again to the sculptor. Meanwhile Hermon saw how her young figure was
trembling, and, before he had time to address a soothing-word to her,
she sobbed aloud, crying out to Ledscha: "You are not a mother! My
child, he rescued it from the flames. I will not, and I can not--I will
no longer pray for his misfortune!"

She drew her veil over her pretty, tear-stained face as she spoke, and
darted lightly down the temple steps close beside him to seek shelter
in her parents' house, which had been unwillingly opened to the cast-off
wife, but now afforded her a home rich in affection.

Immeasurably bitter scorn was depicted in Ledscha's features as she
gazed after Gula. She did not appear to notice Hermon, and when at last
he appealed to her and briefly urged her to ask the old enchantress
on the Owl's Nest for a remedy for the wounded Gaul, she again leaned
against the post of the cella door, extended both arms with passionate
fervour toward the goddess, and remained standing there motionless, deaf
to his petition.

His blood seethed in his veins, and he was tempted to go nearer and
force her to hear him; but before he had ascended the first of the
flight of steps leading to the pronaos, he heard the footsteps of the
men who were bearing the wounded warrior after him.

They must not see him here with one of their countrywomen at this hour,
and manly pride forbade him to address her again as a supplicant.

So he went back to the road, mounted his horse, and rode on without
vouchsafing a word of farewell to the woman who was invoking destruction
upon his head. As he did so his eyes again rested on the stern face of
Nemesis, and the wheel whose turning determined the destiny of men at
her feet.

Assailed by horrible fears, and overpowered by presentiments of evil, he
pursued his way through the darkness.

Perhaps Myrtilus had succumbed to the terrible attack which must have
visited him in such a storm, and life without his friend would be
bereft of half its charm. Orphaned, poor, a struggler who had gained no
complete victory, it had been rich only in disappointments to him, in
spite of his conviction that he was a genuine artist, and was fighting
for a good cause. Now he knew that he had also lost the woman by whose
assistance he was certain of a great success in his own much-disputed
course, and Ledscha, if any one, was right in expecting a favourable
hearing from the goddess who punished injustice.

He did not think of Daphne again until he was approaching the place
where her tents had stood, and the remembrance of her fell like a ray of
light into his darkened soul.

Yet on that spot had also been erected the wooden platform from which
Althea had showed him the transformation into the spider, and the
recollection of the foolish error into which the Thracian had drawn him
disagreeably clouded the pleasant thought of Daphne.




CHAPTER XVII.

Complete darkness enfolded the white house. Hermon saw only two windows
lighted, the ones in his friend's studio, which looked out into the open
square, while his own faced the water.

What did this mean?

It must be nearly midnight, and he could no longer expect Myrtilus to be
still at work. He had supposed that he should find him in his chamber,
supported by his slaves, struggling for breath. What was the meaning of
the light in the workrooms now?

Where was his usually efficient Bias? He never went to rest when his
master was to return home, yet the carrier dove must have announced his
coming!

But Hermon had also enjoined the care of Myrtilus upon the slave, and he
was undoubtedly beside the sufferer's couch, supporting him in the same
way that he had often seen his master.

He was now riding across the open space, and he heard the men who
carried the Gaul talking close behind him.

Was the wounded barbarian the sole acquisition of this journey?

The beat of his horse's hoofs and the voices of the Biamites echoed
distinctly enough amid the stillness of the night, which was interrupted
only by the roaring of the wind. And this disturbance of the deep
silence around had entered the lighted windows before him, for a figure
appeared at one of them, and--could he believe his own eyes?--Myrtilus
looked down into the square, and a joyous welcome rang from his lips as
loudly as in his days of health.

The darkness of the night suddenly seemed to Hermon to be illumined.
A leap to the ground, two bounds up the steps leading to the house,
an eager rush through the corridor that separated him from the room in
which Myrtilus was, the bursting instead of opening of the door, and, as
if frantic with happy surprise, he impetuously embraced his friend, who,
burin and file in hand, was just approaching the threshold, and kissed
his brow and cheeks in the pure joy of his heart.

Then what questions, answers, tidings! In spite of the torrents of rain
and the gale, the invalid's health had been excellent. The solitude had
done him good. He knew nothing about the carrier dove. The hurricane had
probably "blown it away," as the breeders of the swift messengers said.

Question and reply now followed one another in rapid succession, and
both were soon acquainted with everything worth knowing; nay, Hermon had
even delivered Daphne's rose to his friend, and informed him what had
befallen the Gaul who was being brought into the house.

Bias and the other slaves had quickly appeared, and Hermon soon rendered
the wounded man the help he needed in an airy chamber in the second
story of the house, which, owing to the heat that prevailed in summer so
close under the roof, the slaves had never occupied.

Bias assisted his master with equal readiness and skill, and at last the
Gaul opened his eyes and, in the language of his country, asked a
few brief questions which were incomprehensible to the others. Then,
groaning, he again closed his lids.

Hitherto Hermon had not even allowed himself time to look around his
friend's studio and examine what he had created during his absence. But,
after perceiving that his kind act had not been in vain, and consuming
with a vigorous appetite the food and wine which Bias set before him,
he obliged Myrtilus--for another day was coming--to go to rest, that the
storm might not still prove hurtful to him.

Yet he held his friend's hand in a firm clasp for a long time, and,
when the latter at last prepared to go, he pressed it so closely that
it actually hurt Myrtilus. But he understood his meaning, and, with a
loving glance that sank deep into Hermon's heart, called a last good
night.

After two sleepless nights and the fatiguing ride which he had just
taken, the sculptor felt weary enough; but when he laid his hand on the
Gaul's brow and breast, and felt their burning heat, he refused Bias's
voluntary offer to watch the sufferer in his place.

If to amuse or forget himself he had caroused far more nights in
succession in Alexandria, why should he not keep awake when the object
in question was to wrest a young life from the grasp of death? This man
and his life were now his highest goal, and he had never yet repented
his foolish eccentricity of imposing discomforts upon himself to help
the suffering.

Bias, on his part, was very willing to go to rest. He had plenty of
cause for weariness; Myrtilus's unscrupulous body-servant had stolen
off with the other slaves the night before, and did not return, with
staggering gait, until the next morning, but, in order to keep his
promise to his master, he had scarcely closed his eyes, that he might be
at hand if Myrtilus should need assistance.

So Bias fell asleep quickly enough in his little room in the lower
story, while his master, by the exertion of all his strength of will,
watched beside the couch of the Gaul.

Yet, after the first quarter of an hour, his head, no matter how he
struggled to prevent it, drooped again and again upon his breast. But
just as slumber was completely overpowering him his patient made him
start up, for he had left his bed, and when Hermon, fully roused, looked
for him, was standing in the middle of the room, gazing about him.

The artist thought that fever had driven the wounded warrior from his
couch, as it formerly did his fellow-pupil Lycon, whom, in the delirium
of typhus, he could keep in bed only by force. So he led the Gaul
carefully back to the couch he had deserted, and, after moistening the
bandage with healing balm from Myrtilus's medicine chest, ordered him to
keep quiet.

The barbarian yielded as obediently as a child, but at first remained in
a sitting posture and asked, in scarcely intelligible broken Greek, how
he came to this place.

After Hermon had satisfied his curiosity, he also put a few questions,
and learned that his charge not only wore a mustache, like his fellow
countrymen, but also a full beard, because the latter was the badge of
the bridge builders, to which class he belonged. While examining the one
crossing the canal, it had fallen in upon him.

He closed his eyes as he spoke, and Hermon wondered if it was not time
for him to lie down also; but the wounded man's brow was still burning,
and the Gallic words which he constantly muttered were probably about
the phantoms of fever, which Hermon recognised from Lycon's illness.

So he resolved to wait and continue to devote the night, which he had
already intended to give him, to the sufferer. From the chair at the
foot of the bed he looked directly into his face. The soft light of the
lamp, which with two others hung from a tall, heavy bronze stand in the
shape of an anchor, which Bias had brought, shone brightly enough to
allow him to perceive how powerful was the man whose life he had saved.
His own face was scarcely lighter in hue than the barbarian's, and how
sharp was the contrast between his long, thick black beard and his white
face and bare arched chest!

Hermon had noticed this same contrast in his own person. Otherwise the
Gaul did not resemble him in a single feature, and he might even have
refused to compare his soft, wavy beard with the harsh, almost bristly
one of the barbarian. And what a defiant, almost evil expression his
countenance wore when--perhaps because his wound ached--he closed his
lips more firmly! The children who so willingly let him, Hermon, take
them in his arms would certainly have been afraid of this savage-looking
fellow.

Yet in build, and at any rate in height and breadth of shoulders, there
was some resemblance between him and the Gaul.

As a bridge builder, the injured man belonged, in a certain sense, to
the ranks of the artists, and this increased Hermon's interest in his
patient, who was now probably out of the most serious danger.

True, the Greek still cast many a searching glance at the barbarian,
but his eyes closed more and more frequently, and at last the idea took
possession of him that he himself was the wounded man on the couch, and
some one else, who again was himself, was caring for him.

He vainly strove to understand the impossibility of this division of
his own being, but the more eagerly he did so the greater became his
bewilderment.

Suddenly the scene changed; Ledscha had appeared.

Bending over him, she lavished words of love; but when, in passionate
excitement, he sprang from the couch to draw her toward him, she changed
into the Nemesis to whose statue she had just prayed.

He stood still as if petrified, and the goddess, too, did not stir. Only
the wheel which had rested at her feet began to move, and rolled, with
a thundering din, sometimes around him, sometimes around the people
who, as if they had sprung from the ground, formed a jeering company of
spectators, and clapped their hands, laughed, and shouted whenever it
rolled toward him and he sprang back in fear.

Meanwhile the wheel constantly grew larger, and seemed to become
heavier, for the wooden beams over which it rolled splintered, crashing
like thin laths, and the spectators' shouts of applause sounded ruder
and fiercer.

Then mortal terror suddenly seized him, and while he shouted for help
to Myrtilus, Daphne, and her father Archias, his slave Bias, the old
comrade of Alexander, Philippus, and his wife, he awoke, bathed in
perspiration, and looked about him.

But he must still be under the spell of the horrible dream, for the
rattling and clattering around him continued, and the bed where the
wounded Gaul had lain was empty.

Hermon involuntarily dipped his hand into the water which stood ready to
wet the bandages, and sprinkled his own face with it; but if he had ever
beheld life with waking eyes, he was doing so now. Yet the barbarian had
vanished, and the noise in the house still continued.

Was it possible that rats and mice--? No! That was the shriek of a
terrified human being--that a cry for help! This sound was the imperious
command of a rough man's voice, that--no, he was not mistaken--that
was his own name, and it came from the lips of his Myrtilus, anxiously,
urgently calling for assistance.

Then he suddenly realized that the white house had been attacked,
that his friend must be rescued from robbers or the fury of a mob of
Biamites, and, like the bent wood of a projectile when released from the
noose which holds it to the ground, the virile energy that characterized
him sprang upward with mighty power. The swift glance that swept the
room was sent to discover a weapon, and before it completed the circuit
Hermon had already grasped the bronze anchor with the long rod twined
with leaves and the teeth turned downward. Only one of the three little
vessels filled with oil that hung from it was burning. Before swinging
the heavy standard aloft, he freed it from the lamps, which struck the
floor with a clanging noise.

The man to whom he dealt a blow with this ponderous implement would
forget to rise. Then, as if running for a prize in the gymnasium, he
rushed through the darkness to the staircase, and with breathless haste
groped his way down the narrow, ladderlike steps. He felt himself an
avenging, punishing power, like the Nemesis who had pursued him in his
dreams. He must wrest the friend who was to him the most beloved of
mortals from the rioters. To defeat them himself seemed a small matter.
His shout--"I am coming, Myrtilus! Snuphis, Bias, Dorcas, Syrus! here,
follow me!" was to summon the old Egyptian doorkeeper and the slaves,
and inform his friend of the approach of a deliverer.

The loudest uproar echoed from his own studio. Its door stood wide open,
and black smoke, mingled with the deep red and yellow flames of burning
pitch, poured from it toward him.

"Myrtilus!" he shouted at the top of his voice as he leaped across the
threshold into the tumult which filled the spacious apartment, at the
same time clashing the heavy iron anchor down upon the head of the
broad-shouldered, half-naked fellow who was raising a clumsy lance
against him.

The pirate fell as though struck by lightning, and he again shouted
"Myrtilus!" into the big room, so familiar to him, where the conflict
was raging chaotically amid a savage clamour, and the smoke did not
allow him to distinguish a single individual.

For the second time he swung the terrible weapon, and it struck to the
floor the monster with a blackened face who had rushed toward him, but
at the same time the anchor broke in two.

Only a short metal rod remained in his hand, and, while he raised his
arm, determined to crush the temples of the giant carrying a torch who
sprang forward to meet him, it suddenly seemed as if a vulture with
glowing plumage and burning beak was attacking his face, and the
terrible bird of prey was striking its hard, sharp, red-hot talons more
and more furiously into his lips, cheeks, and eyes.

At first a glare as bright as sunshine had flashed before his gaze;
then, where he had just seen figures and things half veiled by the
smoke, he beheld only a scarlet surface, which changed to a violet, and
finally a black spot, followed by a violet-blue one, while the vulture
continued to rend his face with beak and talons.

Then the name "Myrtilus!" once more escaped his lips; this time,
however, it did not sound like the encouraging shout of an avenging
hero, but the cry for aid of one succumbing to defeat, and it was soon
followed by a succession of frantic outbursts of suffering, terror, and
despair.

But now sharp whistles from the water shrilly pierced the air and
penetrated into the darkened room, and, while the tumult around Hermon
gradually died away, he strove, tortured by burning pain, to grope his
way toward the door; but here his foot struck against a human body,
there against something hard, whose form he could not distinguish, and
finally a large object which felt cool, and could be nothing but his
Demeter.

But she seemed doomed to destruction, for the smoke was increasing every
moment, and constantly made his open wounds smart more fiercely.

Suddenly a cooler air fanned his burning face, and at the same time he
heard hurrying steps approach and the mingled cries of human voices.

Again he began to shout the names of his friends, the slaves, and the
porter; but no answer came from any of them, though hasty questions in
the Greek language fell upon his ear.

The strategist, with his officers, the nomarch of the district with his
subordinates, and many citizens of Tennis had arrived. Hermon knew most
of them by their voices, but their figures were not visible. The red,
violet, and black cloud before him was all he could see.

Yet, although the pain continued to torture him, and a voice in his soul
told him that he was blinded, he did not allow the government officials
who eagerly surrounded him to speak, only pointed hastily to his eyes,
and then bade them enter Myrtilus's studio. The Egyptian Chello, the
Tennis goldsmith, who had assisted the artists in the preparation of the
noble metal, and one of the police officers who had been summoned to rid
the old house of the rats and mice which infested it, both knew the way.

They must first try to save Myrtilus's work and, when that was
accomplished, preserve his also from destruction by the flames.

Leaning on the goldsmith's arm, Hermon went to his friend's studio; but
before they reached it smoke and flames poured out so densely that it
was impossible even to gain the door.

"Destroyed--a prey to the flames!" he groaned. "And he--he--he--"

Then like a madman he asked if no one had seen Myrtilus, and where he
was; but in vain, always in vain.

At last the goldsmith who was leading him asked him to move aside, for
all who had flocked to the white house when it was seized by the flames
had joined in the effort to save the statue of Demeter, which they had
found unharmed in his studio.

Seventeen men, by the exertion of all their strength, were dragging the
heavy statue from the house, which was almost on the point of falling
in, into the square. Several others were bearing corpses into the open
air-the old porter Snuphis and Myrtilus's body servant. Some motionless
forms they were obliged to leave behind. Both the bodies had deep
wounds. There was no trace of Myrtilus and Bias.

Outside the storm had subsided, and a cool breeze blew refreshingly into
Hermon's face. As he walked arm in arm with the notary Melampus, who had
invited him to his house, and heard some one at his side exclaim, "How
lavishly Eos is scattering her roses to-day!" he involuntarily lifted
the cloth with which he had covered his smarting face to enjoy the
beautiful flush of dawn, but again beheld nothing save a black and
violet-blue surface.

Then drawing his hand from his guide's arm, he pressed it upon his poor,
sightless, burning eyes, and in helpless rage, like a beast of prey
which feels the teeth of the hunter's iron trap rend his flesh, groaned
fiercely, "Blind! blind!" and again, and yet again, "Blind!"

While the morning star was still paling, the lad who after Hermon's
landing had raced along the shore with the burning torch glided into the
little pronaos of the Temple of Nemesis.

Ledscha was still standing by the doorpost of the cella with uplifted
hand, so deeply absorbed in fervent prayer that she did not perceive the
approach of the messenger until he called her.

"Succeeded?" she asked in a muffled tone, interrupting his hasty
greeting.

"You must give the goddess what you vowed," was the reply. "Hanno sends
you the message. And also, 'You must come with me in the boat quickly-at
once!'"

"Where?" the girl demanded.

"Not on board the Hydra yet," replied the boy hurriedly. "First only to
the old man on the Megara. The dowry is ready for your father. But there
is not a moment to lose."

"Well, well!" she gasped hoarsely. "But, first, shall I find the man
with the black beard on board of one of the ships?"

"Certainly!" answered the lad proudly, grasping her arm to hurry her;
but she shook him off violently, turned toward the cella again, and once
more lifted her hands and eyes to the statue of Nemesis.

Then she took up the bundle she had hidden behind a pillar, drew from
it a handful of gold coins, which she flung into the box intended for
offerings, and followed the boy.

"Alive?" she asked as she descended the steps; but the lad understood
the meaning of the question, and exclaimed: "Yes, indeed! Hanno says the
wounds are not at all dangerous."

"And the other?"

"Not a scratch. On the Hydra, with two severely wounded slaves. The
porter and the others were killed."

"And the statues?"

"They-such things can't be accomplished without some little
blunder-Labaja thinks so, too."

"Did they escape you?"

"Only one. I myself helped to smash the other, which stood in the
workroom that looks out upon the water. The gold and ivory are on the
ship. We had horrible work with the statue which stood in the room whose
windows faced the square. They dragged the great monster carefully into
the studio that fronts upon the water. But probably it is still standing
there, if the thing is not already--just see how the flames are whirling
upward!--if it is not already burned with the house."

"What a misfortune!" Ledscha reproachfully exclaimed.

"It could not be helped," the boy protested. "People from Tennis
suddenly rushed in. The first--a big, furious fellow-killed our Loule
and the fierce Judas. Now he has to pay for it. Little Chareb threw the
black powder into his eyes, while Hanno himself thrust the torch in his
face."

"And Bias, the blackbeard's slave?"

"I don't know. Oh, yes! Wounded, I believe, on board the ship."

Meanwhile the lad, a precocious fourteen-year-old cabin-boy from the
Hydra, pointed to the boat which lay ready, and took Ledscha's bundle in
his hand; but she sprang into the light skiff before him and ordered it
to be rowed to the Owl's Nest, where she must bid Mother Tabus good-bye.
The cabin-boy, however, declared positively that the command could not
be obeyed now, and at his signal two black sailors urged it with swift
oar strokes toward the northwest, to Satabus's ship. Hanno wished to
receive his bride as a wife from his father's hand.

Ledscha had not insisted upon the fulfilment of her desire, but as the
boat passed the Pelican Island her gaze rested on the lustreless waning
disk of the moon. She thought of the torturing night, during which she
had vainly waited here for Hermon, and a triumphant smile hovered around
her lips; but soon the heavy eyebrows of the girl who was thus leaving
her home contracted in a frown--she again fancied she saw, where the
moon was just fading, the body of a gigantic, hideous spider. She
banished the illusion by speaking to the boy--spiders in the morning
mean misfortune.

The early dawn, which was now crimsoning the east, reminded her of the
blood which, as an avenger, she must yet shed.




BOOK 2.




CHAPTER I.

While the market place in Tennis was filling, Archias's white house
had become a heap of smouldering ruins. Hundreds of men and women were
standing around the scene of the conflagration, but no one saw the
statue of Demeter, which had been removed from Hermon's studio just in
time. The nomarch had had it locked up in the neighbouring temple of the
goddess.

It was rumoured that the divinity had saved her own statue by a miracle;
Pamaut, the police officer, said that he had seen her himself as,
surrounded by a brilliant light, she soared upward on the smoke that
poured from the burning house. The strategist and the nomarch used
every means in their power to capture the robbers, but without the least
success.

As it had become known that Paseth, Gula's husband, had cast off his
wife because she had gone to Hermon's studio, the magistrates believed
that the attack had been made by the Biamites; yet Paseth was absent
from the city during the assault, and the innocence of the others could
also be proved.

Since, for two entire years, piracy had entirely ceased in this
neighbourhood, no one thought of corsairs, and the bodies of the
incendiaries having been consumed by the flames with the white house, it
could not be ascertained to what class the marauders belonged.

The blinded sculptor could only testify that one of the robbers was a
negro, or at any rate had had his face blackened, and that the size of
another had appeared to him almost superhuman. This circumstance gave
rise to the fable that, during the terrible storm of the previous clay,
Hades had opened and spirits of darkness had rushed into the studio of
the Greek betrayer.

The strategist, it is true, did not believe such tales, but the
superstition of the Biamites, who, moreover, aided the Greeks
reluctantly to punish a crime which threatened to involve their own
countrymen, put obstacles in the way of his measures.

Not until he heard of Ledscha's disappearance, and was informed by
the priest of Nemesis of the handsome sum which had been found in the
offering box of the temple shortly after the attack, did he arrive at
a conjecture not very far from the real state of affairs; only it
was still incomprehensible to him what body of men could have placed
themselves at the disposal of a girl's vengeful plan.

On the second day after the fire, the epistrategus of the whole Delta,
who had accidentally come to the border fortress, arrived at Tennis
on the galley of the commandant of Pelusium, and with him Proclus, the
grammateus of the Dionysian artists, the Lady Thyone, Daphne, and her
companion Chrysilla.

The old hero Philippus was detained in the fortress by the preparations
for war.

Althea had returned to Alexandria, and Philotas, who disliked her, had
gone there himself, as Chrysilla intimated to him that he could hope
for no success in his suit to her ward so long as Daphne had to devote
herself to the care of the blinded Hermon.

The epistrategus proceeded with great caution, but his efforts also
remained futile. He ordered a report to be made of all the vessels which
had entered the harbours and bays of the northeastern Delta, but those
commanded by Satabus and his sons gave no cause for investigation; they
had come into the Tanite arm of the Nile as lumber ships from Pontus,
and had discharged beams and planks for the account of a well-known
commercial house in Sinope.

Yet the official ordered the Owl's Nest to be searched. In doing this
he made himself guilty of an act of violence, as the island's right of
asylum still existed, and this incensed the irritable and refractory
Biamites the more violently, the deeper was the reverent awe with which
the nation regarded Tabus, who, according to their belief, was over a
hundred years old. The Biamites honoured her not only as an enchantress
and a leech, but as the ancestress of a race of mighty men. By molesting
this aged woman, and interfering with an ancient privilege, the
epistrategus lost the aid of the hostile fishermen, sailors, and
weavers. Any information from their ranks to him was regarded as
treachery; and, besides, his stay in Tennis could be but brief, as the
King, on account of the impending war, had summoned him back to the
capital.

On the third day after his arrival he left Tennis and sailed from Tanis
for Alexandria. He had had little time to attend to Thyone and her
guests.

Proclus, too, could not devote himself to them until after the departure
of the epistrategus, since he had gone immediately to Tanis, where,
as head of the Dionysian artists of all Egypt, he had been occupied in
attending to the affairs of the newly established theatre.

On his return to Tennis he had instantly requested to be conducted to
the Temple of Demeter, to inspect the blinded Hermon's rescued work.

He had entered the cella of the sanctuary with the expectation of
finding a peculiar, probably a powerful work, but one repugnant to his
taste, and left it fairly overpowered by the beauty of this noble work
of art.

What he had formerly seen of Hermon's productions had prejudiced
him against the artist, whose talent was great, but who, instead of
dedicating it to the service of the beautiful and the sublime, chose
subjects which, to Proclus, did not seem worthy of artistic treatment,
or, when they were, sedulously deprived them of that by which, in his
eyes, they gained genuine value. In Hermon's Olympian Banquet he--who
also held the office of a high priest of Apollo in Alexandria--had even
seen an insult to the dignity of the deity. In the Street Boy Eating
Figs, the connoisseur's eye had recognised a peculiar masterpiece, but
he had been repelled by this also; for, instead of a handsome boy, it
represented a starving, emaciated vagabond.

True to life as this figure might be, it seemed to him reprehensible,
for it had already induced others to choose similar vulgar subjects.

When recently at Althea's performance he had met Hermon and saw how
quickly his beautiful travelling companion allowed herself to be induced
to bestow the wreath on the handsome, black-bearded fellow, it vexed
him, and he had therefore treated him with distant coldness, and allowed
him to perceive the disapproval which the direction taken by his art had
awakened in his mind.

In the presence of Hermon's Demeter, the opinion of the experienced man
and intelligent connoisseur had suddenly changed.

The creator of this work was not only one of the foremost artists of his
day, nay, he had also been permitted to fathom the nature of the deity
and to bestow upon it a perfect form.

This Demeter was the most successful personification of the divine
goodness which rewards the sowing of seed with the harvest. When Hermon
created it, Daphne's image had hovered before his mind, even if he had
not been permitted to use her as a model, and of all the maidens whom he
knew there was scarcely one better suited to serve as the type for the
Demeter.

So what he had seen in Pelusium, and learned from women, was true. The
heart and mind of the artist who had created this work were not filled
with the image of Althea--who during the journey had bestowed many a
mark of favour upon the aging man, and with whom he was obliged to work
hand in hand for Queen Arsinoe's plans--but the daughter of Archias, and
this circumstance also aided in producing his change of view.

Hermon's blindness, it was to be hoped, would be cured.

Duty, and perhaps also interest, commanded him to show him frankly how
highly he estimated his art and his last work.

After the arrival of Thyone and Daphne, Hermon had consented to
accompany them on board the Proserpina, their spacious galley. True, he
had yielded reluctantly to this arrangement of his parents' old friend,
and neither she nor Daphne had hitherto succeeded in soothing the fierce
resentment against fate which filled his soul after the loss of his
sight and his dearest friend. As yet every attempt to induce him to
bear his terrible misfortune with even a certain degree of composure had
failed.

The Tennis leech, trained by the Egyptian priests at Sais in the art of
healing, who was attached as a pastophorus to the Temple of Isis, in the
city of weavers, had covered the artist's scorched face with bandages,
and earnestly adjured him never in his absence to raise them, and to
keep every ray of light from his blinded eyes. But the agitation which
had mastered Hermon's whole being was so great that, in spite of the
woman's protestations, he lifted the covering again and again to see
whether he could not perceive once more at least a glimmer of the
sunlight whose warming power he felt. The thought of living in darkness
until the end of his life seemed unendurable, especially as now all the
horrors which, hitherto, had only visited him in times of trial during
the night assailed him with never-ceasing cruelty.

The image of the spider often forced itself upon him, and he fancied
that the busy insect was spreading its quickly made web over his blinded
eyes, which he was not to touch, yet over which he passed his hand to
free them from the repulsive veil.

The myth related that because Athene's blow had struck the ambitious
weaver Arachne, she had resolved, before the goddess transformed her
into a spider, to put an end to her disgrace.

How infinitely harder was the one dealt to him! How much better reason
he had to use the privilege in which man possesses an advantage over the
immortals, of putting himself to death with his own hand when he deems
the fitting time has come! What should he, the artist, to whom his eyes
brought whatever made life valuable, do longer in this hideous black
night, brightened by no sunbeam?

He was often overwhelmed, too, by the remembrance of the terrible end
of the friend in whom he saw the only person who might have given him
consolation in this distress, and the painful thought of his poverty.

He was supported solely by what his art brought and his wealthy uncle
allowed him. The Demeter which Archias had ordered had been partially
paid for in advance, and he had intended to use the gold--a considerable
sum--to pay debts in Alexandria. But it was consumed with the rest of
his property--tools, clothing, mementoes of his dead parents, and a
few books which contained his favourite poems and the writings of his
master, Straton.

These precious rolls had aided him to maintain the proud conviction of
owing everything which he attained or possessed solely to himself. It
had again become perfectly clear to him that the destiny of earth-born
mortals was not directed by the gods whom men had invented after
their own likeness, in order to find causes for the effects which they
perceived, but by deaf and blind chance. Else how could even worse
misfortune, according to the opinion of most people, have befallen
the pure, guiltless Myrtilus, who so deeply revered the Olympians and
understood how to honour them so magnificently by his art, than himself,
the despiser of the gods?

But was the death for which he longed a misfortune?

Was the Nemesis who had so swiftly and fully granted the fervent prayer
of an ill-used girl also only an image conjured up by the power of human
imagination?

It was scarcely possible!

Yet if there was one goddess, did not that admit the probability of the
existence of all the others?

He shuddered at the idea; for if the immortals thought, felt, acted, how
terribly his already cruel fate would still develop! He had denied and
insulted almost all the Olympians, and not even stirred a finger to the
praise and honour of a single one.

What marvel if they should choose him for the target of their resentment
and revenge?

He had just believed that the heaviest misfortune which can befall a man
and an artist had already stricken him. Now he felt that this, too, had
been an error; for, like a physical pain, he realized the collapse of
the proud delusion of being independent of every power except himself,
freely and arbitrarily controlling his own destiny, owing no gratitude
except to his own might, and being compelled to yield to nothing save
the enigmatical, pitiless power of eternal laws or their co-operation,
so incomprehensible to the human intellect, called "chance," which took
no heed of merit or unworthiness.

Must he, who had learned to silence and to starve every covetous desire,
in order to require no gifts from his own uncle and his wealthy kinsman
and friend, and be able to continue to hold his head high, as the most
independent of the independent, now, in addition to all his other woe,
be forced to believe in powers that exercised an influence over his
every act? Must he recognise praying to them and thanking them as the
demand of justice, of duty, and wisdom? Was this possible either?

And, believing himself alone, since he could not see Thyone and Daphne,
who were close by him, he struck his scorched brow with his clinched
fist, because he felt like a free man who suddenly realizes that a rope
which he can not break is bound around his hands and feet, and a giant
pulls and loosens it at his pleasure.

Yet no! Better die than become for gods and men a puppet that obeys
every jerk of visible and invisible hands.

Starting up in violent excitement, he tore the bandage from his face and
eyes, declaring, as Thyone seriously reprimanded him, that he would go
away, no matter where, and earn his daily bread at the handmill, like
the blind Ethiopian slave whom he had seen in the cabinetmaker's house
at Tennis.

Then Daphne spoke to him tenderly, but her soothing voice caused him
keener pain than his old friend's stern one.

To sit still longer seemed unendurable, and, with the intention of
regaining his lost composure by pacing to and fro, he began to walk; but
at the first free step he struck against the little table in front of
Thyone's couch, and as it upset and the vessels containing water fell
with it, clinking and breaking, he stopped and, as if utterly crushed,
groped his way back, with both arms outstretched, to the armchair he had
quitted.

If he could only have seen Daphne press her handkerchief first to her
eyes, from which tears were streaming, and then to her lips, that
he might not hear her sobs, if he could have perceived how Thyone's
wrinkled old face contracted as if she were swallowing a colocynth
apple, while at the same time she patted his strong shoulder briskly,
exclaiming with forced cheerfulness: "Go on, my boy! The steed rears
when the hornet stings! Try again, if it only soothes you! We will take
everything out of your way. You need not mind the water-jars. The potter
will make new ones!"

Then Hermon threw back his burning head, rested it against the back of
the chair, and did not stir until the bandage was renewed.

How comfortable it felt!

He knew, too, that he owed it to Daphne; the matron's fingers could not
be so slender and delicate, and he would have been more than glad
to raise them to his lips and thank her; but he denied himself the
pleasure.

If she really did love him, the bond between them must now be severed;
for, even if her goodness of heart extended far enough to induce her
to unite her blooming young existence to his crippled one, how could he
have accepted the sacrifice without humiliating himself? Whether such a
marriage would have made her happy or miserable he did not ask, but he
was all the more keenly aware that if, in this condition, he became her
husband, he would be the recipient of alms, and he would far rather, he
mentally repeated, share the fate of the negro at the handmill.

The expression of his features revealed the current of his thoughts to
Daphne, and, much as she wished to speak to him, she forced herself to
remain silent, that the tones of her voice might not betray how deeply
she was suffering with him; but he himself now longed for a kind word
from her lips, and he had just asked if she was still there when Thyone
announced a visit from the grammateus Proclus.

He had recently felt that this man was unfriendly to him, and again his
anger burst forth. To be exposed in the midst of his misery to the scorn
of a despiser of his art was too much for his exhausted patience.

But here he was interrupted by Proclus himself, who had entered the
darkened cabin where the blind man remained very soon after Thyone.

Hermon's last words had betrayed to the experienced courtier how well
he remembered his unkind remarks, so he deferred the expression of
his approval, and began by delivering the farewell message of the
epistrategus, who had been summoned away so quickly.

He stated that his investigations had discovered nothing of importance,
except, perhaps, the confirmation of the sorrowful apprehension that the
admirable Myrtilus had been killed by the marauders. A carved stone had
been found under the ashes, and Chello, the Tennis goldsmith, said he
had had in his own workshop the gem set in the hapless artist's shoulder
clasp, and supplied it with a new pin.

While speaking, he took Hermon's hand and gave him the stone, but the
artist instantly used his finger tips to feel it.

Perhaps it really did belong to the clasp Myrtilus wore, for, although
still unpractised in groping, he recognised that a human head was carved
in relief upon the stone, and Mrytilus's had been adorned with the
likeness of the Epicurean.

The damaged little work of art, in the opinion of Proclus and Daphne,
appeared to represent this philosopher, and at the thought that his
friend had fallen a victim to the flames Hermon bowed his head and
exerted all his strength of will in order not to betray by violent sobs
how deeply this idea pierced his heart.

Thyone, shrugging her shoulders mournfully, pointed to the suffering
artist. Proclus nodded significantly, and, moving nearer to Hermon,
informed him that he had sought out his Demeter and found the statue
uninjured. He was well aware that it would be presumptuous to offer
consolation in so heavy an affliction, and after the loss of his dearest
friend, yet perhaps Hermon would be glad to hear his assurance that he,
whose judgment was certainly not unpractised, numbered his work among
the most perfect which the sculptor's art had created in recent years.

"I myself best know the value of this Demeter," the sculptor broke in
harshly. "Your praise is the bit of honey which is put into the mouth of
the hurt child."

"No, my friend," Proclus protested with grave decision. "I should
express no less warmly the ardent admiration with which this noble
figure of the goddess fills me if you were well and still possessed your
sight. You were right just now when you alluded to my aversion, or, let
us say, lack of appreciation of the individuality of your art; but this
noble work changes everything, and nothing affords me more pleasure
than that I am to be the first to assure you how magnificently you have
succeeded in this statue."

"The first!" Hermon again interrupted harshly. "But the second and third
will be lacking in Alexandria. What a pleasure it is to pour the gifts
of sympathy upon one to whom we wish ill! But, however successful my
Demeter may be, you would have awarded the prize twice over to the one
by Myrtilus."

"Wrong, my young friend!" the statesman protested with honest zeal.
"All honour to the great dead, whose end was so lamentable; but in
this contest--let me swear it by the goddess herself!--you would
have remained victor; for, at the utmost, nothing can rank with the
incomparable save a work of equal merit, and--I know life and art--two
artists rarely or never succeed in producing anything so perfect as this
masterpiece at the same time and in the same place."

"Enough!" gasped Hermon, hoarse with excitement; but Proclus, with
increasing animation, continued: "Brief as is our acquaintance, you have
probably perceived that I do not belong to the class of flatterers, and
in Alexandria it has hardly remained unknown to you that the younger
artists number me, to whom the office of judge so often falls, among
the sterner critics. Only because I desire their best good do I frankly
point out their errors. The multitude provides the praise. It will soon
flow upon you also in torrents, I can see its approach, and as this
blindness, if the august Aesculapius and healing Isis aid, will pass
away like a dreary winter night, it would seem to me criminal to deceive
you about your own ability and success. I already behold you creating
other works to the delight of gods and men; but this Demeter extorts
boundless, enthusiastic appreciation; both as a whole, and in detail, it
is faultless and worthy of the most ardent praise. Oh, how long it
is, my dear, unfortunate friend, since I could congratulate any other
Alexandrian with such joyful confidence upon the most magnificent
success! Every word--you may believe it!--which comes to you in
commendation of this last work from lips unused to eulogy is sincerely
meant, and as I utter it to you I shall repeat it in the presence of the
King, Archias, and the other judges."

Daphne, with hurried breath, deeply flushed cheeks, and sparkling
eyes, had fairly hung upon the lips of the clever connoisseur. She knew
Proclus, and his dreaded, absolutely inconsiderate acuteness, and was
aware that this praise expressed his deepest conviction. Had he been
dissatisfied with the statue of Demeter, or even merely superficially
touched by its beauty, he might have shrunk from wounding the
unfortunate artist by censure, and remained silent; but only something
grand, consummate, could lead him to such warmth of recognition.

She now felt it a misfortune that she and Thyone had hitherto been
prevented, by anxiety for their patient, from admiring his work. Had it
still been light, she would have gone to the temple of Demeter at once;
but the sun had just set, and Proclus was obliged to beg her to have
patience.

As the cases were standing finished at the cabinetmaker's, the statue
had been packed immediately, under his own direction, and carried on
board his ship, which would convey it with him to the capital the next
day.

While this arrangement called forth loud expressions of regret from
Daphne and the vivacious matron, Hermon assented to it, for it would
at least secure the ladies, until their arrival in Alexandria, from a
painful disappointment.

"Rather," Proclus protested with firm dissent, "it will rob you for some
time of a great pleasure, and you, noble daughter of Archias, probably
of the deepest emotion of gratitude with which the favour of the
immortals has hitherto rendered you happy; yet the master who created
this genuine goddess owes the best part of it to your own face."

"He told me himself that he thought of me while at work," Daphne
admitted, and a flood of the warmest love reached Hermon's ears in her
agitated tones, while, greatly perplexed, he wondered with increasing
anxiety whether the stern critic Proclus had really been serious in the
extravagant eulogium, so alien to his reputation in the city.

Myrtilus, too, had admired the head of his Demeter, and--this he himself
might admit--he had succeeded in it, and yet ought not the figure, with
its too pronounced inclination forward, which, it is true, corresponded
with Daphne's usual bearing, and the somewhat angular bend of the arms,
have induced this keen-sighted connoisseur to moderate the exalted
strain of his praise? Or was the whole really so admirable that it would
have seemed petty to find fault with the less successful details? At any
rate, Proclus's eulogy ought to give him twofold pleasure, because his
art had formerly repelled him, and Hermon tried to let it produce this
effect upon him. But it would not do; he was continually overpowered by
the feeling that under the enthusiastic homage of the intriguing Queen
Arsinoe's favourite lurked a sting which he should some day feel. Or
could Proclus have been persuaded by Thyone and Daphne to help them
reconcile the hapless blind man to his hard fate?

Hermon's every movement betrayed the great anxiety which filled his
mind, and it by no means escaped Proclus's attention, but he attributed
it to the blinded sculptor's anguish in being prevented, after so great
a success, from pursuing his art further.

Sincerely touched, he laid his slender hand on the sufferer's muscular
arm, saying: "A more severe trial than yours, my young friend, can
scarcely be imposed upon the artist who has just attained the highest
goal, but three things warrant you to hope for recovery--your vigorous
youth, the skill of our Alexandrian leeches, and the favour of the
immortal gods. You shrug your shoulders? Yet I insist that you have won
this favour by your Demeter. True, you owe it less to yourself than to
yonder maiden. What pleasure it affords one whom, like myself, taste and
office bind to the arts, to perceive such a revolution in an artist's
course of creation, and trace it to its source! I indulged myself in it
and, if you will listen, I should like to show you the result."

"Speak," replied Hermon dully, bowing his head as if submitting to the
inevitable, while Proclus began:

"Hitherto your art imitated, not without success, what your eyes showed
you, and if this was filled with the warm breath of life, your work
succeeded. All respect to your Boy Eating Figs, in whose presence you
would feel the pleasure he himself enjoyed while consuming the sweet
fruit. Here, among the works of Egyptian antiquity, there is imminent
danger of falling under the tyranny of the canon of proportions which
can be expressed in figures, or merely even the demands of the style
hallowed by thousands of years, but in a subject like the 'Fig-eater'
such a reproach is not to be feared. He speaks his own intelligible
language, and whoever reproduces it without turning to the right or left
has won, for he has created a work whose value every true friend of art,
no matter to what school he belongs, prizes highly.

"To me personally such works of living reality are cordially welcome.
Yet art neither can nor will be satisfied with snatches of what is
close at hand; but you are late-born, sons of a time when the two great
tendencies of art have nearly reached the limits of what is attainable
to them. You were everywhere confronted with completed work, and you are
right when you refuse to sink to mere imitators of earlier works, and
therefore return to Nature, with which we Hellenes, and perhaps
the Egyptians also, began. The latter forgot her; the former--we
Greeks--continued to cling to her closely."

"Some few," Hermon eagerly interrupted the other, "still think it
worth the trouble to take from her what she alone can bestow. They
save themselves the toilsome search for the model which others so
successfully used before them, and bronze and marble still keep
wonderfully well. Bring out the old masterpieces. Take the head from
this one, the arm from that, etc. The pupil impresses the proportions on
his mind. Only so far as the longing for the beautiful permits do even
the better ones remain faithful to Nature, not a finger's breadth more."

"Quite right," the other went on calmly. "But your objection only
brings one nearer the goal. How many who care only for applause content
themselves to-day, unfortunately, with Nature at second hand! Without
returning to her eternally fresh, inexhaustible spring, they draw from
the conveniently accessible wells which the great ancients dug for
them."

"I know these many," Hermon wrathfully exclaimed. "They are the brothers
of the Homeric poets, who take verses from the Iliad and Odyssey to
piece out from them their own pitiful poems."

"Excellent, my son!" exclaimed Thyone, laughing, and Daphne remarked
that the poet Cleon had surprised her father with such a poem a few
weeks before. It was a marvellous bit of botchwork, and yet there was a
certain meaning in the production, compiled solely from Homeric verses.

"Diomed's Hecuba," observed Proclus, "and the Aphrodite by Hippias,
which were executed in marble, originated in the same way, and deserve
no better fate, although they please the great multitude. But, praised
be my lord, Apollo, our age can also boast of other artists. Filled with
the spirit of the god, they are able to model truthfully and faithfully
even the forms of the immortals invisible to the physical eye. They
stand before the spectator as if borrowed from Nature, for their
creators have filled them with their own healthy vigour. Our poor
Myrtilus belonged to this class and, after your Demeter, the world will
include you in it also."

"And yet," answered Hermon in a tone of dissent, "I remained faithful to
myself, and put nothing, nothing at all of my own personality, into the
forms borrowed from Nature."

"What need of that was there?" asked Proclus with a subtle smile. "Your
model spared you the task. And this at last brings me to the goal I
desired to reach. As the great Athenians created types for eternity,
so also does Nature at times in a happy hour, for her own pleasure, and
such a model you found in our Daphne.-No contradiction, my dear young
lady! The outlines of the figure--By the dog! Hermon might possibly have
found forms no less beautiful in the Aphrosion, but how charming and
lifelike is the somewhat unusual yet graceful pose of yours! And then
the heart, the soul! In your companionship our artist had nothing to do
except lovingly to share your feelings in order to have at his disposal
everything which renders so dear to us all the giver of bread, the
preserver of peace, the protector of marriage, the creator and supporter
of the law of moderation in Nature, as well as in human existence. Where
would all these traits be found more perfectly united in a single human
being than in your person, Daphne, your quiet, kindly rule?"

"Oh, stop!" the girl entreated. "I am only too well aware--"

"That you also are not free from human frailties," Proclus continued,
undismayed. "We will take them, great or small as they may be, into the
bargain. The secret ones do not concern the sculptor, who does not or
will not see them. What he perceives in you, what you enable him to
recognise through every feature of your sweet, tranquillizing face,
is enough for the genuine artist to imagine the goddess; for the
distinction between the mortal and the immortal is only the degree of
perfection, and the human intellect and artist soul can find nothing
more perfect in the whole domain of Demeter's jurisdiction than is
presented to them in your nature. Our friend yonder seized it, and his
magnificent work of art proves how nearly it approaches the purest and
loftiest conception we form of the goddess whom he had to represent. It
is not that he deified you, Daphne; he merely bestowed on the divinity
forms which he recognised in you."

Just at that moment, obeying an uncontrollable impulse, Hermon pulled
the bandage from his eyes to see once more the woman to whom this warm
homage was paid.

Was the experienced connoisseur of art and the artist soul in the right?

He had told himself the same thing when he selected Daphne for a model,
and her head reproduced what Proclus praised as the common possession of
Daphne and Demeter. Truthful Myrtilus had also seen it. Perhaps his work
had really been so marvellously successful because, while he was engaged
upon it, his friend had constantly stood before his mind in all the
charm of her inexhaustible goodness.

Animated by the ardent desire to gaze once more at the beloved face, to
which he now owed also this unexpectedly great success, he turned toward
the spot whence her voice had reached him; but a wall of violet mist,
dotted with black specks, was all that his blinded eyes showed him, and
with a low groan he drew the linen cloth over the burns.

This time Proclus also perceived what was passing in the poor artist's
mind, and when he took leave of him it was with the resolve to do his
utmost to brighten with the stars of recognition and renown the dark
night of suffering which enshrouded this highly gifted sculptor, whose
unexpectedly great modesty had prepossessed him still more in his
favour.




CHAPTER II.

After the grammateus had retired, Daphne insisted upon leaving Tennis
the next day.

The desire to see Hermon's masterpiece drew her back to Alexandria even
more strongly than the knowledge of being missed by her father.

Only the separation from Thyone rendered the departure difficult, for
the motherless girl had found in her something for which she had long
yearned, and most sorely missed in her companion Chrysilla, who from
expediency approved of everything she did or said.

The matron, too, had become warmly attached to Daphne, and would gladly
have done all that lay in her power to lighten Hermon's sad fate, yet
she persisted in her determination to return speedily to her old husband
in Pelusium.

But she did not fully realize how difficult this departure would be
for her until the blind man, after a long silence, asked whether it was
night, if the stars were in the sky, and if she really intended to leave
him.

Then burning sympathy filled her compassionate soul, and she could no
longer restrain her tears. Daphne, too, covered her face, and imposed
the strongest restraint upon herself that she might not sob aloud.

So it seemed a boon to both when Hermon expressed the desire to spend
part of the night on deck.

This desire contained a summons to action, and to be able to bestir
themselves in useful service appeared like a favour to Thyone and
Daphne.

Without calling upon a slave, a female servant, or even Chrysilla for
the smallest office, the two prepared a couch on deck for the blind man,
and, leaning on the girl's stronger arm, he went up into the open air.

There he stretched both arms heavenward, inhaled deep breaths of the
cool night breeze, and thirstily emptied the goblet of wine which Daphne
mixed and gave him with her own hand.

Then, with a sigh of relief, he said: "Everything has not grown black
yet. A delightful feeling of pleasure takes possession even of the blind
man when the open air refreshes him and the wine warms his blood in the
sunshine of your kindness."

"And much better things are still in prospect," Daphne assured him.
"Just think what rapture it will be when you are permitted to see the
light again after so long a period of darkness!"

"When--" repeated Hermon, his head drooping as he spoke.

"It must, it must be so!" rang with confident assurance from Thyone's
lips.

"And then," added Daphne, gazing sometimes upward to the firmament
strewn with shining stars, sometimes across the broad, rippling expanse
of the water, in which the reflection of the heavenly bodies shimmered
in glittering, silvery radiance, "yes, Hermon, who would not be glad to
exchange with you then? You may shake your head, but I would take your
place quickly and with joyous courage. There is a proof of the existence
of the gods, which so exactly suits the hour when you will again see,
enjoy, admire what this dreary darkness now hides from you. It was a
philosopher who used it; I no longer know which one. How often I have
thought of it since this cruel misfortune befell you! And now--"

"Go on," Hermon interrupted with a smile of superiority. "You are
thinking of Aristotle's man who grew up in a dark cave. The conditions
which must precede the devout astonishment of the liberated youth when
he first emerged into the light and the verdant world would certainly
exist in me."

"Oh, not in that way," pleaded the wounded girl; and Thyone exclaimed:
"What is the story of the man you mention? We don't talk about Aristotle
and such subjects in Pelusium."

"Perhaps they are only too much discussed in Alexandria," said the
blind artist. "The Stagirite, as you have just heard, seeks to prove the
existence of the gods by the man of whom I spoke."

"No, he does prove it," protested Daphne. "Just listen, Mother Thyone. A
little boy grows up from earliest childhood into a youth in a dark cave.
Then suddenly its doors are opened to him. For the first time he sees
the sun, moon, and stars, flowers and trees, perhaps even a beautiful
human face. But at the moment when all these things rush upon him like
so many incomprehensible marvels, must he not ask himself who created
all this magnificence? And the answer which comes to him--"

"There is only one," cried the matron; "the omnipotent gods. Do you
shrug your shoulders at that, son of the pious Erigone? Why, of course!
The child who still feels the blows probably rebels against his earthly
father. But if I see aright, the resentment will not last when you, like
the man, go out of the cave and your darkness also passes away. Then the
power from which you turned defiantly will force itself upon you, and
you will raise your hands in grateful prayer to the rescuing divinity.
As to us women, we need not be drawn out of a cave to recognise it.
A mother who reared three stalwart sons--I will say nothing of the
daughters--can not live without them. Why are they so necessary to her?
Because we love our children twice as much as ourselves, and the danger
which threatens them alarms the poor mother's heart thrice as much as
her own. Then it needs the helping powers. Even though they often refuse
their aid, we may still be grateful for the expectation of relief. I
have poured forth many prayers for the three, I assure you, and after
doing so with my whole soul, then, my son, no matter how wildly the
storm had raged within my breast, calmness returned, and Hope again
took her place at the helm. In the school of the denier of the gods, you
forgot the immortals above and depended on yourself alone. Now you need
a guide, or even two or three of them, in order to find the way. If your
mother were still alive, you would run back to her to hide your face in
her lap. But she is dead, and if I were as proud as you, before clasping
the sustaining hand of another mortal I would first try whether one
would not be voluntarily extended from among the Olympians. If I were
you, I would begin with Demeter, whom you honoured by so marvellous a
work."

Hermon waved his hand as if brushing away a troublesome fly, exclaiming
impatiently: "The gods, always the gods! I know by my own mother,
Thyone, what you women are, though I was only seven years old when I was
bereft of her by the same powers that you call good and wise, and who
have also robbed me of my eyesight, my friend, and all else that was
dear. I thank you for your kind intention, and you, too, Daphne, for
recalling the beautiful allegory. How often we have argued over its
meaning! If we continued the discussion, perhaps it might pleasantly
shorten the next few hours, which I dread as I do my whole future
existence, but I should be obliged in the outset to yield the victory to
you. The great Herophilus is right when he transfers the seat of thought
from the heart to the head. What a wild tumult is raging here behind my
brow, and how one voice drowns another! The medley baffles description.
I could more easily count with my blind eyes the cells in a honeycomb
than refute with my bewildered brain even one shrewd objection. It seems
to me that we need our eyes to understand things. We certainly do to
taste. Whatever I eat and drink--langustae and melons, light Mareotic
wine and the dark liquor of Byblus my tongue can scarcely distinguish
it. The leech assures me that this will pass away, but until the chaos
within merges into endurable order there is nothing better for me than
solitude and rest, rest, rest."

"We will not deny them to you," replied Thyone, glancing significantly
at Daphne. "Proclus's enthusiastic judgment was sincerely meant. Begin
by rejoicing over it in the inmost depths of your heart, and vividly
imagining what a wealth of exquisite joys will be yours through your
last masterpiece."

"Willingly, if I can," replied the blind man, gratefully extending his
hand. "If I could only escape the doubt whether the most cruel tyrant
could devise anything baser than to rob the artist, the very person to
whom it is everything, of his sight."

"Yes, it is terrible," Daphne assented. "Yet it seems to me that a
richer compensation for the lost gift is at the disposal of you artists
than of us other mortals, for you understand how to look with the eyes
of the soul. With them you retain what you have seen, and illumine it
with a special radiance. Homer was blind, and for that very reason, I
think, the world and life became clear and transfigured for him though a
veil concealed both from his physical vision."

"The poet!" Hermon exclaimed. "He draws from his own soul what sight,
and sight alone, brings to us sculptors. And, besides, his spirit
remained free from the horrible darkness that assailed mine. Joy itself,
Daphne, has lost its illuminating power within. What, girl, what is to
become of the heart in which even hope was destroyed?"

"Defend it manfully and keep up your courage," she answered softly;
but he pressed her hand firmly, and, in order not to betray how
self-compassion was melting his own soul, burst forth impetuously: "Say
rather: Crush the wish whose fulfilment is self-humiliation! I will go
back to Alexandria. Even the blind and crippled can find ways to earn
their bread there. Now grant me rest, and leave me alone!"

Thyone drew the girl away with her into the ship's cabin.

A short time after, the steward Gras went to Hermon to entreat him to
yield to Thyone's entreaties and leave the deck.

The leech had directed the sufferer to protect himself from draughts
and dampness, and the cool night mists were rising more and more densely
from the water.

Hermon doubtless felt them, but the thought of returning to the close
cabin was unendurable. He fancied that his torturing thoughts would
stifle him in the gloom where even fresh air was denied him.

He allowed the careful Bithynian to throw a coverlet over him and draw
the hood of his cloak over his head, but his entreaties and warnings
were futile.

The steward's watchful nursing reminded Hermon of his own solicitude
for his friend and of his faithful slave Bias, both of whom he had lost.
Then he remembered the eulogy of the grammateus, and it brought up the
question whether Myrtilus would have agreed with him. Like Proclus, his
keen-sighted and honest friend had called Daphne the best model for the
kindly goddess. He, too, had given to his statue the features of the
daughter of Archias, and admitted that he had been less successful. But
the figure! Perhaps he, Hermon, in his perpetual dissatisfaction with
himself had condemned his own work too severely, but that it lacked the
proper harmony had escaped neither Myrtilus nor himself. Now he recalled
the whole creation to his remembrance, and its weaknesses forced
themselves upon him so strongly and objectionably that the extravagant
praise of the stern critic awakened fresh doubts in his mind.

Yet a man like the grammateus, who on the morrow or the day following it
would be obliged to repeat his opinion before the King and the judges,
certainly would not have allowed himself to be carried away by mere
compassion to so great a falsification of his judgment.

Or was he himself sharing the experience of many a fellow-artist? How
often the creator deceived himself concerning the value of his own work!
He had expected the greatest success from his Polyphemus hurling the
rock at Odysseus escaping in the boat, and a gigantic smith had posed
for a model. Yet the judges had condemned it in the severest manner as
a work far exceeding the bounds of moderation, and arousing positive
dislike. The clay figure had not been executed in stone or metal, and
crumbled away. The opposite would probably now happen with the Demeter.
Her bending attitude had seemed to him daring, nay, hazardous; but the
acute critic Proclus had perceived that it was in accord with one of
Daphne's habits, and therefore numbered it among the excellences of the
statue.

If the judges who awarded the prize agreed with the verdict of the
grammateus, he must accustom himself to value his own work higher,
perhaps even above that of Myrtilus.

But was this possible?

He saw his friend's Demeter as though it was standing before him, and
again he recognised in it the noblest masterpiece its maker had ever
created. What praise this marvellous work would have deserved if his own
really merited such high encomiums!

Suddenly an idea came to him, which at first he rejected as
inconceivable; but it would not allow itself to be thrust aside, and its
consideration made his breath fail.

What if his own Demeter had been destroyed and Myrtilus's statue saved?
If the latter was falsely believed to be his work, then Proclus's
judgment was explained--then--then---

Seized by a torturing anguish, he groaned aloud, and the steward Gras
inquired what he wanted.

Hermon hastily grasped the Bithynian's arm, and asked what he knew about
the rescue of his statue.

The answer was by no means satisfying. Gras had only heard that, after
being found uninjured in his studio, it had been dragged with great
exertion into the open air. The goldsmith Chello had directed the work.

Hermon remembered all this himself, yet, with an imperious curtness in
marked contrast to his usual pleasant manner to this worthy servant, he
hoarsely commanded him to bring Chello to him early the next morning,
and then again relapsed into his solitary meditations.

If the terrible conjecture which had just entered his mind should be
confirmed, no course remained save to extinguish the only new light
which now illumined the darkness of his night, or to become a cheat.

Yet his resolution was instantly formed. If the goldsmith corroborated
his fear, he would publicly attribute the rescued work to the man who
created it. And he persisted in this intention, indignantly silencing
the secret voice which strove to shake it. It temptingly urged that
Myrtilus, so rich in successes, needed no new garland. His lost sight
would permit him, Hermon, from reaping fresh laurels, and his friend
would so gladly bestow this one upon him. But he angrily closed his
ears to these enticements, and felt it a humiliation that they dared to
approach him.

With proud self-reliance he threw back his head, saying to himself that,
though Myrtilus should permit him ten times over to deck him self with
his feathers, he would reject them. He would remain himself, and was
conscious of possessing powers which perhaps surpassed his friend's.
He was as well qualified to create a genuine work of art as the best
sculptor, only hitherto the Muse had denied him success in awakening
pleasure, and blindness would put an end to creating anything of his
own.

The more vividly he recalled to memory his own work and his friend's,
the more probable appeared his disquieting supposition.

He also saw Myrtilus's figure before him, and in imagination heard his
friend again promise that, with the Arachne, he would wrest the prize
even from him.

During the terrible events of the last hours he had thought but seldom
and briefly of the weaver, whom it had seemed a rare piece of good
fortune to be permitted to represent. Now the remembrance of her took
possession of his soul with fresh power.

The image of Arachne illumined by the lamplight, which Althea had showed
him, appeared like worthless jugglery, and he soon drove it back into
the darkness which surrounded him. Ledscha's figure, however, rose
before him all the more radiantly. The desire to possess her had flown
to the four winds; but he thought he had never before beheld anything
more peculiar, more powerful, or better worth modelling than the
Biamite girl as he saw her in the Temple of Nemesis, with uplifted hand,
invoking the vengeance of the goddess upon him, and there--he discovered
it now--Daphne was not at all mistaken. Images never presented
themselves as distinctly to those who could see as to the blind man
in his darkness. If he was ever permitted to receive his sight, what a
statue of the avenging goddess he could create from this greatest event
in the history of his vision!

After this work--of that he was sure--he would no longer need the
borrowed fame which, moreover, he rejected with honest indignation.




CHAPTER III.

It must be late, for Hermon felt the cool breeze, which in this region
rose between midnight and sunrise, on his burned face and, shivering,
drew his mantle closer round him.

Yet it seemed impossible to return to the cabin; the memory of Ledscha
imploring vengeance, and the stern image of the avenging goddess in the
cella of the little Temple of Nemesis, completely mastered him. In
the close cabin these terrible visions, united with the fear of having
reaped undeserved praise, would have crouched upon his breast like
harpies and stifled or driven him mad. After what had happened, to
number the swift granting of the insulted Biamite's prayer among the
freaks of chance was probably a more arbitrary and foolish proceeding
than, with so many others, to recognise the incomprehensible power of
Nemesis. Ledscha had loosed it against him and his health, perhaps even
his life, and he imagined that she was standing before him with the
bridle and wheel, threatening him afresh.

Shivering, as if chilled to the bone, overwhelmed by intense horror,
he turned his blinded eyes upward to the blackness above and raised his
hand, for the first time since he had joined the pupils of Straton in
the Museum, to pray. He besought Nemesis to be content, and not add to
blindness new tortures to augment the terrible ones which rent his soul,
and he did so with all the ardour of his passionate nature.

The steward Gras had received orders to wake the Lady Thyone if anything
unusual happened to the blind man, and when he heard the unfortunate
artist groan so pitifully that it would have moved a stone, and saw him
raise his hand despairingly to his head, he thought it was time to utter
words of consolation, and a short time after the anxious matron followed
him.

Her low exclamation startled Hermon. To be disturbed in the first
prayer after so long a time, in the midst of the cries of distress of a
despairing soul, is scarcely endurable, and the blind man imposed little
restraint upon himself when his old friend asked what had occurred, and
urged him not to expose himself longer to the damp night air.

At first he resolutely resisted, declaring that he should lose his
senses alone in the close cabin.

Then, in her cordial, simple way, she offered to bear him company in the
cabin. She could not sleep longer, at any rate; she must leave him early
in the morning, and they still had many things to confide to each other.

Touched by so much kindness, he yielded and, leaning on the Bithynian's
arm, followed her, not into his little cabin, but into the captain's
spacious sitting room.

Only a single lamp dimly lighted the wainscoting, composed of ebony,
ivory, and tortoise shell, the gay rug carpet, and the giraffe and
panther skins hung on the walls and doors and flung on the couches and
the floor.

Thyone needed no brilliant illumination for this conversation, and the
blinded man was ordered to avoid it.

The matron was glad to be permitted to communicate to Hermon so speedily
all that filled her own heart.

While he remained on deck, she had gone to Daphne's cabin.

She had already retired, and when Thyone went to the side of the couch
she found the girl, with her cheeks wet with tears, still weeping,
and easily succeeded in leading the motherless maiden to make a frank
confession.

Both cousins had been dear to her from childhood; but while Myrtilus,
though often impeded by his pitiable sufferings, had reached by a smooth
pathway the highest recognition, Hermon's impetuous toiling and striving
had constantly compelled her to watch his course with anxious solicitude
and, often unobserved, extend a helping hand.

Sympathy, disapproval, and fear, which, however, was always blended with
admiration of his transcendent powers, had merged into love. Though he
had disdained to return it, it had nevertheless been perfectly evident
that he needed her, and valued her and her opinion. Often as their views
differed, the obstinate boy and youth had never allowed any one except
herself a strong influence over his acts and conduct. But, far as he
seemed to wander from the paths which she believed the right ones,
she had always held fast to the conviction that he was a man of noble
nature, and an artist who, if he only once fixed his eyes upon the
true goal, would far surpass by his mighty power the other Alexandrian
sculptors, whatever names they bore, and perhaps even Myrtilus.

To the great vexation of her father who, after her mother's death, in
an hour when his heart was softened, had promised that he would never
impose any constraint upon her in the choice of a husband, she had
hitherto rejected every suitor. She had showed even the distinguished
Philotas in Pelusium, without the least reserve, that he was seeking her
in vain; for just at that time she thought she had perceived that
Hermon returned her love, and after his abrupt departure it had become
perfectly evident that the happiness of her life depended upon him.

The terrible misfortune which had now befallen him had only bound her
more firmly to the man she loved. She felt that she belonged to him
indissolubly, and the leech's positive assurance that his blindness
was incurable had only increased the magic of the thought of being and
affording tenfold more to the man bereft of sight than when, possessing
his vision, the world, life, and art belonged to him. To be able to
lavish everything upon the most beloved of mortals, and do whatever her
warm, ever-helpful heart prompted, seemed to her a special favour of the
gods in whom she believed.

That it was Demeter, to the ranks of whose priestesses she belonged, who
was so closely associated with his blinding, also seemed to her no mere
work of chance. The goddess on whom Hermon had bestowed the features of
her own face had deprived him of sight to confer upon her the happiness
of brightening and beautifying the darkness of his life.

If she saw aright, and it was only the fear of obtaining, with herself,
her wealth, that still kept him from her, the path which would finally
unite them must be found at last. She hoped to conquer also her father's
reluctance to give his only child in marriage to a blind man, especially
as Hermon's last work promised to give him the right to rank with the
best artists of his age.

The matron had listened to this confession with an agitated heart.
She had transported herself in imagination into the soul of the girl's
mother, and brought before her mind what objections the dead woman would
have made to her daughter's union with a man deprived of sight; but
Daphne had firmly insisted upon her wish, and supported it by many
a sensible and surprising answer. She was beyond childhood, and her
three-and-twenty years enabled her to realize the consequences which so
unusual a marriage threatened to entail.

As for Thyone herself, she was always disposed to look on the bright
side, and the thought that this vigorous young man, this artist crowned
with the highest success, must remain in darkness to the end of his
life, was utterly incompatible with her belief in the goodness of the
gods. But if Hermon was cured, a rare wealth of the greatest happiness
awaited him in the union with Daphne.

The mood in which she found the blind man had wounded and troubled her.
Now she renewed the bandage, saying: "How gladly I would continue to
use my old hands for you, but this will be the last time in a long while
that I am permitted to do this for the son of my Erigone; I must leave
you to-morrow."

Hermon clasped her hand closely, exclaiming with affectionate warmth:
"You must not go, Thyone! Stay here, even if it is only a few days
longer."

What pleasure these words gave her, and how gladly she would have
fulfilled his wish! But it could not be, and he did not venture to
detain her by fresh entreaties after she had described how her aged
husband was suffering from her absence.

"I often ask myself what he still finds in me," she said. "True, so long
a period of wedded life is a firm tie. If I am gone and he does not find
me when he returns home from inspections, he wanders about as if lost,
and does not even relish his food, though the same cook has prepared it
for years. And he, who forgets nothing and knows by name a large number
of the many thousand men he commands, would very probably, when I am
away, join the troops with only sandals on his feet. To miss my ugly
old face really can not be so difficult! When he wooed me, of course
I looked very different. And so--he confessed it himself--so he always
sees me, and most plainly when I am absent from his sight. But that,
Hermon, will be your good fortune also. All you now know as young and
beautiful will continue so to you as long as this sorrowful blindness
lasts, and on that very account you must not remain alone, my boy--that
is, if your heart has already decided in favour of any one--and that is
the case, unless these old eyes deceive me."

"Daphne," he answered dejectedly, "why should I deny that she is dear to
me? And yet, how dare the blind man take upon himself the sin of binding
her young life--"

"Stop! stop!" Thyone interrupted with eager warmth. "She loves you, and
to be everything to you is the greatest happiness she can imagine."

"Until repentance awakes, and it is too late," he answered gravely.
"But even were her love strong enough to share her husband's misfortune
patiently--nay, perhaps with joyous courage--it would still be
contemptible baseness were I to profit by that love and seek her hand."

"Hermon!" the matron now exclaimed reproachfully; but he repeated with
strong emphasis: "Yes, it would be baseness so great that even her most
ardent love could not save me from the reproach of having committed it.
I will not speak of her father, to whom I am so greatly indebted. It may
be that it might satisfy Daphne, full of kindness as she is, to devote
herself, body and soul, to the service of her helpless companion. But
I? Far from thinking constantly, like her, solely of others and their
welfare, I should only too often, selfish as I now am, be mindful of
myself. But when I realize who I am, I see before me a blind man who is
poorer than a beggar, because the scorching flames melted even the gold
which was to help him pay his debts."

"Folly!" cried the matron. "For what did Archias gather his boundless
treasures? And when his daughter is once yours--"

"Then," Hermon went on bitterly, "the blinded artist's poverty will be
over. That is your opinion, and the majority of people will share it.
But I have my peculiarities, and the thought of being rescued from
hunger and thirst by the woman I love, and who ought to see in me the
man from whom she receives the best gifts--to be dependent on her as
the recipient of her alms--seems to me worse than if I were once more to
lose my sight. I could not endure it at all! Every mouthful would choke
me. Just because she is so dear to me, I can not seek her hand; for,
in return for her great self-sacrificing love, I could give her nothing
save the keen discontent which seizes the proud soul that is forced
constantly to accept benefits, as surely as the ringing sound follows
the blow upon the brass. My whole future life would become a chain of
humiliations, and do you know whither this unfortunate marriage would
lead? My teacher Straton once said that a man learns to hate no one more
easily than the person from whom he receives benefits which it is out
of his power to repay. That is wise, and before I will see my great love
for Daphne transformed to hate, I will again try the starving which,
while I was a sculptor at Rhodes, I learned tolerably well."

"But would not a great love," asked Thyone, "suffice to repay tenfold
the perishable gifts that can be bought with gold and silver?"

"No, and again no!" Hermon answered in an agitated tone. "Something else
would blend with the love I brought to the marriage, something that must
destroy all the compensation it might offer; for I see myself becoming
a resentful misanthrope if I am compelled to relinquish the pleasure of
creating and, condemned to dull inaction, can do nothing except allow
myself to be tended, drink, eat, and sleep. The gloomy mood of her
unfortunate husband would sadden Daphne's existence even more than my
own; for, Thyone, though I should strive with all my strength to bear
patiently, with her dear aid, the burden imposed upon me, and move on
through the darkness with joyous courage, like many another blind man, I
could not succeed."

"You are a man," the matron exclaimed indignantly, "and what thousands
have done before you--"

"There," he loudly protested, "I should surely fail; for, you dear
woman, who mean so kindly by me, my fate is worse than theirs. Do you
know what just forced from my lips the exclamation of pain which alarmed
you? I, the only child of the devout Erigone, for whose sake you are so
well disposed toward me, am doomed to misfortune as surely as the victim
dragged to the altar is certain of death. Of all the goddesses, there is
only one in whose power I believe, and to whom I just raised my hands in
prayer. It is the terrible one to whom I was delivered by hate and the
deceived love which is now dragging me by the hair, and will rob and
torture me till I despair of life. I mean the gray daughter of Night,
whom no one escapes, dread Nemesis."

Thyone sank down into the chair by the blind artist's side, asking
softly, "And what gave you into her avenging hands, hapless boy?"

"My own abominable folly," he answered mournfully and, with the feeling
that it would relieve his heart to pour out to this true friend what he
would usually have confided only to his Myrtilus, he hurriedly related
how he had recognised in Ledscha the best model for his Arachne, how he
had sought her love, and then, detained by Althea, left her in the lurch
and most deeply offended and insulted her. Lastly, he gave a brief but
vivid description of his meeting with the vengeful barbarian girl in
the Temple of Nemesis, how Ledscha had invoked upon him the wrath of the
terrible goddess, and how the most horrible punishment had fallen upon
him directly after the harsh accusation of the Biamite.

The matron had listened to this confession in breathless suspense. Now
she fixed her eyes on the floor, shook her gray head gently, and said
anxiously: "Is that it? It certainly puts things in a different light.
As the son of your never-to-be-forgotten mother, you are indeed dear to
my heart; but Daphne is not less dear to me, and though in your marriage
I just saw happiness for you both, that is now past. What is poverty,
what is blindness! Eros would reconcile far more difficult problems, but
his arrows are shattered on the armour of Nemesis. Where there is a pair
of lovers, and she raises her scourge against one of them, the other
will also be struck. Until you feel that you are freed from this
persecutor, it would be criminal to bind a loving woman to you and your
destiny. It is not easy to find the right path for you both, for even
Nemesis and her power do not make the slightest change in the fact that
you need faithful care and watching in your blindness. Daylight brings
wisdom, and we will talk further to-morrow."

She rose as she spoke; but Hermon detained her, while from his lips
escaped the anxious question, "So you will take Daphne away from me, and
leave me alone in my blindness?"

"You in your blindness?" cried Thyone, and the mere reproachful tone of
the question banished the fear. "I would as quickly deprive my own son
of my support as I would you just at this time, my poor boy; but whether
my conscience will permit me to let Daphne remain near you only grant
me, I repeat it, until sunrise to-morrow for reflection. My old heart
will then find the right way."

"Yet whatever you may decide concerning us," pleaded the blind man,
"tell Daphne that, on the eve of losing her, I first felt in its full
power how warmly I love her. Even without Nemesis, the joy of making
her mine would have been denied me. Fate will never permit me to possess
her; yet never again to hear her gentle voice, never more to feel her
dear presence, would be blinding me a second time."

"It need not be imposed upon you long," said the matron soothingly.

Then she went close to him, laid her hand on his shoulder, and said:
"The power of the goddess who punishes the misdeeds of the reckless is
called irresistible and uncontrollable; but one thing softens even her,
and checks her usually resistless wheel: it is a mother's prayer. I
heard this from my own mother, and experienced it myself, especially in
my oldest son Eumedes, who from the wildest madcap became an ornament
of his class, and to whom the King--you doubtless know it--intrusted the
command of the fleet which is to open the Ethiopian land of elephants
to the Egyptian power. You, Hermon, are an orphan, but for you, too,
the souls of your parents live on. Only I do not know whether you still
honour and pray to them."

"I did until a few years ago," replied Hermon.

"But later you neglected this sacred duty," added Thyone. "Yet how was
that possible? In our barren Pelusium I could not help thinking hundreds
of times of the grove which Archias planted in your necropolis for the
dead members of his family, and how often, while we were in Alexandria,
it attracted me to think in its shade of your never-to-be-forgotten
mother. There I felt her soul near me; for there was her home, and in
imagination I saw her walking and resting under the trees. And you--her
beloved child--you remained aloof from this hallowed spot! Even at the
festival of the dead you omitted prayers and sacrifices?"

The blind artist assented to this question by a silent bend of the head;
but the matron indignantly exclaimed: "And did not you know, unhappy
man, that you were thus casting away the shield which protects mortals
from the avenging gods? And your glorious mother, who would have given
her life for you? Yet you loved her, I suppose?"

"Thyone!" Hermon cried, deeply wounded, holding out his right hand as if
in defence. "Well, well!" said the matron. "I know that you revere her
memory. But that alone is not sufficient. On memorial festivals, and
especially on the birthdays, a mother's soul needs a prayer and a gift
from the son, a wreath, a fillet, fragrant ointment, a piece of honey, a
cup of wine or milk--all these things even the poor man spares from his
penury--yet a warm prayer, in pure remembrance and love, would suffice
to rob the wrath of Nemesis, which the enraged barbarian girl let loose
upon you, of its power. Only your mother, Hermon, the soul of the noble
woman who bore you, can restore to you what you have lost. Appeal for
aid to her, son of Erigone, and she will yet make everything right."

Bending quickly over the artist as she spoke, she kissed his brow and
moved steadily away, though he called her name with yearning entreaty.

A short time after, the steward Gras led Hermon to his cabin, and while
undressing him reported that a messenger from Pelusium had announced
that the commandant Philippus was coming to Tennis the next morning,
before the market place filled, to take his wife with him to Alexandria,
where he was going by the King's command.

Hermon only half listened, and then ordered the Bithynian to leave him.

After he had reclined on the couch a short time, he softly called the
names of the steward, Thyone, and Daphne. As he received no answer, and
thus learned that he was alone, he rose, drew himself up to his full
height, gazed heavenward with his bandaged eyes, stretched both hands
toward the ceiling of the low cabin, and obeyed his friend's bidding.

Thoroughly convinced that he was doing right, and ashamed of having
so long neglected what the duty of a son commanded, he implored his
mother's soul for forgiveness.

While doing so he again found that the figure which he recalled to his
memory appeared before him with marvellous distinctness. Never had she
been so near him since, when a boy of seven, she clasped him for the
last time to her heart. She tenderly held out her arms to him, and he
rushed into her embrace, shouting exultantly while she hugged and kissed
him. Every pet name which he had once been so glad to hear, and during
recent years had forgotten, again fell from her lips. As had often
happened in days long past, he again saw his mother crown him for a
festival. Pleased with the little new garment which she herself had
woven for him and embroidered with a tiny tree with red apples, beneath
which stood a bright-plumaged duckling, she led him by the hand in the
necropolis to the empty tomb dedicated to his father.

It was a building the height of a man, constructed of red Cyprian
marble, on which, cast in bronze, shield, sword, and lance, as well as
a beautiful helmet, lay beside a sleeping lion. It was dedicated to
the memory of the brave hipparch whom he had been permitted to call his
father, and who had been burned beside the battlefield on which he had
found a hero's death.

Hermon now again beheld himself, with his mother, garlanding, anointing,
and twining with fresh fillets the mausoleum erected by his uncle
Archias to his brave brother. The species of every flower, the colour
of the fillets-nay, even the designs embroidered on his little holiday
robe--again returned to his mind, and, while these pleasant memories
hovered around him, he appealed to his mother in prayer.

She stood before him, young and beautiful, listening without reproach or
censure as he besought her forgiveness and confided to her his sins, and
how severely he was punished by Nemesis.

During this confession he felt as though he was kneeling before the
beloved dead, hiding his face in her lap, while she bent over him and
stroked his thick, black hair. True, he did not hear her speak; but when
he looked up again he could see, by the expression of her faithful blue
eyes, that his manly appearance surprised her, and that she rejoiced in
his return to her arms.

She listened compassionately to his laments, and when he paused
pressed his head to her bosom and gazed into his face with such joyous
confidence that his heart swelled, and he told himself that she could
not look at him thus unless she saw happiness in store for him.

Lastly, he began also to confide that he loved no woman on earth more
ardently than the very Daphne whom, when only a pretty little child, she
had carried in her arms, yet that he could not seek the wealthy heiress
because manly pride forbade this to the blind beggar.

Here the anguish of renunciation seized him with great violence, and
when he wished to appeal again to his mother his exhausted imagination
refused its service, and the vision would not appear.

Then he groped his way back to the bed, and, as he let his head sink
upon the pillows, he fancied that he would soon be again enwrapped in
the sweet slumber of childhood, which had long shunned his couch.

It was years since he had felt so full of peace and hope, and he told
himself, with grateful joy, that every childlike emotion had not yet
died within him, that the stern conflicts and struggles of the last
years had not yet steeled every gentle emotion.




CHAPTER IV.

The sun of the following day had long passed its meridian when Hermon
at last woke. The steward Gras, who had grown gray in the service of
Archias, was standing beside the couch.

There was nothing in the round, beardless face of this well-fed yet
active man that could have attracted the artist, yet the quiet tones of
his deep voice recalled to memory the clear, steadfast gaze of his gray
eyes, from which so often, in former days, inviolable fidelity, sound
sense, caution, and prudence had looked forth at him.

What the blind man heard from Gras surprised him--nay, at first seemed
impossible. To sleep until the afternoon was something unprecedented for
his wakeful temperament; but what was he to say to the tidings that
the commandant of Pelusium had arrived in his state galley early in
the morning and taken his wife, Daphne, and Chrysilla away with him to
Alexandria?

Yet it sounded credible enough when the Bithynian further informed him
that the ladies had left messages of remembrance for him, and said that
Archias's ship, upon which he was, would be at his disposal for any
length of time he might desire. Gras was commissioned to attend him. The
Lady Thyone especially desired him to heed her counsel.

While the steward was communicating this startling news as calmly as
if everything was a matter of course, the events of the preceding night
came back to Hermon's memory with perfect distinctness, and again the
fear assailed him that the rescued Demeter was the work of Myrtilus, and
not his own.

So the first question he addressed to Gras concerned the Tennis
goldsmith, and it was a keen disappointment to Hermon when he learned
that the earliest time he could expect to see him would be the following
day. The skilful artisan had been engaged for weeks upon the gold
ornaments on the new doors of the holy of holies in the Temple of Amon
at Tanis. Urgent business had called him home from the neighbouring
city just before the night of the attack; but yesterday evening he had
returned to Tanis, where his wife said he would have only two days' work
to do.

This answer, however, by no means appeased Hermon's impatience.
He commanded that a special messenger should be sent to summon the
goldsmith, and the Bithynian received the order with a slight shake of
his round head.

What new trouble had befallen the usually alert young artist that he
received this unexpected change in his situation as apathetically as
a horse which is led from one stall to another, and, instead of
questioning him, thought only of hastening his interview with the
goldsmith? If his mistress, who had left him full of anxiety from the
fear that her departure would deeply agitate the blind man, should learn
how indifferently he had received it! He, Gras, certainly would not
betray it. Eternal gods--these artists! He knew them. Their work was
dearer to their hearts than their own lives, love, or friendship.

During breakfast, of which the steward was obliged to remind him, Hermon
pondered over his fate; but how could he attain any degree of clearness
of vision until he secured accurate information concerning the statue
of Demeter? Like a dark cloud, which sweeps over the starry sky and
prevents the astronomer from seeing the planets which he desires to
observe, the fear that Proclus's praise had been bestowed upon the work
of Myrtilus stood between him and every goal of his thought.

Only the fact that he still remained blind, and not even the faintest
glimmer of light pierced the surrounding darkness, while the sun
continued its course with glowing radiance, and that, blinded and
beggared, he must despise himself if he sought to win Daphne, was
certain. No reflection could alter it.

Again the peace of mind which he thought he had regained during
slumber was destroyed. Fear of the artisan's statement even rendered it
impossible to pray to his mother with the affectionate devotion he had
felt the day before.

The goldsmith had directed the rescue of the Demeter, yet he would
scarcely have been able to distinguish it from the statue by Myrtilus;
for though, like his friend, he had often employed his skilful hands in
the arrangement of the gold plates at the commencement of the work, the
Egyptian had been summoned to Tennis before the statues had attained
recognisable form. He had not entered the studios for several months,
unless Bias had granted him admittance without informing his master.
This was quite possible, for the slave's keen eyes certainly had not
failed to notice how little he and Myrtilus valued the opinion of the
honest, skilful, but extremely practical and unimaginative man, who
could not create independently even the smallest detail.

So it was impossible to determine at present whether Chello had seen
the finished statues or not, yet Hermon desired the former with actual
fervour, that he might have positive certainty.

While reflecting over these matters, the image of the lean Egyptian
goldsmith, with his narrow, brown, smooth-shaven face and skull,
prominent cheek bones, receding brow, projecting ears and, with all
its keenness, lustreless glance, rose before him as if he could see
his bodily presence. Not a single word unconnected with his trade,
the weather, or an accident, had ever reached the friends' ears from
Chello's thick lips, and this circumstance seemed to warrant Hermon in
the expectation of learning from him the pure, unadulterated truth.

Rarely had a messenger of love been awaited with such feverish suspense
as the slave whom Gras had despatched to Tanis to induce the goldsmith
to return home. He might come soon after nightfall, and Hermon used the
interval to ask the Bithynian the questions which he had long expected.

The replies afforded little additional information. He learned only that
Philippus had been summoned to Alexandria by the King, and that the Lady
Thyone and her husband had talked with the leech and assented to his
opinion that it would be better for Hermon to wait here until the burns
on his face were healed before returning to Alexandria.

For Daphne's sake this decision had undoubtedly been welcome to the
matron, and it pleased him also; for he still felt so ill physically,
and so agitated mentally, that he shrank from meeting his numerous
acquaintances in the capital.

The goldsmith! the goldsmith! It depended upon his decision whether he
would return to Alexandria at all.

Soon after Hermon had learned from Gras that the stars had risen, he
was informed that he must wait patiently for his interview with the
Egyptian, as he had been summoned to the capital that very day by a
messenger from Proclus.

Then the steward had fresh cause to marvel at his charge, for this news
aroused the most vehement excitement.

In fact, it afforded the prospect of a series--perhaps a long one--of
the most torturing days and nights. And the dreaded hours actually
came--nay, the anguish of uncertainty had become almost unendurable,
when, on the seventh day, the Egyptian at last returned from Alexandria.
They had seemed like weeks to Hermon, had made his face thinner, and
mingled the first silver hairs in his black beard.

The calls of the cheerful notary and the daily visits of the leech, an
elderly man, who had depressed rather than cheered him by informing him
of many cases like his own which all proved incurable, had been his sole
diversion. True, the heads of the Greek residents of Tennis had also
sometimes sought him: the higher government officials, the lessees of
the oil monopoly and the royal bank, as well as Gorgias, who, next to
Archias the Alexandrian, owned the largest weaving establishments, but
the tales of daily incidents with which they entertained Hermon
wearied him. He listened with interest only to the story of Ledscha's
disappearance, yet he perceived, from the very slight impression it made
upon him, how little he had really cared for the Biamite girl.

His inquiries about Gula called down upon him many well-meant jests. She
was with her parents; while Taus, Ledscha's young sister, was staying
at the brick-kiln, where the former had reduced the unruly slaves to
submission.

Care had been taken to provide for his personal safety, for the attack
might perhaps yet prove to have been connected with the jealousy of the
Biamite husbands.

The commandant of Pelusium had therefore placed a small garrison of
heavily armed soldiers and archers in Tennis, for whom tents had been
pitched on the site of the burned white house.

Words of command and signals for changing the guards often reached
Hermon when he was on the deck of his ship, and visitors praised the
wise caution and prompt action of Alexander the Great's old comrade.

The notary, a vivacious man of fifty, who had lived a long time in
Alexandria and, asserting that he grew dull and withered in little
Tennis, went to the capital as frequently as possible, had often called
upon the sculptor at first, and been disposed to discuss art and the
other subjects dear to Hermon's heart, but on the third day he again
set off for his beloved Alexandria. When saying farewell, he had been
unusually merry, and asked Hermon to send him away with good wishes
and offer sacrifices for the success of his business, since he hoped to
bring a valuable gift on his return from the journey.

The blind artist was glad to have other visits for a short time, but he
preferred to be alone and devote his thoughts to his own affairs.

He now knew that his love was genuine. Daphne seemed the very
incarnation of desirable, artless, heart-refreshing womanliness, but his
memory could not dwell with her long; anxiety concerning Chello's report
only too quickly interrupted it, as soon as he yielded to its charm.

He did not think at all of the future. What was he to appoint for a time
which the words of a third person might render unendurable?

When Gras at last ushered in the goldsmith, his heart throbbed so
violently that it was difficult for him to find the words needed for the
questions he desired to ask.

The Egyptian had really been summoned to Alexandria by Proclus, not on
account of the Demeter, but the clasp said to belong to Myrtilus, found
amid the ruins of the fallen house, and he had been able to identify it
with absolute positiveness as the sculptor's property.

He had been referred from one office to another, until finally the
Tennis notary and Proclus opened the right doors to him.

Now the importance of his testimony appeared, since the will of the
wealthy young sculptor could not be opened until his death was proved,
and the clasp which had been found aided in doing so.

Hermon's question whether he had heard any particulars about this will
was answered by the cold-hearted, dull-brained man in the negative.

He had done enough, he said, by expressing his opinion. He had gone to
Alexandria unwillingly, and would certainly have stayed in Tennis if he
could have foreseen what a number of tiresome examinations he would
be obliged to undergo. He had been burning with impatience to quit the
place, on account of the important work left behind in Tanis, and he
did not even know whether he would be reimbursed for his travelling
expenses.

During this preliminary conversation Hermon gained the composure he
needed.

He began by ascertaining whether Chello remembered the interior
arrangement of the burned white house, and it soon appeared that he
recollected it accurately.

Then the blind man requested him to tell how the rescue of the statue
had been managed, and the account of the extremely prosaic artisan
described so clearly and practically how, on entering the burning
building, he found Myrtilus's studio already inaccessible, but the
statue of Demeter in Hermon's still uninjured, that the trustworthiness
of his story could not be doubted.

One circumstance only appeared strange, yet it was easily explained.
Instead of standing on the pedestal, the Demeter was beside it, and even
the slow-witted goldsmith inferred from this fact that the robbers had
intended to steal it and placed it on the floor for that purpose, but
were prevented from accomplishing their design by the interference of
Hermon and the people from Tennis.

After the Egyptian, in reply to the artist's inquiry concerning what
other works of art and implements he had seen in the studio, had
answered that nothing else could be distinguished on account of the
smoke, he congratulated the sculptor on his last work. People were
already making a great stir about the new Demeter. It had been discussed
not only in the workshop of his brother, who, like himself, followed
their father's calling, but also in the offices, at the harbour, in the
barbers' rooms and the cookshops, and he, too, must admit that, for a
Greek goddess, that always lacked genuine, earnest dignity, it really
was a pretty bit of work.

Lastly, the Egyptian asked to whom he should apply for payment for the
remainder of his labour.

The strip of gold, from which Hermon had ordered the diadem to be made,
had attracted his attention on the head of his Demeter, and compensation
for the work upon this ornament was still due.

Hermon, deeply agitated, asked, with glowing cheeks, whether Chello
really positively remembered having prepared for him the gold diadem
which he had seen in Alexandria, and the Egyptian eagerly assured him
that he had done so. Hitherto he had found the sculptors honest men, and
Hermon would not withhold the payment for his well-earned toil.

The artist strenuously denied such an intention; but when, in his desire
to have the most absolute assurance, he again asked questions about the
diadem, the Egyptian thought that the blind sculptor doubted the justice
of his demand, and wrathfully insisted upon his claim, until Gras
managed to whisper, undetected by Hermon, that he would have the money
ready for him.

This satisfied the angry man. He honestly believed that he had prepared
the gold for the ornament on the head of the Demeter in Alexandria; yet
the statue chiselled by Myrtilus had also been adorned with a diadem,
and Chello had wrought the strip of gold it required. Only it had
escaped his memory, because he had been paid for the work immediately
after its delivery.

Glad to obey his mistress's orders to settle at once any debts which the
artist might have in Tennis, the steward followed the goldsmith while
Hermon, seizing the huge goblet which had just been filled with wine and
water for him drained it at one long draught. Then, with sigh of relief,
he restored it to its place, raised his hand and his blinded eyes
heavenward, and offered a brief, fervent thanksgiving to his mother's
soul and the great Demeter, whom, he might now believe it himself, he
had honoured with a masterpiece which had extorted warm admiration even
from a connoisseur unfriendly his art.

When Gras returned, he said, with a grin of satisfaction, that the
goldsmith was like all the rest of his countrymen. The artists did not
owe him another drachm; the never-to-be-forgotten Myrtilus had paid for
the work ordered by Hermon also.

Then, for the first time since he had been led on board the ship, a gay
laugh rang fro the blind man's lips, rising in deep, pure, joyous tones
from his relieved breast.

The faithful gray eyes of honest Gras glittered with tears at the
musical tones, and how ardently he wished for his beloved mistress
when the sculptor, not content with this, exclaimed as gleefully as in
happier days: "Hitherto I have had no real pleasure from my successful
work, old Gras, but it is awaking now! If my Myrtilus were still alive,
and these miserable eyes yet possessed the power of rejoicing in the
light and in beautiful human forms, by the dog! I would have the mixing
vessels filled, wreath after wreath brought, boon companions summoned,
and with flute-playing, songs, and fiery words, offer the Muses,
Demeter, and Dionysus their due meed of homage!"

Gras declared that this wish might easily be fulfilled. There was no
lack of wine or drinking cups on the vessel, the flute-players whom he
had heard in the Odeum at Tanis did not understand their business amiss,
flowers and wreaths could be obtained, and all who spoke Greek in Tennis
would accept his invitation.

But the Bithynian soon regretted this proposal, for it fell like a
hoar-frost upon the blind man's happy mood. He curtly declined. He would
not play host where he was himself a guest, and pride forbade him to use
the property of others as though it were his own.

He could not regain his suddenly awakened pleasure in existence before
Gras warned him it was time to go to rest. Not until he was alone in the
quiet cabin did the sense of joy in his first great success overpower
him afresh.

He might well feel proud delight in the work which he had created, for
he had accomplished it without being unfaithful to the aims he had set
before him.

It had been taken from his own studio, and the skilful old artisan had
recognised his preliminary work upon the diadem which he, Hermon, had
afterward adorned with ornaments himself. But, alas! this first must at
the same time be his last great success, and he was condemned to live on
in darkness.

Although abundant recognition awaited him in Alexandria, his quickly
gained renown would soon be forgotten, and he would remain a beggared
blind man. But it was now allowable for him to think secretly of
possessing Daphne; perhaps she would wait for him and reject other
suitors until he learned in the capital whether he might not hope to
recover his lost sight. He was at least secure against external want;
the generous Archias would hardly withhold from him the prize he
had intended for the successful statue, although the second had been
destroyed. The great merchant would do everything for his fame-crowned
nephew, and he, Hermon, was conscious that had his uncle been in his
situation he would have divided his last obol with him. Refusal of
his assistance would have been an insult to his paternal friend and
guardian.

Lastly, he might hope that Archias would take him to the most skilful
leeches in Alexandria and, if they succeeded in restoring his lost power
of vision, then--then Yet it seemed so presumptuous to lull himself in
this hope that he forbade himself the pleasure of indulging it.

Amid these consoling reflections, Hermon fell asleep, and awoke fresher
and more cheerful than he had been for some time.

He had to spend two whole weeks more in Tennis, for the burns healed
slowly, and an anxious fear kept him away from Alexandria.

There the woman he loved would again meet him and, though he could
assure Thyone that Nemesis had turned her wheel away from him, he would
have been permitted to treat Daphne only with cool reserve, while every
fibre of his being urged him to confess his love and clasp her in his
arms.

Gras had already written twice to his master, telling him with what
gratifying patience Hermon was beginning to submit to his great
misfortune, when the notary Melampus returned from Alexandria with news
which produced the most delightful transformation in the blind artist's
outer life.

More swiftly than his great corpulence usually permitted the jovial man
to move, he ascended to the deck, calling: "Great, greater, the greatest
of news I bring, as the heaviest but by no means the most dilatory of
messengers of good fortune from the city of cities. Prick up your ears,
my friend, and summon all your strength, for there are instances of the
fatal effect of especially lavish gifts from the blind and yet often
sure aim of the goddess of Fortune. The Demeter, in whom you proved so
marvellously that the art of a mortal is sufficient to create immortals,
is beginning to show her gratitude. She is helping to twine wreaths for
you in Alexandria."

Here the vivacious man suddenly hesitated and, while wiping his plump
cheeks, perspiring brow, and smooth, fat double chin with his kerchief,
added in a tone of sincere regret: "That's the way with me! In one thing
which really moves me, I always forget the other. The fault sticks to me
like my ears and nose. When my mother gave me two errands, I attended to
the first in the best possible way, but overlooked the second entirely,
and was paid for it with my father's staff, yet even the blue wales made
no change in the fault. But for that I should still be in the city of
cities; but it robbed me of my best clients, and so I was transferred
to this dullest of holes. Even here it clings to me. My detestable
exultation just now proves it. Yet I know how dear to you was the dead
man who manifests his love even from the grave. But you will forgive me
the false note into which my weakness led me; it sprang from regard for
you, my young friend. To serve your cause, I forgot everything else.
Like my mother's first errand, it was performed in the best possible
way. You will learn directly. By the lightnings of Father Zeus and the
owl of Athene, the news I bring is certainly great and beautiful; but
he who yearned to make you happy was snatched from you and, though his
noble legacy must inspire pleasure and gratitude, it will nevertheless
fill your poor eyes with sorrowful tears."

Melampus turned, as he spoke, to the misshapen Egyptian slave who
performed the duties of a clerk, and took several rolls from the
drumshaped case that hung around his neck; but his prediction concerning
Hermon was speedily fulfilled, for the notary handed him the will of his
friend Myrtilus.

It made him the heir of his entire fortune and, however happy the
unexpected royal gift rendered the blind man, however cheering might
be the prospects it opened to him for the future and the desire of
his heart, sobs nevertheless interrupted the affectionate words which
commenced the document Melampus read aloud to him.

Doubtless the tears which Hermon dedicated to the most beloved of human
beings made his blinded eyes smart, but he could not restrain them,
and even long after the notary had left him, and the steward had
congratulated him on his good fortune, the deep emotion of his tender
heart again and again called forth a fresh flood of tears consecrated to
the memory of his friend.

The notary had already informed the grammateus of the disposition which
Myrtilus had made of his property in Hermon's favour a few days before,
but, by the advice of the experienced Proclus, the contents of the will
had been withheld from the sculptor; the unfortunate man ought to be
spared any disappointment, and proof that Myrtilus was really among the
victims of the accident must first be obtained.

The clasp found in the ruins of the white house appeared to furnish
this, and the notary had put all other business aside and gone to
Alexandria to settle the matter.

The goldsmith Chello, who had fastened a new pin to the clasp, and could
swear that it had belonged to Myrtilus, had been summoned to the capital
as a witness, and, with the aid of the influential grammateus of
the Dionysian games and priest of Apollo, the zeal of Melampus had
accomplished in a short time the settlement of this difficult affair,
which otherwise might perhaps have consumed several months.

The violent death of Myrtilus had been admitted as proved by the
magistrate, who had been prepossessed in Hermon's favour by his
masterpiece. Besides, no doubts could be raised concerning the validity
of a will attested by sixteen witnesses. The execution of this last
testament had been intrusted to Archias, as Myrtilus's nearest relative,
and several other distinguished Alexandrians.

The amount of the fortune bequeathed had surprised even these wealthy
men, for under the prudent management of Archias the property inherited
by the modest young sculptor had trebled in value.

The poor blind artist had suddenly become a man who might be termed
"rich," even in the great capital.

Again the steward shook his head; this vast, unexpected inheritance did
not seem to make half so deep an impression upon the eccentric blind
man as the news received a short time ago that his trivial debt to the
goldsmith Chello was already settled. But Hermon must have dearly loved
the friend to whom he owed this great change of fortune, and grief for
him had cast joy in his immense new wealth completely into the shade.

This conjecture was confirmed on the following morning, for the blind
man had himself led to the Greek necropolis to offer sacrifices to the
gods of the nether world and to think of his friend.

When, soon after noon, the lessee of the royal bank appeared on the ship
to offer him as many drachmae or talents as he might need for present
use, he asked for a considerable sum to purchase a larger death-offering
for his murdered friend. The next morning he went with the architect
of the province to the scene of the conflagration, and had him mark the
spot of ground on which he desired to erect to his Myrtilus a monument
to be made in Alexandria.

At sunset, leaning on the steward's arm, he went to the Temple of
Nemesis, where he prayed and commissioned the priest to offer a costly
sacrifice to the goddess in his name.

On the return home, Hermon suddenly stood still and mentioned to Gras
the sum which he intended to bestow upon the blind in Tennis. He knew
now what it means to live bereft of light, and, he added in a low tone,
to be also poor and unable to earn his daily bread.

On the ship he asked the Bithynian whether his burned face had become
presentable again, and no longer made a repulsive impression.

This Gras could truthfully assure him. Then the artist's features
brightened, and the Bithynian heard genuine cheerfulness ring in the
tones of his voice as he exclaimed: "Then, old Gras, we will set out for
Alexandria as soon as the ship is ready to sail. Back to life, to the
society of men of my own stamp, to reap the praise earned by my own
creations, and to the only divine maiden among mortals--to Daphne!"

"The day after to-morrow!" exclaimed the steward in joyous excitement;
and soon after the carrier dove was flying toward the house of Archias,
bearing the letter which stated the hour when his fame-crowned blind
nephew would enter the great harbour of Alexandria.

The evening of the next day but one the Proserpina was bearing Hermon
away from the city of weavers toward home.

As the evening breeze fanned his brow, his thoughts dwelt sadly on his
Myrtilus. Hitherto it had always seemed as if he was bound, and must
commit some atrocious deed to use the seething power condemned to
inaction. But as the galley left the Tanitic branch of the Nile behind,
and the blind man inhaled the cool air upon the calm sea, his heart
swelled, and for the first time he became fully aware that, though the
light of the sun would probably never shine for him again, and therefore
the joy of creating, the rapture of once more testing his fettered
strength, would probably be forever denied him, other stars might
perhaps illumine his path, and he was going, in a position of brilliant
independence, toward his native city, fame, and--eternal gods!--love.

Daphne had conquered, and he gave only a passing thought to Ledscha and
the hapless weaver Arachne.




CHAPTER V.

At the third hour after sunrise a distinguished assemblage of people
gathered at the landing place east of the Temple of Poseidon in the
great harbour of Alexandria.

Its members belonged to the upper classes, for many had come in
carriages and litters, and numerous pedestrians were accompanied by
slaves bearing in delicately woven baskets and cornucopias a laurel
wreath, a papyrus crown, or bright-hued flowers.

The most aristocratic among the gentlemen had gathered on the western
side of the great sanctuary, between the cella and the long row of Doric
columns which supported the roof of the marble temple.

The Macedonian Council of the city was already represented by several of
its members. Among their number was Archias, Daphne's father, a man
of middle height and comfortable portliness, from whose well-formed,
beardless face looked forth a pair of shrewd eyes, and whose quick
movements revealed the slight irritability of his temperament.

Several members of the Council and wealthy merchants surrounded
him, while the grammateus Proclus first talked animatedly with other
government officials and representatives of the priesthood, and then
with Archias. The head of the Museum, who bore the title of "high
priest," had also appeared there with several members of this famous
centre of the intellectual life of the capital. They shared the shade
of this part of the temple with distinguished masters of sculpture
and painting, architecture and poetry, and conversed together with the
graceful animation of Greeks endowed with great intellectual gifts.

Among them mingled, distinguishable neither by costume nor language, a
number of prominent patrons of art in the great Jewish community.
Their principal, the alabarch, was talking eagerly with the philosopher
Hegesias and the Rhodian leech Chrysippus; Queen Arsinoe's favourite,
whom at Althea's instigation she had sent with Proclus to receive the
returning traveller.

Sometimes all gazed toward the mouth of the harbour, where the expected
ship must soon pass the recently completed masterpiece of Sostratus, the
towering lighthouse, still shining in its marble purity.

Soon many Alexandrians also crowded the large platform in front of the
Temple of Poseidon, and the very wide marble staircase leading from it
to the landing place.

Beneath the bronze statues of the Dioscuri, at the right and left of the
topmost step, had also gathered the magnificent figures of the Phebi and
the younger men from the wrestling school of Timagetes, with garlands on
their curling locks, as well as many younger artists and pupils of the
older masters.

The statues of the gods and goddesses of the sea and their lofty
pedestals, standing at the sides of the staircase, cast upon the marble
steps, gleaming in the radiance of the morning sun, narrow shadows,
which attracted the male and female chorus singers, who, also wearing
beautiful garlands, had come to greet the expected arrival with solemn
chants.

Several actors were just coming from rehearsal in the theatre of
Dionysus, east of the Temple of Poseidon, of which, like all the stages
in the city, Proclus was chief manager.

A pretty dancing girl, who hung on the arm of the youngest, extended her
hand with a graceful gesture toward the staircase, and asked:

"Whom can they be expecting there? Probably some huge new animal for the
Museum which has been caught somewhere for the King, for yonder stiff
wearer of a laurel crown, who throws his head back as though he would
like to eat the Olympians and take the King for a luncheon into the
bargain, is Straton, the denier of the gods, and the little man with the
bullethead is the grammarian Zoilus."

"Of course," replied her companion. "But there, too, is Apollodorus, the
alabarch of the Jews, and the heavy money-bag Archias--"

"Why look at them!" cried the younger mime. "It's far better worth
while to stretch your neck for those farther in front. They are genuine
friends of the Muses--the poets Theocritus and Zenodotus."

"The great Athene, Apollo, and all his nine Pierides, have sent their
envoys," said the older actor pathetically, "for there, too, are
the sculptors Euphranor and Chares, and the godlike builder of the
lighthouse, Sostratus in person."

"A handsome man," cried the girl flute-player, "but vain, I tell you,
vain--"

"Self-conscious, you ought to say," corrected her companion.

"Certainly," added the older actor, patting his smooth cheeks and chin
with a rose he held in his hand. "Who can defend himself against the
highest merit, self-knowledge? But the person who is to have this
reception, by the staff of Dionysus! if modesty flies away from him
like the bird from a girl, it ought Just look there! The tall,
broad-shouldered fellow yonder is Chrysippus, the right hand of Arsinoe,
as our grammateus Proclus is her left. So probably some prince is
expected."

"The gentlemen of the Museum and the great artists yonder would not stir
a foot, far less lose so precious a morning hour, for any mere wearer of
a crown or sceptre," protested the other actor; "it must be--"

"That the King or the Queen command it," interrupted the older player.
"Only Arsinoe is represented here. Or do you see any envoy of Ptolemy?
Perhaps they will yet arrive. If there were ambassadors of the great
Roman Senate--"

"Or," added the dancer, "envoys from King Antiochus. But--goose that I
am!--then they would not be received here, but in the royal harbour at
the Lochias. See if I don't prove to be right! Divine honours are to be
paid to some newly attracted hero of the intellect. But--just follow my
finger! There--yonder--it comes floating along at the left of the
island of Antirrhodus. That may be his galley! Magnificent! Wonderfully
beautiful! Brilliant! Like a swan! No, no, like a swimming peacock! And
the silver embroidery on the blue sails! It glitters and sparkles like
stars in the azure sky."

Meanwhile the elder actor, shading his eyes with his hand, had been
gazing at the harbour, where, amid the innumerable vessels, the expected
one, whose sails were just being reefed, was steered by a skilful
hand. Now he interrupted the blond beauty with the exclamation: "It is
Archias's Proserpina! I know it well." Then, in a declamatory tone, he
continued: "I, too, was permitted on the deck of the glittering vessel,
lightly rocked by the crimson waves, to reach my welcome goal; as the
guest of peerless Archias, I mean. The most magnificent festival in
his villa! There was a little performance there in which Mentor and I
allowed ourselves to be persuaded to take part. But just see how the
beautiful ship uses the narrow passage between the two triremes, as
if it had the bloodleech's power of contraction! But to return to
the festival of Archias: the oyster ragout served there, the pheasant
pasties--"

Here he interrupted himself, exclaiming in surprise: "By the club of
Hercules, the Proserpina is to be received with a full chorus! And there
is the owner himself descending the stairs! Whom is she bringing?"

"Come! come!" cried the dancing girl to her companion, dragging him
after her, "I shall die of curiosity."

The singing and shouting of many voices greeted the actors as they
approached the platform of the Temple of Poseidon.

When from this spot the dancer fixed her eyes upon the landing place,
she suddenly dropped her companion's arm, exclaiming: "It is the
handsome blind sculptor, Hermon, the heir of the wealthy Myrtilus. Do
you learn this now for the first time, you jealous Thersites? Hail,
hail, divine Hermon! Hail, noble victim of the ungrateful Olympians!
Hail to thee, Hermon, and thy immortal works! Hail, hail, hail!"

Meanwhile she waved her handkerchief with frenzied eagerness, as if she
could thus force the blind man to see her, and a group of actors whom
Proclus, the grammateus of the Dionysian arts, had sent here to receive
Hermon worthily, followed her example.

But her cries were drowned by the singing of the chorus and by thousands
of shouting voices, while Hermon was embraced by Archias on board the
galley, and then, by his guidance, stepped on shore and ascended the
staircase of the Temple of Poseidon.

Before the ship entered the harbour, the artist had had a large goblet
of unmixed wine given to him, that he might conquer the emotion that had
overpowered him.

Though his blind eyes did not show him even the faintest outline of a
figure, he felt as if he was flooded with brilliant sunshine.

While the Proserpina was bearing him past the lighthouse, Gras told him
that they had now reached the great harbour, and at the same time he
heard the shouts, whistles, signals, and varying sounds of the landing
place with its crowded shipping, and of the capital.

His blood surged in his veins, and before his mind rose the vision of
the corn-flower blue sky, mirrored in the calm surface of the bluest of
seas. The pharos built by Sostratus towered in dazzling whiteness above
the tide, and before him rose the noble temple buildings, palaces, and
porticoes of the city of Alexandria, with which he was familiar, and
before and between them statue after statue of marble and bronze, the
whole flooded with radiant golden light.

True, darkness sometimes swallowed this wonderful picture, but an effort
of the will was sufficient to show it to him again.

"The Temple of Poseidon!" cried Gras. "The Proserpina is to land at
the foot of the steps." And now Hermon listened to the sounds from
the shore, whose hum and buzz transported him into the midst of the
long-missed city of commerce, knowledge, and arts.

Then the captain's shouts of command fell imperiously upon his ears, the
strokes of the oars ceased, their blades sank with a loud splash into
the water, and at the same instant from the temple steps Hermon was
greeted by the solemn notes of the chorus, from whose rhythm his own
name rang forth again and again like so many shouts of victory.

He thought his heart would fairly burst through his arched chest,
and the passionate violence of its throbbing did not lessen when Gras
exclaimed: "Half Alexandria has assembled to greet you. Ah, if you could
only see it! How the kerchiefs are waving! Laurel after laurel in every
hand! All the distinguished people in the capital have gathered on the
sacred soil of the Temple of Poseidon. There is Archias, too; there are
the artists and the famous gentlemen of the Museum, the members of the
Ephebi, and the priests of the great gods."

Hermon listened with his hand pressed on his breast, and while doing
so the power of his imagination showed the vast, harmoniously noble
structure of the many-pillared Temple of Poseidon, surrounded by as
many thousands as there were in reality hundreds. From all parts of the
sanctuary, even from the tops of the roofs, he beheld laurel branches
and kerchiefs waving and tossing, and wreaths flung on the ground before
him. If this picture was correct, the whole city was greeting him,
headed by the men whom he honoured as great and meritorious, and in
front of them all Daphne, with drooping head, full of feminine grace and
heart-winning goodness.

While the chorus continued their song, and the welcoming shouts grew
louder, the brilliant picture faded away, but in return he felt friendly
arms clasp him. First Archias, then Proclus, and after him a succession
of fellow-artists-the greatest of all--drew him into a warm embrace.

Finally he felt himself led away, placed his feet as his Uncle Archias
whispered directions, and as they gropingly obeyed them ascended the
temple steps and stood in utter darkness upon the platform listening to
the speeches which so many had prepared.

All the distinguished men in the city expressed their sympathy, their
pity, their admiration, their hopes, or sent assurances of them to him.
The Rhodian Chrysippus, despatched by the Queen, delivered the wreath
which the monarch bestowed, and informed Hermon, with her greetings,
that Arsinoe deemed his Demeter worthy of the laurel.

The most famous masters of his art, the great scholars from the Museum,
the whole priesthood of Demeter, which included Daphne, the servants
of Apollo, his dear Ephebi, the comrades of his physical exercises--all
whom he honoured, admired, loved-loaded him with praises and good
wishes, as well as the assurance of their pride in numbering him among
them.

No form, no colour from the visible world, penetrated the darkness
surrounding him, not even the image of the woman he loved. Only his ears
enabled him to receive the praises, honours, congratulations lavished
here and, though he sometimes thought he had received enough, he again
listened willingly and intently when a new speaker addressed him in warm
words of eulogy. What share compassion for his unprecedentedly sorrowful
fate had in this extravagantly laudatory and cordial greeting, he did
not ask; he only felt with a throbbing heart that he now stood upon a
summit which he had scarcely ventured to hope ever to attain. His dreams
of outward success which had not been realized, because he deemed it
treason to his art to deviate from the course which he believed right
and best adapted to it, he now, without having yielded to the demands of
the old school, heard praised as his well-earned possessions.

He felt as if he breathed the lighter, purer air of the realms of the
blessed, and the laurel crown which the Queen's envoy pressed upon his
brow, the wreaths which his fellow-artists presented to him by hands
no less distinguished than those of the great sculptor Protogenes, and
Nicias, the most admired artist after the death of Apelles, seemed,
like the wings on the hat and shoes of Hermes, messenger of the gods, to
raise him out of himself and into the air.

Darkness surrounded him, yet a bright dazzling light issued from his
soul and illuminated his whole being with the warm golden radiance of
the sun.

Not even the faintest shadow dimmed it until Soteles, his fellow-student
at Rhodes, who sustained him with ardent earnestness in the struggle to
prefer truth to beauty, greeted him.

He welcomed him and wished that he might recover his lost sight as
warmly as his predecessors. He praised the Demeter, too, but added that
this was not the place to say what he missed in her. Yet that she did
lack it awakened in him an emotion of pain, for this, Hermon's last
work, apparently gave the followers of the ancients a right to number
him in their ranks.

His cautious expression of regret must refer to the head of his Demeter.
Yet surely it was not his fault that Daphne's features bore the impress
of that gentle, winning kindness which he himself and Soteles, imitating
him, had often condemned as weak and characterless.

The correctness of his belief was instantly proved to him by the address
of gray-haired, highly praised Euphranor, who spoke of the Demeter's
countenance with warm admiration. And how ardently the poets Theocritus
and Zenodotus extolled his work to the skies!

Amid so much laudation, one faint word of dissatisfaction vanished like
a drop of blood that falls into a clear stream.

The welcome concluded with a final chant by the chorus, and continued to
echo in Hermon's ears as he entered his uncle's chariot and drove away
with him, crowned with laurel and intoxicated as if by fiery wine.

Oh, if he could only have seen his fellow-citizens who so eagerly
expressed their good will, their sympathy, their admiration! But the
black and coloured mist before his eyes revealed no human figure, not
even that of the woman he loved, who, he now learned for the first time
from her father, had appeared among the priestesses of Demeter to greet
him.

Doubtless he was gladdened by the sound of her voice, the clasp of her
hand, the faint fragrance of violets exhaling from her fair hair, which
he had often remembered with so much pleasure when alone in Tennis; but
the time to devote himself to her fully and completely had not yet come,
for what manifold and powerful impressions, how much that was elevating,
delightful, and entertaining awaited him immediately!

The Queen's envoy had expressed his mistress's desire to receive the
creator of the Demeter, the Ephebi and his fellow-artists had invited
him to a festival which they desired to give in his honour, and on
the way Archias informed him that many of his wealthy friends in the
Macedonian Council expected that he, the honoured hero of the day, would
adorn with his presence a banquet in their houses.

What a rich, brilliant life awaited him in spite of his blindness!
When he entered his uncle's magnificent city home, and not only all the
servants and clients of the family, but also a select party of ladies
and gentlemen greeted him with flowers and hundreds of other tokens of
affection and appreciation, he gave himself up without reserve to this
novel excess of fame and admiration.

Notwithstanding his blindness, he felt, after the burns on his face had
healed, thoroughly well, as strong as a giant--nay, more vigorous and
capable of enjoyment than ever. What prevented him from revelling to
the full in the superabundant gifts which Fate, recently so cruel, now
suddenly cast into his lap with lavish kindness?

Yet many flattering and pleasant things as he had experienced that day,
he was far from feeling satiety. On entering the hall of the men in his
uncle's dwelling, the names of famous men and proud beauties had been
repeated to him. Formerly they had taken little notice of him, yet now
even the most renowned received him like an Olympian victor.

What did all these vain women really care for him? Yet their favour was
part of the triumph whose celebration he must permit to-day. His heart
held but one being for whom it yearned, and with whom thus far he had
been able only to exchange a few tender greetings.

The time for a long conversation had not yet arrived, but he asked
Thyone to lead him to her and, while she listened anxiously, described
with feverish animation the incidents of the last few days. But he soon
lowered his voice to assure her that he had not ceased to think of her
even for a single hour, and the feeling of happiness which, in spite of
his misfortune, had filled and lent wings to his soul, was not least due
to the knowledge of being near her again.

And her presence really benefited him almost as much as he had
anticipated during the hours of solitary yearning in Tennis; he felt it
a great favour of Fate to be permitted to strive to possess her, felt
even during the delirium of this reception that he loved her. What a
tremendous longing to clasp her at once in his arms as his betrothed
bride overwhelmed him; but her father's opposition to the union of
his only child with a blind man must first be conquered, and the great
agitation in his soul, as well as the tumult around him, seemed like a
mockery of the quiet happiness which hovered before him when he thought
of his marriage with Daphne. Not until everything was calmer would the
time come to woo her. Until then both must be satisfied with knowing
from each other's lips their mutual love, and he thought he perceived in
the tone of her voice the deep emotion of her heart.

Perhaps this had prevented Daphne's expressing her congratulations upon
the success of his Demeter as eagerly and fully as he had expected.
Painfully disturbed by her reserve, he had just attempted to induce her
to give a less superficial opinion of his work, when the curtains of
the dining room parted-the music of flutes, singing, and pleasant odours
greeted him and the guests. Archias summoned them to breakfast, and a
band of beautiful boys, with flowers and garlands of ivy, obeyed the
command to crown them.

Then Thyone approached the newly united pair and, after exchanging a few
words with Daphne, whispered in an agitated voice to the blind sculptor,
over whose breast a brown-locked young slave was just twining a garland
of roses: "Poverty no longer stands between you and the object of your
love; is it Nemesis who even now still seals your lips?"

Hermon stretched out his hand to draw her nearer to him and murmur
softly that her counsel had aided him to break the power of the terrible
goddess, but he grasped the empty air. At the same time the deep voice
of his love's father, whose opposition threatened to cloud his new
happiness, singing, flute-playing, and the laughter of fair women
greeted him and, only half master of his own will, he assented, by a
slight bend of the head, to the matron's question. A light shiver ran
through his frame with the speed of lightning, and the Epicurean's maxim
that fear and cold are companions darted through his brain. But what
should he fear? He had endured severe trials, it is true, for the sake
of remaining faithful to truth in art and life; but who probably ever
reached the age of manhood without once deviating from it? Besides, he
was surely aware that, had he been obliged to answer Thyone in words, he
would not have been guilty of the falsehood. His reply had consisted
of a slight motion of the head, and it negatived nothing; it was merely
intended to defer for a short time the thing he most desired.

Yet the rash answer weighed heavily on his mind; but it could no longer
be recalled that day, and was believed, for Thyone whispered, "We shall
succeed in reconciling the terrible being."

Again the light tremour ran through him, but it lasted only an instant;
for Chrysilla, the representative of the dead mistress of the house,
whose duty it was to assign the guests their places, called to Hermon,
"The beautiful Glycera does you the honour of choosing you for a
neighbour" and, before the sentence was finished, Archias himself seized
his arm and led him to the cushions at the side of the much-courted
beauty.

The guests began the banquet in a very joyous mood.

Greek gaiety, and the quick intellect and keen wit of the Alexandrians,
combined with the choicest viands of the luxurious capital, where the
wines and dainties of all the countries of the Mediterranean found
sellers and buyers, and the cook's vocation was developed into a fine
art, to spice this banquet with a hundred charms for the mind and
senses. To-day the principal place in this distinguished circle of
famous men, great and wealthy nobles, beautiful and aristocratic women,
was awarded to the blind sculptor. He was pledged by every one who had
admired his Demeter, who compassionated his sad fate, or who desired to
be agreeable to him or his host.

Every kind remark about his person, his blindness, and his masterpiece
was repeated to him and, after the wine and the effort to attract
Daphne's attention and shine in the presence of his beautiful neighbour
had heated and winged his thoughts, he found an apt reply to each
noteworthy word.

When the dessert was finally eaten, and after sunset, in the brilliant
light of the lamps and candles, greater attention was paid to the mixing
vessels, all remained silent to listen to his fervid speech.

Glycera had asked him, at the beginning of the banquet, to tell her
about the attack in Tennis. Now he yielded to her wish that he should
repeat the captivating tale to the others, and the spirits of the wine
helped him to perform the task with such animation that his hearers
listened to his description in breathless suspense, and many eyes rested
on the handsome face of the great blind artist as if spellbound.

When he paused, loud applause rewarded him, and as it reached him from
every part of the spacious room, his deep, resonant voice put him in
communication even with the more distant guests, and he might have been
taken for the symposiarch or director of the banquet.

This conspicuous position of the feted artist did not please every
one, and a rhetorician, famed for his sharp tongue, whispered to his
neighbour, one of Hermon's older fellow-artists, "What his eyes have
lost seems to benefit his tongue." The sculptor answered: "At any rate,
the impetuous young artist might succeed better in proving himself,
by its assistance, a good entertainer, than in creating more mediocre
masterpieces like the Demeter."

Similar remarks were made on other cushions; but when the philosopher
Hegesias asked the famous sculptor Euphranor what he thought of Hermon's
Demeter, the kindly old man answered, "I should laud this noble work
as a memorable event, even if it did not mark the end, as well as the
beginning, of its highly gifted creator's new career."

Nothing of this kind was uttered near Hermon. Everything that reached
him expressed delight, admiration, sympathy, and hope. At dessert the
beautiful Glycera divided her apple, whispering as she gave him one
half, "Let the fruit tell you what the eyes can no longer reveal, you
poor and yet so abundantly rich darling of the gods."

He murmured in reply that his happiness would awake the envy of the
immortals if, in addition, he were permitted to feast upon the sight of
her beauty.

Had he been able to see himself, Hermon, who, as a genuine Greek, was
accustomed to moderate his feelings in intercourse with others, would
have endeavoured to express the emotions of joy which filled his heart
with more reserve, and to excel his companions at the festival less
recklessly.

His enthusiastic delight carried many away with him; others, especially
Daphne, were filled with anxious forebodings by his conduct, and others
still with grave displeasure.

Among the latter was the famous leech Erasistratus, who shared Archias's
cushions, and had been solicited by the latter to try to restore his
blind nephew's sight. But the kindly physician, who gladly aided even
the poorest sufferer, curtly and positively refused. To devote his time
and skill to a blind man who, under the severest of visitations, lulled
himself so contentedly in happiness, he considered unjust to others who
desired recovery more ardently.

"When the intoxication of this unbridled strength passes away, and is
followed by a different mood," remarked the merchant, "we will talk of
this matter again," and the confident tone of his deep voice gave the
simple sentence such significance that the learned leech held out his
hand, saying: "Only where deep, earnest longing for recovery fills the
sufferer's mind will the gods aid the physician. We will wait for the
change which you predict, Archias!"

The guests did not disperse until late, and the best satisfied of
all was the grammateus Proclus, who had taken advantage of the rich
merchant's happy mood, and his own warm intercession in behalf of his
nephew's work, to persuade Archias to advance Queen Arsinoe a large sum
of money for an enterprise whose object he still carefully concealed.

The highly honoured blind artist spent the night under his uncle's roof.




CHAPTER VI.

Hermon rose from his couch the next morning alert and ready for new
pleasures.

He had scarcely left the bath when envoys from the Ephebi and the
younger artists invited him to the festivities which they had arranged
in his honour. He joyously accepted, and also promised messengers from
many of Archias's friends, who wished to have the famous blind sculptor
among their guests, to be present at their banquets.

He still felt as if he were intoxicated, and found neither disposition
nor time for quiet reflection. His great strength, fettered as it were
by his loss of sight, now also began to stir. Fate itself withheld him
from the labour which he loved, yet in return it offered him a wealth of
varying pleasure, whose stimulating power he had learned the day before.
He still relished the draught from the beaker of homage proffered by his
fellow-citizens; nay, it seemed as if it could not lose its sweetness
for a long time.

He joined the ladies before noon, and his newly awakened feeling of joy
beamed upon them scarcely less radiantly than yesterday. Though Thyone
might wonder that a man pursued by Nemesis could allow himself to be
borne along so thoughtlessly by the stream of pleasure, Daphne certainly
did not grudge him the festal season which, when it had passed, could
never return to the blind artist. When it was over, he would yearn for
the quiet happiness at her side, which gazed at him like the calm eyes
of the woman he loved. With her he would cast anchor for the remainder
of his life; but first must come the period when he enjoyed the
compensation now awarded to him for such severe sufferings.

His heart was full of joy as he greeted Daphne and the Lady Thyone, whom
he found with her; but his warm description of the happy emotion which
had overpowered him at the abundant honours lavished upon him was
interrupted by Archias.

In his usual quick, brisk manner, he asked whether Hermon wished to
occupy the beautiful villa with the magnificent garden on Lake Mareotis,
inherited from Myrtilus, which could scarcely be reached in a vehicle
from the Brucheium in less than an hour, or the house situated in the
centre of the city, and Hermon promptly decided in favour of the latter.

His uncle, and probably the ladies also, had expected the contrary.
Their silence showed this plainly enough, and Hermon therefore added
in a tone of explanation that later the villa would perhaps suit his
condition better, but now he thought it would be a mistake to retire
to the quiet which half the city was conspiring to disturb. No one
contradicted him, and he left the women's apartment with a slight
feeling of vexation, which, however, was soon jested away by the gay
friends who sought him.

When he removed to the city house the next day, he had not yet found
time for a serious talk with Daphne. His uncle, who had managed
the estate of Myrtilus, and wished to give Hermon an account of his
inheritance, was refused by the blind artist, who assured him that he
knew Archias had greatly increased rather than diminished his property,
and thanked him sincerely and warmly. In the convenient and spacious
city house the young sculptor very soon thought he had good reason to be
satisfied with his choice.

Most of his friends were busy artists, and what loss of time every visit
to the remote villa would have imposed upon them, what haste he himself
would have been obliged to use to reach home from the bath, where he
often spent many hours, from the wrestling school, from the meetings of
fashionable people in the Paneum gardens, and at sunset by the seashore
on the royal highway in the Brucheium. All these places were very far
from the villa. It would have required whole hours, too, to reach a
famous cookshop in the Canopus, at whose table he liked to assemble
beloved guests or revel with his friends. The theatre, the Odeum, most
of the public buildings, as well as the houses of his best friends,
and especially the beautiful Glycera, were easily reached from his city
home, and, among the temples, that of Demeter, which he often visited to
pray, offer sacrifices, and rejoice in the power of attraction which his
statue of the goddess exerted upon the multitude. It stood at the back
of the cella in a place accessible to the priesthood alone, visible
only through the open doors, upon a pedestal which his fellow-artists
pronounced rather too high. Yet his offer to have it made smaller was
not accepted, because had it been lower the devout supplicants who stood
there to pray could not have raised their eyes to it.

It was not only at the festivals of the dead that he went to the Greek
cemetery, where he had had a magnificent monument erected for his dead
mother. If his head ached after a nocturnal carouse, or the disagreeable
alarming chill stole over him which he had felt for the first time when
he falsely answered Thyone that he was still under the ban of Nemesis,
he went to the family monuments, supplied them with gifts, had
sacrifices offered to the souls of the beloved dead, and in this way
sometimes regained a portion of his lost peace of mind.

The banquet in the evening always dispelled whatever still oppressed
him on his return home from these visits, for, though months had elapsed
since his brilliant reception, he was still numbered, especially in
artist circles, with the most honoured men; he, the blind man, no longer
stood in any one's way; conversation gained energy and meaning through
the vivacity of his fervid intellect, which seemed actually deepened by
his blindness when questions concerning art were at issue, and from a
modest fellow-struggler he had become a patron bestowing orders.

The sculptor Soteles, who had followed his footsteps since the
apprenticeship in Rhodes, was intrusted with the erection of the
monument to Myrtilus in Tennis, and another highly gifted young
sculptor, who pursued his former course, with the execution of the one
to his mother.

From a third he ordered a large new mixing vessel of chased silver for
the society of Ephebi, whose members had lauded him, at the magnificent
festival given in his honour, with genuine youthful fervour.

In the designs for these works his rich and bold gift of invention and
the power of his imagination proved their full value, and even his older
fellow-artists followed him with sincere admiration when, in spite of
his darkened eyes, he brought before them distinctly, and often even
with the charcoal or wax tablet in his hand, what he had in mind. What
magnificent things might not this man have created had he retained his
sight, what masterpieces might not have been expected! and his former
works, which had been condemned as unlovely, offensive, and exaggerated,
were now loudly admired; nay, the furious Maenads struggling on
the ground and the Street Boy Eating Figs, which were no longer his
property, were sold at high prices. No meeting of artists was complete
without Hermon, and the great self-possession which success and wealth
bestowed, besides his remarkable talent and the energy peculiar to him,
soon aided him to great influence among the members of his profession;
nay, he would speedily have reached the head of their leaders had not
the passionate impetuosity of his warlike nature led the more cautious
to seek to restrain the powerful enthusiast.

Archias's wealthy friends had no such apprehension. To them the lauded
blind artist was not much more than a costly dish certain to please
their guests; yet this, too, was no trifle in social circles which spent
small fortunes for a rare fish.

At the banquets of these princes of commerce he often met Daphne, still
more frequently the beautiful Glycera, whose husband, an old ship-owner
of regal wealth, was pleased to see famous men harnessed to his young
wife's chariot of victory. Hermon's heart had little to do with the
flirtation to which Glycera encouraged him at every new meeting, and the
Thracian Althea only served to train his intellect to sharp debates. But
in this manner he so admirably fulfilled her desire to attract attention
that she more than once pointed out to the Queen, her relative, the
remarkably handsome blind man whose acquaintance she had made on a night
of mad revel during the last Dionysia but one. Althea even thought
it necessary to win him, in whom she saw the future son-in-law of the
wealthy Archias, for through the graminateus Proclus the merchant had
been persuaded to advance the King's wife hundreds of talents, and
Arsinoe cherished plans which threatened to consume other large sums.

Thyrone watched Hermon's conduct with increasing indignation, while
Daphne perceived that these women had no more power to estrange her
lover from her than the bedizened beauties who were never absent from
the artists' festivals. How totally different was his intercourse
with her! His love and respect were hers alone; yet she saw in him a
soul-sick man, and persistently rejected Philotas, who wooed her with
the same zeal as before, and the other suitors who were striving to win
the wealthy heiress. She had confessed her feelings to her father, her
best friend, and persuaded him to have patience a little longer, and
wait for the change which he himself expected in his nephew.

This had not been difficult, for Archias loved Hermon, in spite of the
many anxieties he had caused him, as if he were his own son and, knowing
his daughter, he was aware that she could be happy with the man who
possessed her heart though he was deprived of sight.

The fame which Hermon had won by great genius and ability had gratified
him more than he expressed, and he could not contradict Daphne when
she asserted that, in spite of the aimless life of pleasure to which
he devoted himself, he had remained the kind-hearted, noble man he had
always been.

In fact, he used, unasked and secretly, a considerable portion of
his large revenues to relieve the distress of the poor and suffering.
Archias learned this as the steward of his nephew's property, and when
to do good he made new demands upon him, he gladly fulfilled them;
only he constantly admonished the blind man to think of his own severe
sufferings and his cure. Daphne did the same, and he willingly obeyed
her advice; for, loudly and recklessly as he pursued pleasure in social
circles, he showed himself tenderly devoted to her when he found her
alone in her father's house. Then, as in better days, he opened his
heart to her naturally and modestly and, though he refrained from vows
of love, he showed her that he did not cease to seek with her, and her
alone, what his noisy pleasures denied. Then he also found the old tone
of affection, and of late he came more frequently, and what he confided
to no one else implied to her, at least by hints.

Satiety and dissatisfaction were beginning to appear, and what he had
attempted to do for the cure of his eyes had hitherto been futile. The
remedies of the oculists to whom he had been directed by Daphne herself
had proved ineffectual. The great physician Erasistratus, from whom he
first sought help, had refrained, at her entreaty and her father's, from
refusing to aid him, but indignantly sent him away when he persisted in
the declaration that it would be impossible for him to remain for months
secluded from all society and subsist for weeks on scanty fare.

He would submit even to that, he assured Daphne, after she represented
to him what he was losing by such lack of resignation, when the time
of rest had come for which he longed, but from which many things still
withheld him. Yesterday the King had invited him to the palace for the
first time, and to decline such an honour was impossible.

In fact, he had long wished for this summons, because he had been
informed that no representative of the sovereign had been present at
his reception. Only his wife Arsinoe had honoured him by a wreath and
congratulations. This lack of interest on the part of the King had
wounded him, and the absence of an invitation from the royal connoisseur
had cast a shadow into the midst of many a mirthful hour. He had
doubtless been aware what great and important affairs of state were
claiming the conscientious sovereign just at this time, and how almost
unbearable his restless, unloving spouse was rendering his domestic
life; yet Hermon thought Ptolemy might have spared a short time for
an event in the art life of the city, as his Demeter had been called
hundreds of times.

Now the long-desired command to appear before the sovereign had finally
reached him, and, in the secure belief that it would bring fresh
recognition and rare honours, he entered the royal palace.

Proclus, who neglected no opportunity of serving the nephew of the rich
man whose aid he constantly required for the Queen's finances, was his
guide, and described the decoration of the inner apartments of the royal
residence. Their unostentatious simplicity showed the refined taste of
their royal occupant. There was no lack of marble and other rare kinds
of stone, and the numerous bas-reliefs which covered the walls like the
most superb tapestry were worthy of special attention. In the oblong
apartment through which the blind man was guided these marble pictures
represented in magnificent work scenes from the campaigns in which
Ptolemy, the King's father, had participated as Alexander's general.
Others showed Athene, Apollo, the Muses, and Hermes, surrounding or
hastening toward the throne of the same monarch, and others again Greek
poets and philosophers. Magnificent coloured mosaic pictures covered the
floor and many flat spaces above door and windows, but gold and silver
had been sparingly used.

Masterpieces of painting and sculpture were the ornaments of the room.
In the antechamber, where Hermon waited for the King, Proclus mentioned
one of the finest statues of Alexander by Lysippus, and an exquisite
Eros by Praxiteles.

The period of waiting, however, became so long to the spoiled artist
that he anticipated the monarch's appearance with painful discomfort,
and the result of the few minutes which Ptolemy II devoted to his
reception was far behind the hopes he had fixed upon them.

In former days he had often seen the narrow-shouldered man of barely
medium height who, to secure his own safety, had had two brothers killed
and sent another into exile, but now ruled Egypt shrewdly and prudently,
and developed the prosperity of Alexandria with equal energy and
foresight.

Now, for the first time, Hermon heard him speak. He could not deny that
his voice was unusually pleasant in tone, yet it unmistakably issued
from the lips of a sufferer.

The brief questions with which he received the blind artist were kindly,
and as natural as though addressing an equal, and every remark made
in connection with Hermon's answers revealed a very quick and keen
intellect.

He had seen the Demeter, and praised the conception of the goddess
because it corresponded with her nature. The sanctity which, as it were,
pervaded the figure of the divine woman pleased him, because it made the
supplicants in the temple feel that they were in the presence of a being
who was elevated far above them in superhuman majesty.

"True," he added, "your Demeter is by no means a powerful helper in
time of need. She is a goddess such as Epicurus imagines the immortals.
Without interfering with human destiny, she stands above it in sublime
grandeur and typical dignity. You belong, if I see correctly, to the
Epicureans?"

"No," replied Hermon. "Like my lord and King, I, too, number myself
among the pupils of the wise Straton."

"Indeed?" asked Ptolemy in a drawling tone, at the same time casting
a glance of astonishment at the blind man's powerful figure and
well-formed, intellectual face. Then he went on eagerly: "I shall
scarcely be wrong in the inference that you, the creator of the
Fig-eater, had experienced a far-reaching mental change before your
unfortunate loss of sight?"

"I had to struggle hard," replied Hermon, "but I probably owe the
success of the Demeter to the circumstance that I found a model whose
mind and nature correspond with those of the goddess to a rare degree."

The monarch shook his fair head, and protested in a tone of positive
superior knowledge: "As to the model, however well selected it may be,
it was not well chosen for this work, far less for you. I have watched
your battle against beauty in behalf of truth, and rejoiced, though I
often saw you and your little band of young disciples shoot beyond the
mark. You brought something new, whose foundation seemed to me sound,
and on which further additions might be erected. When the excrescences
fell off, I thought, this Hermon, his shadow Soteles, and the others
who follow him will perhaps open new paths to the declining art which is
constantly going back to former days. Our time will become the point of
departure of a new art. But for that very reason, let me confess it, I
regret to see you fall back from your bold advance. You now claim for
your work that it cleaves strictly to Nature, because the model is taken
from life itself. It does not become me to doubt this, yet the stamp
of divinity which your Demeter bears is found in no mortal woman.
Understand me correctly! This is certainly no departure from the truth,
for the ideal often deserves this lofty name better than anything the
visible world offers to the eye; but hitherto you have done honour to
another truth. If I comprehend your art aright, its essence is opposed
to the addition of superhuman dignity and beauty, with which you, or the
model you used, strove to ennoble and deify your Demeter. Admirably
as you succeeded in doing so, it forces your work out of the sphere of
reality, whose boundary I never before saw you cross by a single inch.
Whether this occurred unconsciously to you in an hour of mental ecstasy,
or whether you felt that you still lacked the means to represent the
divine, and therefore returned to the older methods, I do not venture to
decide. But at the first examination of your work I was conscious of
one thing: It means for you a revolution, a rupture with your former
aspirations; and as--I willingly confess it--you had been marvellously
successful, it would have driven you, had your sight been spared, out
of your own course and into the arms of the ancients, perhaps to your
material profit, but scarcely to the advantage of art, which needs a
renewal of its vital energies."

"Let me assure you, my lord," Hermon protested, "that had I remained
able to continue to create, the success of the Demeter would never,
never have rendered me faithless to the conviction and method of
creation which I believed right; nay, before losing my sight, my whole
soul was absorbed in a new work which would have permitted me to remain
wholly and completely within the bounds of reality."

"The Arachne?" asked the King.

"Yes, my lord," cried Hermon ardently. "With its completion I expected
to render the greatest service, not only to myself, but to the cause of
truth."

Here Ptolemy interrupted with icy coldness: "Yet you were certainly
wrong; at least, if the Thracian Althea, who is the personification of
falsehood, had continued to be the model." Then he changed his tone, and
with the exclamation: "You are protected from the needs of life, unless
your rich uncle throws his property into the most insatiable of gulfs.
May Straton's philosophy help you better to sustain your courage in the
darkness which surrounds you than it has aided me to bear other trials!"
he left the room.

Thus ended the artist's conversation with the King, from which Hermon
had expected such great results and, deeply agitated, he ordered the
driver of his horses to take him to Daphne. She was the only person to
whom he could confide what disappointment this interview had caused him.

Others had previously reproached him, as the King had just done, with
having, in the Demeter, become faithless to his artistic past. How false
and foolish this was! Many a remark from the critics would have been
better suited to Myrtilus's work than to his. Yet his fear in Tennis had
not been true. Only Daphne's sweet face did not suit his more vigorous
method of emphasizing distinctions.

What a many-hued chameleon was the verdict upon works of plastic art!
Once--on his return to the capital--thousands had united in the same
one, and now how widely they differed again!

His earlier works, which were now lauded to the skies, had formerly
invited censure and vehement attacks.

What would he not have given for the possibility of seeing his admired
work once more!

As his way led past the Temple of Demeter, he stopped near it and was
guided to the sanctuary.

It was filled with worshippers, and when, in his resolute manner, he
told the curator and the officiating priest that he wished to enter
the cella, and asked for a ladder to feel the goddess, he was most
positively refused.

What he requested seemed a profanation of the sacred image, and it would
not do to disturb the devout throng. His desire to lower the pedestal
could not be gratified.

The high priest who came forward upheld his subordinates and, after a
short dispute, Hermon left the sanctuary with his wish unfulfilled.

Never had he so keenly lamented his lost vision as during the remainder
of the drive, and when Daphne received him he described with passionate
lamentation how terribly blindness embittered his life, and declared
himself ready to submit to the severest suffering to regain his sight.

She earnestly entreated him to apply to the great physician Erasistratus
again, and Hermon willingly consented. He had promised to attend a
banquet given that day by the wealthy ship-owner Archon. The feast
lasted until early morning, but toward noon Hermon again appeared in his
uncle's house, and met Daphne full of joyous confidence, as if he were
completely transformed.

While at Archon's table he had determined to place his cure in the hands
of higher powers. This was the will of Fate; for the guest whose cushion
he shared was Silanus, the host's son, and the first thing he learned
from him was the news that he was going the next day, with several
friends, to the oracle of Amon in the Libyan Desert, to ask it what
should be done for his mother, who had been for several years an invalid
whom no physician could help. He had heard from many quarters that the
counsel of the god, who had greeted Alexander the Great as his son, was
infallible.

Then Hermon had been most urgently pressed by the young man to accompany
him. Every comfort would be provided. One of his father's fine ships
would convey them to Paraetonium, where tents, saddle horses, and guides
for the short land journey would be ready.

So he had promised to go with Silanus, and his decision was warmly
approved by his uncle, Daphne, and the gray-haired Pelusinian couple.
Perhaps the god would show the blind man the right path to recovery. He
would always be able to call the skill of the Alexandrian leeches to his
aid.

Soon after Hermon went on board Archon's splendidly equipped vessel
and, instead of a tiresome journey, began a new and riotous period of
festivity.

Lavish provision had been made for gay companions of both sexes, merry
entertainment by means of dancing, music, and song, well filled dishes
and mixing vessels, and life during the ride through the coast and
desert regions was not less jovial and luxurious than on the ship.

It seemed to the blind man like one vast banquet in the dark,
interrupted only by sleep.

The hope of counsel from the gods cheered the depressed mood which had
weighed upon him for several weeks, and rich young Silanus praised the
lucky fate which had enabled him to find a travelling companion whose
intellect and wit charmed him and the others, and often detained them
over the wine until late into the night.

Here, too, Hermon felt himself the most distinguished person, the
animating and attracting power, until it was said that the voyage was
over, and the company pitched their tents in the famous oasis near the
Temple of Amon.

The musicians and dancers, with due regard to propriety, had been left
behind in the seaport of Paraetonium. Yet the young travellers were
sufficiently gay while Silanus and Hermon waited for admission to the
place of the oracle. A week after their arrival it was opened to them,
yet the words repeated to them by the priest satisfied neither Hermon
nor Archon's son, for the oracle advised the latter to bring his mother
herself to the oasis by the land road if she earnestly desired recovery,
while to Hermon was shouted the ambiguous saying:

  "Only night and darkness spring from the rank marsh of pleasure;
   Morning and day rise brightly from the starving sand."

Could Silanus's mother, who was unable to move, endure the desert
journey? And what was the meaning of the sand, from which morning and
day--which was probably the fresh enjoyment of the light--were to rise
for Hermon? The sentence of the oracle weighed heavily upon him, as
well as on Archon's son, who loved his mother, and the homeward journey
became to the blind man by no means a cheerful but rather a very
troubled dream.

Thoughtful, very disturbed, dissatisfied with himself, and resolved to
turn his back upon the dreary life of pleasure which for so long a time
had allowed him no rest, and now disgusted him, he kept aloof from his
travelling companions, and rejoiced when, at Alexandria, he was led
ashore in the harbour of Eunostus.




CHAPTER VII.

Hermon entered his house with drooping head.

Here he was informed that the grammateus of the Dionysian artists had
already called twice to speak to him concerning an important matter.
When he came from the bath, Proclus visited him again. His errand was
to invite him to a banquet which was to take place that evening at his
residence in a wing of the royal palace.

But Hermon was not in the mood to share a joyous revel, and he frankly
said so, although immediately after his return he had accepted the
invitation to the festival which the whole fellowship of artists would
give the following day in honour of the seventieth birthday of the old
sculptor Euphranor. The grammateus alluded to this, and most positively
insisted that he could not release him; for he came not only by his own
wish, but in obedience to the command of Queen Arsinoe, who desired to
tell the creator of the Demeter how highly she esteemed his work and his
art. She would appear herself at dessert, and the banquet must therefore
begin at an unusually early hour. He, Proclus, was to have the high
honour of including the royal lady among his guests solely on Hermon's
account, and his refusal would be an insult to the Queen.

So the artist found himself obliged to relinquish his opposition. He did
this reluctantly; but the Queen's attention to him and his art flattered
his vanity and, if he was to abandon the intoxicating and barren life
of pleasure, it could scarcely be done more worthily than at a festival
where the King's consort intended to distinguish him in person.

The banquet was to begin in a few hours, yet he could not let the day
pass without seeing Daphne and telling her the words of the oracle. He
longed, with ardent yearning, for the sound of her voice, and still more
to unburden his sorely troubled soul to her.

Oh, if only his Myrtilus still walked among the living! How totally
different, in spite of his lost vision, would his life have been!

Daphne was now the only one whom he could put in his place.

Since his return from the oracle, the fear that the rescued Demeter
might yet be the work of Myrtilus had again mastered him. However loudly
outward circumstances might oppose this, he now felt, with a certainty
which surprised him, that this work was not his own. The approval, as
well as the doubts, which it aroused in others strengthened his opinion,
although even now he could not succeed in bringing it into harmony with
the facts. How deep had been the intoxication in which he had so long
reeled from one day to the next, since it had succeeded in keeping every
doubt of the authorship of this work far from him!

Now he must obtain certainty, and Daphne could help him to it; for, as
a priestess of Demeter, she possessed the right to procure him access
to the cella and get permission for him to climb the lofty pedestal and
feel the statue with his fingers, whose sense of touch had become much
keener.

He would frankly inform her of his fear, and her truthful nature would
find the doubt that gnawed his heart as unendurable as he himself.

It would have been a grave crime to woo her before he was relieved of
this uncertainty, and he would utter the decisive words that very day,
and ask her whether her love was great enough to share the joys and
sorrows of life with him, the blind man, who perhaps must also divest
himself of a false fame.

Time pressed.

He called at Archias's house with a wreath on his head and in festal
robes; but Daphne was in the temple, whither old Philippus and Thyone
had gone, and his uncle was attending a late session of the Council.

He would have liked to follow Daphne to the sanctuary, but the late
hour forbade it, and he therefore only charged Gras to tell his young
mistress that he was going to Proclus's banquet, and would return early
the next morning to discuss a most important subject with her.

Then he went directly to the neighbouring palace. The Queen might have
appeared already, and it would not do to keep her waiting.

He was aware that she lived at variance with her husband, but how
could he have suspected that she cherished the more than bold design
of hurling the sovereign from his throne and seizing the Egyptian crown
herself.

Proclus and Althea were among the conspirators who supported Arsinoe,
and the Queen thought it would be an easy matter to win over to her
cause and herself the handsome sculptor, whom she remembered at the last
Dionysia.

The wealthy blind artist, so highly esteemed among the members of his
profession, might become valuable to the conspiracy, for she knew what
enthusiastic devotion the Alexandrian artists felt for the King, and
everything depended upon forming a party in her own favour among them.
This task was to fall to Hermon, and also another, still more important
one; for he, his nephew and future son-in-law, if any one, could
persuade the wealthy Archias to lend the plot his valuable aid. Hitherto
the merchant had been induced, it is true, to advance large sums of
money to the Queen, but the loyal devotion which he showed to her
royal husband had rendered it impossible to give him even a hint of the
conspiracy. Althea, however, declared that the blind man's marriage to
Daphne was only a question of time, and Proclus added that the easily
excited nephew would show himself more pliant than the uncle if Arsinoe
exerted upon him the irresistible charm of her personality.

When Hermon entered the residence of the grammateus in the palace, the
guests had already assembled. The Queen was not to appear until after
the feast, when the mixing jars were filled. The place by Hermon's side,
which Althea had chosen for herself, would then be given up to Arsinoe.

The sovereign was as unaccustomed to the society of a blind artist
as Hermon was to that of a queen, and both eagerly anticipated the
approaching meeting.

Yet it was difficult for Hermon to turn a bright face toward his
companion. The sources of anxiety and grief which had previously
burdened his mind would not vanish, even under the roof of the royal
palace.

Althea's presence reminded him of Tennis, Ledscha, and Nemesis, who for
so long a time seemed to have suspended her persecution, but since he
had returned from the abode of the oracle was again asserting the old
right to him. During many a sleepless hour of the night he had once more
heard the rolling of her terrible wheel.

Even before the journey to the oasis of Amon, everything life could
offer him, the idle rake, in his perpetual darkness, had seemed shallow
and scarcely worth stretching out his hand for it.

True, an interesting conversation still had power to charm him, but
often during its continuance the full consciousness of his misfortune
forced itself upon his mind; for the majority of the subjects discussed
by the artists came to them through the medium of sight, and referred
to new creations of architecture, sculpture, and painting, from whose
enjoyment his blindness debarred him.

When returning home from a banquet, if his way lay through the city,
he was reminded of the superb buildings, marble terraces and fountains,
statues and porticoes, which had formerly satiated his eyes with
delight, and must now be illumined with a brilliant radiance by the
morning sunbeams, though a hostile fate shut them out from his eyes,
starving and thirsting for beautiful forms.

But it had seemed to him still harder to bear that his blinded eyes
refused to show him the most beautiful of all beautiful things, the
human form, when he lingered among the Ephebi or the spectators of
a festal procession, or visited the gymnasium, the theatre, the
Aphrodisium, or the Paneum gardens, where the beautiful women met at
sunset.

The Queen was to appear immediately, and when she took her place near
him his blindness would again deprive him of the sight of her delicately
cut features, prevent his returning the glances from her sparkling eyes,
and admiring the noble outlines of her thinly veiled figure.

Would his troubled spirit at least permit him to enjoy and enter without
restraint into the play of her quick wit?

Perhaps her arrival would relieve him from the discomfort which
oppressed him here.

A stranger, out of his own sphere, he felt chilled among these closely
united men and women, to whom no tie bound him save the presence of the
same host.

He was not acquainted with a single individual except the mythograph
Crates, who for several months had been one of the members of the
Museum, and who had attached himself to Hermon at Straton's lectures.

The artist was surprised to find this man in such a circle, but he
learned from Althea that the young member of the Museum was a relative
of Proclus, and a suitor of the beautiful Nico, one of the Queen's
ladies in waiting, who was among the guests.

Crates had really been invited in order to win him over to the Queen's
cause; but charming fair-haired Nico had been commissioned by the
conspirators to persuade him to sing Arsinoe's praises among his
professional associates.

The rest of the men present stood in close connection with Arsinoe,
and were fellow-conspirators against her husband's throne and life.
The ladies whom Proclus had invited were all confidants of Arsinoe, the
wives and daughters of his other guests. All were members of the highest
class of society, and their manners showed the entire freedom from
restraint that existed in the Queen's immediate circle. Althea profited
by the advantage of being Hermon's only acquaintance here. So, when he
took his place on the cushion at her side, she greeted him familiarly
and cordially, as she had treated him for a long time, wherever they
met, and in a low voice told him, sometimes in a kindly tone, sometimes
with biting sarcasm, the names and characters of the other guests.

The most aristocratic was Amyntas, who stood highest of all in the
Queen's favour because he had good reason to hate the other Arsinoe, the
sister of the King. His son had been this royal dame's first husband,
and she had deserted him to marry Lysimachus, the aged King of Thrace.

The Rhodian Chrysippus, her leech and trusted counsellor, also possessed
great influence over the Queen.

"The noble lady," whispered Althea, "needs the faithful devotion of
every well-disposed subject, for perhaps you have already learned how
cruelly the King embitters the life of the mother of his three children.
Many a caprice can be forgiven the suffering Ptolemy, who recently
expressed a wish that he could change places with the common workmen
whom he saw eating their meal with a good appetite, and who is now
tortured by the gout; yet he watches the hapless woman with the jealousy
of a tiger, though he himself is openly faithless to her. What is the
Queen to him, since the widow of Lysimachus returned from Thrace--no,
from Cassandrea, Ephesus, and sacred Samothrace, or whatever other
places there are which would no longer tolerate the murderess?"

"The King's sister--the object of his love?" cried Hermon incredulously.
"She must be forty years old now."

"Very true," Althea assented. "But we are in Egypt, where marriages
between brothers and sisters are pleasing to gods and men; and besides,
we make our own moral laws here. Her age! We women are only as old as we
look, and the leeches and tiring women of this beauty of forty practise
arts which give her the appearance of twenty-five, yet perhaps the King
values her intellect more than her person, and the wisdom of a hundred
serpents is certainly united in this woman's head. She will make our
poor Queen suffer unless real friends guard her from the worst. The
three most trustworthy ones are here: Amyntas, the leech Chrysippus, and
the admirable Proclus. Let us hope that you will make this three-leaved
clover the luck-promising four-leaved one. Your uncle, too, has often
with praiseworthy generosity helped Arsinoe in many an embarrassment.
Only make the acquaintance of this beautiful royal lady, and the
last drop of your blood will not seem too precious to shed for her!
Besides--Proclus told me so in confidence--you have little favour to
expect from the King. How long he kept you waiting for the first word
concerning a work which justly transported the whole city with delight!
When he did finally summon you, he said things which must have wounded
you."

"That is going too far," replied Hermon.

"Then he kept back his real opinion," Althea protested. "Had I not made
it a rule to maintain absolute silence concerning everything I hear in
conversation from those with whom I am closely associated--"

Here she was interrupted by Chrysippus, who asked if Althea had told her
neighbour about his Rhodian eye-salve.

He winked at her and made a significant gesture as he spoke, and then
informed the blind artist how graciously Arsinoe had remembered him when
she heard of the remedy by whose aid many a wonderful cure of blind eyes
had been made in Rhodes. The royal lady had inquired about him and his
sufferings with almost sisterly interest, and Althea eagerly confirmed
the statement.

Hermon listened to the pair in silence.

He had not been able to see them, it is true, yet he had perceived
their design as if the loss of sight had sharpened his mental vision.
He imagined that he could see the favourite and Althea nudge each other
with sneering gestures, and believed that their sole purpose was to
render him--he knew not for what object--the obedient tool of the Queen,
who had probably also succeeded in persuading his usually cautious uncle
to render her great services.

The remembrance of Arsinoe's undignified conduct at the Dionysia, and
the shameful stories of her which he had heard returned to his mind. At
the same time he saw Daphne rise before him in her aristocratic dignity
and kindly goodness, and a smile of satisfaction hovered around his lips
as he said to himself: "The spider Althea again! But, in spite of my
blindness, I will be caught neither in her net nor in the Queen's. They
are the last to bar the way which leads to Daphne and real happiness."

The Rhodian was just beginning to praise Arsinoe also as a special
friend and connoisseur of the sculptor's art when Crates, Hermon's
fellow-student, asked the blind artist, in behalf of his beautiful
companion, why his Demeter was placed upon a pedestal which, to others
as well as himself, seemed too high for the size of the statue.

Hermon replied that he had heard several make this criticism, but the
priests of the goddess refused to take it into account.

Here he hesitated, for, like a blow from an invisible hand, the thought
darted through his mind that perhaps, on the morrow, he would see
himself compelled before the whole world to cast aside the crown of fame
which he owed to the statue on the lofty pedestal. He did not have even
the remotest idea of continuing to deck himself with false renown if
his dread was realized; yet he doubtless imagined how this whole
aristocratic circle, with the Queen, Althea, and Proclus at its head,
would turn with reckless haste from the hapless man who had led them
into such a shameful error.

Yet what mattered it, even if these miserable people considered
themselves deceived and pointed the finger of scorn at him? Better
people would thereby be robbed of the right to accuse him of
faithlessness to himself. This thought darted through his heated brain
like a flash of lightning, and when, in spite of his silence, the
conversation was continued and Althea told the others that only Hermon's
blindness had prevented the creation of a work which could have been
confidently expected far to surpass the Demeter, since it seemed to have
been exactly suited to his special talent, he answered his beautiful
companion's remark curtly and absently.

She perceived this with annoyance and perplexity.

A woman who yearns for the regard of all men, and makes love a toy,
easily lessens the demands she imposes upon individuals. Only, even
though love has wholly disappeared, she still claims consideration, and
Althea did not wish to lose Hermon's regard.

When Amyntas, the head of the conspirators, attracted the attention of
the company by malicious remarks about the King's sister, the Thracian
laid her hand on the blind artist's arm, whispering: "Has the image of
the Arachne which, at Tennis, charmed you even in the presence of the
angry Zeus, completely vanished from your memory? How indifferent you
look! But I tell you"--her deep blue eyes flashed as she spoke--"that so
long as you were still a genuine creating artist the case was different.
Even while putting the last touches of the file to the Demeter, for
which Archias's devout daughter posed as your model, another whom you
could not banish from your mind filled your imagination. Though so loud
a denial is written on your face, I persist in my conviction, and that
no idle delusion ensnares me I can prove!"

Hermon raised his sightless eyes to her inquiringly, but she went on
with eager positiveness: "Or, if you did not think of the weaver while
carving the goddess, how did you happen to engrave a spider on the
ribbon twined around the ears of grain in Demeter's hand? Not the
smallest detail of a work produced by the hand of a valued friend
escapes my notice, and I perceived it before the Demeter came to the
temple and the lofty pedestal. Now I would scarcely be able to discover
it in the dusky cella, yet at that time I took pleasure in the sight of
the ugly insect, not only because it is cleverly done, but because it
reminded me of something"--here she lowered her voice still more--"that
pleased me, though probably it would seem less flattering to the
daughter of Archias, who perhaps is better suited to act as guide to the
blind. How bewildered you look! Eternal gods! Many things are forgotten
after long months have passed, but it will be easy for me to sharpen
your memory. 'At the time Hermon had just finished the Demeter,' the
spider called to me, 'he scratched me on the gold.' But at that very
time--yes, my handsome friend, I can reckon accurately--you had met me,
Althea, in Tennis, I had brought the spider-woman before your eyes. Was
it really nothing but foolish vanity that led me to the conviction
that you were thinking of me also when you engraved on the ribbon the
despised spider-for which, however, I always felt a certain regard--with
the delicate web beneath its slender legs?"

Hitherto Hermon had listened to every word in silence, labouring for
breath. He was transported as if by magic to the hour of his return from
Pelusium; he saw himself enter Myrtilus's studio and watch his friend
scratch something, he did not know what, upon the ribbon which fastened
the bunch of golden grain. It was--nay, it could have been nothing
else--that very spider. The honoured work was not his, but his dead
friend's. How the exchange had occurred he could not now understand,
but to disbelieve that it had taken place would have been madness or
self-deception.

Now he also understood the doubts of Soteles and the King. Not
he--Myrtilus, and he alone, was the creator of the much-lauded Demeter!

This conviction raised a hundred-pound weight from his soul.

What was applause! What was recognition! What were fame and laurel
wreaths! He desired clearness and truth for himself and all the world
and, as if frantic, he suddenly sprang from his cushions, shouting to
the startled guests: "I myself and this whole great city were deceived!
The Demeter is not mine, not the work of Hermon! The dead Myrtilus
created it!"

Then pressing his hand to his brow, he called his student friend to
his side, and, as the scholar anxiously laid his arm on his shoulder,
whispered: "Away, away from here! Only let me get out of doors into the
open air!"

Crates, bewildered and prepared for the worst, obeyed his wish; but
Althea and the other guests left behind felt more and more impressed by
the suddenly awakened conviction that the hapless blind man had now also
become the victim of madness.




CHAPTER VIII.

Without a word of explanation, Hermon dragged his guide along in
breathless haste. No one stopped them.

The atrium, usually swarming with guards, servants, and officials until
a far later hour, was completely deserted when the blind man hurried
through it with his friend.

The door leading into the outer air stood open, but Hermon, leaning on
the scholar's arm, had scarcely crossed the threshold and entered the
little courtyard encircled with ornamental plants, which separated this
portion of the palace from the street, when both were surrounded by a
band of armed Macedonian soldiers, whose commander exclaimed: "In the
name of the King! Not a sound, if you value your lives!"

Incensed, and believing that there was some mistake, Hermon announced
himself as a sculptor and Crates as a member of the Museum, but this
statement did not produce the slightest effect upon the warrior; nay,
when the friends answered the officer's inquiry whether they were coming
from Proclus's banquet in the affirmative; he curtly commanded them to
be put in chains.

To offer resistance would have been madness, for even Hermon perceived,
by the loud clanking of weapons around them, the greatly superior power
of the enemy, and they were acting by the orders of the King. "To the
prison near the place of execution!" cried the officer; and now not only
the mythograph, but Hermon also was startled--this dungeon opened only
to those sentenced to death.

Was he to be led to the executioner's block? A cold shudder ran through
his frame; but the next moment he threw back his waving locks, and his
chest heaved with a long breath.

What pleasure had life to offer him, the blind man, who was already dead
to his art? Ought he not to greet this sudden end as a boon from the
immortals?

Did it not spare him a humiliation as great and painful as could be
imagined?

He had already taken care that the false renown should not follow him
to the grave, and Myrtilus should have his just due, and he would do
whatever else lay in his power to further this object. Wherever the
beloved dead might be, he desired to go there also. Whatever might await
him, he desired no better fate. If he had passed into annihilation, he,
Hermon, wished to follow him thither, and annihilation certainly meant
redemption from pain and misery. But if he were destined to meet his
Myrtilus and his mother in the world beyond the grave, what had he not
to tell them, how sure he was of finding a joyful reception there from
both! The power which delivered him over to death just at that moment
was not Nemesis--no, it was a kindly deity.

Only his heart grew heavy at the thought of leaving Daphne to the
tireless wooer Philotas or some other--everything else from which it is
usually hard to part seemed like a burden that we gladly cast aside.

"Forward!" he called blithely and boldly to the officer; while Crates,
with loud lamentations, was protesting his innocence to the warrior who
was putting fetters upon him.

A chain was just being clasped around Hermon's wrists also when he
suddenly started. His keen ear could not deceive him, and yet a demon
must be mocking him, for the voice that had called his name was the
girl's of whom, in the presence of welcome death, he had thought with
longing regret.

Yet it was no illusion that deceived him. Again he heard the beloved
voice, and this time it addressed not only him, but with the utmost
haste the commander of the soldiers.

Sometimes with touching entreaty, sometimes with imperious command, she
protested, after giving him her name, that this matter could be nothing
but an unfortunate mistake. Lastly, with earnest warmth, she besought
him, before taking the prisoners away, to permit her to speak to the
commanding general, Philippus, her father's guest, who, she was certain,
was in the palace. The blood of these innocent men would be on his head
if he did not listen to her representations.

"Daphne!" cried Hermon in grateful agitation; but she would not listen
to him, and followed the soldier whom the captain detailed to guide her
into the palace.

After a few moments, which the blind artist used to inspire the
despairing scholar with courage, the girl returned, and she did not come
alone. The gray-haired comrade of Alexander accompanied her, and after
a few minutes both prisoners were released from their fetters. Philippus
hastily refused their thanks and, after addressing a few words to the
officer, he changed his tone, and his deep voice sounded paternally
cordial as he exclaimed to Daphne: "Fifteen minutes more, you dear,
foolhardy girl, and it would have been too late. To-morrow you shall
confess to me who treacherously directed you to this dangerous path."

Lastly, he turned to the prisoners to explain that they would be
conducted to the adjacent barracks of the Diadochi, and spend the night
there.

Early the next morning they should be examined, and, if they could
clear themselves from the suspicion of belonging to the ranks of the
conspirators, released.

Daphne again pleaded for the liberation of the prisoners, but Philippus
silenced her with the grave exclamation, "The order of the King!"

The old commander offered no objection to her wish to accompany
Hermon to prison. Daphne now slipped her arm through her cousin's, and
commanded the steward Gras, who had brought her here, to follow them.

The goal of the nocturnal walk, which was close at hand, was reached
at the end of a few minutes, and the prisoners were delivered to the
commander of the Diadochi. This kindly disposed officer had served under
Hermon's father, and when the names of the prisoners were given, and the
officer reported to him that General Philippus recommended them to his
care as innocent men, he had a special room opened for the sculptor and
his fair guide, and ordered Crates to enter another.

He could permit the beautiful daughter of the honoured Archias to remain
with Hermon for half an hour, then he must beg her to allow herself to
be escorted to her home, as the barracks were closed at that time.

As soon as the captive artist was alone with the woman he loved, he
clasped her hand, pouring forth incoherent words of the most ardent
gratitude, and when he felt her warmly return the pressure, he could not
restrain the desire to clasp her to his heart. For the first time his
lips met hers, he confessed his love, and that he had just regarded
death as a deliverer; but his life was now gaining new charm through her
affection.

Then Daphne herself threw her arms around his neck with fervent
devotion.

The love that resistlessly drew his heart to her was returned with equal
strength and ardour. In spite of his deep mental distress, he could
have shouted aloud in his delight and gratitude. He might now have been
permitted to bind forever to his life the woman who had just rescued
him from the greatest danger, but the confession he must make to his
fellow-artists in the palaestra the following morning still sealed his
lips. Yet in this hour he felt that he was united to her, and ought not
to conceal what awaited him; so, obeying a strong impulse, he exclaimed:
"You know that I love you! Words can not express the strength of my
devotion, but for that very reason I must do what duty commands before I
ask the question, 'Will you join your fate to mine?'"

"I love you and have loved you always!" Daphne exclaimed tenderly. "What
more is needed?"

But Hermon, with drooping head, murmured: "To-morrow I shall no longer
be what I am now. Wait until I have done what duty enjoins; when that is
accomplished, you shall ask yourself what worth the blind artist still
possesses who bartered spurious fame for mockery and disgrace in order
not to become a hypocrite."

Then Daphne raised her face to his, asking, "So the Demeter is the work
of Myrtilus?"

"Certainly," he answered firmly. "It is the work of Myrtilus."

"Oh, my poor, deceived love!" cried Daphne, strongly agitated, in a tone
of the deepest sorrow. "What a terrible ordeal again awaits you! It
must indeed distress me--and yet Do not misunderstand me! It seems
nevertheless as if I ought to rejoice, for you and your art have not
spoken to me even a single moment from this much-lauded work."

"And therefore," he interrupted with passionate delight, "therefore
alone you withheld the enthusiastic praise with which the others
intoxicated me? And I, fool, blinded also in mind, could be vexed with
you for it! But only wait, wait! Soon-to-morrow even--there will be
no one in Alexandria who can accuse me of deserting my own honest
aspiration, and, if the gods will only restore my sight and the ability
to use my hands as a sculptor, then, girl, then--"

Here he was interrupted by a loud knocking at the door.

The time allowed had expired.

Hermon again warmly embraced Daphne, saying: "Then go! Nothing can cloud
what these brief moments have bestowed. I must remain blind; but you
have restored the lost sight to my poor darkened soul. To-morrow I shall
stand in the palaestra before my comrades, and explain to them what a
malicious accident deceived me, and with me this whole great city. Many
will not believe me, and even your father will perhaps consider it a
disgrace to give his arm to his scorned, calumniated nephew to guide
him home. Bring this before your mind, and everything else that you must
accept with it, if you consent, when the time arrives, to become mine.
Conceal and palliate nothing! But should the Lady Thyone speak of the
Eumenides who pursued me, tell her that they had probably again extended
their arms toward me, but when I return to-morrow from the palaestra I
shall be freed from the terrible beings."

Lastly, he asked to be told quickly how she had happened to come to the
palace at the right time at so late an hour, and Daphne informed him
as briefly and modestly as if the hazardous venture which, in strong
opposition to her retiring, womanly nature, she had undertaken, was a
mere matter of course.

When Thyone in her presence heard from Gras that Hermon intended to go
to Proclus's banquet, she started up in horror, exclaiming, "Then the
unfortunate man is lost!"

Her husband, who had long trusted even the gravest secrets to his
discreet old wife, had informed her of the terrible office the King had
confided to him. All the male guests of Proclus were to be executed; the
women--the Queen at their head--would be sent into exile.

Then Daphne, on her knees, besought the matron to tell her what
threatened Hermon, and succeeded in persuading her to speak.

The terrified girl, accompanied by Gras, went first to her lover's house
and, when she did not find him there, hastened to the King's palace.

If Hermon could have seen her with her fluttering hair, dishevelled by
the night breeze, and checks blanched by excitement and terror, if he
had been told how she struggled with Thyone, who tried to detain her and
lock her up before she left her father's house, he would have perceived
with still prouder joy, had that been possible, what he possessed in the
devoted love of this true woman.

Grateful and moved by joyous hopes, he informed Daphne of the words of
the oracle, which had imprinted themselves upon his memory.

She, too, quickly retained them, and murmured softly:

"Noise and dazzling radiance are hostile to the purer light, Morning and
day will rise quietly from the starving sand."

What could the verse mean except that the blind man would regain the
power to behold the light of clay amid the sands of the silent desert?

Perhaps it would be well for him to leave Alexandria now, and she
described how much benefit she had received while hunting from the
silence of the wilderness, when she had left the noise of the city
behind her. But before she had quite finished, the knocking at the door
was repeated.

The lovers took leave of each other with one last kiss, and the final
words of the departing girl echoed consolingly in the blind man's heart,
"The more they take from you, the more closely I will cling to you."

Hermon spent the latter portion of the night rejoicing in the
consciousness of a great happiness, yet also troubled by the difficult
task which he could not escape.

When the market place was filling, gray-haired Philippus visited him.

He desired before the examination, for which every preparation had been
made, to understand personally the relation of his dead comrade's son to
the defeated conspiracy, and he soon perceived that Hermon's presence at
the banquet was due solely to an unlucky accident or in consequence of
the Queen's desire to win him over to her plot.

Yet he was forced to advise the blind sculptor to leave Alexandria. The
suspicion that he had been associated with the conspirators was the more
difficult to refute, because his Uncle Archias had imprudently allowed
himself to be persuaded by Proclus and Arsinoe to lend the Queen large
sums, which had undoubtedly been used to promote her abominable plans.

Philippus also informed him that he had just come from Archias, whom he
had earnestly urged to fly as quickly as possible from the persecution
which was inevitable; for, secure as Hermon's uncle felt in his
innocence, the receipts for the large sums loaned by him, which had just
been found in Proclus's possession, would bear witness against him. Envy
and ill will would also have a share in this affair, and the usually
benevolent King knew no mercy where crime against his own person was
concerned. So Archias intended to leave the city on one of his own ships
that very day. Daphne, of course, would accompany him.

The prisoner listened in surprise and anxiety.

His uncle driven from his secure possessions to distant lands! Daphne
taken from him, he knew not whither nor for how long a time, after he
had just been assured of her great love! He himself on the way to expose
himself to the malice and mockery of the whole city!

His heart contracted painfully, and his solicitude about his uncle's
fate increased when Philippus informed him that the conspirators had
been arrested at the banquet and, headed by Amyntas, the Rhodian,
Chrysippus, and Proclus, had perished by the executioner's sword at
sunrise.

The Queen, Althea, and the other ladies were already on the way to
Coptos, in Upper Egypt, whither the King had exiled them.

Ptolemy had intrusted the execution of this severe punishment to
Alexander's former comrade as the most trustworthy and discreet of his
subjects, but rejected, with angry curtness, Philippus's attempt to
uphold the innocence of his friend Archias.

The old man's conversation with Hermon was interrupted by the
functionaries who subjected him and Crates to the examination. It lasted
a long time, and referred to every incident in the artist's life since
his return to Alexandria. The result was favourable, and the prisoner
was dismissed from confinement with the learned companion of his fate.

When, accompanied by Philippus, Hermon reached his house, it was so
late that the artists' festival in honour of the sculptor Euphranor,
who entered his seventieth year of life that day, must have already
commenced.

On the way the blind man told the general what a severe trial awaited
him, and the latter approved his course and, on bidding him farewell,
with sincere emotion urged Hermon to take courage.

After hastily strengthening himself with a few mouthfuls of food and a
draught of wine, his slave Patran, who understood writing, wished to put
on the full laurel wreath; but Hermon was seized with a painful sense of
dissatisfaction, and angrily waved it back.

Without a single green leaf on his head, he walked, leaning on the
Egyptian's arm, into the palaestra, which was diagonally opposite to his
house.

Doubtless he longed to hasten at once to Daphne, but he felt that he
could not take leave of her until he had first cast off, as his heart
and mind dictated, the terrible burden which oppressed his soul.
Besides, he knew that the object of his love would not part from him
without granting him one last word.

On the way his heart throbbed almost to bursting.

Even Daphne's image, and what threatened her father, and her with him,
receded far into the background. He could think only of his design, and
how he was to execute it.

Yet ought he not to have the laurel wreath put on, in order, after
removing it, to bestow it on the genius of Myrtilus?

Yet no!

Did he still possess the right to award this noble branch to any one? He
was appearing before his companions only to give truth its just due. It
was repulsive to endow this explanation of an unfortunate error with a
captivating aspect by any theatrical adornment. To be honest, even for
the porter, was a simple requirement of duty, and no praiseworthy merit.

The guide forced a path for him through carriages, litters, and whole
throngs of slaves and common people, who had assembled before the
neighbouring palaestra.

The doorkeepers admitted the blind man, who was well known here, without
delay; but he called to the slave: "Quick, Patran, and not among the
spectators--in the centre of the arena!"

The Egyptian obeyed, and his master crossed the wide space, strewn with
sand, and approached the stage which had been erected for the festal
performances.

Even had his eyes retained the power of sight, his blood was coursing
so wildly through his veins that he might perhaps have been unable to
distinguish the statues around him and the thousands of spectators, who,
crowded closely together, richly garlanded, their cheeks glowing with
enthusiasm, surrounded the arena.

"Hermon!" shouted his friend Soteles in joyful surprise in the midst of
this painful walk. "Hermon!" resounded here, there, and everywhere
as, leaning on his friend's arm, he stepped upon the stage, and the
acclamations grew louder and louder as Soteles fulfilled the sculptor's
request and led him to the front of the platform.

Obeying a sign from the director of the festival, the chorus, which had
just sung a hymn to the Muses, was silent.

Now the sculptor began to speak, and noisy applause thundered around him
as he concluded the well-chosen words of homage with which he offered
cordial congratulations to the estimable Euphranor, to whom the festival
was given; but the shouts soon ceased, for the audience had heard
his modest entreaty to be permitted to say a few words, concerning a
personal matter, to those who were his professional colleagues, as well
as to the others who had honoured him with their interest and, only too
loudly, with undeserved applause. The more closely what he had to say
concerned himself, the briefer he would make his story.

And, in fact, he did not long claim the attention of his hearers.
Clearly and curtly he stated how it had been possible to mistake
Mrytilus's work for his, how the Tennis goldsmith had dispelled his
first suspicion, and how vainly he had besought the priests of Demeter
to be permitted to feel his statue. Then, without entering into details,
he informed them that, through an accident, he had now reached the firm
conviction that he had long worn wreaths which belonged to another. But,
though the latter could not rise from the grave, he still owed it to
truth, to whose service he had dedicated his art from the beginning,
and to the simple honesty, dear alike to the peasant and the artist, to
divest himself of the fame to which he was not entitled. Even while he
believed himself to be the creator of the Demeter, he had been seriously
troubled by the praise of so many critics, because it had exposed him to
the suspicion of having become faithless to his art and his nature. In
the name of the dead, he thanked his dear comrades for the enthusiastic
appreciation his masterpiece had found. Honour to Myrtilus and his
art, but he trusted this noble festal assemblage would pardon the
unintentional deception, and aid his prayer for recovery. If it should
be granted he hoped to show that Hermon had not been wholly unworthy to
adorn himself for a short time with the wreaths of Myrtilus.

When he closed, deep silence reigned for a brief interval, and one man
looked at another irresolutely until the hero of the day, gray-haired
Euphranor, rose and, leaning on the arm of his favourite pupil, walked
through the centre of the arena to the stage, mounted it, embraced
Hermon with paternal warmth, and made him happy by the words: "The
deception that has fallen to your lot, my poor young friend, is a
lamentable one; but honour to every one who honestly means to uphold
the truth. We will beseech the immortals with prayers and sacrifices
to restore sight to your artist eyes. If I am permitted, my dear young
comrade, to see you continue to create, it will be a source of joy to me
and all of us; yet the Muses, even though unasked, lead into the eternal
realm of beauty the elect who consecrates his art to truth with the
right earnestness."

The embrace with which the venerable hero of the festival seemed to
absolve Hermon was greeted with loud applause; but the kind words which
Euphranor, in the weak voice of age, had addressed to the blind man had
been unintelligible to the large circle of guests.

When he again descended to the arena new plaudits rose; but soon hisses
and other signs of disapproval blended with them, which increased in
strength and number when a well known critic, who had written a learned
treatise concerning the relation of the Demeter to Hermon's earlier
works, expressed his annoyance in a loud whistle. The dissatisfied and
disappointed spectators now vied with one another to silence those who
were cheering by a hideous uproar while the latter expressed more
and more loud the sincere esteem with which they were inspired by the
confession of the artist who, though cruelly prevented from winning
fresh fame, cast aside the wreath which a dead man had, as were,
proffered from his tomb.

Probably every man thought that, in the same situation, he would have
done the same yet not only justice--nay, compassion--dictated showing
the blind artist that they believed in and would sustain him. The
ill-disposed insisted that Hermon had only done what duty commanded
the meanest man, and the fact that he had deceived all Alexandria still
remained. Not a few joined this party, for larger possession excite envy
perhaps even more frequently than greater fame.

Soon the approving and opposing voices mingled in an actual conflict.
But before the famous sculptor Chares, the great and venerable artist
Nicias, and several younger friends of Hermon quelled this unpleasant
disturbance of the beautiful festival, the blind man, leaning on the arm
of his fellow-artist Soteles, had left the palaestra.

At the exit he, parted from his friend, who had been made happy by the
ability to absolve his more distinguished leader from the reproach of
having become faithless to their common purpose, and who intended to
intercede further in his behalf in the palaestra.

Hermon no longer needed him; for, besides his slave Patran, he found
the steward Gras, who, by his master's order, guided the blind man to
Archias's closed harmamaxa, which was waiting outside the building.




CHAPTER IX.

The sculptor's head was burning feverishly when he entered the vehicle.
He had never imagined that the consequences of his explanation would
be so terrible. During the drive--by no means a long one--to the great
harbour, he strove to collect his thoughts. Groaning aloud, he covered
his ears with his hands to shut out the shouts and hisses from the
palaestra, which in reality were no longer audible.

True, he would not need to expose himself to this uproar a second time,
yet if he remained in Alexandria the witticisms, mockery, and jibes of
the whole city, though in a gentler form, would echo hundreds of times
around him.

He must leave the city. He would have preferred to go on board the
staunch Tacheia and be borne far away with his uncle and Daphne, but he
was obliged to deny himself the fulfilment of this desire. He must now
think solely of regaining his sight.

Obedient to the oracle, he would go to the desert where from the
"starving sand" the radiant daylight was to rise anew for him.

There he would, at any rate, be permitted to recover the clearness
of perception and feeling which he had lost in the delirium of the
dissolute life of pleasure that he had led in the past. Pythagoras had
already forbidden the folly of spoiling the present by remorse; and
he, too, did not do this. It would have been repugnant to his genuinely
Greek nature. Instead of looking backward with peevish regret, his
purpose was to look with blithe confidence toward the future, and to do
his best to render it better and more fruitful than the months of revel
which lay behind him.

He could no longer imagine a life worth living without Daphne, and the
thought that if his uncle were robbed of his wealth he would become her
support cheered his heart. If the oracle did not fulfil its promise, he
would again appeal to medical skill, and submit even to the most severe
suffering which might be imposed upon him.

The drive to the great harbour was soon over, but the boat which lay
waiting for him had a considerable distance to traverse, for the Tacheia
was no longer at the landing place, but was tacking outside the Pharos,
in order, if the warrant of arrest were issued, not to be stopped at
the channel dominated by the lighthouse. He found the slender trireme
pervaded by a restless stir. His uncle had long been expecting him with
burning impatience.

He knew, through Philippus, what duty still detained the deceived
artist, but he learned, at the same time, that his own imprisonment had
been determined, and it would be advisable for him to leave the city
behind him as quickly as possible. Yet neither Daphne nor he was willing
to depart without saying farewell to Hermon.

But the danger was increasing every moment, and, warm as was the
parting, the last clasp of the hand and kiss swiftly followed the first
words of greeting.

So the blind artist learned only that Archias was going to the island of
Lesbos, his mother's home, and that he had promised his daughter to
give Hermon time to recover his sight. The property bequeathed to him by
Myrtilus had been placed by the merchant in the royal bank, and he had
also protected himself against any chance of poverty. Hermon was to send
news of his health to Lesbos from time to time if a safe opportunity
offered and, when Daphne knew where he was to be found, she could let
him have tidings. Of course, for the present great caution must be
exercised in order not to betray the abode of the fugitives.

Hermon, too, ought to evade the pursuit of the incensed King as quickly
as possible.

Not only Daphne's eyes, but her father's also, overflowed with tears at
this parting, and Hermon perceived more plainly than ever that he was as
dear to his uncle as though he were his own son.

The low words which the artist exchanged with the woman whose love, even
during the period of separation, would shed light and warmth upon his
darkened life, were deeply impressed upon the souls of both.

For the present, faithful Gras was to remain in charge of his master's
house in Alexandria. Leaning on his arm, the blind man left the Tacheia,
which, as soon as both had entered the boat, was urged forward by
powerful strokes of the oars.

The Bithynian informed Hermon that kerchiefs were waving him a farewell
from the trireme, that the sails had been unfurled, and the wind was
driving the swift vessel before it like a swallow.

At the Pharos Gras reported that a royal galley was just passing them,
undoubtedly in pursuit of the Tacheia; but the latter was the swiftest
of all the Greek vessels, and they need not fear that she would be
overtaken by the war ship.

With a sore heart and the desolate feeling of being now utterly alone,
Hermon again landed and ordered that his uncle's harmamaxa should convey
him to the necropolis. He desired to seek peace at his mother's grave,
and to take leave of these beloved tombs.

Guided by the steward, he left them cheered and with fresh confidence in
the future, and the faithful servant's account of the energy with which
Daphne had aided the preparations for departure benefited him like a
refreshing bath.

When he was again at home, one visitor after another was announced,
who came there from the festival in the palaestra, and, in spite of
his great reluctance to receive them, he denied no one admittance, but
listened even to the ill-disposed and spiteful.

In the battle which he had commenced he must not shrink from wounds,
and he was struck by many a poisoned shaft. But, to make amends, a clear
understanding was effected between him and those whom he esteemed.

The last caller left him just before midnight.

Hermon now made many preparations for departure.

He intended to go into the desert with very little luggage, as the
oracle seemed to direct. How long a time his absence would extend could
not be estimated, and the many poor people whom he had fed and supported
must not suffer through his departure. The arrangements required to
effect this he dictated to the slave, who understood writing. He had
gained in him an extremely capable servant, and Patran expressed his
readiness to follow him into the desert; but the wry face which, sure
that the blind man could not see him, he made while saying so, seemed to
prove the contrary.

Weary, and yet too excited to find sleep, Hermon at last went to rest.

If his Myrtilus had been with him now, what would he not have had to say
to express his gratitude, to explain! How overjoyed he would have been
at the fulfilment of his wish to see him united to Daphne, at least in
heart; with what fiery ardour he would have upbraided those who believed
him capable of having appropriated what belonged to another!

But Myrtilus was no more, and who could tell whether his body had not
remained unburied, and his soul was therefore condemned to be borne
restlessly between heaven and earth, like a leaf driven by the wind?
Yet, if the earth covered him, where was the spot on which sacrifices
could be offered to his soul, his tombstone could be anointed, and he
himself remembered?

Then a doubt which had never before entered his mind suddenly took
possession of Hermon.

Since for so many months he had firmly believed his friend's work to be
his own, he might also have fallen into another delusion, and Myrtilus
might still dwell among the living.

At this thought the blind man, with a swift movement, sat erect upon his
couch; it seemed as if a bright light blazed before his eyes in the dark
room.

The reasons which had led the authorities to pronounce Myrtilus dead
rendered his early end probable, it is true, yet by no means proved it
absolutely. He must hold fast to that.

He who, ever since he returned to Alexandria from Tennis, had squandered
precious time as if possessed by evil demons, would now make a better
use of it. Besides, he longed to leave the capital. What! Suppose he
should now, even though it were necessary to delay obeying the oracle's
command, search, traverse, sail through the world in pursuit of
Myrtilus, even, if it must be, to the uttermost Thule?

But he fell back upon the couch as quickly as he had started up.

"Blind! blind!" he groaned in dull despair. How could he, who was
not able even to see his hand before his eyes, succeed in finding his
friend?

And yet, yet----

Had his mind been darkened with his eyes, that this thought came to him
now for the first time, that he had not sent messengers to all quarters
of the globe to find some trace of the assailants and, with them, of the
lost man?

Perhaps it was Ledscha who had him in her power, and, while he
was pondering and forming plans for the best way of conducting
investigations, the dimmed image of the Biamite again returned
distinctly to his mind, and with it that of Arachne and the spider, into
which the goddess transformed the weaver.

Half overcome by sleep, he saw himself, staff in hand, led by Daphne,
cross green meadows and deserts, valleys and mountains, to seek his
friend; yet whenever he fancied he caught sight of him, and Ledscha with
him, in the distance, the spider descended from above and, with magical
speed, wove a net which concealed both from his gaze.

Groaning and deeply disturbed, half awake, he struggled onward, always
toward one goal, to find his Myrtilus again, when suddenly the sound of
the knocker on the entrance door and the barking of Lycas, his Arabian
greyhound, shook the house.

Recalled to waking life, he started up and listened.

Had the men who were to arrest him or inquisitive visitors not allowed
themselves to be deterred even by the late hour?

He listened angrily as the old porter sternly accosted the late guest;
but, directly after, the gray-haired native of the region near the First
Cataract burst into the strange Nubian oaths which he lavished liberally
whenever anything stirred his aged soul.

The dog, which Hermon had owned only a few months, continued to bark;
but above his hostile baying the blind man thought he recognised a name
at whose sound the blood surged hotly into his cheeks. Yet he could
scarcely have heard aright!

Still he sprang from the couch, groped his way to the door, opened it,
and entered the impluvium that adjoined his bedroom. The cool night air
blew upon him from the open ceiling. A strong draught showed that the
door leading from the atrium was being opened, and now a shout, half
choked by weeping, greeted him: "Hermon! My clear, my poor beloved
master!"

"Bias, faithful Bias!" fell from the blind man's lips, and when he felt
the returned slave sink down before him, cover his hand with kisses and
wet it with tears, he raised him in his strong arms, clasped him in a
warm embrace, kissed his checks, and gasped, "And Myrtilus, my Myrtilus,
is he alive?"

"Yes, yes, yes," sobbed Bias. "But you, my lord-blind, blind! Can it be
true?"

When Hermon released him to inquire again about his friend, Bias
stammered: "He isn't faring so badly; but you, you, bereft of light and
also of the joy of seeing your faithful Bias again! And the immortals
prolong one's years to experience such evils! Two griefs always belong
to one joy, like two horses to a chariot."

"My wise Bias! Just as you were of old!" cried Hermon in joyful
excitement.

Then he quieted the hound and ordered one of the attendants, who came
hurrying in, to bring out whatever dainty viands the house contained and
a jar of the best Byblus wine from the cellar.

Meanwhile he did not cease his inquiries about his friend's health, and
ordered a goblet to be brought him also, that he might pledge the slave
and give brief answers to his sympathizing questions about the cause of
the blindness, the noble Archias, the gracious young mistress Daphne,
the famous Philippus and his wife, the companion Chrysilla, and the
steward Gras. Amid all this he resolved to free the faithful fellow and,
while Bias was eating, he could not refrain from telling him that he had
found a mistress for him, that Daphne was the wife whom he had chosen,
but the wedding was still a long way off.

He controlled his impatience to learn the particulars concerning his
friend's fate until Bias had partially satisfied his hunger.

A short time ago Hermon would have declared it impossible that he could
ever become so happy during this period of conflict and separation from
the object of his love.

The thought of his lost inheritance doubtless flitted through his
mind, but it seemed merely like worthless dust, and the certainty
that Myrtilus still walked among the living filled him with unclouded
happiness. Even though he could no longer see him, he might expect to
hear his beloved voice again. Oh, what delight that he was permitted to
have his friend once more, as well as Daphne, that he could meet him
so freely and joyously and keep the laurel, which had rested with such
leaden weight upon his head, for Myrtilus, and for him alone!

But where was he?

What was the name of the miracle which had saved him, and yet kept him
away from his embrace so long?

How had Myrtilus and Bias escaped the flames and death on that night of
horror?

A flood of questions assailed the slave before he could begin a
connected account, and Hermon constantly interrupted it to ask for
details concerning his friend and his health at each period and on every
occasion.

Much surprised by his discreet manner, the artist listened to the
bondman's narrative; for though Bias had formerly allowed himself to
indulge in various little familiarities toward his master, he refrained
from them entirely in this story, and the blind man's misfortune
invested him in his eyes with a peculiar sacredness.




CHAPTER X.

He had arrived wounded on the pirate ship with his master's friend,
the returned bondman began. When he had regained consciousness, he met
Ledscha on board the Hydra, as the wife of the pirate Hanno. She had
nursed Myrtilus with tireless solicitude, and also often cared for his,
Bias's, wounds. After the recovery of the prisoners, she became their
protectress, and placed Bias in the service of the Greek artist.

They, the Gaul Lutarius, and one of the sculptor's slaves, were the only
ones who had been brought on board the Hydra alive from the attack in
Tennis, but the latter soon succumbed to his wounds.

Hermon owed it solely to the bridge-builder that he had escaped from
the vengeance of his Biamite foe, for the tall Gaul, whose thick beard
resembled Hermon's in length and blackness, was mistaken by Hanno for
the person whom Ledscha had directed him to deliver alive into her
power.

The pirate had surrendered the wrong captive to the woman he loved and,
as Bias declared, to his serious disadvantage; for, though Hanno and
the Biamite girl were husband and wife, no one could help perceiving the
cold dislike with which Ledscha rebuffed the giant who read her every
wish in her eyes. Finally, the captain of the pirate ship, a silent man
by nature, often did not open his lips for days except to give orders
to the crew. Frequently he even refused to be relieved from duty, and
remained all night at the helm.

Only when, at his own risk, or with the vessels of his father and
brother, he attacked merchant ships or defended himself against a war
galley, did he wake to vigorous life and rush with gallant recklessness
into battle.

A single man on the Hydra was little inferior to him in strength and
daring--the Gaul Lutarius. He had been enrolled among the pirates, and
when Hanno was wounded in an engagement with a Syrian war galley,
was elected his representative. During this time Ledscha faithfully
performed her duty as her young husband's nurse, but afterward treated
him as coldly as before.

Yet she devoted herself eagerly to the ship and the crew, and
the fierce, lawless fellows cheerfully submitted to the sensible
arrangements of their captain's beautiful, energetic wife. At this
period Bias had often met Ledscha engaged in secret conversation with
the Gaul, yet if any tender emotion really attracted her toward any one
other than her husband, Myrtilus would have been suspected rather than
the black-bearded bridge-builder; for she not only showed the sculptor
the kindest consideration, but often entered into conversation with
him, and even persuaded him, when the sea was calm, or the Hydra lay at
anchor in one of the hidden bays known to the pirates, to practise his
art, and at last to make a bust of her. She had succeeded in getting
him clay, wax, and tools for the purpose. After asking which goddess
had ill-treated the weaver Arachne, she commanded him to make a head of
Athene, adorned with the helmet, modelled from her own. During this time
she frequently inquired whether her features really were not beautiful
enough to be copied for the countenance of a goddess, and when he
eagerly assured her of the fact, made him swear that he was not
deceiving her with flattery.

Neither Bias nor Myrtilus had ever been allowed to remain on shore; but,
on the whole, the slave protested, Myrtilus's health, thanks to the pure
sea air on the Hydra, had improved, in spite of the longing which
often assailed him, and the great excitements to which he was sometimes
exposed.

There had been anxious hours when Hanno's father and brothers visited
the Hydra to induce her captain to make money out of the captive
sculptor, and either sell him at a high price or extort a large ransom
from him; but Bias had overheard how resolutely Ledscha opposed these
proposals, and represented to old Satabus of what priceless importance
Myrtilus might become to them if either should be captured and
imprisoned.

The greatest excitements, of course, had been connected with the battles
of the pirates. Myrtilus, who, in spite of his feeble health, by no
means lacked courage, found it especially hard to bear that during the
conflicts he was locked up with Bias, but even Ledscha could neither
prevent nor restrict these measures.

Bias could not tell what seas the Hydra had sailed, nor at what--usually
desolate-shores she had touched. He only knew that she had gone to
Sinope in Pontus, passed through the Propontis, and then sought booty
near the coasts of Asia Minor. Ledscha had refused to answer every
question that referred to these things.

Latterly, the young wife had become very grave, and apparently
completely severed her relations with her husband; but she also
studiously avoided the Gaul and, if they talked to each other at all, it
was in hurried whispers.

So events went on until something occurred which was to affect the lives
of the prisoners deeply. It must have been just beyond the outlet from
the Hellespont into the AEgean Sea; for, in order to pass through the
narrow straits leading thither from Pontus, the Hydra had been most
skilfully given the appearance of a peaceful merchant vessel.

The slave's soul must have been greatly agitated by this experience, for
while, hitherto, whenever he was interrupted by Hermon he had retained
his composure, and could not refrain from occasionally connecting a
practical application with his report, now, mastered by the power of
the remembrance, he uttered what he wished to tell his master in an
oppressed tone, while bright drops of perspiration bedewed the speaker's
brow.

A large merchant ship had approached them, and three men came on board
the Hydra--old Satabus, his son Labaja, and a gray-haired, bearded
seafarer of tall stature and dignified bearing, Schalit, Ledscha's
father.

The meeting between the Biamite ship-owner and his child, after so long
a separation, was a singular one; for the young wife held out her hand
to her father timidly, with downcast eyes, and he refused to take it.
Directly after, however, as if constrained by an irresistible impulse,
he drew his unruly daughter toward him and kissed her brow and cheeks.

Roast meat and the best wine had been served in the large ship's cabin;
but though Myrtilus and Bias had been locked up as if a bloody battle
was expected, the loud, angry uproar of men's deep voices reached them,
and Ledscha's shrill tones shrieking in passionate wrath blended in the
strife. Furniture must have been upset and dishes broken, yet the giants
who were disputing here did not come to blows.

At last the savage turmoil subsided.

When Bias and his master were again released, Ledscha was standing,
in the dusk of evening, at the foot of the mainmast, pressing her brow
against the wood as if she needed some support to save herself from
falling.

She checked Myrtilus's words with an imperious "Let me alone!" The next
day she had paced restlessly up and down the deck like a caged beast of
prey, and would permit no one to speak to her.

At noon Hanno was about to get into a boat to go to her father's ship,
and she insisted upon accompanying him. But this time the corsair seemed
completely transformed, and with the pitiless sternness, which he so
well knew how to use in issuing commands, ordered her to remain on the
Hydra.

She, however, by no means obeyed her husband's mandate without
resistance, and, at the recollection of the conflict which now occurred
between the pair, in which she raged like a tigress, the narrator's
cheeks crimsoned.

The quarrel was ended by the powerful seaman's taking in his arms his
lithe, slender wife, who resisted him with all her strength and had
already touched the side of the boat with her foot, and putting her down
on the deck of his ship.

Then Hanno leaped back into the skiff, while Ledscha, groaning with
rage, retired to the cabin.

An hour after she again appeared on deck, called Myrtilus and Bias and,
showing them her eyes, reddened by tears, told them, as if in apology
for her weakness, that she had not been permitted to bid her father
farewell. Then, pallid as a corpse, she had turned the conversation upon
Hermon, and informed Myrtilus that an Alexandrian pilot had told her
father that he was blind, and her brother-in-law Labaja had heard the
same thing. While saying this, her lips curled scornfully, but when she
saw how deeply their friend's misfortune moved her two prisoners, she
waved her hand, declaring that he did not need their sympathy; the pilot
had reported that he was living in magnificence and pleasure, and the
people in the capital honoured and praised him as if he were a god.

Thereupon she had laughed shrilly and reviled so bitterly the
contemptible blind Fortune that remains most loyal to those who deserve
to perish in the deepest misery, that Bias avoided repeating her words
to his master.

The news of Myrtilus's legacy had not reached her ears, and Bias, too,
had just heard of it for the first time.

Ledscha's object had been to relieve her troubled soul by attacks
upon the man whom she hated, but she suddenly turned to the master and
servant to ask if they desired to obtain their liberty.

Oh, how quickly a hopeful "Yes" reached the ears of the gloomy woman!
how ready both were to swear, by a solemn oath, to fulfil the conditions
the Biamite desired to impose!

As soon as opportunity offered, both were to leave the Hydra with one
other person who, like Bias and herself, understood how to mange a boat.

The favourable moment soon came. One moonless night, when the steering
of the Hydra was intrusted to the Gaul, Ledscha waked the two prisoners
and, with the Gaul Lutarius, Myrtilus, and the slave, entered the boat,
which conveyed them to the shore without accident or interruption.

Bias knew the name of the place where it had anchored, it is true, but
the oath which Ledscha had made him swear there was so terrible that he
would not have broken it at any cost.

This oath required the slave, who, three days after their landing,
was sent to Alexandria by the first ship that sailed for that port, to
maintain the most absolute secrecy concerning Myrtilus's hiding place
until he was authorized to speak. Bias was to go to Alexandria without
delay, and there obtain from Archias, who managed Myrtilus's property,
the sums which Ledscha intended to use in the following manner: Two
attic talents Bias was to bring back. These were for the Gaul, probably
in payment for his assistance. Two more were to be taken by the slave to
the Temple of Nemesis. Lastly, Bias was to deliver five talents to old
Tabus, who kept the treasure of the pirate family on the Owl's Nest, and
tell her that Ledscha, in this money, sent back the bridal dowry which
Hanno had paid her father for his daughter. With this she released
herself from the husband who inspired her with feelings very unlike
love.

Hermon asked to have this commission repeated, and received the
directions Myrtilus had given to the slave. The blind man's hope that
they must also include greetings and news from his friend's hand was
destroyed by Bias, whom Myrtilus, in the leisure hours on the Hydra,
had taught to read. This was not so difficult a task for the slave, who
longed for knowledge, and had already tried it before. But with writing,
on the other hand, he could make no headway. He was too old, and his
hand had become too clumsy to acquire this difficult art.

In reply to Hermon's anxious question whether his friend needed anything
in his present abode, the slave reported that he was at liberty to move
about at will, and was not even obliged to share Ledscha's lodgings. He
lacked nothing, for the Biamite, besides some gold, had left with him
also gems and pearls of such great value that they would suffice to
support him several years. As for himself, she had supplied him more
than abundantly with money for travelling expenses.

Myrtilus was awaiting his return in a city prospering under a rich and
wise regent, and sent whole cargoes of affectionate remembrances. The
sculptor, too, was firmly resolved to keep the oath imposed upon him.

As soon as he, Bias, had performed the commission intrusted to him, he
and Myrtilus would be released from their vow, and Hermon would learn
his friend's residence.




CHAPTER XI.

No morning brightened Hermon's night of darkness.

When the returned slave had finished his report, the sun was already
shining into his master's room.

Without lying down again, the latter went at once to the Tennis notary,
who had moved to Alexandria two months before, and with his assistance
raised the money which his friend needed.

Worthy Melampus had received the news that Myrtilus was still alive in a
very singular manner. Even now he could grasp only one thing at a time,
and he loved Hermon with sincere devotion. Therefore the lawyer who
had so zealously striven to expedite the blind man's entering into
possession of his friend's inheritance would very willingly have
permitted Myrtilus--doubtless an invalid--to continue to rest quietly
among the dead. Yet his kind heart rejoiced at the deliverance of the
famous young artist, and so during Hermon's story he had passed from
sincere regret to loud expressions of joyous sympathy.

Lastly, he had placed his whole property at the disposal of Hermon, who
had paid him liberally for his work, to provide for the blind sculptor's
future. This generous offer had been declined; but he now assisted
Hermon to prepare the emancipation papers for his faithful Bias, and
found a ship that was bound to Tanis. Toward evening he accompanied
Hermon to the harbour and, after a cordial farewell from his helpful
friend, the artist, with the new "freedman" Bias and the slave clerk
Patran, went on board the vessel, now ready to sail.

The voyage was one of the speediest, yet the end came too soon for both
master and servant--Hermon had not yet heard enough of the friend beyond
his reach, and Bias was far from having related everything he desired
to tell about Myrtilus and Ledscha; yet he was now permitted to express
every opinion that entered his mind, and this had occupied a great deal
of time.

Bias also sought to know much more about Hermon's past and future than
he had yet learned, not merely from curiosity, but because he foresaw
that Myrtilus would not cease to question him about his blind friend.

The misfortune must have produced a deep and lasting effect upon the
artist's joyous nature, for his whole bearing was pervaded by such
earnestness and dignity that years, instead of months, seemed to have
elapsed since their separation.

It was characteristic of Daphne that her lover's blindness did not
alienate her from him; yet why had not the girl, who still desired to
become his wife, been able to wed the helpless man who had lost his
sight? If the father did not wish to be separated from his daughter,
surely he could live with the young couple. A home was quickly made
everywhere for the rich, and, if Archias was tired of his house in
Alexandria, as Hermon had intimated, there was room enough in the world
for a new one.

But that was the way with things here below! Man was the cause of man's
misfortune! Daphne and Hermon remained the same; but Archias from an
affectionate father had become transformed into an entirely different
person. If the former had been allowed to follow their inclinations,
they would now be united and happy, while, because a third person so
willed, they must go their way solitary and wretched.

He expressed this view to his master, and insisted upon his opinion
until Hermon confided to him what had driven Archias from Alexandria.

Patran, Bias's successor, was by no means satisfactory to him. Had
Hermon retained his sight, he certainly would not have purchased him, in
spite of his skill as a scribe, for the Egyptian had a "bad face."

Oh, if only he could have been permitted to stay with his benefactor
instead of this sullen man! How carefully he would have removed the
stones from his darkened pathway!

During the voyage he was obliged to undergo severe struggles to keep the
oath of secrecy imposed upon him; but perjury threatened him with the
most horrible tortures, not to mention the sorceress Tabus, whom he was
to meet.

So Myrtilus's abode remained unknown to Hermon.

Bias approved his master's intention of going into the desert. He had
often seen the oracle of Amon tested, and he himself had experienced the
healthfulness of the desert air. Besides, it made him proud to see that
Hermon was disposed to follow his suggestion of pitching his tent in a
spot which he designated. This was at the end of the arm of the sea at
Clysma. Several trees grew there beside small springs, and a peaceful
family of Amalekites raised vegetables in their little garden, situated
on higher ground, watered by the desert wells.

When a boy, before the doom of slavery had been pronounced upon him
and his father, his mother, by the priest's advice, took him there to
recover from the severe attack of fever which he could not shake off
amid the damp papyrus plantations surrounding his parents' house. In
the dry, pure air of the desert he recovered, and he would guide Hermon
there before returning to Myrtilus.

From Tanis they reached Tennis in a few hours, and found shelter in the
home of the superintendent of Archias's weaving establishments, whose
hospitality Myrtilus and Hermon had enjoyed before their installation
in the white house, now burned to the ground. The Alexandrian bills of
exchange were paid in gold by the lessee of the royal bank, who was a
good friend of Hermon. Toward evening, both rowed to the Owl's Nest,
taking the five talents with which the runaway wife intended to purchase
freedom from her husband.

As the men approached the central door of the pirates' house, a
middy-aged Biamite woman appeared and rudely ordered them to leave
the island. Tabus was weak, and refused to see visitors. But she was
mistaken; for when Bias, in the dialect of his tribe, shouted loudly
that messengers from the wife of her grandson Hanno had arrived, there
was a movement at the back of the room, and broken sentences, gasped
with difficulty, expressed the old dame's wish to receive the strangers.

On a sheep's-wool couch, over which was spread a wolfskin, the last
gift of her son Satabus, lay the sorceress, who raised herself as Hermon
passed through the door.

After his greeting, she pointed to her deaf ear and begged him to
speak louder. At the same time she gazed into his eyes with a keen,
penetrating glance, and interrupted him by the question: "The Greek
sculptor whose studio was burned over his head? And blind? Blind still?"

"In both eyes," Bias answered for his master.

"And you, fellow?" the old dame asked; then, recollecting herself,
stopped the reply on the servant's lips with the hasty remark: "You
are the blackbeard's slave--a Biamite? Oh, I remember perfectly! You
disappeared with the burning house."

Then she gazed intently and thoughtfully from one to the other, and
at last, pointing to Bias, muttered in a whisper: "You alone come from
Hanno and Ledscha, and were with them on the Hydra? Very well. What news
have you for the old woman from the young couple?"

The freedman began to relate what brought him to the Owl's Nest, and
the gray-haired crone listened eagerly until he said that Ledscha lived
unhappily with her husband, and therefore had left him. She sent back
to her, as the head of Hanno's family, the bridal dowry with which Hanno
had bought her from her father as his wife.

Then Tabus struggled into a little more erect posture, and asked: "What
does this mean? Five talents--and gold, not silver talents? And she
sends the money to me? To me? And she ran away from her husband? But
no--no! Once more--you are a Biamite--repeat it in our own language--and
loudly. This ear is the better one."

Bias obeyed, and the old dame listened to the end without interrupting
him: then raising her brown right hand, covered with a network of
blue-black veins, she clinched it into a fist, which she shook far more
violently than Bias would have believed possible in her weak condition.
At the same time she pressed her lips so tightly together that her
toothless mouth deepened into a hole, and her dim eyes shone with a
keen, menacing light. For some time she found no reply, though strange,
rattling, gasping sounds escaped her heaving breast.

At last she succeeded in uttering words, and shrieked shrilly:
"This--this--away with the golden trash! With the bridal dowry of the
family rejected, and once more free, the base fool thinks she would be
like the captive fox that gnawed the rope! Oh, this age, these people!
And this, this is the haughty, strong Ledscha, the daughter of the
Biamites, who--there stands the blind girl--deceiver!--who so admirably
avenged herself?"

Here her voice failed, and Hermon began to speak to assure her that she
understood Ledscha's wish aright. Then he asked her for a token by which
she acknowledged the receipt of the gold, which he handed her in a stout
linen bag.

But his purpose was not fulfilled, for suddenly, flaming with passionate
wrath, she thrust the purse aside, groaning: "Not an obol of the
accursed destruction of souls shall come back to Hanno, nor even into
the family store. Until his heart and hers stop beating, the most
indissoluble bond will unite both. She desires to ransom herself from
a lawful marriage concluded by her father, as if she were a captive of
war; perhaps she even wants to follow another. Hanno, brave lad, was
ready to go to death for her sake, and she rewards him by bringing
shame on his head and disgrace on us all. Oh, these times, this world!
Everything that is inviolable and holy trampled in the dust! But they
are not all so! In spite of Grecian infidelity, marriage is still
honoured among our people. But she who mocks what is sacred, and
tramples holy customs under foot, shall be accursed, execrated, given
over to want, hunger, disease, death!"

With rattling breath and closed eyes she leaned farther back against the
cushions that supported her; but Bias, in their common language, tried
to soothe her, and informed her that, though Ledscha had probably run
away from her husband, she had by no means renounced her vengeance. He
was bringing two talents with him to place in the Temple of Nemesis.

"Of Nemesis?" repeated the old dame. Then she tried to raise herself
and, as she constantly sank back again, Bias aided her. But she had
scarcely recovered her sitting posture when she gasped to the freedman:
"Nemesis, who helped, and is to continue to help her to destroy her foe?
Well, well! Five talents--a great sum, a great sum! But the more the
better! To Nemesis with them, to Ate and the Erinyes! The talons of the
avenging goddess shall tear the beautiful face, the heart, and the liver
of the accursed one! A twofold malediction on her who has wronged the
son of my Satabus!"

While speaking, her head nodded swiftly up and down, and when at last
she bowed it wearily, her visitors heard her murmur the names of Satabus
and Hanno, sometimes tenderly, sometimes mournfully.

Finally she asked whether any one else was concerned in Ledscha's
flight; and when she learned that a Gallic bridge-builder accompanied
the fugitive wife, she again started up as if frantic, exclaiming: "Yes,
to Nemesis with the gold! We neither need nor want it, and Satabus, my
son, he will bless me for renunciation--"

Here exhaustion again silenced her. She gazed mutely and thoughtfully
into vacancy, until at last, turning to Bias, she began more calmly:
"You will see her again, man, and must tell her what the clan of Tabus
bought with her talents. Take her my curse, and let her know that
her friends would be my foes, and her foes should find in Tabus a
benefactress!"

Then, deeply buried in thought, she again fixed her eyes on the floor;
but at last she called to Hermon, saying: "You, blind Greek--am I not
right?--the torch was thrust into your face, and you lost the sight of
both eyes?"

The artist assented to this question; but she bade him sit down before
her, and when he bent his face near her she raised one lid after the
other with trembling fingers, yet lightly and skilfully, gazed long
and intently into his eyes, and murmured: "Like black Psoti and lawless
Simeon, and they are both cured."

"Can you restore me?" Hermon now asked in great excitement. "Answer
me honestly, you experienced woman! Give me back my sight, and demand
whatever gold and valuables I still possess--"

"Keep them," Tabus contemptuously interrupted. "Not for gold or goods
will I restore you the best gift man can lose. I will cure you because
you are the person to whom the infamous wretch most ardently wished the
sorest trouble. When she hoped to destroy you, she perceived in this
deed the happiness which had been promised to her on a night when
the full moon was shining. To-day--this very night--the disk
between Astarte's horns rounds again, and presently--wait a little
while!--presently you shall have what the light restores you--" Then she
called the Biamite woman, ordered her to bring the medicine chest, and
took from it one vessel after another. The box she was seeking was
among the last and, while handing it to Bias, she muttered: "Oh, yes,
certainly--it does one good to destroy a foe, but no less to make her
foe happy!"

Turning to the freedman, she went on in a louder tone: "You, slave,
shall inform Hanno's wife that old Tabus gave the sculptor, whose
blindness she caused, the remedy which restored the sight of black
Psoti, whom she knew." Here she paused, gazed upward, and murmured
almost unintelligibly: "Satabus, Hanno! If this is the last act of the
old mother, it will give ye pleasure."

Then she told Hermon to kneel again, and ordered the slave to hold the
lamp which her nurse Tasia had just lighted at the hearth fire.

"The last," she said, looking into the box, "but it will be enough. The
odour of the herb in the salve is as strong as if it had been prepared
yesterday."

She laid the first bandage on Hermon's eyes with her own weak fingers,
at the same time muttering an incantation; but it did not seem to
satisfy her. Great excitement had taken possession of her, and as the
silver light of the full moon shone into her room she waved her hands
before the artist's eyes and fixed her gaze upon the threshold illumined
by the moonbeams, ejaculating sentences incomprehensible to the blind
man. Bias supported her, for she had risen to her full height, and he
felt how she tottered and trembled.

Yet her strength held out to whisper to Hermon: "Nearer, still nearer!
By the light of the august one whose rays greet us, let it be said: You
will see again. Await your recovery patiently in a quiet place in the
pure air, not in the city. Refrain from everything with which the Greeks
intoxicate themselves. Shun wine, and whatever heats the blood. Recovery
is coming; I see it drawing near. You will see again as surely as I now
curse the woman who abandoned the husband to whom she vowed fidelity.
She rejoiced over your blindness, and she will gnash her teeth with rage
and grief when she hears that it was Tabus who brought light into the
darkness that surrounds you."

With these words she pushed off the freedman's supporting arms and sank
back upon the couch.

Again Hermon tried to thank her; but she would not permit it, and said
in an almost inaudible tone: "I really did not give the salve to do you
good--the last act of all--"

Finally she murmured a few words of direction for its use, and added
that he must keep the sunlight from his blind eyes by bandages and
shades, as if it were a cruel foe.

When she paused, and Bias asked her another question, she pointed to the
door, exclaiming as loudly as her weakness permitted, "Go, I tell you,
go!"

Hermon obeyed and left her, accompanied by the freedman, who carried the
box of salve so full of precious promise.

The next morning Bias delivered to the astonished priest of Nemesis the
large gifts intended for the avenging goddess.

Before Hermon entered the boat with him and his Egyptian slave, the
freedman told his master that Gula was again living in perfect harmony
with the husband who had cast her off, and Taus, Ledscha's younger
sister, was the wife of the young Biamite who, she had feared, would
give up his wooing on account of her visit to Hermon's studio.

After a long voyage through the canal which had been dug a short time
before, connecting the Mediterranean with the Red Sea, the three men
reached Clysma. Opposite to it, on the eastern shore of the narrow
northern point of the Erythraean sea--[Red Sea]--lay the goal of their
journey, and thither Bias led his blind master, followed by the slave,
on shore.




CHAPTER XII.

It was long since Hermon had felt so free and light-hearted as during
this voyage.

He firmly believed in his recovery.

A few days before he had escaped death in the royal palace as if by a
miracle, and he owed his deliverance to the woman he loved.

In the Temple of Nemesis at Tennis the conviction that the goddess had
ceased to persecute him took possession of his mind.

True, his blind eyes had been unable to see her menacing statue, but not
even the slightest thrill of horror had seized him in its presence. In
Alexandria, after his departure from Proclus's banquet, she had desisted
from pursuing him. Else how would she have permitted him to escape
uninjured when he was already standing upon the verge of an abyss, and a
wave of her hand would have sufficed to hurl him into the death-dealing
gulf?

But his swift confession, and the transformation which followed it, had
reconciled him not only with her, but also with the other gods; for they
appeared to him in forms as radiant and friendly as in the days of his
boyhood, when, while Bias took the helm on the long voyage through the
canal and the Bitter Lakes, he recalled the visible world to his memory
and, from the rising sun, Phoebus Apollo, the lord of light and
purity, gazed at him from his golden chariot, drawn by four horses, and
Aphrodite, the embodiment of all beauty, rose before him from the snowy
foam of the azure waves. Demeter, in the form of Daphne, appeared,
dispensing prosperity, above the swaying golden waves of the ripening
grain fields and bestowing peace beside the domestic hearth. The whole
world once more seemed peopled with deities, and he felt their rule in
his own breast.

The place of which Bias had told him was situated on a lofty portion of
the shore. Beside the springs which there gushed from the soil of the
desert grew green palm trees and thorny acacias. Farther on flourished
the fragrant betharan. About a thousand paces from this spot the
faithful freedman pitched the little tent obtained in Tennis under the
shade of several tall palm trees and a sejal acacia.

Not far from the springs lived the same family of Amalekites whom Bias
had known from boyhood. They raised a few vegetables in little beds, and
the men acted as guards to the caravans which came from Egypt through
the peninsula of Sinai to Petrea and Hebron. The daughter of the aged
sheik whose men accompanied the trains of goods, a pleasant, middle-aged
woman, recognised the Biamite, who when a boy had recovered under her
mother's nursing, and promised Bias to honour his blind master as a
valued guest of the tribe.

Not until after he had done everything in his power to render life in
the wilderness endurable, and had placed a fresh bandage over his eyes,
would Bias leave his master.

The freedman entered the boat weeping, and Hermon, deeply agitated,
turned his face toward him.

When he was left alone with his Egyptian slave, with whom he rarely
exchanged a word, he fancied that, amid the murmur of the waves washing
the strand at his feet, blended the sounds of the street which led
past his house in Alexandria, and with them all sorts of disagreeable
memories crowded upon him; but soon he no longer heard them, and the
next night brought refreshing sleep.

Even on the second day he felt that the profound silence which
surrounded him was a benefit. The stillness affected him like something
physical.

The life was certainly monotonous, and at first there were hours when
the course of the new existence, so devoid of any change, op pressed
him, but he experienced no tedium. His mental life was too rich, and the
unburdening of his anxious soul too great a relief for that.

He had shunned serious thought since he left the philosopher's school;
but here it soon afforded him the highest pleasure, for never had his
mind moved so freely, so undisturbed by any limit or obstacle.

He did not need to search for what he hoped to find in the wilderness.
His whole past life passed before him as if by its own volition. All
that he had ever experienced, learned, thought, felt, rose before his
mind with wonderful distinctness, and when he overlooked all his mental
possessions, as if from a high watch-tower in the bright sunshine, he
began to consider how he had used the details and how he could continue
to do so.

Whatever he had seen incorrectly forced itself resistlessly upon him,
yet here also the Greek nature, deeply implanted in his soul, guarded
him, and it was easy for him to avoid self-torturing remorse. He only
desired to utilize for improvement what he recognised as false.

When in this delicious silence he listened to the contradictory demands
of his intellect and his senses, it often seemed as though he was
present at a discussion between two guests who were exchanging their
opinions concerning the subject that occupied his mind.

Here he first learned to deepen sound intellectual power and listen to
the demands of the heart, or to repulse and condemn them.

Ah, yes, he was still blind; but never had he observed and recognised
human life and its stage, down to the minutest detail, which his eyes
refused to show him, so keenly as during these clays. The phenomena
which had attracted or repelled his vision here appeared nearer and more
distinctly.

What he called "reality" and believed he understood thoroughly and
estimated correctly, now disclosed many a secret which had previously
remained concealed.

How defective his visual perception had been! how necessary it now
seemed to subject his judgment to a new test! Doubtless a wealth of
artistic subjects had come to him from the world of reality which he had
placed far above everything else, but a greater and nobler one from the
sphere which he had shunned as unfruitful and corrupting.

As if by magic, the world of ideality opened before him in this
exquisite silence. He again found in his own soul the joyous creative
forces of Nature, and the surrounding stillness increased tenfold his
capacity of perceiving it; nay, he felt as if creative energy dwelt in
solitude itself.

His mind had always turned toward greatness. The desire to impress his
works with the stamp of his own overflowing power had carried him far
beyond moderation in modelling his struggling Maenads.

Now, when he sought for subjects, beside the smaller and more simple
ones appeared mighty and manifold ones, often of superhuman grandeur.

Oh, if a higher power would at some future day permit him to model
with his strong hands this battle of the Amazons, this Phoebus Apollo,
radiant in beauty and the glow of victory, conquering the dragons of
darkness!

Arachne, too, returned to his mind, and also Demeter. But she did not
hover before him as the peaceful dispenser of blessings, the preserver
of peace, but as the maternal earth goddess, robbed of her daughter
Proserpina. How varied in meaning was this myth!--and he strove to
follow it in every direction.

Nothing more could come to the blind artist from Nature by the aid of
his physical vision. The realm of reality was closed to him; but he had
found the key to that of the ideal, and what he found in it proved to be
no less true than the objects the other had offered.

How rich in forms was the new world which forced itself unbidden on his
imagination! He who, a short time before, had believed whatever could
not be touched by the hands was useless for his art, now had the choice
among a hundred subjects, full of glowing life, which were attainable by
no organ of the senses. He need fear to undertake none, if only it was
worthy of representation; for he was sure of his ability, and difficulty
did not alarm him, but promised to lend creating for the first time its
true charm.

And, besides, without the interest of animated conversation, without
festal scenes where, with garlanded head and intoxicating pleasure
soaring upward from the dust of earth, existence had seemed to him
shallow and not worth the trouble it imposed upon mortals, solitude now
offered him hours as happy as he had ever experienced while revelling
with gay companions.

At first many things had disturbed them, especially the dissatisfied,
almost gloomy disposition of his Egyptian slave, who, born in the city
and accustomed to its life, found it unbearable to stay in the desert
with the strange blind master, who lived like a porter, and ordered him
to prepare his wretched fare with the hands skilled in the use of the
pen.

But this living disturber of the peace was not to annoy the recluse
long. Scarcely a fortnight after Bias's departure, the slave Patran, who
had cost so extravagant a sum, vanished one morning with the sculptor's
money and silver cup.

This rascally trick of a servant whom he had treated with almost
brotherly kindness wounded Hermon, but he soon regarded the morose
fellow's disappearance as a benefit.

When for the first time he drank water from an earthen jug, instead of
a silver goblet, he thought of Diogenes, who cast his cup aside when he
saw a boy raise water to his lips in his hand, yet with whom the great
Macedonian conqueror of the world would have changed places "if he had
not been Alexander."

The active, merry son of Bias's Amalekite friend gladly rendered him
the help and guidance for which he had been reluctant to ask his
ill-tempered slave, and he soon became accustomed to the simple fare of
the nomads. Bread and milk, fruits and vegetables from his neighbour's
little garden, satisfied him, and when the wine he had drunk was used,
he contented himself, obedient to old Tabus's advice, with pure water.

As he still had several gold coins on his person, and wore two costly
rings on his finger, he doubtless thought of sending to Clysma for meat,
poultry, and wine, but he had refrained from doing so through the advice
of the Amalekite woman, who anointed his eyes with Tabus's salve and
protected them by a shade of fresh leaves from the dazzling rays of
the desert sun. She, like the sorceress on the Owl's Nest, warned him
against all viands that inflamed the blood, and he willingly allowed her
to take away what she and her gray-haired father, the experienced head
of the tribe, pronounced detrimental to his recovery.

At first the "beggar's fare" seemed repulsive, but he soon felt that it
was benefiting him after the riotous life of the last few months.

One day, when the Amalekite took off his bandage, he thought he saw
a faint glimmer of light, and how his heart exulted at this faint
foretaste of the pleasure of sight!

In an instant hope sprang up with fresh power in his excitable soul,
and his lost cheerfulness returned to him like a butterfly to the newly
opened flower. The image of his beloved Daphne rose before him in sunny
radiance, and he saw himself in his studio in the service of his art.

He had always been fond of children, and the little ones in the
Amalekite family quickly discovered this, and crowded around their blind
friend, who played all sorts of games with them, and in spite of the
bandaged eyes, over which spread a broad shade of green leaves, could
make whistles with his skilful artist hands from the reeds and willow
branches they brought.

He saw before him the object to which his heart still clung as
distinctly as if he need only stretch out his hand to draw it nearer,
and perhaps--surely and certainly, the Amalekite said--the time would
come when he would behold it also with his bodily eyes.

If the longing should be fulfilled! If his eyes were again permitted
to convey to him what formerly filled his soul with delight! Yes,
beauty--was entitled to a higher place than truth, and if it again
unfolded itself to his gaze, how gladly and gratefully he would pay
homage to it with his art!

The hope that he might enjoy it once more now grew stronger, for the
glimmer of light became brighter, and one day, when his skilful nurse
again took the bandage from his milk-white pupils, he saw something long
appear, as if through, a mist. It was only the thorny acacia tree at
his tent; but the sight of the most beautiful of beautiful things never
filled him with more joyful gratitude.

Then he ordered the less valuable of his two rings to be sold to offer a
sacrifice to health-bestowing Isis, who had a little temple in Clysma.

How fervently he now prayed also to the great Apollo, the foe of
darkness and the lord of everything light and pure! How yearningly he
besought Aphrodite to bless him again with the enjoyment of eternal
beauty, and Eros to heal the wound which his arrow had inflicted upon
his heart and Daphne's, and bring them together after so much distress
and need!

When, after the lapse of another week, the bandage was again removed,
his inmost soul rejoiced, for his eyes showed him the rippling
emerald-green surface of the Red Sea, and the outlines of the palms, the
tents, the Amalekite woman, her boy, and her two long-eared goats.

How ardently he thanked the gracious deities who, in spite of Straton's
precepts, were no mere figments of human imagination and, as if he
had become a child again, poured forth his overflowing heart with mute
gratitude to his mother's soul!

The artist nature, yearning to create, began to stir within more
ceaselessly than ever before. Already he saw clay and wax assuming forms
beneath his skilful hands; already he imagined himself, with fresh power
and delight, cutting majestic figures from blocks of marble, or, by
hammering, carving, and filing, shaping them from gold and ivory.

And he would not take what he intended to create solely from the world
of reality perceptible to the senses. Oh, no! He desired to show through
his art the loftiest of ideals. How could he still shrink from using the
liberty which he had formerly rejected, the liberty of drawing from his
own inner consciousness what he needed in order to bestow upon the ideal
images he longed to create the grandeur, strength, and sublimity in
which he beheld them rise before his purified soul!

Yet, with all this, he must remain faithful to truth, copy from Nature
what he desired to represent. Every finger, every lock of hair, must
correspond with reality to the minutest detail, and yet the whole must
be pervaded and penetrated, as the blood flows through the body, by the
thought that filled his mind and soul.

A reflected image of the ideal and of his own mood, faithful to truth,
free, and yet obedient to the demands of moderation--in this sentence
Hermon summed up the result of his solitary meditations upon art and
works of art. Since he had found the gods again, he perceived that the
Muse had confided to him a sacerdotal office. He intended to perform its
duties, and not only attract and please the beholder's eyes through his
works, but elevate his heart and mind, as beauty, truth, grandeur, and
eternity uplifted his own soul. He recognised in the tireless creative
power which keeps Nature ever new, fresh, and bewitching, the presence
of the same deity whose rule manifested itself in the life of his own
soul.

So long as he denied its existence, he had recognised no being more
powerful than himself; now that he again felt insignificant beside it,
he knew himself to be stronger than ever before, that the greatest
of all powers had become his ally. Now it was difficult for him to
understand how he could have turned away from the deity. As an artist
he, too, was a creator, and, while he believed those who considered
the universe had come into existence of itself, instead of having been
created, he had robbed himself of the most sublime model. Besides, the
greatest charm of his noble profession was lost to him. Now he knew it,
and was striving toward the goal attainable by the artist alone among
mortals--to hold intercourse with the deity, and by creations full of
its essence elevate the world to its grandeur and beauty.

One day, at the end of the second month of his stay in the desert,
when the Amalekite woman removed the bandage, her boy, whose form he
distinguished as if through a veil, suddenly exclaimed: "The white cover
on your eyes is melting! They are beginning to sparkle a little, and
soon they will be perfectly well, and you can carve the lion's head on
my cane."

Perhaps the artist might really have succeeded in doing so, but he
forbade himself the attempt.

He thought that the time for departure had now arrived, and an
irresistible longing urged him back to the world and Daphne.

But he could not resist the entreaties of the old sheik and his daughter
not to risk what he had gained, so he continued to use the shade of
leaves, and allowed himself to be persuaded to defer his departure until
the dimness which still prevented his seeing anything distinctly passed
away.

True, the beautiful peace which he had enjoyed of late was over and,
besides, anxiety for the dear ones in distant lands was constantly
increasing. He had had no news of them for a long time, and when he
imagined what fate might have overtaken Archias, and his daughter with
him, if he had been carried back to the enraged King in Alexandria, a
terrible dread took possession of him, which scattered even joy in
his wonderful recovery to the four winds, and finally led him to the
resolution to return to the world at any risk and devote himself to
those whose fate was nearer to his heart than his own weal and woe.




CHAPTER XIII.

Hermon, filled with longing, went down toward evening to the shore.

The sun was setting, and the riot of colours in the western horizon
seemed like a mockery of the torturing anxiety which had mastered his
soul.

He did not notice the boat that was approaching the land; many
travellers who intended to go through Arabia Petrea landed here, and
for several days--he knew why--there had been more stir in these quiet
waters.

Suddenly he was surprised by the ringing shout with which he had
formerly announced his approach to Myrtilus.

Unconsciously agitated by joy, as if the sunset glow before him had
suddenly been transformed into the dawn of a happy day, he answered by a
loud cry glad with hope. Although his dim eyes did not yet permit him to
distinguish who was standing erect in the boat, waving greetings to him,
he thought he knew whom this exquisite evening was bringing.

Soon his own name reached him. It was his "wise Bias" who shouted, and
soon, with a throbbing heart, he held out both hands to him.

The freedman had performed his commission in the best possible manner,
and was now no longer bound to silence by oath.

Ledscha had left him and Myrtilus to themselves and, as Bias thought
he had heard, had sailed with the Gaul Lutarius for Paraetonium, the
frontier city between the kingdom of Egypt and that of Cyrene.

Myrtilus felt stronger than he had done for a long time, and had sent
him back to the blind friend who would need him more than he did.

But worthy Bias also brought messages from Archias and Daphne. They were
well, and his uncle now had scarcely any cause to fear pursuers.

Before the landing of the boat, the shade had covered Hermon's eyes;
but when, after the freedman's first timid question about his sight, he
raised it again, at the same time reporting and showing what progress
he had already made toward recovery, the excess of joy overpowered
the freedman, and sometimes laughing, sometimes weeping, he kissed the
convalescent's hands and simple robe. It was some time before he calmed
himself again, then laying his forefinger on the side of his nose, he
said: "Therein the immortals differ from human beings. We sculptors can
only create good work with good tools, but the immortals often use the
very poorest of all to accomplish the best things. You owe your sight to
the hate of this old witch and mother of pirates, so may she find peace
in the grave. She is dead. I heard it from a fellow-countryman whom I
met in Herocipolis. Her end came soon after our visit."

Then Bias related what he knew of Hermon's uncle, of Daphne, and
Myrtilus.

Two letters were to give him further particulars.

They came from the woman he loved and from his friend, and as soon as
Bias had lighted the lamp in the tent, at the same time telling his
master in advance many items of news they contained, he set about the
difficult task of reading.

He had certainly scarcely become a master of this art on board the
Hydra, yet his slow performance did all honour to the patience of his
teacher Myrtilus.

He began with Daphne's letter, but by the desire of prudent Archias it
communicated few facts. But the protestations of love and expressions of
longing which filled it pierced the freedman's soul so deeply that his
voice more than once failed while reading them.

Myrtilus's letter, on the contrary, gave a minute description of his
mode of life, and informed his friend what he expected for him and
himself in the future. The contents of both relieved Hermon's sorely
troubled heart, made life with those who were dearest to him possible,
and explained many things which the reports of the slave had not
rendered perfectly clear.

Archias had gone with Daphne to the island of Lesbos, his mother's
native city. The ships which conveyed travellers to Pergamus, where
Myrtilus was living, touched at this port, and Bias, to whom Hermon had
confided the refuge of the father and daughter, had sought them there,
and found them in a beautiful villa.

After being released from his oath, Myrtilus had put himself into
communication with his uncle, and just before Bias's departure the
merchant had come to Pergamus with his daughter. As he had the most
cordial reception from the Regent Philetaerus, he seemed inclined to
settle permanently there.

As for Myrtilus, he had cast anchor with Ledscha in the little Mysian
seaport town of Pitane, near the mouth of the Caicus River, on which,
farther inland, was the rapidly growing city of Pergamus.

She had found a hospitable welcome in the family of a seafarer who were
relatives, while the Gaul continued his voyage to obtain information
about his tribe in Syria. But he had already returned when Bias reached
Pitane with the two talents intended for him. Myrtilus had availed
himself of Ledscha's permission long before and gone to Pergamus, where
he had lived and worked in secrecy until, after the freedman's return
from Ledscha, who at once left Pitane with the Gaul, he was released
from his oath.

During the absence of Bias he had modelled a large relief, a triumphal
procession of Dionysus, and as the renown of his name had previously
reached Pergamus, the artists and the most distinguished men in the city
flocked to his studio to admire the work of the famous Alexandrian.

Soon Philetoerus, who had founded the Pergamenian kingdom seven years
before, and governed it with great wisdom, came to Myrtilus.

Like his nephew and heir Eumenes, he was a friend to art, and induced
the laurel-crowned Alexandrian to execute the relief, modelled in clay,
in marble for the Temple of Dionysus at Pergamus.

The heir to the throne of Philetaerus, who was now advancing in years,
was especially friendly to Myrtilus, and did everything in his power to
bind him to Pergamus.

He succeeded, for in the beautiful house, located in an extremely
healthful site, which Eumenes had assigned for a residence and studio to
the Alexandrian artist, whose work he most ardently admired, and whom he
regarded as the most welcome of guests, Myrtilus felt better physically
than he had for years. Besides, he thought that, for many reasons,
his friend would be less willing to settle in Alexandria, and that the
presence of his uncle and Daphne would attract him to Pergamus.

Moreover, Hermon surely knew that if he came to him as a blind man he
would find a brother; if he came restored to sight, he would also find a
brother, and likewise a fellow-artist with whom he could live and work.

Myrtilus had told the heir to the throne of Pergamus of his richly
gifted blind relative, and of the peculiarity of his art, and Eumenes
eagerly endeavoured to induce his beloved guest to persuade his friend
to remove to his capital, where there was no lack of distinguished
leeches.

If Hermon remained blind, he would honour him; if he recovered his
sight, he would give him large commissions.

How deeply these letters moved the heart of the recovering man! What
prospects they opened for his future life, for love, friendship, and,
not least, for his art!

If he could see--if he could only see again! This exclamation blended
with everything he thought, felt, and uttered. Even in sleep it haunted
him. To regain the clearness of vision he needed for his work, he would
willingly have submitted to the severest tortures.

In Alexandria alone lived the great leeches who could complete the work
which the salve of an ignorant old woman had begun. Thither he must
go, though it cost him liberty and life. The most famous surgeon of the
Museum at the capital had refused his aid under other circumstances.
Perhaps he would relent if Philippus, a friend of Erasistratus, smoothed
the way for him, and the old hero was now living very near. The ships,
whose number on the sea at his feet was constantly increasing, were
attracted hither by the presence of the Egyptian King and Queen on the
isthmus which connects Asia and Africa. The priest of Apollo at Clysma,
and other distinguished Greeks whom he met there, had told him the day
before yesterday, and on two former visits to the place, what was
going on in the world, and informed him how great an honour awaited the
eastern frontier in these days. The appearance of their Majesties in
person must not only mean the founding of a city, the reception of a
victorious naval commander, and the consecration of a restored temple,
but also have still deeper causes.

During the last few years severe physical suffering had brought the
unfortunate second king of the house of Ptolemy to this place to seek
the aid of the ancient Egyptian gods, and, besides the philosophy, busy
himself with the mystic teachings and magic arts of their priesthood.

Only a short period of life seemed allotted to the invalid ruler, and
the service of the time-honoured god of the dead, to whom he had erected
one of the most magnificent temples in the world at Alexandria, to which
Egyptians and Hellenes repaired with equal devotion, opened hopes for
the life after death which seemed to him worthy of examination.

For this reason also he desired to secure the favour of the Egyptian
priesthood.

For this purpose, for the execution of his wise and beneficent
arrangements, as well as for the gratification of his expensive tastes,
large sums of money were required; therefore he devoted himself with
especial zeal to enlarging the resources of his country, already so rich
by nature.

In all these things he had found an admirable assistant in his sister
Arsinoe. As the daughter of the father and mother to whom he himself
owed existence, he could claim for her unassailable legitimacy the same
recognition from the priesthood, and the same submission from the people
rendered to his own person, whom the religion of the country commanded
them to revere as the representative of the sun god.

As marriages between brothers and sisters had been customary from
ancient times, and were sanctioned by religion and myth, he had married
the second Arsinoe, his sister, immediately after the banishment of the
first Queen of this name.

After the union with her, he called himself Philadelphus--brotherly
love--and honoured his sister and wife with the same name.

True, this led the sarcastic Alexandrians to utter many a biting, more
or less witty jest, but he never had cause to regret his choice; in
spite of her forty years, and more than one bloody deed which before her
marriage to him she had committed as Queen of Thrace and as a widow, the
second Arsinoe was always a pattern of regally aristocratic, dignified
bearing and haughty womanly beauty.

Though the first Philadelphus could expect no descendants from her, he
had provided for securing them through her, for he had induced her to
adopt the first Arsinoe's three children, who had been taken from their
exiled mother.

Arsinoe was now accompanying her royal husband Philadelphus to the
eastern frontier. There the latter expected to name the city to be newly
founded "Arsinoe" for her, and-to show his esteem for the priesthood--to
consecrate in person the new Temple of Tum in the city of Pithom, near
Heroopolis.

Lastly, the monarch had been endeavouring to form new connections
with the coast countries of eastern Africa, and open them to Egyptian
commerce.

Admiral Eumedes, the oldest son of Philippus and Thyone, had succeeded
in doing this most admirably, for the distinguished commander had not
only founded on the Ethiopian shore of the Red Sea a city which he named
for the King "Ptolemais," but also won over the princes and tribes of
that region to Egypt.

He was now returning from Ethiopia with a wealth of treasures.

After the brilliant festivals the invalid King, with his new wife, was
to give himself up to complete rest for a month in the healthful air of
the desert region which surrounded Pithom, far from the tumult of the
capital and the exhausting duties of government.

The magnificent shows which were to be expected, and the presence of the
royal pair, had attracted thousands of spectators on foot or horseback,
and by water, and the morning after Bias's return the sea near Clysma
was swarming with vessels of all kinds and sizes.

It was more than probable that Philippus, the father, and Thyone, the
mother of the famous returning Admiral Eumedes, would not fail to be
present at his reception on his native soil, and therefore Hermon wished
to seek out his dear old friends in Heroopolis, where the greeting was
to take place, and obtain their advice.

The boat on which the freedman had come was at the disposal of his
master and himself. Before Hermon entered it, he took leave, with an
agitated heart and open hand, of his Amalekite friends and, in spite
of the mist which still obscured everything he beheld, he perceived how
reluctantly the simple dwellers in the wilderness saw him depart.

When the master and servant entered the boat, in spite of the sturdy
sailors who manned it, it proved even more difficult than they had
feared to make any progress; for the whole narrow end of the arm of the
sea, which here extended between Egypt and Arabia Petrea, was covered
with war galleys and transports, boats and skiffs. The two most
magnificent state galleys from Heroopolis were coming here, bearing the
ambassadors who, in the King's name, were to receive the fleet and its
commander. Other large and small, richly equipped, or unpretending ships
and boats were filled with curious spectators.

What a gay, animated scene! What brilliant, varied, strange, hitherto
unseen objects were gathered here: vessels of every form and size, sails
white, brown, and black, and on the state galleys and boats purple,
blue, and every colour, adorned with more or less costly embroidery!
What rising and falling of swiftly or slowly moving oars!

"From Alexandria!" cried Bias, pointing to a state galley which the King
was sending to the commander of the southern fleet.

"And there," remarked Hermon, proud of his regained power of
distinguishing one thing from another, and letting his eyes rest on
one of the returning transports, on whose deck stood six huge African
elephants, whose trumpeting mingled with the roaring of the lions and
tigers on the huge freight vessels, and the exulting shouts of the men
and women in the ships and boats.

"After the King's heart!" exclaimed Bias. "He probably never received at
one time before so large an accession to his collection of rare animals.
What is the transport with the huge lotus flower on the prow probably
bringing?"

"Oh, and the monkeys and parrots over yonder!" joyously exclaimed the
Amalekite boy who had been Hermon's guide, and had accompanied him
into the boat. Then he suddenly lowered his voice and, fearing that his
delight might give pain to the less keen-sighted man whom he loved, he
asked, "You can see them, my lord, can't you?"

"Certainly, my boy, though less plainly than you do," replied Hermon,
stroking the lad's dark hair.

Meanwhile the admiral's ship had approached the shore.

Bias pointed to the poop, where the commander Eumedes was standing
directing the course of the fleet.

As if moulded in bronze, a man thoroughly equal to his office, he
seemed, in spite of the shouts, greetings, and acclamations thundering
around him, to close his eyes and ears to the vessels thronging about
his ship and devote himself body and soul to the fulfilment of his duty.
He had just embraced his father and mother, who had come here to meet
him.

"The King undoubtedly sent by his father the laurel wreath on his
helmet," observed Bias, pointing to the admiral. "So many honours
while he is still so young! When you went to the wrestling school in
Alexandria, Eumedes was scarcely eight years older than you, and I
remember how he preferred you to the others. A sign, and he will notice
us and allow you to go on his ship, or, at any rate, send us a boat in
which we can enter the canal."

"No, no," replied Hermon. "My call would disturb him now."

"Then let us make ourselves known to the Lady Thyone or her husband,"
the freedman continued. "They will certainly take us on their large
state galley, from which, though your eyes do not yet see as far as a
falcon's, not a ship, not a man, not a movement will escape them."

But Hermon added one more surprise to the many which he had already
given, for he kindly declined Bias's well-meant counsel, and, resting
his hand on the Amalekite boy's shoulder, said modestly: "I am no longer
the Hermon whom Eumedes preferred to the others. And the Lady Thyone
must not be reminded of anything sad in this festal hour for the
mother's heart. I shall meet her to-morrow, or the day after, and yet I
had intended to let no one who is loyal to me look into my healing eyes
before Daphne."

Then he felt the freedman's hand secretly press his, and it comforted
him, after the sorrowful thoughts to which he had yielded, amid the
shouts of joy ringing around him. How quietly, with what calm dignity,
Eumedes received the well-merited homage, and how disgracefully the
false fame had bewildered his own senses!

Yet he had not passed through the purifying fire of misfortune in vain!
The past should not cloud the glad anticipation of brighter days!

Drawing a long breath, he straightened himself into a more erect
posture, and ordered the men to push the boat from the shore. Then he
pressed a farewell kiss on the Amalekite boy's forehead, the lad sprang
ashore, and the journey northward began.

At first the sailors feared that the crowd would be too great, and the
boat would be refused admission to the canal; but the helmsman succeeded
in keeping close behind a vessel of medium size, and the Macedonian
guards of the channel put no obstacle in their countryman's way, while
boats occupied by Egyptians and other barbarians were kept back.

In the Bitter Lakes, whose entire length was to be traversed, the ships
had more room, and after a long voyage through dazzling sunlight, and
along desolate shores, the boat anchored at nightfall at Heroopolis.

Hermon and Bias obtained shelter on one of the ships which the sovereign
had placed at the disposal of the Greeks who came to participate in the
festivals to be celebrated.

Before his master went to rest, the freedman--whom he had sent out to
look for a vessel bound to Pelusium and Alexandria the next day or the
following one--returned to the ship.

He had talked with the Lady Thyone, and told Hermon from her that she
would visit or send for him the next day, after the festival.

His own mother, the freedman protested, could not have rejoiced more
warmly over the commencement of his recovery, and she would have come
with him at once had not Philippus prevented his aged wife, who was
exhausted by the long journey.

The next morning the sun poured a wealth of radiant light upon the
desert, the green water of the harbour, and the gray and yellow walls of
the border fortress.

Three worlds held out their hands to one another on this water way
surrounded by the barren wilderness--Egypt, Hellas, and Semitic Asia.

To the first belonged the processions of priests, who, with images of
the gods, consecrated vessels, and caskets of relics, took their places
at the edge of the harbour. The tawny and black, half-naked soldiers
who, with high shields, lances, battle-axes and bows, gathered around
strangely shaped standards, joined them, amid the beating of drums and
blare of trumpets, as if for their protection. Behind them surged a vast
multitude of Egyptians and dark-skinned Africans.

On the other side of the canal the Asiatics were moving to and fro.
The best places for spectators had been assigned to the petty kings and
princes of tribes, Phoenician and Syrian merchants, and well-equipped,
richly armed warriors. Among them thronged owners of herds and seafarers
from the coast. Until the reception began, fresh parties of bearded sons
of the desert, in floating white bernouse, mounted on noble steeds, were
constantly joining the other Asiatics.

The centre was occupied by the Greeks. The appearance of every
individual showed that they were rulers of the land, and that they
deserved to be. How free and bold was their bearing! how brightly and
joyously sparkled the eyes of these men, whose wreaths of green leaves
and bright-hued flowers adorned locks anointed for the festivals! Strong
and slender, they were conspicuous in their stately grace among the
lean Egyptians, unbridled in their jests and jeers, and the excitable
Asiatics.

Now the blare of trumpets and the roll of drums shook the air like
echoing lightning and heavy peals of thunder; the Egyptian priests sang
a hymn of praise to the God King and Goddess Queen, and the aristocratic
priestesses of the deity tinkled the brass rings on the sistrum. Then a
chorus of Hellenic singers began a polyphonous hymn, and amid its full,
melodious notes, which rose above the enthusiastic shouts of "Hail!"
from the multitude, King Ptolemy and his sister-wife showed themselves
to the waiting throng. Seated on golden thrones borne on the broad
shoulders of gigantic black Ethiopians, and shaded by lofty canopies,
both were raised above the crowd, whom they saluted by gracious
gestures.

The athletic young bearers of the large round ostrich-feather fans which
protected them from the sunbeams were followed in ranks by the monarch's
"relatives" and "friends," the dignitaries, the dark and fair-haired
bands of the guards of Grecian youths and boys, as well as divisions of
the picked corps of the Hetairoi, Diadochi, and Epigoni, in beautiful
plain Macedonian armour.

They were followed in the most informal manner by scholars from the
Museum, many Hellenic artists, and wealthy gentlemen of Alexandria of
Greek and Jewish origin, whom the King had invited to the festival.

In his train they went on board the huge galley on which the reception
was to take place. Scarcely had the last one stepped on the deck when it
began.

Eumedes came from the admiral's galley to the King's. Ptolemy embraced
him like a friend, and Arsinoe added a wreath of fresh roses to the
laurel crown which the sovereign had sent the day before.

At the same time thundering plaudits echoed from the walls of the
fortifications and broke, sometimes rising, sometimes falling, against
the ships and masts in the calm water of the harbour.

The King had little time to lose. Even festal joy must move swiftly.
There were many and varied things to be seen and done; but in the course
of an hour--so ran the order--this portion of the festivities must be
over, and it was fully obeyed.

The hands and feet of the woolly-headed blacks who, amid loud
acclamations, carried on shore the cages in which lions, panthers, and
leopards shook the bars with savage fury, moved as if they were winged.
The slender, dark-brown Ethiopians who led giraffes, apes, gazelles, and
greyhounds past the royal pair rushed along as if they were under the
lash; and the sixty elephants which Eumedes and his men had caught in
the land of Chatyth moved at a rapid pace past the royal state galley.

At the sight of them the King joined in the cheers of thousands of
voices on the shore; these giant animals were to him auxiliaries
who could put to flight a whole corps of hostile cavalry, and
Arsinoe-Philadelphus, the Queen, sympathized with his pleasure.

She raised her voice with her royal husband, and it seemed to the
spectators on the shore as if they had a share in the narrative when she
listened to Eumedes's first brief report.

Only specimens of the gold and ivory, spices and rare woods, juniper
trees and skins of animals which the ships brought home could be borne
past their Majesties, and the black and brown men who carried them moved
at a breathless rate.

The sun was still far from the meridian when the royal couple and their
train withdrew from the scene of the reception ceremonial, and drove, in
a magnificent chariot drawn by four horses, to the neighbouring city
of Pithoin, where new entertainments and a long period of rest awaited
them. Hermon had seen, as if through a veil of white mists, the objects
that aroused the enthusiasm of the throng, and so, he said to himself,
it had been during the whole course of his life. Only the surface of the
phenomena on which he fixed his eyes had been visible to him; he had
not learned to penetrate further into their nature, fathom them to their
depths, until he became blind.

If the gods fulfilled his hope, if he regained his vision entirely, and
even the last mists had vanished, he would hold firmly to the capacity
he had gained, and use it in life as well as in art.




CHAPTER XIV.

The messenger from Philippus appeared in the afternoon. It was the young
hipparch who had studied in Athens and accompanied the commandant of
Pelusium to Tennis the year before. He came charged with the commission
to convey the artist, in the carriage of the gray-haired comrade of
Alexander, to the neighbouring city of Pithom, where Philippus, by the
King's command, was now residing.

On the way the hipparch told the sculptor that the Lady Thyone had
recently done things unprecedented for a woman of her age.

She had been present at the founding of the city of Arsinoe, as well
as at the laying of the corner stone of the temple which was to be
consecrated to the new god Serapis in the neighbourhood. The day before
she had welcomed her returning son before the entry of the fleet into
the canal, and to-day had remained from the beginning to the end of his
reception by the King, without being unduly wearied.

Her first thought, after the close of the ceremony, had concerned
her convalescing young friend. New entertainments, in which the Queen
commanded her to participate, awaited her in Pithom, but pleasure at the
return of her famous son appeared to double her power of endurance.

Pithom was the sacred name of the temple precincts of the desert city of
Thekut--[The biblical Suchot]--near Heroopolis, where the citizens lived
and pursued their business.

The travellers reached the place very speedily. Garlands of flowers and
hangings adorned the houses. The sacred precinct Pithom, above which
towered the magnificently restored temple of the god Turn, was also
still adorned with many superb ones, as well as lofty masts, banners,
and triumphal arches.

Before they reached it the equipage passed the sumptuous tents which had
been erected for the royal pair and their attendants. If Hermon had
not known how long the monarch intended to remain here, their size and
number would have surprised him.

A regular messenger and carrier-dove service had been established
between Alexandria and Pithom for the period of Ptolemy's relaxation;
and the sovereign was accompanied not only by several of the chief
councillors and secretaries, but artists and some of the Museum
scientists with whom he was on specially intimate terms, who were to
adorn the festival on the frontier with their presence, and cheer the
invalid King, who needed entertainment. Singers and actors also belonged
to the train.

As they passed the encampment of the troops who accompanied the
sovereign, the hipparch could show Hermon a magnificent military
spectacle.

Heroopolis was fortified, and belonged to the military colonies which
Alexander the Great had established throughout all Egypt in order to win
it over more quickly to Grecian customs. A Hellenic phalanx and Libyan
mercenaries formed the garrison there, but at Pithom the King had
gathered the flower of his troops around him, and this circumstance
showed how little serious consideration the cautious ruler, who usually
carefully regarded every detail, gave to the war with Cyrene, in which
he took no personal part. The four thousand Gauls whom he had sent
across the frontier as auxiliary troops promised to become perilous to
the foe, who was also threatened in the rear by one of the most powerful
Libyan tribes.

Therefore, the artist was assured by his military companion,
Philadelphus could let the campaign take its course, and permit himself
the brief period of rest in this strangely chosen place, which the
leeches had advised.

The house where the aged couple lived with their son, Admiral Eumedes,
was on the edge of the precincts of the temple. It belonged to the
most distinguished merchant in the place, and consisted of a large open
courtyard in the form of a square, surrounded by the building and its
communicating wings.

When the hipparch led Hermon into this place a number of people had
already assembled there. Soldiers and sailors stood in groups in the
centre, awaiting the orders of the old general and his subordinate
officers. Messengers and slaves, coming and going on various errands,
were crossing it, and on the shady side benches and chairs stood under
a light awning. Most of these were occupied by visitors who came to
congratulate the mother of the fame-crowned admiral.

Thyone was reclining on a divan in their midst, submitting with a sigh
to the social duties which her high position imposed upon her.

Her face was turned toward the large doorway of the main entrance, while
she sometimes greeted newly introduced guests, sometimes bade farewell
to departing ones, and meanwhile answered and asked questions.

She had been more wearied by the exertions of the last few days than her
animated manner revealed. Yet as soon as Hermon, leaning on the young
hipparch's arm, approached her, she rose and cordially extended both
hands to him. True, the recovering man was still unable to see her
features distinctly, but he felt the maternal kindness with which she
received him, and what his eyes could not distinguish his ears taught
him in her warm greetings. His heart dilated and, after he had kissed
her dear old hand more than once with affectionate devotion, she led
him among her guests and presented him to them as the son of her dearest
friend.

A strange stir ran through the assembled group, nearly all whose members
belonged to the King's train, and the low whispers and murmurs around
him revealed to Hermon that the false wreaths he wore had by no means
been forgotten in this circle.

A painful feeling of discomfort overwhelmed the man accustomed to the
silence of the desert, and a voice within cried with earnest insistence,
"Away from here!"

But he had no time to obey it; an unusually tall, broad-shouldered man,
with a thick gray beard and grave, well-formed features, in whom he
thought he recognised the great physician Erasistratus, approached
Thyone, and asked, "The recluse from the desert with restored sight?"

"The same," replied the matron, and whispered to the other, who was
really the famous scientist and leech whom Hermon had desired to seek
in Alexandria. "Exhaustion will soon overcome me, and how many important
matters I had to discuss with you and the poor fellow yonder!"

The physician laid his hand on the matron's temples, and, raising his
voice, said in a tone of grave anxiety: "Exhaustion! It would be better
for you, honoured lady, to keep your bed."

"Surely and certainly!" the wife of the chief huntsman instantly
assented. "We have already taxed your strength far too long, my noble
friend."

This welcome confession produced a wonderful effect upon the other
visitors, and very soon the last one had vanished from the space under
the awning and the courtyard. Not a single person had vouchsafed Hermon
a greeting; for the artist, divested of the highest esteem, had
been involved in the ugly suspicion of having driven his uncle from
Alexandria, and the monarch was said to have spoken unfavourably of him.

When the last one had left the courtyard, the leech exchanged a quick
glance of understanding, which also included Hermon, with Thyone,
and the majordomo received orders to admit no more visitors, while
Erasistratus exclaimed gaily, "It is one of the physician's principal
duties to keep all harmful things--including living ones--from his
patient."

Then he turned to Hermon and had already begun to question him about
his health, when the majordomo announced another visitor. "A very
distinguished gentleman, apparently," he said hastily; "Herophilus of
Chalcedon, who would not be denied admittance."

Again the eyes of Erasistratus and the matron met, and the former
hastened toward his professional colleague.

The two physicians stopped in the middle of the courtyard and talked
eagerly together, while Thyone, with cordial interest, asked Hermon to
tell her what she had already partially learned through the freedman
Bias.

Finally Erasistratus persuaded the matron, who seemed to have
forgotten her previous exhaustion, to share the consultation, but the
convalescent's heart throbbed faster as he watched the famous leeches.

If these two men took charge of his case, the most ardent desire of his
soul might be fulfilled, and Thyone was certainly trying to induce them
to undertake his treatment; what else would have drawn her away from him
before she had said even one word about Daphne?

The sculptor saw, as if through a cloud of dust, the three consulting
together in the centre of the courtyard, away from the soldiers and
messengers.

Hermon had only seen Erasistratus indistinctly, but before his eyes were
blinded he had met him beside the sick-bed of Myrtilus, and no one who
had once beheld it could forget the manly bearded face, with the grave,
thoughtful eyes, whose gaze deliberately sought their goal.

The other also belonged to the great men in the realm of intellect.
Hermon knew him well, for he had listened eagerly in the Museum to the
lectures of the famous Herophilus, and his image also had stamped itself
upon his soul.

Even at that time the long, smooth hair of the famous investigator had
turned gray. From the oval of his closely shaven, well-formed face, with
the long, thin, slightly hooked nose, a pair of sparkling eyes had
gazed with penetrating keenness at the listeners. Hermon had imagined
Aristotle like him, while the bust of Pythagoras, with which he was
familiar, resembled Erasistratus.

The convalescent could scarcely expect anything more than beneficial
advice from Herophilus; for this tireless investigator rarely rendered
assistance to the sick in the city, because the lion's share of his time
and strength were devoted to difficult researches. The King favoured
these by placing at his disposal the criminals sentenced to death. In
his work of dissection he had found that the human brain was the seat of
the soul, and the nerves originated in it.

Erasistratus, on the contrary, devoted himself to a large medical
practice, though science owed him no less important discoveries.

The circle of artists had heard what he taught concerning the blood
in the veins and the air bubbles in the arteries, how he explained the
process of breathing, and what he had found in the investigation of the
beating of the heart.

But he performed his most wonderful work with the knife in his hand as a
surgeon. He had opened the body of one of Archias's slaves, who had been
nursed by Daphne, and cured him after all other physicians had given him
up.

When this man's voice reached Hermon, he repeated to himself the words
of refusal with which the great physician had formerly declined to
devote his time and skill to him. Perhaps he was right then--and how
differently he treated him to-day!

Thyone had informed the famous scientist of everything which she knew
from Hermon, and had learned of the last period of his life through
Bias.

She now listened with eager interest, sometimes completing Hermon's
acknowledgments by an explanatory or propitiating word, as the leeches
subjected him to a rigid examination, but the latter felt that his
statements were not to serve curiosity, but an honest desire to aid him.
So he spoke to them with absolute frankness.

When the examination was over, Erasistratus exclaimed to his
professional colleague: "This old woman! Precisely as I would have
prescribed. She ordered the strictest diet with the treatment. She
rejected every strong internal remedy, and forbade him wine, much meat,
and all kinds of seasoning. Our patient was directed to live on milk and
the same simple gifts of Nature which I would have ordered for him. The
herb juice in the clever sorceress's salve proved the best remedy. The
incantations could do no harm. On the contrary, they often produce a
wonderful effect on the mind, and from it proceed further."

Here Erasistratus asked to have a description of the troubles which
still affected Hermon's vision, and the passionate eagerness with which
the leeches gazed into his eyes strengthened the artist's budding hope.
Never had he wished more ardently that Daphne was back at his side.

He also listened with keen attention when the scientists finally
discussed in low tones what they had perceived, and caught the words,
"White scar on the cornea," "leucoma," and "operation." He also heard
Herophilus declare that an injury of the cornea by the flame of the
torch was the cause of the blindness. In the work which led him to the
discovery of the retina in the eye he had devoted himself sedulously to
the organs of sight. This case seemed as if it had been created for his
friend's keen knife.

What expectations this assurance aroused in the half-cured man, who felt
as if the goal was already gained, when, shortly after, Erasistratus,
the greatest physician of his time, offered to make the attempt in
Alexandria to remove, by a few little incisions, what still dimmed his
impaired vision!

Hermon, deeply agitated, thanked the leech, and when Thyone perceived
what was passing in his mind she ventured to ask the question whether
it would not be feasible to perform the beneficent work here, and, if
possible, the next day, and the surgeon was ready to fulfil the wish
of the matron and the sufferer speedily. He would bring the necessary
instruments with him. It only depended upon whether a suitable room
could be found in the crowded city, and Thyone believed that such a one
could not be lacking in the great building at her disposal.

A short conversation with the steward confirmed this opinion.

Then Erasistratus appointed the next morning for the operation. During
the ceremony of consecrating the temple it would be quiet in the house
and its vicinity. The preliminary fasting which he imposed upon his
patients Hermon had already undergone.

"The pure desert air here," he added, "will be of the utmost assistance
in recovery. The operation is slight, and free from danger. A few days
will determine its success. I shall remain here with their Majesties,
only"--and here he hesitated doubtfully--"where shall I find a competent
assistant?"

Herophilus looked his colleague in the face with a sly smile, saying,
"If you credit the old man of Chalcedon with the needful skill, he is at
your disposal."

"Herophilus!" cried Thyone, and tears of emotion wet her aged eyes,
which easily overflowed; but when Hermon tried to give expression to his
fervent gratitude in words, Erasistratus interrupted him, exclaiming,
as he grasped his comrade's hand, "It honours the general in his purple
robe, when he uses the spade in the work of intrenchment."

Many other matters were discussed before the professional friends
withdrew, promising to go to work early the next morning.

They kept their word, and while the temple of the god Turn resounded
with music and the chanting of hymns by the priests, whose dying notes
entered the windows of the sick-room, while Queen Arsinoe-Philadelphus
led the procession, and the King, who was prevented by the gout from
entering and passing around the sanctuary at her side, ordered a
monument to be erected in commemoration of this festival, the famous
leeches toiled busily.

When the music and the acclamations of the crowd died away, their
task was accomplished. The great Herophilus had rendered his equally
distinguished colleague the aid of an apprentice. When Hermon's lips
again tried to pour forth his gratitude, Herophilus interrupted him
with the exclamation: "Use the sight you have regained, young master, in
creating superb works of art, and I shall be in your debt, since, with
little trouble, I was permitted to render a service to the whole Grecian
world."

Hermon spent seven long days and nights full of anxious expectation in
a darkened room. Bias and a careful old female slave of the Lady Thyone
watched him faithfully. Philippus, his wife, and his famous son Eumedes
were allowed to pay him only brief visits; but Erasistratus watched the
success of the operation every morning. True, it had been by no means
dangerous, and certainly would not have required his frequent visits,
but it pleased the investigator, reared in the school of Stoics, to
watch how this warm-blooded young artist voluntarily submitted to
live in accord with reason and Nature--the guiding stars of his own
existence.

But Hermon opened his soul to his learned friend, and what Erasistratus
thus learned strengthened the conviction of this great alleviator
of physical pain that suffering and knowledge of self were the best
physicians for the human soul. The scientist, who saw in the arts
the noblest ornament of mortal life, anticipated with eager interest
Hermon's future creative work.

On the seventh day the leech removed the bandage from his patient's
eyes, and the cry of rapture with which Hermon clasped him in his arms
richly rewarded him for his trouble and solicitude.

The restored man beheld in sharp, clear, undimmed outlines everything at
which the physician desired him to look.

Now Erasistratus could write to his friend Herophilus in Alexandria that
the operation was successful.

The sculptor was ordered to avoid the dazzling sunlight a fortnight
longer, then he might once more use his eyes without restriction, and
appeal to the Muse to help in creating works of art.

Thyone was present at this explanation. After she had conquered the
great emotion which for a time sealed her lips, her first question,
after the physician's departure, was: "And Nemesis? She too, I think,
has fled before the new light?"

Hermon pressed her hand still more warmly, exclaiming with joyous
confidence: "No, Thyone! True, I now have little reason to fear the
avenging goddess who pursues the criminal, but all the more the other
Nemesis, who limits the excess of happiness. Will she not turn her swift
wheel, when I again, with clear eyes, see Daphne, and am permitted to
work in my studio once more with keen eyes and steady hand?"

Now the barriers which had hitherto restricted Hermon's social
intercourse also fell. Eumedes, the commander of the fleet, often
visited him, and while exchanging tales of their experiences they became
friends.

When Hermon was alone with Thyone and her gray-haired husband, the
conversation frequently turned upon Daphne and her father.

Then the recovered artist learned to whom Archias owed his escape from
being sentenced to death and having his property confiscated. Papers,
undeniably genuine, had proved what large sums had been advanced by the
merchant during the period of the first Queen Arsinoe's conspiracy,
and envious foes had done their best to prejudice the King and his
sister-wife against Archias. Then the gray-haired hero fearlessly
interceded for his friend, and the monarch did not remain deaf to his
representations. King Ptolemy was writing the history of the conqueror
of the world, and needed the aged comrade of Alexander, the sole
survivor who had held a prominent position in the great Macedonian's
campaigns. It might be detrimental to his work, on which he set great
value, if he angered the old warrior, who was a living source of
history. Yet the King was still ill-disposed to the merchant, for while
he destroyed Archias's death sentence which had been laid before him for
his signature, he said to Philippus: "The money-bag whose life I give
you was the friend of my foe. Let him beware that my arm does not yet
reach him from afar!"

Nay, his resentment went so far that he refused to receive Hermon, when
Eumedes begged permission to present the artist whose sight had been so
wonderfully restored.

"To me he is still the unjustly crowned conspirator," Philadelphus
replied. "Let him create the remarkable work which I formerly expected
from him, and perhaps I shall have a somewhat better opinion of him,
deem him more worthy of our favour."

Under these circumstances it was advisable for Archias and Daphne to
remain absent from Alexandria, and the experienced couple could only
approve Hermon's decision to go to Pergamus as soon as Erasistratus
dismissed him. A letter from Daphne, which reached Thyone's hands at
this time, increased the convalescent's already ardent yearning to
the highest pitch. The girl entreated her maternal friend to tell her
frankly the condition of her lover's health. If he had recovered, he
would know how to find her speedily; if the blindness was incurable,
she would come herself to help him bear the burden of his darkened
existence. Chrysilla would accompany her, but she could leave her father
alone in Pergamus a few months without anxiety, for he had a second
son there in his nephew Myrtilus, and had found a kind friend in
Philetaerus, the ruler of the country.

From this time Hermon daily urged Erasistratus to grant him entire
liberty, but the leech steadfastly refused, though he knew whither his
young friend longed to go.

Not until the beginning of the fourth week after the operation did
he himself lead Hermon into the full sunlight, and when the recovered
artist came out of the house he raised his hands in mute prayer, gushing
from the inmost depths of his heart.

The King was to return to Alexandria in a few days, and at the same
time Philippus and Thyone were going back to Pelusium. Hermon wished to
accompany them there and sail thence on a ship bound for Pergamus.

With Eumedes he visited the unfamiliar scenes around him, and his newly
restored gift of sight presented to him here many things that formerly
he would scarcely have noticed, but which now filled him with grateful
joy. Gratitude, intense gratitude, had taken possession of his whole
being. This feeling mastered him completely and seemed to be fostered
and strengthened by every breath, every heart throb, every glance into
his own soul and the future.

Besides, many beauties, nay, even many marvels, presented themselves to
his restored eyes. The whole wealth of the magic of beauty, intellect,
and pleasure in life, characteristic of the Greek nature, appeared
to have followed King Ptolemy and Queen Arsinoe-Philadelphus hither.
Gardens had been created on the arid, sandy soil, whose gray and yellow
surface extended in every direction, the water on the shore of the canal
which united Pithom with the Nile not sufficing to render it possible
to make even a narrow strip of arable land. Fresh water flowed from
beautiful fountains adorned with rich carvings, and the pure fluid
filled large porphyry and marble basins. Statues, single and in groups,
stood forth in harmonious arrangement against green masses of leafage,
and Grecian temples, halls, and even a theatre, rapidly constructed in
the noblest forms from light material, invited the people to devotion,
to the enjoyment of the most exquisite music, and to witness the perfect
performance of many a tragedy and comedy.

Statues surrounded the hurriedly erected palaestra where the Ephebi
every morning practised their nude, anointed bodies in racing,
wrestling, and throwing the discus. What a delight it was to Hermon to
feast his eyes upon these spectacles! What a stimulus to the artist, so
long absorbed in his own thoughts, who had so recently returned from
the wilderness to the world of active life, when he was permitted, in
Erasistratus's tent, to listen to the great scholars who had accompanied
the King to the desert! Only the regret that Daphne was not present to
share his pleasure clouded Hermon's enjoyment, when Eumedes related
to his parents, himself, and a few chosen friends the adventures
encountered, and the experiences gathered in distant Ethiopia, on land
and water, in battle and the chase, as investigator and commander.

The utmost degree of variety had entered into the simplicity of the
monotonous desert, the most refined abundance for the intellect and the
need of beauty appeared amid its barrenness.

The poet Callimachus had just arrived with a new chorus of singers,
tablets by Antiphilus and Nicias had come to beautify the last days of
the residence in the desert--when doves, the birds of Aphrodite, flew
with the speed of lightning into Pithom, but instead of bringing a new
message of love and announcing the approach of fresh pleasure, they bore
terrible tidings which put joy to flight and stifled mirthfulness.

The unbridled greed of rude barbarians had chosen Alexandria for its
goal, and startled the royal pair and their chosen companions from the
sea of pleasure where they would probably have remained for weeks.

The four thousand Gauls who had been obtained to fight against Cyrene
were in the act of rushing rapaciously upon the richest city in the
world. The most terrible danger hung like a black cloud over the capital
founded by Alexander, whose growth had been so rapid. True, General
Satvrus asserted that he was strong enough, with the troops at his
disposal, to defeat the formidable hordes; but a second dove, sent
by the epitropus who had remained in Alexandria, alluded to serious
disaster which it would scarcely be possible to avert.

The doves now flew swiftly to and fro; but before the third arrived,
Eumedes, the commander of the fleet just from Ethiopia, was already on
the way to Alexandria with all the troops assembled on the frontier.

The King and Queen, with the corps of pages and the corps of youths,
entered the boats waiting for them to return, drawn by teams of four
swift horses, to Memphis, to await within the impregnable fortress of
the White Castle the restoration of security in the capital.

The Greeks prized the most valiant fearlessness so highly that no shadow
could be suffered to rest upon the King's, and therefore the monarch's
hurried departure was made in a way which permitted no thought of
flight, and merely resembled impatient yearning for new festivals and
the earnest desire to fulfil grave duties in another portion of the
kingdom.

Many of the companions of the royal pair, among them Erasistratus,
accompanied them. Hermon bade him farewell with a troubled heart, and
the leech, too, parted with regret from the artist to whom, a year
before, he had refused his aid.




CHAPTER XV.

Hermon went, with Philippus and Thyone, on board the ship which was to
convey them through the new canal to Pelusium, where the old commandant
had to plan all sorts of measures. In the border fortress the artist
was again obliged to exercise patience, for no ship bound to Pergamus or
Lesbos could be found in the harbour. Philippus had as much work as
he could do, but all his arrangements were made when carrier doves
announced that the surprise intended by the Gauls had been completely
thwarted, and his son Eumedes was empowered to punish them.

The admiral would take his fleet to the Sebennytic mouth of the Nile.

Another dove came from King Ptolemy, and summoned the old general at
once to the capital. Philippus resolved to set off without delay and, as
the way led past that mouth of the Nile, met his son on the voyage.

Hermon must accompany him and his wife to Alexandria, whence, without
entering the city, he could sail for Pergamus; ships bound to all the
ports in the Mediterranean were always in one of the harbours of the
capital. A galley ready to weigh anchor was constantly at the disposal
of the commandant of the fortress, and the next noon the noble pair,
with Hermon and his faithful Bias, went on board the Galatea.

The weather was dull, and gray clouds were sweeping across the sky over
the swift vessel, which hugged the coast, and, unless the wind shifted,
would reach the narrow tongue of land pierced by the Sebennytic mouth of
the Nile before sunrise.

Though the general and his wife went to rest early, Hermon could not
endure the close air of the cabin. Wrapped in his cloak he went on deck.
The moon, almost full, was sailing in the sky, sometimes covered by dark
clouds, sometimes leaving them behind. Like a swan emerging from the
shadow of the thickets along the shore upon the pure bosom of the
lake, it finally floated into the deep azure of the radiant firmament.
Hermon's heart swelled.

How he rejoiced that he was again permitted to behold the starry sky,
and satiate his soul with the beauty of creation! What delight it gave
him that the eternal wanderers above were no longer soulless forms,
that he again saw in the pure silver disk above friendly Selene, in the
rolling salt waves the kingdom of Poseidon! To-morrow, when the deep
blue water was calm, he would greet the sea-god Glaucus, and when snowy
foam crowned the crests of the waves, white-armed Thetis. The wind was
no longer an empty sound to him; no, it, too, came from a deity. All
Nature had regained a new, divine life. Doubtless he felt much nearer to
his childhood than before, but he was infinitely less distant from the
eternal divinity. And all the forms, so full of meaning, which appeared
to him from Nature, and from every powerful emotion of his own soul,
were waiting to be represented by his art in the noblest of forms, those
of human beings. There were few with whose nature he had not become
familiar in the darkness and solitude that once surrounded him.

When he began to create again, he had only to summon them, and he
awaited, with the suspense of the general who is in command of new
troops on the eve of battle, the success of his own work after the great
transformation which had taken place in him.

What a stress and tumult!

He had controlled it since the first hour when he regained his full
vision. He would fain have transformed the moon into the sun, the ship
into the studio, and begun to model.

He knew, too, what he desired to create.

He would model an Apollo trampling under foot the slain dragon of
darkness.

He would succeed in this work now. And as he looked up and saw Selene
just emerging again from the black cloud island, the thought entered his
mind that it was a moonlight night like this when all the unspeakably
terrible misfortune occurred--which was now past.

Yet neither the calm wanderer above nor a resentful woman had exposed
him to the persecution of Nemesis. In the stillness of the desert he had
perceived what had brought all this terrible suffering upon him; but
he would not repeat it to himself now, for he felt within his soul the
power to remain faithful to his best self in the future.

With clear eyes he gazed keenly and blithely at the new life. Nothing,
least of all, futile self-torturing regret for faults committed, should
cloud the fair morning dawning anew for him, which summoned him to
active work, to gratitude and love.

Uttering a sigh of relief, he paced the deck--now brilliantly
illuminated by silvery light--with long strides.

The moon above his head reminded him of Ledscha. He was no longer angry
with her. The means by which she had intended to destroy him had been
transformed into a benefit, and while in the desert he had perceived
how often man finally blesses, as the highest gain, what he at first
regarded as the most cruel affliction.

How distinctly the image of the Biamite again stood before his agitated
soul!

Had he not loved her once?

Or how had it happened that, though his heart was Daphne's, and hers
alone, he had felt wounded and insulted when his Bias, who was leaning
over the railing of the deck yonder, gazing at the glittering waves, had
informed him that Ledscha had been accompanied in her flight from her
unloved husband by the Gaul whose life he, Hermon, had saved? Was this
due to jealousy or merely wounded vanity at being supplanted in a heart
which he firmly believed belonged, though only in bitter hate, solely to
him?

She certainly had not forgotten him, and while the remembrance of her
blended with the yearning for Daphne which never left him, he sat down
and gazed out into the darkness till his head drooped on his breast.

Then a dream showed the Biamite to the slumbering man, yet no longer in
the guise of a woman, but as the spider Arachne. She increased before
his eyes to an enormous size and alighted upon the pharos erected by
Sostratus. Uninjured by the flames of the lighthouse, above which she
hovered, she wove a net of endlessly long gray threads over the whole
city of Alexandria, with its temples, palaces, and halls, harbours and
ships, until Daphne suddenly appeared with a light step and quietly cut
one after the other.

Suddenly a shrill whistle aroused him. It was the signal of the
flute-player to relieve the rowers.

A faint yellow line was now tingeing the eastern horizon of the gray,
cloudy sky. At his left extended the flat, dull-brown coast line, which
seemed to be lower than the turbid waves of the restless sea. The cold
morning wind was blowing light mists over the absolutely barren shore.
Not a tree, not a bush, not a human dwelling was to be seen in this
dreary wilderness. Wherever the eye turned, there was nothing but sand
and water, which united at the edge of the land. Long lines of surf
poured over the arid desert, and, as if repelled by the desolation of
this strand, returned to the wide sea whence they came.

The shrill screams of the sea-gulls behind the ship, and the hoarse,
hungry croaking of the ravens on the shore blended with the roaring of
the waves. Hermon shuddered at this scene. Shivering, he wrapped his
cloak closer around him, yet he did not go to the protecting cabin, but
followed the nauarch, who pointed out to him the numerous vessels which,
in a wide curve, surrounded the place where the Sebennytic arm of the
Nile pierced the tongue of land to empty into the sea.

The experienced seaman did not know what ships were doing there, but it
was hardly anything good; for ravens in a countless multitude were to be
seen on the shore and all moved toward the left.

Philippus's appearance on deck interrupted the nauarch. He anxiously
showed the birds to the old hero also, and the latter's only reply was,
"Watch the helm and sails!"

Yonder squadron, Philippus said to the artist, was a part of his son's
fleet; what brought it there was a mystery to him too.

After the early meal, the galley of Eumedes approached his father's
trireme. Two other galleys, not much inferior in size, were behind, and
probably fifty smaller vessels were moving about the mouth of the Nile
and the whole dreary tongue of land.

All belonged to the royal war fleet, and the deck of every one was
crowded with armed soldiers.

On one a forest of lances bristled in the murky air, and upon its
southward side a row of archers, each man holding his bow in his hand,
stood shoulder to shoulder.

At what mark were their arrows to be aimed? The men on board the Galatea
saw it distinctly, for the shore was swarming with human figures, here
standing crowded closely together, like horses attacked by a pack of
wolves; yonder running, singly or in groups, toward the sea or into the
land. Dark spots on the light sand marked the places where others had
thrown themselves on the ground, or, kneeling, stretched out their arms
as if in defence.

Who were the people who populated this usually uninhabited, inhospitable
place so densely and in so strange a manner?

This could not be distinguished from the Galatea with the naked eye,
but Philippus thought that they were the Gauls whose punishment had been
intrusted to his son, and it soon proved that the old general was right;
for just as the Galatea was approaching the shore, a band of twenty or
thirty men plunged into the sea. They were Gauls. The light complexions
and fair and red bristling hair showed this--Philippus knew them, and
Hermon remembered the hordes of men who had rushed past him on the ride
to Tennis.

But the watchers were allowed only a short time for observation; brief
shouts of command rang from the ships near them, long bows were raised
in the air, and one after another of the light-hued forms in the water
threw up its arms, sprang up, or sank motionless into the waves around
them, which were dyed with a crimson stain.

The artist shuddered; the gray-haired general covered his head with his
cloak, and the Lady Thyone followed his example, uttering her son's name
in a tone of loud lamentation.

The nauarch pointed to the black birds in the air and close above the
shore and the water; but the shout, "A boat from the admiral's galley!"
soon attracted the attention of the voyagers on the Galatea in a new
direction.

Thirty powerful rowers were urging the long, narrow boat toward them.
Sometimes raised high on the crest of a mountain wave, sometimes sinking
into the hollow, it completed its trip, and Eumedes mounted a swinging
rope ladder to the Galatea's deck as nimbly as a boy.

Here the young commander of the fleet hastened toward his parents. His
mother sobbed aloud at his anything but cheerful greeting; Philippus
said mournfully, "I have heard nothing yet, but I know all."

"Father," replied the admiral, and raising the helmet from his head,
covered with brown curls, he added mournfully: "First as to these men
here. It will teach you to understand the other terrible things. Your
Uncle Archias's house was destroyed; yonder men were the criminals."

"In the capital!" Philippus exclaimed furiously, and Hermon cried in no
less vehement excitement: "How did my uncle get the ill will of these
monsters? But as the vengeance is in your hands, they will atone for
this breach of the peace!"

"Severely, perhaps too severely," replied Eumedes gloomily, and
Philippus asked his son how this evil deed could have happened, and the
purport of the King's command.

The admiral related what had occurred in the capital since his departure
from Pithom.

The four thousand Gauls who had been sent by King Antiochus to the
Egyptian army as auxiliary troops against Cyrene refused, before
reaching Paraetonium, on the western frontier of the Egyptian kingdom,
to obey their Greek commanders. As they tried to force them to continue
their march, the barbarians left them bound in the road. They
spared their lives, but rushed with loud shouts of exultation toward
Alexandria, which was close at hand.

They had learned that the city was almost stripped of troops, and the
most savage instinct urged them toward the wealthy capital.

Without encountering any resistance, they broke through the necropolis
into Alexandria, crossed the Draco canal, and marched past the
unfinished Temple of Serapis through the Rhakotis. At the Canopic Way
they turned eastward and rushed through this main artery of traffic
till, in the Brucheium, they hastened in a northerly direction toward
the sea.

South of the Theatre of Dionysus they halted. One division turned toward
the market-place, another toward the royal palaces.

Until they reached the Brucheium the hordes, so eager for booty, had
refrained from plunder and pillage.

Their whole strength was to be reserved, as the examination proved, for
the attack upon the royal palaces. Several people who were thoroughly
familiar with Alexandria had acted as guides.

The instigator of the mutiny was said to be a Gallic captain who had
taken part in the surprise of Delphi, but, having ventured to punish
disobedient soldiers, he was killed. A bridge-builder from the ranks,
and his wife, who was not of Gallic blood, had taken his place.

This woman, a resolute and obstinate but rarely beautiful creature, when
the division that was to attack the royal palaces was marching past the
house which Hermon had occupied as the heir of Myrtilus, pressed forward
herself across the threshold, to order the mutineers who followed her to
destroy and steal whatever came in their way. The bridge-builder went to
the market-place, and in pillaging the wealthy merchants' houses
began with Archias's. Meanwhile it was set on fire and, with the large
warehouses adjoining it, was burned to the foundation walls.

But the robbers were to obtain no permanent success, either in the
market-place or in Myrtilus's house, which was diagonally opposite
to the palaestra; for General Satyrus, at the first tidings of their
approach, had collected all the troops at his disposal and the crews of
several war galleys, and imprisoned the division in the market-place
as though in a mouse-trap. The bands to which the woman belonged were
forced by the cavalry into the palaestra and the neighbouring Maander,
and kept there until Eumedes brought re-enforcements and compelled the
Gauls to surrender.

The King sent from Memphis the order to take the vanquished men to
the tongue of land where they now were, and could easily be imprisoned
between the sea and the Sebennytic inland lake. They were guilty of
death to the last man, and starvation was to perform the executioner's
office upon them.

He, Eumedes, the admiral concluded, was in the King's service, and must
do what his commander in chief ordered.

"Duty," sighed Philippus; "yet what a punishment!"

He held out his hand to his son as he spoke, but the Lady Thyone shook
her head mournfully, saying: "There are four thousand over yonder; and
the philosopher and historian on the throne, the admirable art critic
who bestows upon his capital and Egypt all the gifts of peace, who
understands how to guard and develop it better than any one else--yet
what influence the gloomy powers exert upon him!"

Here she hesitated, and went on in a low whisper: "The blood of two
brothers stains his hand and his conscience. The oldest, to whom
the throne would have belonged, he exiled. And our friend, Demetrius
Phalereus, his father's noble councillor! Because you, Philippus,
interceded for him--though you were in a position of command, because
Ptolemy knows your ability--you were sent to distant Pelusium, and there
we should be still--"

"Guard your tongue, wife!" interrupted the old general in a tone
of grave rebuke. "The vipers on the crowns of Upper and Lower Egypt
symbolize the King's swift power over life and death. To the Egyptians
the Philadelphi, Ptolemy and Arsinoe, are gods, and what cause have we
to reproach them except that they use their omnipotence?"

"And, mother," Eumedes eagerly added, "do not the royal pair on the
throne merely follow the example of far greater ones among the immortal
gods? When the very Gauls who are devoted to death yonder, greedy for
booty, attacked Delphi, four years ago, it was the august brother and
sister, Apollo and Artemis, who sent them to Hades with their arrows,
while Zeus hurled his thunderbolts at them and ordered heavy boulders
to fall upon them from the shaken mountains. Many of the men over there
fled from destruction at Delphi. Unconverted, they added new crimes
to the old ones, but now retribution will overtake them. The worse the
crime, the more bloody the vengeance.

"Even the last must die, as my sovereign commands; only I shall
determine the mode of death according to my own judgment, and at the
same time, mother, feel sure of your approval. Instead of lingering
starvation, I shall use swift arrows. Now you know what you were obliged
to learn. It would be wise, mother, for you to leave this abode of
misery. Duty summons me to my ship." He held out his hand to his parents
and Hermon as he spoke, but the latter clasped it firmly, exclaiming in
a tone of passionate emotion, "What is the name of the woman to whom,
though she is not of their race, the lawless barbarians yielded?"

"Ledscha," replied the admiral.

Hermon started as if stung by a scorpion, and asked, "Where is she?"

"On my ship," was the reply, "if she has not yet been taken ashore with
the others."

"To be killed with the pitiable band there?" cried Thyone angrily,
looking her son reproachfully in the face.

"No, mother," replied Eumedes. "She will be taken to the others under
the escort of trustworthy men in order, perhaps, to induce her to speak.
It must be ascertained whether there were accomplices in the attack on
the royal palaces, and lastly whence the woman comes."

"I can tell you that myself," replied Hermon. "Allow me to accompany
you. I must see and speak to her."

"The Arachne of Tennis?" asked Thyone. Hermon's mute nod of assent
answered the question, but she exclaimed: "The unhappy woman, who called
down the wrath of Nemesis upon you, and who has now herself fallen a
prey to the avenging goddess. What do you want from her?"

Hermon bent down to his old friend and whispered, "To lighten her
terrible fate, if it is in my power."

"Go, then," replied the matron, and turned to her son, saying, "Let
Hermon tell you how deeply this woman has influenced his life, and, when
her turn comes, think of your mother."

"She is a woman," replied Eumedes, "and the King's mandate only commands
me to punish men. Besides, I promised her indulgence if she would make a
confession."

"And she?" asked Hermon.

"Neither by threats nor promises," answered the admiral, "can this
sinister, beautiful creature be induced to speak."

"Certainly not," said the artist, and a smile of satisfaction flitted
over his face.




CHAPTER XVI.

A short row took Hermon and Eumedes the admiral's galley. Ledscha had
already been carried ashore. There she was to be confronted with the men
who were suspected of having showed the mutineers the way to the city.

Absorbed in his own thoughts, Hermon waited for the admiral, who at
first was claimed by one official duty after another. The artist's
thoughts lingered with Daphne. To her father the loss of his house, nay,
perhaps of his wealth, would seem almost unendurable, yet even were he
beggared, provision was made for him and his daughter. He, Hermon, could
again create, as in former days, and what happiness it would be if he
were permitted to repay the man to whom he owed so much for the kindness
bestowed upon him!

He longed to give to the woman he loved again and again, and it would
have seemed to him a favour of fortune if the flames had consumed even
the last drachm of her wealthy father.

Completely engrossed by these reflections, he forgot the horrors before
him, but when he raised his eyes and saw the archers continuing their
terrible work he shuddered.

The admiral's galley lay so near the shore that he distinguished the
figures of the Gauls separately. Some, obeying the instinct of self
preservation, fled from the places which could be reached by the arrows
of the archers on the ships, but others pressed toward the shafts.
A frightful, heart-rending spectacle, yet how rich in food for the
long-darkened eyes of the artist! Two brothers of unusual height, who,
nude like all their comrades in death, offered their broad, beautifully
arched chests to the arrows, would not leave his memory. It was a
terrible sight, yet grand and worthy of being wrested from oblivion by
art, and it impressed itself firmly on his mind.

After noon Eumedes could at last devote himself to his young friend.
Although the wind drove showers of fine rain before it, the admiral
remained on deck with the sculptor. What cared they for the inclement
weather, while one was recalling to mind and telling his friend how the
hate of an offended woman had unchained the gloomy spirits of revenge
upon him, the other, who had defied death on land water, listened to his
story, sometimes in surprise, sometimes with silent horror?

After the examination to which she had been subjected, Eumedes had
believed Ledscha to be as Hermon described her. He found nothing
petty in this beautiful, passionate creature who avenged the injustice
inflicted upon her as Fate took vengeance, who, with unsparing energy,
anticipated the Nemesis to whom she appealed, compelled men's obedience,
and instead of enriching herself cast away the talents extorted to bring
down fresh ruin upon the man who had transformed her love to hate.

While the friends consulted together with lowered voices, their
conjecture became conviction that it was the Biamite's inextinguishable
hate which had led her to the Gauls and induced her to share the attack
upon the capital.

The assault upon the houses of Archias and Myrtilus was a proof of
this, for the latter was still believed to be Hermon's property. She had
probably supposed that the merchant's palace sheltered Daphne, in whom,
even at Tennis, she had seen and hated her successful rival.

Only the undeniable fact that Ledscha was the bridge-builder's companion
presented an enigma difficult to solve. The freedman Bias had
remained on Philippus's galley, and could not now be appealed to for
a confirmation of his assertions, but Hermon distinctly remembered his
statement that Ledscha had allowed the Gaul, after he had received the
money intended for him, to take her from Pitane to Africa.

When the short November day was drawing to a close, and the friends had
strengthened themselves with food and drink, the rain ceased and, as
the sun set, its after-glow broke through the rifts and fissures in the
black wall of clouds in the western horizon like blazing flames in the
conflagration of a solid stone building. Yet the glow vanished swiftly
enough. The darkness of night spread over the sea and the arid strip of
land in the south, but the greedy croaking of the ravens and vultures
echoed more and more loudly from the upper air. From time to time the
outbursts of rage and agony of despairing men, and horrible jeering
laughter, drowned the voices of the flocks of birds and the roaring
of the tempestuous sea. Sometimes, too, a sharp word of command, or a
signal heard for a long distance, pierced through the awful sounds.

Here and there, and at last everywhere on the squadron, which surrounded
the tongue of land in a shallow curve, dim lights began to appear on the
masts and prows of the ships; but darkness brooded over the coast. Only
in the three fortified guardhouses, which had been hastily erected here,
the feeble light of a lantern illumined the gloom.

Twinkling lights also appeared in the night heavens between the swiftly
flying clouds. One star after another began to adorn the blue islands in
the cloudy firmament, and at last the full moon burst through the heavy
banks of dark clouds, and shone in pure brilliancy above their heads,
like a huge silver vessel in the black catafalque of a giant.

At the end of the first hour after sunset Eumedes ordered the boat to be
manned.

Armed as if for battle, he prepared for the row to the scene of misery,
and requested Hermon to buckle a coat of mail under his chlamys and
put on the sword he gave him. True, a division of reliable Macedonian
warriors was to accompany them, and Ledscha was in a well-guarded
place, yet it might perhaps be necessary to defend themselves against
an outburst of despair among the condemned prisoners. On the short trip,
the crests of the tossing waves sometimes shone with a flickering light,
while elsewhere long shadows spread like dark sails over the sea. The
flat coast on which both men soon stepped was brightly illumined by the
moonbeams, and the forms of the doomed men stood forth, like the black
figures on the red background of a vase, upon the yellowish-brown sand
on which they were standing, running, walking, or lying.

At the western end of the tongue of land a sand hill had been surrounded
by a wall and moat, guarded by heavily armed soldiers and several
archers. The level ground below had been made secure against any attack,
and on the right side was a roof supported by pillars.

The officials intrusted with the examination of the ringleaders had
remained during the day in this hastily erected open hut. The latter,
bound to posts, awaited their sentence.

The only woman among them was Ledscha, who crouched, unfettered, on the
ground behind the enclosure, which consisted of short stakes fastened by
a rope.

Without presenting any serious obstacle, it merely indicated how far
the prisoners might venture to go. Whoever crossed it must expect to
be struck down by an arrow from the wall. This earthwork, it is true,
menaced those held captive here, but they also owed it a debt of
gratitude, for it shut from their eyes the horrible incidents on the
sandy plain between the sea and the inland lake.

This spot was now made as light as day by the rays of the full moon
which floated in the pure azure sky far above the black cloud mountains,
like a white lotus flower on clear waters, and poured floods of silvery
radiance upon the earth.

Eumedes commanded the Macedonians who formed his escort to remain at the
fortress on the dune, and, pointing out Ledscha by a wave of the hand,
he whispered to Hermon: "By the girdle of Aphrodite! she is terribly
beautiful! For whom is the Medea probably brewing in imagination the
poisoned draught?"

Then he gave the sculptor permission to promise her immunity from
punishment if she would consent at least to explain the Gauls'
connection with the royal palaces; but Hermon strenuously refused to
undertake this or a similar commission to Ledscha.

Eumedes had expected the denial, and merely expressed to his friend his
desire to speak to the Biamite after his interview was over. However
refractory she might be, his mother's intercession should benefit her.
Hermon might assure her that he, the commander, meant to deal leniently.
He pressed the artist's hand as he spoke, and walked rapidly away to
ascertain the condition of affairs in the other guardhouses.

Never had the brave artist's heart throbbed faster in any danger than on
the eve of this meeting; but it was no longer love that thrilled it so
passionately, far less hate or the desire to let his foe feel that her
revenge was baffled.

It was easy for the victor to exercise magnanimity, and easiest of all
for the sculptor in the presence of so beautiful an enemy, and Hermon
thought he had never seen the Biamite look fairer. How exquisitely
rounded was the oval, how delicately cut the profile of her face, how
large were the widely separated, sparkling eyes, above which, even in
the pale moonlight, the thick black brows were visible, united under the
forehead as if for a dark deed to be performed in common!

Time had rather enhanced than lessened the spell of this wonderful young
creature. Now she rose from the ground where she had been crouching and
paced several times up and down the short path at her disposal; but
she started suddenly, for one of the Gauls bound to the posts, in whom
Hermon recognised the bridge-builder, Lutarius, called her name, and
when she turned her face toward him, panted in broken Greek like one
overwhelmed by despair: "Once more--it shall be the last time--I beseech
you! Lay your hand upon my brow, and if that is too much, speak but one
kind word to me before all is over! I only want to hear that you do not
hate me like a foe and despise me like a dog. What can it cost you? You
need only tell me in two words that you are sorry for your harshness."

"The same fate awaits us both," cried Ledscha curtly and firmly. "Let
each take care of himself. When my turn comes and my eyes grow dim in
death, I will thank them that they will not show you to me again, base
wretch, throughout eternity."

Lutarius shrieked aloud in savage fury, and tore so frantically at the
strong ropes which bound him that the firm posts shook, but Ledscha
turned away and approached the hut.

She leaned thoughtfully against one of the pillars that supported the
roof, and the artist's eyes watched her intently; every movement seemed
to him noble and worth remembering.

With her hand shading her brow, she gazed upward to the full moon.

Hermon had already delayed speaking to her too long, but he would have
deemed it criminal to startle her from this attitude. So must Arachne
have stood when the goddess, in unjust anger, raised the weaver's
shuttle against the more skilful mortal; for while Ledscha's brow
frowned angrily, a triumphant smile hovered around her mouth. At the
same time she slightly opened her exquisitely formed lips, and the
little white teeth which Hermon had once thought so bewitchingly
beautiful glittered between them.

Like the astronomer who fixes his gaze and tries to imprint upon his
memory some rare star in the firmament which a cloud is threatening to
obscure, he now strove to obtain Ledscha's image. He would and could
model her in this attitude, exactly as she stood there, without her
veil, which had been torn from her during the hand-to-hand conflict when
she was captured, with her thick, half-loosened tresses falling over
her left shoulder; nav, even with the slightly hooked nose, which was
opposed to the old rule of art that permitted only the straight bridge
of the nose to be given to beautiful women. Her nature harmonized with
the ideal even in the smallest detail; here any deviation from reality
must tend to injure the work.

She remained motionless for minutes in the same attitude, as if she knew
that she was posing to an artist; but Hermon gazed at her as if spell
bound till the fettered Gaul again called her name.

Then she left the supporting pillar, approached the barrier, stopped at
the rope which extended from one short stake to another, and gazed at
the man who was following her outside of the rope.

It was a Greek who stood directly opposite to her. A black beard adorned
his grave, handsome countenance. He, too, had a chlamys, such as she had
formerly seen on another. Only the short sword, which he wore suspended
at his right side in the Hellenic fashion, would not suit that other;
but suddenly a rush of hot blood crimsoned her face. As if to save
herself from falling, she flung out both arms and clutched a stake with
her right and her left hand, thrusting her head and the upper portion of
her body across the rope toward the man whose appearance had created so
wild a tumult in her whole being.

At last she called Hermon's name in such keen suspense that it fell upon
his ear like a shrill cry.

"Ledscha," he answered warmly, extending both hands to her in sincere
sympathy; but she did not heed the movement, and her tone of calm
self-satisfaction surprised him as she answered: "So you seek me in
misfortune? Even the blind man knows how to find me here."

"I would far rather have met you again in the greatest happiness!"
he interrupted gently. "But I am no longer blind. The immortals again
permit me, as in former days, to feast my eyes upon your marvellous
beauty."

A shrill laugh cut short his words, and the "Not blind!" which fell
again and again from her lips sounded more like laughter than speech.

There are tears of grief and of joy, and the laugh which is an
accompaniment of pleasure is also heard on the narrow boundary between
suffering and despair.

It pierced the artist's heart more deeply than the most savage outburst
of fury, and when Ledscha gasped: "Not blind! Cured! Rich and possessed
of sight, perfect sight!" he understood her fully for the first time,
and could account for the smile of satisfaction which had just surprised
him on her lips.

He gazed at her, absolutely unable to utter a word; but she went on
speaking, while a low, sinister laugh mingled with her tones: "So this
is avenging justice! It allows us women to be trampled under foot, and
holds its hands in its lap! My vengeance! How I have lauded Nemesis!
How exquisitely my retaliation seemed to have succeeded! And now? It was
mere delusion and deception. He who was blind sees. He who was to perish
in misery is permitted, with a sword at his side, to gloat over our
destruction. Listen, if the good news has not already reached you! I,
too, am condemned to death. But what do I care for myself? Even less
than those to whom we pray and offer sacrifices for the betrayed woman.
Now I am learning to know them! Thus Nemesis thanks me for the lavish
gifts I have bestowed upon her? Just before my end she throws you, the
rewarded traitor, into my way! I must submit to have the hated foe,
whose blinding was the sole pleasure in my ruined life, look me in the
face with insolent joy."

Hermon's quick blood boiled.

With fierce resentment he grasped her hand, which lay on the rope,
pressed it violently in his strong clasp, and exclaimed, "Stop, mad
woman, that I may not be forced to think of you as a poisonous serpent
and repulsive spider!"

Ledscha had vainly endeavoured to withdraw her hand while he was
speaking. Now he himself released it; but she looked up at him in
bewilderment, as if seeking aid, and said sadly: "Once--you know that
yourself--I was different--even as long as I supposed my vengeance had
succeeded. But now? The false goddess has baffled every means with which
I sought to punish you. Who averted the sorest ill treatment from my
head? And I was even defrauded of the revenge which it was my right,
nay, my duty, to exercise."

She finished the sentence with drooping head, as if utterly crushed, and
this time she did not laugh, but Hermon felt his wrath transformed
to sympathy, and he asked warmly and kindly if she would let nothing
appease her, not even if he begged her forgiveness for the wrong he had
done her, and promised to obtain her life, nay, also her liberty.

Ledscha shook her head gently, and gravely answered: "What is left me
without hate? What are the things which others deem best and highest to
a miserable wretch like me?"

Here Hermon pointed to the bridge-builder, bound to the post, saying,
"Yonder man led you away from the husband whom you had wedded, and from
him you received compensation for the love you had lost."

"From him?" she cried furiously, and, raising her voice in a tone of the
most intense loathing: "Ask yonder scoundrel himself! Because I needed a
guide, I permitted him to take me away from my unloved husband and from
the Hydra. Because he would help me to shatter the new and undeserved
good fortune which you--yes, you--do you hear?--enjoyed, I remained with
him among the Gauls. More than one Alexandrian brought me the news that
you were revelling in golden wealth, and the wretch promised to make you
and your uncle beggars if the surprise succeeded. He did this, though he
knew that it was you who took him up from the road and saved his life;
for nothing good and noble dwells in his knavish soul. He yearned for
me, and still more ardently for the Alexandrians' gold. Worse than the
wolf that licked the hand of the man who bandaged its wounds, he would
have shown his teeth to the preserver of his life. I have learned this,
and if he dies here of starvation and thirst he will receive only what
he deserves. He knows, too, what I think of him. The greedy beast of
prey was not permitted even to touch my hand. Just ask him! There he is.
Let him tell you how I listened to his vows of love. Before I would
have permitted yonder wretch to recall to life what you crushed in this
heart--"

Here Lutarius interrupted her with a flood of savage, scarcely
intelligible curses, but very soon one of the guards, who came out of
the hut, stopped him with a lash.

When the Gaul, howling under the blows, was silenced, Hermon asked, "So
your mad thirst for vengeance also caused this suicidal attack?"

"No," she answered simply; "but when they determined upon the assault,
and had killed their leader, Belgius, yonder monster stole to their
head. So it happened--I myself do not know how--that they also obeyed
me, and I took advantage of it and induced them to begin with your house
and Archias's. When they had captured the royal palaces, they intended
to assail the Temple of Demeter also."

"Then you thought that even the terrible affliction of blindness would
not suffice to punish the man you hated?" asked Hermon.

"No," she answered firmly; "for you could buy with your gold everything
life offers except sight, while in me--yes, in me--gloom darker than the
blackest night shrouded my soul. Through your fault I was robbed of
all, all that is clear to woman's heart: my father's house, his love,
my sister. Even the pleasure in myself which had been awakened by your
sweet flatteries was transformed by you into loathing."

"By me?" cried Hermon, amazed by the injustice of this severe reproach;
but Ledscha answered his question with the resolute assertion, "By you
and you alone!" and then impatiently added: "You, who, by your art,
could transform mortal women into goddesses, wished to make me a
humiliated creature, with the rope which was to strangle her about her
neck, and at the same time the most repulsive of creeping insects.
'The hideous, gray, eight-legged spider!' I exclaimed to myself, when I
raised my arms and saw my shadow on the sunlit ground. 'The spider!'
I thought, when I shook the distaff to draw threads from the flax in
leisure hours. 'Your image!' I said, when I saw spiders hanging in dusty
corners, and catching flies and gnats. All these things made me a horror
to myself. And at the same time to know that the Demeter, on whom you
bestowed the features of the daughter of Archias, was kindling the
whole great city of Alexandria with enthusiasm, and drawing countless
worshippers to her sanctuary! She, an object of adoration to thousands,
I--the much-praised beauty--a horror to myself! This is what fed my
desire for vengeance with fresh food by day and night; this urged me
to remain with yonder wretch; for he had promised, after pillaging the
royal palaces, to shatter your Demeter, the image of the daughter of
Archias, which they lauded and which brought you fame and honour--it was
to be done before my eyes--into fragments."

"Mad woman!" Hermon again broke forth indignantly, and hastily told her
how she had been misinformed.

Ledscha's large black eyes dilated as if some hideous spectre was rising
from the ground before her, while she heard that the Demeter was the
work of Myrtilus and not his; that his friend's legacy had long since
ceased to belong to him, and that he was again as poor as when he was in
Tennis during the time of their love.

"And the blindness?" she asked sadly.

"It transformed life for me into one long night, illumined by no single
ray of light," was the reply; "but, the immortals be praised, I was
cured of it, and it was old Tabus, on the Owl's Nest at Tennis, whose
wisdom and magic arts you so often lauded, who gave the remedy and
advice to which I owe my recovery."

Here he hesitated, for Ledscha had seized the rope with one hand and the
stake at her right with the other, in order not to fall upon her knees;
but Hermon perceived how terribly his words agitated her, and spoke
to her soothingly. Ledscha did not seem to hear him, for while still
clinging to the rope she looked sometimes at the sand at her feet,
sometimes up to the full moon, which was now flooding both sky and earth
with light.

At last she dropped it, and said in a hollow tone: "Now I understand
everything. You met her when Bias gave her the bridal dowry which was
to purchase my release from my husband. How it must have enraged her! I
thought of it all, pondered and pondered how to spare her; but through
whom, except Tabus, could I return to Hanno the property, won in battle
by his blood, which he had thrown away for me? Tabus kept the family
wealth. And she--the marriage bond which two persons formed was sacred
and unassailable--the woman who broke her faith with her husband and
turned from him--was an abomination to her. How she loved her sons and
grandsons! I knew that she would never forgive the wrong I did Hanno.
From resentment to me she cured the man whom I hated."

"Yet probably also," said Hermon, "because my blighted youth aroused her
pity."

"Perhaps so," replied Ledscha hesitatingly, gazing thoughtfully into
vacancy. "She was what her demons made her. Hard as steel and gentle
as a tender girl. I have experienced it. Oh, that she should die
with rancour against me in her faithful old heart! She could be so
kind!--even when I confessed that you had won my love, she still held me
dear. But there are many great and small demons, and most of them were
probably subject to her. Tabus must have learned through them how deeply
I offended her son Satabus, and how greatly his son Hanno's life was
darkened through me. That is why she thwarted my vengeance, and her
spirits aided her. Thus all these things happened. I suspected it when
I heard that she had succumbed to death, which I--yes, I here--had held
back from her with severe toil through many a sleepless night. O these
demons! They will continue to act in the service of the dead. Wherever
I may go, they will pursue me and, at their mistress's bidding, baffle
what I hope and desire. I have learned this only too distinctly!"

"No, Ledscha, no," Hermon protested. "Every power ceases with death,
even that of the sorceress over spirits. You shall be freed, poor woman!
You will be permitted to go wherever you desire; and I shall model no
spider after your person, but the fairest of women. Thousands will see
and admire her, and--if the Muse aids me--whoever, enraptured by her
beauty, asks, 'Who was the model for this work which inflames the most
obdurate heart?' will be told, 'It was Ledscha, the daughter of Shalit,
the Biamite, whom Hermon of Alexandria found worthy of carving in costly
marble."

Ledscha uttered a deep sigh of relief, and asked: "Is that true? May I
believe it?"

"As true," he answered warmly, "as that Selene, who promised to grant
you in her full radiance the greatest happiness, is now shedding her
mild, forgiving light upon us both."

"The full moon," she murmured softly, gazing upward at the shining disk.

Then she added in a louder tone: "Old Tabus's demons promised me
happiness--you know. It was the spider which so cruelly shadowed it for
me on every full moon, every day, and every night. Will you now swear to
model a statue from me, the statue of a beautiful human being that
will arouse the delight of all who see it? Delight--do you hear?--not
loathing--I ask again, will you?"

"I will, and I shall succeed," he said earnestly, holding out his hand
across the rope. She clasped it, looked up to the full moon again, and
whispered: "This time--I will believe it--you will keep your promise
better than when you were in Tennis. And I--I will cease to wish you
evil, and I will tell you why. Bend your ear nearer, that I may confess
it openly." Hermon willingly obeyed the request, but she leaned her head
against his, and he felt her laboured breathing and the warm tears that
coursed silently down her cheeks as she said, in a low whisper: "Because
the moon is full, and will yet bring me what the demons promised, and
because, though strong, I am still a woman. Happiness! How long ago I
ceased to expect it!--but now-yes, it is what I now feel! I am happy,
and yet can not tell why. My love--oh, yes! It was more ardent than the
burning hate. Now you know it, too, Hermon. And I--I shall be free,
you say? And Tabus, how she lauded rest--eternal rest! Oh dearest--this
sorely tortured heart, too--you can not even imagine how weary I am!"

Here she was silent, but the man into whose face she was gazing with
loving devotion felt a sudden movement at his side as she uttered the
exclamation.

He did not notice it, for the sweet tone of her voice was penetrating
the inmost depths of his heart. It sounded as though she was speaking
from the happiest of dreams.

"Ledscha!" he exclaimed warmly, extending his arm toward her--but
she had already stepped back from his side, and he now perceived the
terrible object--she had snatched his sword from its sheath, and as,
seized by sudden terror, he gazed at her, he saw the shining blade
glitter in the moonlight and suddenly vanish.

In an instant he swung his agile body over the rope and rushed to her.
But she had already sunk to her knees, and while he clasped her in
is arms to support her, he heard her call his own name tenderly, then
murmur it in a lower tone, and the words "Full moon" and "Happiness"
escape her lips.

Then she was silent, and her beautiful head dropped on her breast like a
flower broken by a tempest.




CHAPTER XVII.

"It was best so for her and for us," said Eumedes, after gazing long at
Ledscha's touchingly beautiful, still, dead face.

Then he ordered her to be buried at once and shouted to the guards:
"Everything must be over on this strip of land early to-morrow morning!
Let all who bear arms begin at once. Selene will light the men brightly
enough for the work."

The terrible order given in mercy was fulfilled, and hunger and thirst
were robbed of their numerous prey. When the new day dawned the friends
were still on deck, engaged in grave conversation. The cloudless sky now
arched in radiant light above the azure sea. White seagulls came flying
from the right across the ship, and sportive dolphins gambolled around
her keel.

The flutes of the musicians, marking time for the rowers, echoed gaily
up from the hold, and, obedient to quick words of command, the seamen
were spreading the sails.

The voyage began with a favourable wind. As Hermon looked back for the
last time, the flat, desolate tongue of land appeared like a line of
gray mist in the southeastern horizon; but over it hovered, like a
gloomy thundercloud, the flocks of vultures and ravens, whose numbers
were constantly increasing. Their greedy screaming could still be heard,
though but faintly, yet the eye could no longer distinguish anything
in the fast-vanishing abode of horror, save the hovering whirl of dark
spots--ravens and vultures, vultures and ravens.

Whatever human life had moved there yesterday, now rested from bloody
greed for booty, after victory and defeat, mortal terror, fury, and
despair.

Eumedes pointed out the quiet grave by the sea to his parents, saying:
"The King's command is fulfilled. Not even the one man who is usually
spared to carry the news remains out of the four thousand."

"I thank you," exclaimed Alexander's gray-haired comrade, shaking his
son's right hand, but Thyone laid her hand on Hermon's arm, saving:
"Where the birds are darkening the air behind us lies buried what
incensed Nemesis against you. You must leave the soil of Egypt. True,
it is said that to live in foreign lands, far from the beloved home,
darkens the existence; yet Pergamus, too, is Grecian soil, and there
I see the two noblest of stars illumine your path with their pure
light-art and love."

And his old friend's premonition was fulfilled.

         .......................

The story of Arachne is ended. It closed on the Nile. Hermon's new life
began in Pergamus.

As Daphne's husband, under the same roof with the wonderfully
invigorated Myrtilus, his Uncle Archias, and faithful Bias, Hermon found
in the new home what had hovered before the blind man as the fairest
goal of existence in art, love, and friendship.

He did not long miss the gay varied life of Alexandria, because he found
a rich compensation for it, and because Pergamus, too, was a rapidly
growing city, whose artistic decoration was inferior to no other in
Greece.

Of the numerous works which Hermon completed in the service of the first
three art-loving rulers of the new Pergamenian kingdom, Philetaerus,
Eumenes, and Attalus, nothing was preserved except the head of a Gaul.
This noble masterpiece proves how faithful Hermon remained to truth,
which he had early chosen for the guiding star of his art. It is the
modest remnant of the group in which Hermon perpetuated in marble the
two Gallic brothers whom he saw before his last meeting with Ledscha, as
they offered their breasts to the fatal shafts.

One had gazed defiantly at the arrows of the conquerors; the other,
whose head has been preserved, feeling the inevitable approach of
death, anticipates, with sorrowful emotion, the end so close at hand.
Philetaerus had sent this touching work to King Ptolemy to thank him for
the severity with which he had chastised the daring of the barbarians,
who had not spared his kingdom also. The Gaul's head was again found on
Egyptian soil.

   [Copied in Th. Schrieber's The Head of the Gaul in the Museum of
   Ghizeh in Cairo. Leipsic, 1896. With appendix. By H. Curschmann.]

Hermon also took other subjects in Pergamus from the domain of real
life, though, in most of his work he crossed the limits which he had
formerly imposed upon himself. But one barrier, often as he rushed
forward to its outermost verge, he never dared to pass--moderation, the
noblest demand, to which his liberty-loving race subjected themselves
willingly in life as well as in art. The whole infinite, limitless world
of the ideal had opened itself to the blind man.

He made himself at home in it by remaining faithful to the rule which he
had found in the desert for his creative work, and the genuine happiness
which he enjoyed through Daphne's love and the great fame his sculptures
brought him increased the strong individuality of his power.

The fruits of his tireless industry, the much-admired god of light,
Phoebus Apollo, slaying the dragons of darkness, as well as his
bewitching Arachne, gazing proudly at the fabric with which she
thinks she has surpassed the skill of the goddess, were overtaken by
destruction. In this statue Bias recognised his countrywoman Ledscha,
and often gazed long at it with devout ecstasy. Even Hermon's works of
colossal size vanished from the earth: the Battle of the Amazons and
the relief containing numerous figures: the Sea Gods, which the Regent
Eumenes ordered for the Temple of Poseidon in Pergamus.

The works of his grandson and grandson's pupils, however, are preserved
on the great altar of victory in Pergamus.

The power and energy natural to Hermon, the skill he had acquired in
Rhodes, everything in the changeful life of Alexandria which had induced
him to consecrate his art to reality, and to that alone, and whatever
he had, finally, in quiet seclusion, recognised as right and in
harmony with the Greek nature and his own, blend in those works of his
successor, which a gracious dispensation of Providence permits us still
to admire at the present day, and which we call in its entirety, the art
of Pergamus.

The city was a second beloved home to him, as well as to his wife and
Myrtilus. The rulers of the country took the old Alexandrian Archias
into their confidence and knew how to honour him by many a distinction.
He understood how to value the happiness of his only daughter, the
beautiful development of his grandchildren, and the high place that
Hermon and Myrtilus, whom he loved as if they were his own sons,
attained among the artists of their time. Yet he struggled vainly
against the longing for his dear old home. Therefore Hermon deemed it
one of the best days of his life when his turn came to make Daphne's
father a happy man.

King Ptolemy Philadelphus had sent laurel to the artist who had fallen
under suspicion in Egypt, and his messenger invited him and Myrtilus,
and with them also the exiled merchant, to return to his presence. In
gratitude for the pleasure which Hermon's creation afforded him and his
wife, the cause that kept the fugitive Archias from his home should be
forgiven and forgotten.

The gray-haired son of the capital returned with the Bithynian Gras to
his beloved Alexandria, as if his lost youth was again restored. There
he found unchanged the busy, active life, the Macedonian Council, the
bath, the marketplace, the bewitching conversation, the biting wit, the
exquisite feasts of the eyes--in short, everything for which his
heart had longed even amid the happiness and love of his dear ones in
Pergamus.

For two years he endeavoured to enjoy everything as before; but when
the works of the Pergamenian artists, obtained by Ptolemy, had been
exhibited in the royal palaces, he returned home with a troubled mind.
Like the rest of the world, he thought that the reliefs of Myrtilus,
representing scenes of rural life, were wonderful.

The Capture of Proserpina, a life-size marble group by his son-in-law
Hermon, seemed to him no less perfect; but it exerted a peculiar
influence upon his paternal heart, for, in the Demeter, he recognised
Daphne, in the Proserpina her oldest daughter Erigone, who bore the name
of Hermon's mother and resembled her in womanly charm. How lovely this
budding girl, who was his grand-daughter, seemed to the grandfather!
How graceful, in spite of the womanly dignity peculiar to her, was the
mother, encircling her imperilled child with her protecting arm!

No work of sculpture had ever produced such an effect upon the old
patron of art.

Gras heard him, in his bedroom, murmur the names "Daphne" and "Erigone,"
and therefore it did not surprise him when, the next morning, he
received the command to prepare everything for the return to Pergamus.
It pleased the Bithynian, for he cared more for Daphne, Hermon, and
their children than all the pleasures of the capital.

A few weeks later Archias found himself again in Pergamus with his
family, and he never left it, though he reached extreme old age, and was
even permitted to gaze in wondering admiration at the first attempts of
the oldest son of Hermon and Daphne, and to hear them praised by others.

This grandson of the Alexandrian Archias afterward became the master who
taught the generation of artists who created the Pergamenian works, in
examining which the question forced itself upon the narrator of this
story: How do these sculptures possess the qualities which distinguish
them so strongly from the other statues of later Hellenic antiquity?

Did the great weaver Imagination err when she blended them, through the
mighty wrestler Hermon, with a tendency of Alexandrian science and
art, which we see appearing again among us children of a period so much
later?

Science, which is now once more pursuing similar paths, ought and will
follow them further, but Hermon's words remain applicable to the present
clay: "We will remain loyal servants of the truth; yet it alone does not
hold the key to the holy of holies of art. To him for whom Apollo, the
pure among the gods, and the Muses, friends of beauty, do not open it
at the same time with truth, its gates will remain closed, no matter how
strongly and persistently he shakes them."


     ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS FOR THE ENTIRE ARACHNE:

     Aimless life of pleasure
     Camels, which were rarely seen in Egypt
     Cast my warning to the winds, pity will also fly away with it
     Cautious inquiry saves recantation
     Forbidden the folly of spoiling the present by remorse
     Must--that word is a ploughshare which suits only loose soil
     Nature is sufficient for us
     Regular messenger and carrier-dove service had been established
     Tender and uncouth natural sounds, which no language knows
     There is nothing better than death, for it is peace
     There are no gods, and whoever bows makes himself a slave
     Tone of patronizing instruction assumed by the better informed
     Two griefs always belong to one joy
     Wait, child! What is life but waiting?
     Waiting is the merchant's wisdom
     Woman's hair is long, but her wit is short






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Arachne, Complete, by Georg Ebers

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ARACHNE, COMPLETE ***

***** This file should be named 5516.txt or 5516.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/5/5/1/5516/

Produced by David Widger


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
