The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Red Bicycle, by Fergus Hume

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Red Bicycle

Author: Fergus Hume

Release Date: October 13, 2017 [EBook #55748]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RED BICYCLE ***




Produced by Charles Bowen from images provided by the
Taranaki Herald and Papers Past, National Library of New
Zealand











Transcriber's Notes: From page scans of this book which was published
as a serial in the Taranaki Herald (New Zealand), Vol. LXIII, Issue
144753, 9 August 1915  through Volume LXIII, Issue 144793, 24
September 1915 (Papers Past, National Library of New Zealand).
See web site
https://paperspast.natlib.govt.nz/newspapers/TH19150807.2.57






THE RED BICYCLE.

By FERGUS HUME.
Author of "The Mystery of a Hansom Cab," "The Turnpike House,"
"Tracked by a Tattoo," "The Crowned Skull," etc.






THE RED BICYCLE.




CHAPTER I.


The dingy little cart containing the clean linen of the Rectory, was
on its way by an unusually roundabout route. Neddy Mellin, the washer
woman's son, who disliked work as much as he liked play, which was
natural in a lad of thirteen, grumbled openly at the uncongenial task
of driving the large white donkey. The animal herself, who answered
to the name of Nelly, grumbled also in her own way, as she objected to
innovations. Hitherto she had been allowed to take the short road to
the parson's residence; now she was compelled to go by the long one,
which was particularly annoying on this damp, misty November
afternoon. With the obstinacy of her race she refused to trot, and
although Neddy whipped her, coaxed her, and threatened her, Nelly
tstill behaved as though she were attending a funeral. Mrs. Mellin did
not mind. Throned amidst the bundles of linen, she peered through the
fog for something she particularly wished to see. Only when the cart
arrived midway down a melancholy, deserted thoroughfare, bordered by
dripping elm-trees, did she speak. Then the cart stopped as she
fancied she heard an order.

"There," said Mrs. Mellin, pointing with a fat, red finger at a dreary
mansion which stood in a disorderly garden. "Maranatha! I never did
'ear of sich a queer name in all my born days."

"It's a scripter name, and has to do with cursing," explained her son,
who, being a choir-boy, knew something about the Bible.

"Then don't let me 'ear you use sich a wicked word, or I'll take the
skin off your back," said his mother, wiping her large crimson face
with a corner of her tartan shawl. "Maranatha! it gives me the
shivers, it do."

"You're using it yourself," murmured Neddy, in an injured tone.

"Me, being your elder and your ma, has a right to use words as ain't
fit for you," said Mrs. Mellin, tartly, "and as we've got the washing
of the new gent as has come to live there, I'll say the name often
enough. I'll be bound. But not you, Neddy. Say the 'Ouse, and I'll
know what you mean. And for 'Eaven's sake, child don't 'it the donkey.
I want to look at the place."

Mrs. Mellin craned forward so as to get a better view, and stared at
the square, ugly building, the damp red bricks of which were almost
hidden by dark curtains of untrimmed ivy. Smoke came from one chimney,
which showed that the house was inhabited, but as the shutters were up
and the door closed, there was a sinister look about the whole place
which made the washerwoman shiver. In its wilderness of shrubs and
long grass, girdled by gigantic elms, all sopping and dripping, the
mansion loomed portentously through the mists. It looked like a house
with an evil history, and the queer name on the gate suited it
extraordinarily well. Mrs. Mellin was not imaginative, yet she
shivered again as she signed that Nelly could proceed. Tired of
standing and anxious to get her day's work over, Nelly changed her
funeral pace for a more active one.

"Maranatha!" murmured Mrs. Mellin, as the cart turned into the Parade.
"Well, baronet or no baronet, he won't get much good out of Maranatha.
Arter suicides you may paint a 'ouse, you may furnish a 'ouse, and you
may advertise 'ouses till you're sick, but them as comes to live in
sich allays leaves afore the term's out. An' no wonder 'ow long he'll
stay?"

"Who'll stay?" asked Neddy curiously.

"I wasn't speaking to you, child. 'Old your tongue and drive on. I do
'ope as Mrs. Craver ain't 'eard. This will be news for 'er. And that
Emily Pyne is sich a gossip, as never was."

All the way to the Rectory, Mrs. Mellin continued to talk in this way
to herself, while Neddy kept his ears open to drink in every word. He
was a slender boy with a wonderfully delicate complexion, curly golden
hair, and innocent blue eyes, looking, on the whole, like a stray
angel. And when in the choir he not only looked like an angel but sang
like one, as his voice was remarkably beautiful.

But all Neddy's goods were in the shop-window, since he was as naughty
an urchin as ever existed, to worry a hard-working mother. He told
lies, he played truant, he associated with the worst boys in the
parish, smoked on the sly, and behaved like the unscrupulous young
rascal he truly was. Yet, when necessary, Neddy could play the saint
so perfectly that his conduct, taken in conjuncture with his angelic
looks, quite imposed upon the Rector, who believed him to be a modern
Samuel.

Mrs. Mellin had her doubts, as experience told her otherwise, but
naturally, she kept them to herself, and proclaimed on all and every
occasion that Neddy was too good to live. All the same she was on her
guard against his wiles, and rebuked him sharply when she noticed that
he was listening to her soliloquy. By the time she had finished
telling him where bad boys went and how they fared when they died, the
cart appeared at the Rectory and Mrs. Craver appeared at the back
door.

The parson's wife was a busy, little sharp-faced woman, arrayed in a
shabby black silk, with collar and cuffs of ragged white lace,
carefully mended. The stipend for looking after the souls of the
Hedgerton people was by no means large, and the Rev. George Craver
found it difficult to make both ends meet. Indeed, they would not have
met at all had not Mrs. Craver been a notable housewife, who looked at
both sides of a penny before parting with it, and who made shillings
do the work of pounds. She scraped and screwed and pinched, and buzzed
about the house from dawn till darkness like a busy bee, keeping her
eye on everything and on everyone. According to custom she welcomed
Mrs. Mellin into the kitchen and proceeded to count the washing, while
Neddy sat outside in the cart and smoked a surreptitious cigarette.
After the usual weekly wrangle over missing articles, scanty
starching, bad ironing, and excessive charging, Mrs. Craver gave the
woman a cup of tea and asked questions.

It was her duty, as she conceived it as the Rector's wife, to know all
that went on in the dull, seaside parish, and Mrs. Mellin could supply
her with more information than most people. Therefore, Mrs. Craver
sent the general servant, who was her solitary factotum, into the
wood-shed to clean knives and brush boots while she listened to the
weekly report. Mrs. Mellin began by a reference to her sister-gossip
and rival spy.

"I do 'ope, ma'am, as that Emily Pyne ain't been tellin' you things,
as she ain't to be depended on, with her silly tongue and blind eye."
The washerwoman spoke as if the lady in question had only one organ of
vision, whereas she had two, and very sharp eyes they were.

"No. I haven't seen Miss Pyne," said Mrs. Craver, briskly. "Has she
been doing anything wrong?"

"'Eaven forgive her, ma'am; she never does anything right," said Mrs.
Mellin, piously. "Not that I've got anything against her, for the time
being, 'cept her gossiping constant when she should be working, and
dressing above her station to which she 'ave been called. No, ma'am,
never do I speak against Emily, though she did try to catch Mellin,
when we was gels, failing, nater'ly, when she 'ave a game leg, and
remaining a spinster through 'Eaven's 'and being 'eavy on 'er, may she
be forgiven."

"Well, well; what's the news?" Mrs. Craver had heard all about Miss
Pyne's wickedness before, and spoke impatiently.

Mrs. Mellin wiped her face, sipped her tea, and shook her head. "There
ain't no news as is startling, ma'am, as bombs and bloodshed don't
come 'ere while we 'ave the King--long may he reign over us. But that
'ouse in Ladysmith Road, as is so unlucky, is let at last."

"Maranatha?"

"Which the very name do give me the shudders, ma'am. It's a wicked
name."

"It is an odd name," agreed the sharp little woman, "and I asked the
Rector about it. He says it is a Syriac word, meaning the Lord comes,
or has come."

"Neddy told me it was a cuss, ma'am."

"He shouldn't know anything about curses at his age, Mrs. Mellin. Mr.
Craver said that St. Paul used the word as expressing a curse."

"There now"--Mrs. Mellin was admiringly triumphant--"to think as how
Neddy do pick up things. And a curse is on that 'ouse, Mrs. Craver,
ma'am, for never 'ave it been lucky. The gent as built it fifty years
back lost his arm, as my mother told me; the family as come after him
buried two children in a year; a suicide was the nex' pusson as lived
there, and it stayed empty for years till Mrs. Splurge took it to be
ruined by the breaking of the bank her cash was in and 'ave her
daughter run away with a young man as wasn't what he ought to be. It's
a cussed 'ouse, and looks like one."

"H'm! It has a bad history. Well, and who has taken it now?"

"A baronet."

"Nonsense! Why should a baronet take a furnished house in this dull
town?"

Mrs. Mellin set down her cup and folded her tartan shawl round her in
quite a tragic manner. "That's what I arsk myself, ma'am," she said,
impressively. "Mrs. Splurge, 'oping to make money after losing her
all, advertised the 'ouse to be let furnished. But for two years it
hev been standing as empty as my 'usband's 'ead, people fighting shy
of its bad luck, as you might say, Mrs. Craver, ma'am. And now Sir
'Ector Wyke hev come, bag and baggage, with a 'ousekeeper as I hevn't
seen, though write me she did, saying as she'd engaged me to do the
washin'."

"Sir Hector Wyke?" Mrs. Craver searched her memory. "I seem to have
heard the name before."

"'Ave he done anything bad?" inquired the washerwoman, eagerly.
"Anything as would make 'im 'ide his guilty 'ead. Baronets is bad, as
we know."

"Rubbish! Baronets are no worse than other people. But I fancy I have
heard my son, Mr. Edwin, mention the name. I'll ask him about Sir
Hector when he comes down at the week end."

"Shouldn't be surprised if Mr. Edwin 'ad quite a gory story to tell."
said Mrs. Mellin, hopefully, for, like all her class, she loved
horrors. Anyhow. I'll keep my eye on the 'ouse and the 'ousekeeper."

"What is her name?"

"Vence, she writes it. Jane Vence, and a heathen name it is, ma'am. I
haven't set eyes on her myself; but one as hev tole me ses as she's an
old witch in looks, with a tongue as wicked as that of Emily Pyne's,
and I can't say wuss nor that."

"Mrs. Vence." The Rector's wife repeated the name so as to remember
it. "And what other servants?"

"None." burst out Mrs. Mellin, triumphantly, "And that's the wust of
it, ma'am. I do say as a baronet should be'ave as a baronet, and not
come to live in a musty, fusty old 'ouse with one old woman."

"It is strange. When did Sir Hector come?"

"Two days ago, ma'am. I wonder you 'aven't 'eard."

"No. You bring the news to me."

"And proud I am to do so, me thinking as Emily Pyne would be
before'and. I s'pose the Rector will call, ma'am?"

"I suppose he will. We don't often have a baronet come to Hedgerton."

"And the Rector 'ull find out all about Sir 'Ector, I s'pose?"

"Mrs. Mellin, you are much too curious about your neighbours," said
Mrs. Craver, severely, and quite overlooking the fact that she was
encouraging the woman to gossip. "Learn to mind your own business, and
don't pry into other people's concerns. Probably Sir Hector has heard
that the air is good here, and has come down for the benefit of his
health."

"Ho!" Mrs. Mellin rubbed her nose and took no notice of the rebuke.
"He's ill then, is he?"

"Now I come to think of it, Edwin did mention his name," murmured Mrs.
Craver to herself, while the washerwoman strained her ears to listen.
"Sir Hector Wyke? Yes. He is a rich man, very popular and fashionable
in London. Not so young as he was, and engaged to a young lady."

"She hev throwed him over." cried Mrs. Mellin, eagerly, "and his 'eart
is broke, so he hev come down 'ere to pine away and die. 'Eaven, what
grass we are, and 'ow soon we're cast inter the oven!"

"Don't be silly, Mrs. Mellin. Sir Hector has probably come down for
his health, and wishing to be quiet has only brought his housekeeper
with him. There is no mystery about the matter."

"Baronets who live in style don't come to cussed 'ouses with one old
woman to look after them." said Mrs. Mellin doggedly. "Mark my words,
ma'am, there's going to be a tragity at Maranatha, and it won't be the
fust, ma'am."

"We don't have tragedies here, you foolish woman."

"Oh, don't we, ma'am?" Mrs. Mellin stood up to give her words due
effect. "Why, that 'ouse in Ladysmith Road is full of 'em. And, if you
remember, Richard Jones beat his wife to death only five years back,
and Mrs. Warner ran away with the purser of a ship as went to Chiner;
while the children as hev been scalded to death and drownded is
'undreds, you might put it. No tragity!" Mrs. Mellin snorted. "Why,
ma'am, my own sister Laura was in one."

"She only ran away." said Mrs. Craver, also standing up to intimate
that the conference was ended.

"And 'oo did she run with?" inquired the washerwoman mysteriously,
"She was 'ere to-day and gone to-morrer, as you might say. Twenty and
more years ago she was as lovely a gel as you ever see, but disappear
she did, leaving nothing be'ind to tell her whereabouts, and not a
line hev I 'ad since. Why, you remember Laura yourself, ma'am, as you
was only a five year bride when you come 'ere with Mr. Craver."

"I remember that your sister disappeared during the first year of my
husband becoming Rector of Hedgerton," said Mrs. Craver, drily. "She
was a pretty girl, but flighty and discontented. And as she was always
fond of the theatre, I daresay she went on the stage. Of course, as
she was twenty-five when she disappeared, she was old enough to choose
her own way, although I can't say that either I or Mr. Craver approved
of her choice."

"'Ow do you know, ma'am, that she made that choice?" questioned Mrs.
Mellin, with dignity. "Play-acting Laura loved, there's no denying,
but she mightn't have gone play-acting after all. No, ma'am, some
villain lured 'er away when she was parlourmaid in Maranatha with the
wife of the gent as cut 'is throat in the back room. No wonder I
shiver when I 'ears the name, ma'am, for that 'ouse was the ruin of my
lovely, innercent sister."

"Mrs. Mellin, you are allowing that house to get on your nerves----"

"Me being a marter to 'em and taking 'og-'ead's of physic." murmured
Mrs. Mellin.

"So think no more about the matter. Take Sir Hector Wyke's washing and
be thankful. Meanwhile, tell me more news, and be as quick as you
can."

Mrs. Craver made this request so as to lure Mrs. Mellin from the
subject of the house in Ladysmith Road, as she saw plainly enough that
the woman was becoming quite hysterical over the place. The laundress
fell into the trap and talked of this person and of that with great
gusto, telling what he said and what they said and what she said, with
full details of what all said. Mrs. Craver examined and cross-examined
and re-examined the good lady, and there was scarcely a person in the
place who was not discussed thoroughly. At the end of half-an-hour the
Rector's wife was in full possession of all that had taken place in
the parish during the week, and mentally arranged the facts so that
she might report to her husband. Not that he wished to hear, being
something of a book-worm. But Mrs. Craver always presented her
seven-days' budget regularly, because she thought that it assisted him
in his clerical work. Perhaps it did, as it certainly kept him advised
of all that went on. When the examination was concluded Mrs. Mellin
retired with many blessings on the head of her hostess and climbed
back into the dingy cart. Neddy, having tossed aside the fag-end of
his surreptitious cigarette, drove away meekly, while Mrs. Craver
witnessed the departure. The washerwoman, still haunted by the memory
of the newly-tenanted house, cried back a warning.

"You'll see, ma'am, as a tragity will 'appen at Maranatha. Mark me,
ma'am."




CHAPTER II.


When it became known--chiefly through the agency of Mrs. Mellin--that
a baronet was living at Maranatha the excitement was very great. It
appeared strange to one and all that a titled and wealthy gentleman
should leave the pleasures of London to take up his residence in a
dull place such as Hedgerton truly was. Originally a rude fishing
village, it had of late years been exploited by the jerry-builder, so
that it might be improved into a watering-place and a play-ground for
trippers. A huddle of quaint houses was buried in a hollow by the
shore and faced the estuary of the Thames into which stretched for no
great distance a rough stone pier. Sometimes floating on water and
sometimes stranded on mud were many fishing-smacks, which went out
regularly to the harvest of the sea, while river steamers occasionally
called to discharge cargoes or to land passengers. Since Hedgerton had
been dignified by the name of a watering-place the steamers called
more frequently, especially in summer, and on the whole did fairly
well. But somehow they did not bring to Hedgerton the prosperity
anticipated by the jerry-builder.

The place did not thrive in spite of doctors' recommendations, cheap
fares, and lavish advertisement. Above the hollow wherein nestled the
original town stretched a flat, well-wooded country, dotted sparsely
with houses, and there was a railway station at Redleigh, three miles
away. New Hedgerton, as it was called, consisted of many hastily-built
bungalows extending in a lean line along the cliffs, but those were
occupied only in summer, and therefore remained empty for the greater
part of the year. There was an asphalt esplanade running spaciously
from east to west in front of these bungalows, a small bandstand, and
a crude hall for public entertainments roofed with galvanised iron. At
intervals roads branched at right angles from the esplanade, passing
between houses old and new to run finally through woodlands or between
the hedges which divided vast meadows from the highway. In spring and
summer the country looked very picturesque with the foliage of trees,
the blossom of orchards, and the rainbow hue of multitudinous flowers,
but the change was marked in autumn and winter. Then the balmy air
grew raw and chill; there were damp mists overlying the land morning
and evening, while the lack of life gave the place a melancholy
aspect. At the fall of the year the inhabitants of the district
retired into their houses like rabbits in burrows, as the climate of
this particular part of England did not tempt them to lead an
out-of-door life. On the whole, therefore, Hedgerton was not a
desirable locality either for a pleasure-seeker or for an invalid in
summer.

This being the case, the Hedgerton gossips asked one another daily why
Sir Hector Wyke had come down to the place during the season of mists
and rain, of leafless boughs and ruined orchards. No one was able to
give an answer, although it was frequently suggested that the
baronet's health was bad. But a man in bad health would scarcely come
to so unhealthy a place at so unhealthy a time.

Therefore, there must be some other reason. Everyone tried to learn
what it was, and everyone failed. No information was supplied by the
tenant of Maranatha, who lived a very secluded life and appeared
greatly desirous to be left to himself. He saw no one, and when he
took his solitary walks he spoke to no one. Even Mr. Craver was denied
admittance when he sought to welcome the stranger to his parish and he
returned home to tell his wife that Wyke was probably a misanthropic
creature, who disliked his fellow-men.

The description aroused Mrs. Craver's curiosity, and she was even more
particular than usual in examining Mrs. Mellin when that spy came to
report what had taken place in the parish during the week. The
washerwoman could only state, after three weeks watching, that her
bills and the bills of the tradespeople were paid regularly, and she
saw no one but Mrs. Vence, who as not inclined to be communicative,
and that the house appeared to be as neglected now as it was when Sir
Hector first went to live in it. It would seem that the mysterious
baronet did not so much live in Maranatha as camp in it, since no
attempt was made to brush up the residence or improve the garden in
any way. Sir Hector, save for occasional walks, stayed indoors, like a
snail in a shell, and Mrs. Mellin augured ill from this suspicious
retirement. She chiefly blamed the house itself for the doings of its
tenant.

"There's a cuss on it," she declared with relish, when Mrs. Craver was
speculating as to the meaning of the whole queer business. "If Solomon
hisself, as was 'appy with a thousand wives, lived in that 'ouse he'd
ha' been miserable within the week. Why, the name tells you what it
is, ma'am. What do Maranatha whisper to you but ruin, which there 'as
been, and suicide, which 'appened, and bankruptcy, with the elopement
of gels--which we know is common there. No ma'am, say what you like,
it'll be murder nex'; and 'Eaven be betwixt us and 'arm, save and
bless us." Mrs. Mellin always ended these dismal prognostications with
the observation that she hoped she would not be called upon to give
evidence at the inquest, as murders got on her nerves.

Mrs. Craver was little less fortunate with her son when she asked
questions, for all that Edwin could say amounted to nothing. Sir
Hector Wyke was a rich man, and a popular man, who had been in the
army, and was now a gentleman at large. Edwin had met him in Society,
and liked him fairly well although--as he put it--Wyke was not a man
he would care to make a chum of.

Mrs. Craver suggested that he should call on the baronet and renew his
acquaintance, but this Edwin refused to do. He said that if Wyke
wished to improve the acquaintance he could call at the Rectory, and
as the recluse showed no disposition to do this, it would be best to
leave him alone. The Rector agreed with his son, and Mrs. Craver
therefore found herself in the minority. All the same, she remained
intensely curious, and frequently wondered what mystery lay behind the
whole business. She even questioned, in a delicate way, Hall the
postman and Jervis the policeman, but was unable to learn anything
from either. Hall simply said that he delivered very few letters,
which were received by Mrs. Vence--whom he described as an old hag,
while Jervis declared that he saw nothing and knew nothing and heard
nothing likely to say why the tenant of Maranatha lived so
hermit-like. It was quite painful for brisk little Mrs. Craver to
learn that she could discover nothing--she knew the history and daily
doings of every soul in Hedgerton.

"I'm sure, George." she said plaintively, to the Rector, "one-half the
world does not know how the other half lives."

"Then I'm sure it isn't your fault or Mrs. Mellin's or Miss Pyne's
either," retorted her husband, whereat she was offended, and wondered
more than ever if she would discover the truth.

To inflame her curiosity still more an event occurred at the end
of four weeks which startled her and startled everyone with its
far-reaching consequences. Sir Hector had been leading his secluded
life for quite a month when the event happened. It began in quite a
commonplace way with the delivery of a letter by Hall at Maranatha.
About seven o'clock on a foggy November evening Hall was travelling
along the esplanade on his red-painted Government bicycle when he
alighted to examine his bag. He knew that he had delivered all letters
save one, and searched his bag to find the last missive. By the light
of the lamp the postman looked at the address, and saw that it was
directed to Sir Hector Wyke at Maranatha. With a grunt of satisfaction
that his duties for the day would soon be over, Hall was about to
mount his machine again when Jervis appeared. The bulky form of the
constable loomed portentously through the mists, and Hall guessed who
he was.

"Jervis," said the postman, pausing for a moment.

"Hall," answered the officer, as if delivering a countersign, and
flashed his bull's-eye on the weather-beaten face of the first
speaker, "a shocking night, ain't it? Rain and fog, and bitter cold."

"Why not? 'Tain't June roses as you'll smell in November, Jervis."

"No, worse luck, and night dooty ain't no catch at this time of the
year. Now, I'll be bound, Hall, as you're nearly finished, and can get
home to your warm bed sharp."

"And to tripe and onions, as my old woman does do a turn, Jervis,"
said Hall, licking his lips. "I've only got this one letter to deliver
to Sir Hector Wyke, as folks is talking about so."

"Don't see why they should talk," said the officer bluffly. "Sir
Hector pays his way and keeps himself quiet. Ain't any of my business,
or of yours."

"But he never sees no one, and never comes out, and never has any
callers."

"He's got one to-night," said Jervis unexpectedly. "You know Sankey?"

"Him as drives the trap to and fro this place and Redleigh?"

Jervis nodded and stuck his big thumbs in his belt. "Got a rotten old
fly on the job. Well, I saw it to-night with a fare in it, when Sankey
stopped to ask me where Maranatha was. I gave him the tip as it was in
Ladysmith Road, so Sankey drove off. I wonder his blessed old nag did
the three miles without falling a corpse."

"Did you see who was the fare?" asked Hall, pondering.

"No. Wasn't any of my business. I see you're as curious as the rest of
'em about that bar'nit. Why, Mrs. Craver herself has asked questions
by the dozen, as you might say. Anyhow, Sankey left his passenger at
Maranatha and drove back to Redleigh, for I see him returning."

"Oh," remarked Hall, in guttural tones, "so his fare stops all night
with Sir Hector, I s'pose."

"Why shouldn't he or her, for whether the fare was a male or a female
I don't rightly know."

"Well, Sir Hector ain't 'ad no one to stay with him before."

"Dessay," returned the policeman, carelessly, "but he has to make a
start. I just tell you what, Hall, you're getting like the rest of the
folk hereabouts with their jaw."

"Sir Hector do live such a queer life, Jervis."

"He lives the life as pleases him, as I s'pose he's got the right to."

"I tell you there's something strange in a baronet coming down to
this dull place when the weather's so bad," persisted the postman,
ominously. "Have you seen the gent?"

"Twice. A little gent with a waxed moustache and dressed up to the
nines with fine clothes. I touched my helmet but he only nodded, and
never stopped to pass the time o' day."

"Well, he wouldn't, he being a swell and you only a copper, Jervis."

"That's a nasty way of talking, Hall. S'pose I was to report you to
your superior for idling when your letter should be delivered."

"And s'pose I was to tell Sergeant Purse at Redleigh as you stopped me
on the esplanade to gossip about what ain't any business of yours,"
retorted Hall, tartly. "Two can play at that game, policeman."

"Go and earn your salary." said Jervis, loftily, and walked away.

"You go and hang yourself," was the not very obvious reply of the
postman; and the two opponents were parted by the heavy fog which
dropped its curtain between them.

Chuckling over having had the last word, Hall mounted his machine and
pedalled slowly round the corner, only too anxious to deliver the last
letter and get home to his tripe and onions. He knew that the next
turning was in Ladysmith Road, and it was as well that he did, for the
mists were so thick that he proceeded with some difficulty. The man
could hear the noise of the waves through the fog, and shivered in the
chill, raw air. As there were few lamps he found himself in complete
darkness when he bicycled up the road, and therefore had to ride
cautiously. Finally, he was compelled to dismount, and take his
machine on to the pavement, feeling for guidance along the fence on
the right-hand side. Shortly he came to the first gate, and the
electric torch he carried showed him in black-painted letters "The
Firs," but he passed that gate as not being the one he wanted. The
second gate he also passed, as it was inscribed "The Elms," and then
he walked for quite a long way in the dense gloom to find Maranatha
which stood by itself. Finally, he stumbled on the third gate, the
inscription of which told him that he had reached his goal when he
flashed the electric torch on to the black letters. Hall left his
machine leaning against the fence in the dim light of the street
lamp--for at this point there was one--and opened the gate to walk
slowly up the path between the tangled herbage and under the dripping
trees. It curved gradually--a cobble-stone path overgrown with
weeds--until it ended in an open space before the house. Through the
mists a light beamed from a fanlight over the door, and Hall, anxious
to get home, rapped loudly in the approved style of the postman. There
was no answer, although he waited for quite a minute, and he searched
with his torch for the letterbox. Just as he found it and was about to
slip in the letter the door suddenly opened. A stream of radiance
poured forth to illuminate the untidy garden, and a man dashed out in
a violent hurry. In his exit, he drove Hall against one of the brick
pillars of the porch, and by the time the postman recovered his breath
the man had disappeared, running swiftly.

"Here's a rum go," said Hall, speaking to himself. "I wonder if that's
the blessed baronite, and what he's up to? Here!"--he raised his voice
as he faced the open door--"anyone in? I can't wait here all night!"

There was no reply. The house preserved an ominous silence, which made
Hall shiver, as Mrs. Mellin had done. Fearing that there was something
wrong, and remembering the sinister chatter of the neighbourhood, Hall
stepped hastily into the hall. It was of no great size, carpeted
throughout, and furnished with a black oak settle on one side and a
small rosewood table on the other, together with a hat-rack and an
umbrella-stand. Doors were visible right and left; while beyond were
stairs and a narrow passage beside them leading towards the back of
the house. A swinging lamp illuminated the hall, and in its light
everything appeared to be dusty and uncared for. Mrs. Vence certainly
was not a particularly good housekeeper, or she would not have
neglected her work in this fashion.

Astonished by the continued silence, the postman stood hesitating in
the hall, while the sea-fog poured in like smoke through the open
door. He did not know what to do. The sudden opening of the door, and
the violent exit of the unknown man, and now this ominous silence
disconcerted Hall. He had just opened his mouth to call again, when
there came the sound of a long, faint sigh, and the door on the left
opened slowly to reveal the tottering figure of an old woman. She
gasped when she saw the postman, and suddenly appeared to gather
strength as she moved forward to seize his arm.

"Where is he?" she demanded, faintly, and with a gasp. "Did you catch
him?"

"Catch who, Mrs. Vence?" asked Hall, placing the letter on the
rosewood table, since Mrs. Vence did not seem capable of taking it.

"The man who ran out."

"No. He opened the door and pushed past me, and bolted."

"Bolted!" Mrs. Vence screamed. "The villain!"

"Come!" With unnatural strength she dragged the startled postman
through the door on the left and into a comfortable study, cleaner in
looks than was the hall. On the hearthrug before the fire lay a man in
evening dress face upward with a knife in his heart. Hall uttered a
cry of horror, and his teeth chattered like castanets. "Murder!" he
gasped.

"Murder!" echoed Mrs. Vence, with a shrill scream. "He did it--the man
who bolted. Catch him. Catch him!" She pushed the postman fiercely out
of the room in a tremendous hurry. "Get a policeman. Catch him. Quick!
Quick!"

Hall did not need much urging. With a pale face and dry lips he ran
out of the house, down the path, and through the gate, intending to
mount his bicycle and race for Jervis, who could not be far away. Then
he made a startling discovery. His bicycle was gone. Not a sign of it
remained.

"The murderer has gone off on it," said Hall, blankly.




CHAPTER III.


Hall was astonished to find that his bicycle had vanished. Taken by
surprise he could only stand at the gate and stare helplessly about
him. At last, thinking that something must be done, he shouted wildly
for Jervis. In his agitation it never occurred to him that the
policeman might be at the other end of the esplanade. As it happened,
however, Jervis was close at hand, and shortly his voice boomed
strangely out of the mists.

"What's the trouble? Is that you Hall?"

"He's dead! He's got a knife in his heart!" gasped the postman, who
was clinging to the fence and feeling sick.

Jervis suddenly loomed hugely out of the fog, and entered into the
circle of blurred light cast by the street-lamp. "Who is dead?" he
asked, in surprise.

"Sir Hector Wyke," babbled Hall, whose nerves were very much shaken.
"I saw him lying dead. Mrs. Vence showed me his corpse. My bicycle is
gone----"

"Gone!" Jervis shook the terrified man. "Why I saw your bicycle slip
along under the lamp nigh which we were talking on the esplanade. I
come here straight when I hear your voice, wondering why you should be
in the Ladysmith Road and your bicycle----"

"It was the murderer, Jervis. He dashed past me when I stopped at the
door yonder to deliver the letter you saw. He has taken my bicycle.
Stop him. He ought to be hanged. Oh, oh, oh!" He broke down, shivering
and crying.

"Don't be a fool. Pull yourself together," commanded Jervis, gruffly.
"How can I follow in this fog, and with no machine to catch him up
with? Go to the telegraph-office, and wire Sergeant Purse at Redleigh
that a murder has been committed at Maranatha, and that the criminal
has escaped on a Government machine. He can't go far on a red-painted
bicycle without being captured, though the fog may help him to win
clear. Off with you, Hall, and I'll go into the house."

Hall nodded feebly, "I always thought that there was something strange
about the baronet."

"We ain't got time to talk about the bar'nit. You go and do what I
tell you."

Thus commanded, the postman, whose nerves were all unstrung by the
sight he had seen and the tragedy which had occurred, crawled slowly
down the road into the misty darkness, clinging to the fence to aid
his progress. Jervis listened for a minute or so until the footfalls
of his messenger had died away, then assumed an official expression of
stern determination, and strode up the weedy path.

The door was still open, and Mrs. Vence stood upon the threshold. From
her first words it was very evident that she had overheard the order.
"Do you think Sergeant Purse will stop the bicycle at Redleigh?" she
asked, feverishly, and laid a trembling old hand on the policeman's
arm.

"I can't say. Don't seem to me as a likely thing to happen in this
fog, to say nothing of the fact that this criminal mayn't go through
Redleigh. I suppose the man who escaped is the criminal?"

"If sticking knives in folks' hearts is murder, he is," retorted Mrs.
Vence, in a tart way, "any you oughter go after him at once."

"I ought to see the body at once," was the gruff reply. "'Taint much
good my going on a wild goose chase in this fog. Don't you tell me my
dooty, ma'am, for I know it; none better. And be careful what you say.
as anything you do say will be used as evidence against you."

"Against me?" cried the housekeeper, shrilly. "Me is as innercent as
an unborn babe. Well I never," and she looked furious enough to claw
the ruddy face of the gigantic constable.

Mrs. Vence was a small and stout woman, with a brown, withered face
seamed with innumerable wrinkles. She had abundant white hair,
unbrushed and tangled, which added to her witchlike aspect as she
peered indignantly at Jervis through horn rimmed spectacles. A stuff
dress of faded blue, a dingy knitted shawl of red wool tightened over
rounded shoulders, and a pair of ragged slippers formed her attire, so
that she looked a perfect fright, maliciously observant, and
aggressively disagreeable. The constable paused for a single moment to
wonder why a gentleman should engage such a dirty and disreputable
female as a housekeeper.

"You haven't touched it?" queried the policeman, examining the body of
the dead man.

"Me?" Mrs. Vence began to thrill again. "Why, I haven't had time to
touch it, and I wouldn't have touched it if I had had time. I just
came in with a tray and let it fall when I saw him bending over my
poor master as he'd killed. I dropped myself and dropped the tray when
I fainted, more or less, but not quite. I heard as in a dream,"
exclaimed the housekeeper, dramatically, "the postman's knock. He
waited for a minute until a second knock came, and then ran out of the
house for dear life."

"By him you mean the criminal. I s'pose?" said Jervis, stolidly. "Why
didn't you stop him?"

"How could I, drat you?" demanded Mrs. Vence, in querulous tones. "I
wasn't myself altogether, being in a faint, and yet not in one, as you
might say. Why, I gathered myself together us soon as I could and
tottered to the door. Then, seeing the post in the hall, I knowed as
I'd got a friend, and shoved him out to catch the rascal, drat him,
and drat you asking me why I didn't."

Jervis hastily noted this statement down in his book, still kneeling,
and would have asked questions, but there came an interruption.

It was Mrs. Vence who mentioned that a third person was present.
"Lawks!" said the old woman, wiping her face with her apron. "Thought
you was gone sir."

At the door stood a tall man, arrayed in a fashionable overcoat, with
a knitted white silk scarf round his neck and a silk hat in his hand.
He had large, powerful limbs, a large nose, a large face, and was
large altogether. His hair and beard and moustache were iron-grey, and
his eyes were as black as the night outside.

Wondering who he was, Jervis noted that he looked a truculent kind of
buccaneer, and rose to confront him, thereby revealing the body on the
hearthrug.

The newcomer at the door uttered a startled ejaculation, scarcely
scriptural, and strode forward in quite a masterful way. He looked at
the dead man aghast, then turned towards the policeman with an
indignant expression, as if he suspected him of being the culprit.
"What does this mean?" demanded the buccaneer, fiercely, and pointed
to the corpse with a silver-headed cane which he held in his hand.

"Sir Hector Wyke has been stabbed, as you see, sir," said Jervis,
curtly.

"Good heavens!" cried the stranger. "My poor friend."

"Was Sir Hector your friend, sir?" The gentleman nodded. "I came here
to see him, and hoped that he would give me a bed for the night. Dead.
Stabbed! Who killed him?"

"The other gent as come," chimed in Mrs. Vence, promptly; "and a
murdering villain he is, sir. Clever too; seeing as he's got away on
the postman's bike."

"Do you know anything about him?" asked Jervis, sharply.

"Lawks! and how should I? I never set eyes on him afore this blessed
night."

"The other gent as come," said the stranger, repeating Mrs. Vence's
earlier remark, word for word. "Nonsense. I was the only visitor Sir
Hector had to-night."

"Makin' me out a liar, indeed," cried Mrs. Vence, much offended by the
imputation. "Well, I do say as you've got a face, sir. Impudence and
crime. Oh, little did I think as I'd come to sich a situation, and me
so respectable."

"Hold your tongue," said Jervis, so ferociously that the old creature
started and trembled. "Let us get to the bottom of this. Who are you,
sir?"

The other man produced a card. "I am Oliver Lemby," he declared, in
his deep, rich voice. "And dash you, policeman, don't look at me as
I'd got anything to do with this infernal business. I came down here
to see my friend----"

"In a trap from Redleigh."

"Not all the way," said Lemby, drily. "I travelled by train from
London to Redleigh. Oh! I remember. The driver of the trap stopped to
ask a policeman the way to this house. And you----"

"I am the constable of Hedgerton--the only constable," said Jervis,
stiffly and a trifle imperiously. "Well, sir, and what do you know of
this?"

"Nothing, dash and confound you!" snarled the truculent Mr. Lemby, who
was as aggressive as Mrs. Vence. "I sent the trap away, hoping that
Sir Hector would put me up for the night. This old hag showed me into
the drawing room."

"Did you hear," said Jervis, "anything likely to make you think that a
crime was being committed?"

"Hang you officer! Would I have stayed quietly in the drawing-room had
I guessed for one moment that a murder was being committed?" demanded
Lemby fiercely, and clenching his fist as if about to strike. "Wyke
saw me in the drawing-room when he arrived, and while we were talking
there came a ring at the door. Excusing himself, and asking me to stay
where I  was until he came back, he went down the stairs. I waited and
waited until I was tired. Then I heard the woman shrieking, although I
did not hear what she said."

"I said 'murder,'" observed Mrs. Vence, "and said it loudly, too."

"Not loud enough for me to hear, however," retorted Lemby, "or I
should have been down before. However, as Wyke did not return, I
suspected, from the voices and the shrieks of this old thing, that
something was wrong, so came down to investigate. Well?"

"Ho!" said Jervis, as he saw no reason to disbelieve the plain
statement. "You will have to wait, sir, until my superior officer
comes along. I have sent the postman to the telegraph office to wire
for him."

"Of course I'll wait, dash you! Do you think I am going to leave this
house without finding who has murdered my poor friend? Why are you
waiting here, officer? Why don't you catch the villain?"

"'Taint easy to catch a man as has gone off on a foggy night on a
bicycle, sir," said Jervis, drily. "I can't tell in which direction
he's gone."

"You could trace a Government bicycle because of the colour."

"I have wired to my sergeant to watch Redleigh Station for a
red-painted bike, sir. The assassin may go to Redleigh to catch the
express to London."

"Not he, unless he's a born fool," retorted Lemby contemptuously, "and
his action in using the bike to escape shows that he isn't a fool by
any means. I don't think that you'll nab him easily." He stopped, then
looked at the corpse at his feet with marked emotion. "I suppose poor
Wyke is dead?"

"Stone dead. He's been stabbed to the heart, as you see. Look for
yourself."

"No." Lemby shrank back. "I don't meddle with corpses in charge of the
law. I think you should get a doctor."

"Go for a doctor, Mrs. Vence," said Jervis, quickly, and thinking that
this was good advice. "Bring him here immediately."

"Me!" cried Mrs. Vence, in her usually shrill tones. "Why, I'm a
stranger in this place but a month. I don't know where the doctor's to
be found, 'specially I on this misty night. Go yourself, or send this
gent."

"I can't go myself, and the gent doesn't leave this house until my
sergeant arrives," said Jervis, grimly.

Lemby drew himself up. "Officer, do you suspect me, dash you?"

"I suspect no one, at present. I don't know enough."

"Know enough," echoed the housekeeper contemptuously. "Why, ain't you
heard all what I've told you? It was the beast as went off on the bike
as stabbed my poor master. I saw him bending over the body when I
dropped the tray and the glasses and the wine," and Mrs. Vence pointed
to the tray and the various fragments of glass on the carpet.

"But who is he?"

"I dunno. I never saw him afore."

"Describe him?"

"He was a short man with red hair and rather stout, like me. I
couldn't see much of him, as he was muffled up in a long black
overcoat with a blue scarf round his mouth and a soft hat pulled over
his eyes. I took him to my master into this very room, and was told to
bring wine and cake in 1/2 of an hour. I was coming in with the wine,
having been waiting on the clock in the kitchen, when I see my poor
master dead and him bending over him afore I faints."

"It's my opinion that we ought to have a doctor," said Lemby.

Jervis agreed with Mr. Lemby; but as Mrs. Vence did not know where any
doctor lived, and as he was unable to go himself, and did not intend
to let the buccaneer leave the house, it was difficult to know what to
do. But here Providence stepped in to extricate the trio from this
dilemma. A light, quick step was heard in the hall, and a high,
silvery voice called on the housekeeper.

"It's that imp, Neddy Mellin, with the washing," said Mrs. Vence,
hurrying towards the door. "Don't let the child see the corpse."

She was too late. Neddy suddenly shot into the room, smiling and
angelic in his looks. But the smile died away when he saw the body.
"Crikey!" breathed the lad, turning white, "is the cove a deader?"

"You leave the washing in the hall and cut!" commanded the old woman.
"How dare you come in by the front door?"

"Neddy," said Jervis, who knew the lad well, as did everyone else in
Hedgerton, "go to Dr. Quin, and ask him to come here at once."

"And I'll give you a shilling," said Lemby, sitting down.

"I'm fly," said Neddy, promptly, and reluctantly backed out of the
room. He was anxious to earn the shilling, but still more anxious to
gaze on the body. "Let me see the deader when I come back," he called
out.

"Get along with you; get along!" vociferated Mrs. Vence, and chased
him out of the front door into the mists. When she turned back after
closing the door she glanced at the rosewood table on which Hall had
placed the letter. It was gone. There was not a sign of it to be seen.
And the front door had been open from the time the man had escaped
until now. It was very strange.




CHAPTER IV.


Sergeant Purse, who had come over from Redleigh to take charge of the
matter, was a foxy-faced little man, lean and dried up in appearance,
with beady black eyes like those of a rat. He was immensely interested
in the matter, as he recognised that this was no common crime, and
hoped by tracing the assassin to make a big reputation as a zealous
officer and gain advancement. The description of the murderer given by
Mrs. Vence was largely advertised, and pointed mention was made of the
red-painted bicycle. In the illustrated daily papers pictures of
Hedgerton and Maranatha appeared, both the inside and the outside of
the house being delineated. Mrs. Vence also shared the honour of this
painful publicity, and her portrait looked like that of an old witch.
She was very much annoyed by this caricature.

"Me like that," screamed the housekeeper, when Sergeant Purse showed
her the picture. "Why, 'taint me at all. 'Tisn't saucy, and I always
had a bit of sauciness about me."

The sergeant, laughed drily. "You were not as young as you were."

"Oh, I'm growing old, I don't deny," snapped Mrs. Vence, crushing up
the paper wrathfully. "Sixty's getting on, say what you will. But I
ain't so bad-looking when all's said and done, although not so
handsome as when a gel. I'm active, too, cooking like an angel and
celebrated for my tidiness."

Purse had his own opinion about this, and, staring at the disreputable
dirty old beldame, wondering for the hundredth time why a fastidious
gentleman had engaged her. "Did you know Sir Hector before you came
here?" he asked, wondering in his own mind why he had not put the
question before.

"No, I didn't," retorted Mrs. Vence, alertly. "I saw an advertisement
in the paper as I picked up in a friend's house, and applied for the
situation, saying I could cook and hold my tongue, so Sir Hector
engaged me. I came down here a few days afore he did, quite a month
ago, to get the house ready, and dirty it was, with that, old Peddler,
the caretaker, as didn't half look after the furniture."

"Why was it necessary for you to hold your tongue?" asked Purse,
seizing on the only phrase in the speech which seemed to be important.

"Lawks! How should I know? Sir Hector, he says to me, he says, 'Hold
your tongue and don't talk, for I wants to be secret and quiet like
for a bit.' Them were his words, and inquisitions won't make me say
otherwise."

"Did he explain why he wished to be secret and quiet like?"

"No, he didn't drat you!" grunted the old woman, who was in a vile
temper. "He just had his dinner about six, when Mr. Lemby arrived, and
I showed him into the drorin'-room. I don't think Sir Hector, expected
him, for he seemed surprised like when I took the card of the gent
into the dinin'-room. But he said nothing to me, and went up to the
drorin'-room to have a chat, s'pose. Afore seven there was a ring at
the door, and the other gent arrived. While I was asking his business
Sir Hector came flying down the stairs and took him into the study,
telling me to come with cake and wine in a quarter of an hour. I went
to the kitchen and watched the clock, and about seven I walks in,
happy-like, into the study, knowing as I was doing my duty. There I
saw Sir Hector a corpse, and the gent bending over him, and----"

"You explained all that before," interrupted the sergeant, who knew
the sequel to the statement.

"Then why did you bother me to say it again?" demanded Mrs. Vence,
crabbedly.

"What was the exact time when the second gentleman arrived?"

"About twenty to seven; and a gent I call him, though I don't see if
he was one when he was muffled up like a Christmas-pudding. It was
twenty to seven, as I know from the kitchen clock, which I had my eye
on so's to bring in the wine and cake punctual-like."

"Hall, the postman, says that he arrived at the door about seven, or a
trifle afterwards," said Purse, meditatively, "I expect the murder
took place about that time. You heard no noise?"

"Drat you, how could I when in the kitchen at the back of the house,
and me not expecting horrors and corpses. I came into the study with
the victuals and drinks, as I says, and the postman knocked twice, as
I more or, less fainted, while the gent cut like the wind."

"Did Sir Hector appear to be afraid of his second visitor?"
"No. He seemed to expect him, for he says, 'Oh, you've come,' or
something like that, as he drawed him into the study and sent me about
my business."

"He expected him, then, and was quite friendly."

"You can put it like that if you likes," snarled Mrs. Vence, hugging
herself, and rocking to and fro, "but I'd like to know when I'm to be
let go?"

"After the inquest, which takes place to-morrow."

"And who's going to pay me for what I've had to put up with? I didn't
get no wages from Sir Hector, me having arranged for monthly
payments."

"Well, I suppose Sir Hector's heir will pay you, Mrs. Vence."

"Who's he?"

"I don't know. I'm off to see Mr. Lemby, who is a friend of Sir
Hector's. I may learn something about the heir from him."

"Well," said Mrs. Vence, rising with an ill-humoured look, "the sooner
you get information and them wages the better. I'm travelling to
London myself after the inquest to-morrer, and I do hope as my next
situation won't be police news and chamber of horrors." She paused,
then remarked significantly, "There's the letter, you know, Mr.
Purse."

"What letter?" asked the sergeant, alertly, and pricking up his ears.
"That as the post delivered when he come. He put it on the table in
the hall when talking to me. I shoved him out, and the policeman came.
Afterwards, that imp, Neddy Mellin. When things was quieter, I looked
for the letter. Never a sign of it, Mr. Purse, though I hunted
careful."

"Who took it?"

"Ask me another," said Mrs. Vence, cunningly. "All I can say is as the
door was open from the time the post came to the time I chased that
imp out, me being too worried to shut it."

"Did the boy take it?" asked the sergeant, rather foolishly.

"Lawks! and why should he? It wasn't nothing to do with him. I did ask
him, and he said as he never saw no letter on the table."

"Did Mr. Lemby----"

"He was in the study with the policeman, and with me and the corpse,"
said Mrs. Vence, truculently. "I don't go for to tell lies, do I? But
the door was open all the time, and the fog was pouring in like steam.
If you ask me," added the old woman, slowly, "I do say as the
murderer came back for that letter."

Purse jumped. "Why do you say that?"

"'Cause I don't see as anyone else could have taken it. 'Course it
ain't no business o' mine, but the murderer might have slipped round
the corner on the bicycle and waited his chance to steal."

"He would have acted like a fool had he done that," said Purse,
incredulously.

"Well, well, it's only an idea, as you might say."

"Have you any reason to----"

"No, I ain't got reasons. But the letter's gone, and as no one we know
took it, someone as we don't know did. And that's sense. Well, I'm
going to make myself some tea, and trim up my popping-out bonnet, so
as to look smart for the sitting on the corpse to-morrow. This me?"
Mrs. Vance glared at the crushed newspaper. "I'll have the
law on him as did it."

"Oh, go away and hold your tongue," said Purse, impatiently.

"I was engaged to hold my tongue," said Mrs. Vence, with great
dignity, and tottered out of the room along the passage and into the
kitchen.

Her repetition of the phrase dwelt in the sergeant's memory as he
walked to the inn where Mr. Lemby was staying pending the inquest.

Purse entered the little dark and damp sitting-room, where the
buccaneer bulked largely in the twilight atmosphere. It was a gloomy,
grey day, by no means cheerful, and the sergeant was glad to warm his
hands at the fire which Lemby's desire for comfort had provided. He
also suggested a lamp.

"What the dickens should I do with a lamp at twelve o'clock," asked
Lemby, bluffly. "It's darkish here I don't deny. But if you think that
I'm afraid to show my blamed face let's go outside."

"I never suggested such a thing."

"You hint at it because you think I have something to do with this
confounded murder, sergeant," roared the big man, garnishing his
speech with oaths after his usual fashion.

"Don't talk rubbish, sir," said the sergeant, imperiously, for
although a small man he had a great idea of his own importance.
"There's no evidence to implicate you. All the same, I'm bound to say
that anything you say will be used as evidence against you, if
suspicions are aroused."

"There, dash you! Didn't I say you suspect me?" growled Lemby. "Well,
you have stumbled on a mare's nest, hang you! No one was more
surprised than I was when I stumbled on that policeman and that old
hag dealing with a corpse."

"No one says otherwise," remarked Purse drily. "Undoubtedly the man
who stole the bicycle is the guilty person. Do you know who he is?"

"No, dash you, I don't. Wyke said nothing to me about seeing anyone."

"Did he tell you that he expected a visitor?"

"No. The ring came at the door about twenty or fifteen minutes to
seven, and he bolted away, asking me to wait."

"And he did not return?" said the officer, musingly.

"How the deuce could he, when the man had knifed him?"

"No, of course not," said the sergeant, soothingly, for Lemby was a
difficult witness to deal with. "You were a friend of Sir Hector's?"

"Yes, great friend."

"What do you know about him?"

"What everybody else knows. Everything I know is in the newspapers, as
these infernal reporters have been smelling round here."

"Was there anything in Sir Hector's past life to lead you to suppose
that he had some secret likely to bring about his violent death?"

"No. What a dashed roundabout way you have of asking questions! Why
don't you trace that bicycle and catch the assassin?"

"All over the country I have people on the watch. They may----"

"Yes, and they mayn't," interrupted the buccaneer. "And how long am I
to stay in this rotten hole?"

"Until the inquest is over. It will be held to-morrow. It's strange,"
went on the sergeant, "that no relative of Sir Hector's has appeared
to look after his interests. Yet the case is set forth in the
newspapers."

"Wyke has no relatives," said Lemby, grimly plucking at his beard.
"The title becomes extinct. If you don't believe me ask Mr. Sandal, of
Lincoln's Inn Fields, sergeant. He is Sir Hector's lawyer. I wrote and
asked him to come down."

Purse nodded approvingly. "Very wise of you, sir. But why take this
trouble?"

"Because I wish to know where the property goes to. Sir Hector should,
by rights, leave it to my daughter. He was engaged to marry her."

"Your daughter!" Purse started and stared.

"Yes, dash you! Why shouldn't I have a daughter? Here's the case in a
nutshell, and you can make what you can of it." Lemby paused, cleared
his throat, and continued. "Sir Hector was engaged to marry my
daughter Claudia, though she wasn't overfond of him, since she loved a
chap called Craver."

"That's the name of the Rector of this parish!" exclaimed Purse,
staring hard.

"It's the son I mean, not the father. Well, then, Edwin Craver loved
Claudia; but I refused to allow the marriage as I wanted my daughter
to become a lady of title. Sir Hector proposed, and the marriage was
to have taken place a month ago, as I insisted that Claudia should
become Lady Wyke. Then Sir Hector wrote postponing the marriage, and
came down here."

"What reason did he give?"

"Said his health was bad. I tried to see him and he refused. I
couldn't find out his address for a long time, as he wrote from his
London house. Finally I got it from Craver--Edwin, I mean--and came
down the other night to force Wyke to explain his dashed impudence.
While he was explaining the ring came at the door and he bolted. The
rest you know. Well?"

"Well," echoed Purse, vaguely and rather distraught. He did not know
very well what to say, as this new complication took him by surprise.
Edwin Craver loved the girl, Edwin Craver was the son of the Rector in
whose parish the crime had been committed. "Could it be that Edwin
Craver----"

"No," said Lemby, reading suspicion in the sergeant's eyes. "Edwin is
innocent. I'll swear. In my opinion it was----" He hesitated, faltered
and broke down, while Purse waited for him to complete the sentence.




CHAPTER V.


Lemby had some difficulty in speaking freely, and hesitated so
pointedly that Purse impatiently assisted him. "Are you going to tell
me who is the criminal?"

"No," said Lemby, promptly, and now speaking readily enough. "I was
about to say that I believe it was a case of suicide."

The sergeant expressed his surprise. "Suicide, when Mrs. Vence saw the
assassin bending over his victim? Ridiculous!"

"It may be ridiculous, or it may not be," replied the buccaneer,
doggedly; "but from what I know of Wyke, he was in no danger from
anyone. Who the man is that Mrs. Vence saw I don't know. But Wyke
might have killed himself and the man might have been bending over his
body to afford succour."

"Ridiculous," replied the sergeant. "If the strange man was innocent
he would scarcely have fled. His flight on the bicycle proves his
guilt. Besides, what reason had Wyke to commit suicide?"

"What reason had he to postpone his marriage and come down to this
dismal place?" demanded Lemby, sourly. "You are asking me questions
which I cannot answer. Evidently, although I did not know it, there
was some secret in Wyke's life which made him act so strangely and
drove him to suicide."

"I don't believe for one moment that he committed suicide," persisted
Purse, after a pause, and remembering how Mrs. Vence had been engaged
to hold her tongue; "but he evidently came down here to escape the man
who slew him."

"He might have done so, sergeant." Lemby made a gesture, as if
brushing aside the whole subject. "Anyhow it is a sore blow to me and
to my daughter."

"To you, no doubt, Mr. Lemby, as you lose the gratification of seeing
your daughter bearing a title. But, if she loves young Craver, as you
hint, I think she will be glad that Wyke is gone."

"Perhaps. She's dashed obstinate. Anyhow, from what I have told you,
sergeant, you must see how absurd it is to suspect me."

"I don't suspect you at all," cried Purse, rising. "When you are
examined at the inquest you will no doubt be able to explain more."

"I can't explain more than I have already done." growled Lemby,
sullenly. "Is not my explanation satisfactory?"

"Yes. I think it is. From the evidence given by Mrs. Vence, you did
not come down the stairs until the man was dead."

"That policeman of yours can back up that statement," said Lemby,
eagerly, "and, of course, Mrs. Vence saw the assassin."

"Hullo!" Purse turned sharply at the door, "I thought you believed it
was a case of suicide."

"It was merely an idea," protested the other.

"A very silly idea," retorted the sergeant, and took his departure,
leaving Mr. Lemby to his own thoughts, which were those of
disappointment, as he would never see his daughter Lady Wyke.

During the twenty-four hours which elapsed before the inquest the
sergeant walked round Hedgerton, asking innumerable questions and
noting down innumerable answers. He learnt all about Sir Hector's way
of living, how he kept very much to himself, walked out alone, spoke
to no one, and remained indoors as a rule. He inquired at the
post-office, and discovered that the baronet had received but few
letters, newspapers, and parcels, which were generally redirected from
his town residence. Wyke evidently had made no secret of his stay in
Hedgerton, and in no way could Purse find that he was in hiding. The
man had come down, so it was supposed, for the sake of the Hedgerton
air, and had taken Maranatha on the three months' lease. Therefore, it
might be supposed that, had he not been killed he would have returned
to London at the expiration of that period to resume his ordinary
life. From Mrs. Vence's hint that she had been engaged to hold her
tongue it would appear that there was some mystery in the baronet's
life; but no mystery could be discovered in spite the sergeant's
persistent questioning. He left off as wise as he was when he began.

Purse also called to see the Rector and his wife, ostensibly to ask if
they knew anything about the gentleman who had come to reside in the
parish, but really to learn what he could of young Craver. The
intimation of Lemby that his daughter loved the young man, and that he
wished to marry her, gave Purse the idea that rivalry might be the
cause of the tragedy. But on inquiry the sergeant learnt that Craver
came down to see his parents only now and then at a weeks'-end and had
not been in Hedgerton at the time, that his rival in love was killed.
Moreover, it appeared that the young man had not spoken about Miss
Lemby to his father or mother, and they were quite surprised to hear
that he had any intention of marrying. In fact, Mrs. Craver, was
indignant when she heard the story told by Mr. Lemby, and said that
Edwin would certainly have told her had he been in love. She admitted,
as did the Rector, that Edwin knew Wyke, but insisted that he knew him
merely as an acquaintance. If he had been a rival, as the Rector's
wife declared her son would assuredly have spoken against him, whereas
he only mentioned him indifferently when questioned. But, as Purse
pointed out, if young Craver kept his wooing of Miss Lemby secret from
his parents, he would scarcely have talked about the man she was being
forced to marry. The sergeant left the rectory with a feeling of
disappointment. So far as he could gather from the frank speech of Mr.
and Mrs. Craver, their son had nothing to do with the crime.

The inquest took place in the Entertainment Hall--that shabby building
with the roof of galvanised iron, which was on the esplanade. Sergeant
Purse stated all that he knew, which was little enough, and terminated
his evidence with the surprising information that a telegram had
arrived from the Waking police-office saying that the bicycle had been
found. The constable who had found it would appear in due course to
relate how it had been discovered. But, as the sergeant added, there
was no trace to be found of the man who had stolen the same. This
announcement caused some excitement, as there appeared a chance of
getting at the truth, but, on the whole, Purse's statement caused
prosaic, and his evidence was anything but sensational.

Mrs. Vence was then questioned, and repeated her story much in the
same words as she had used when telling it to Jervis and his superior
officer.

From her evidence the jury gathered that she had been engaged by Sir
Hector, who told her to do her work and hold her tongue. She had come
down a few days before her master had taken over Maranatha from
Pedder, the caretaker, so as to put it in order. The Coroner, weary of
hearing nothings, pointedly asked her why Wyke had requested her to
hold her tongue.

"He didn't ask me to hold my tongue," said Mrs. Vence, tartly. "He
asked me if I could hold my tongue; and that's a different pair of
shoes."

"Well, and why did he?"

"How should I know? I never was one to chatter; and there wasn't
anything to chatter about, so far as I could see. I did my work, and
he read and walked and slept, seeing no one, and keeping silent."

"He saw no one save Mr. Lemby and the man who escaped on the bicycle?"

"You're right there, if ever you was right in your life," was Mrs.
Vence's reply.

"Did he expect Mr. Lemby?"

"No, he didn't. He was quite surprised when he came unexpected, as you
might say. But he told me to show him into the drorin'-room, and went
up himself to have a chat."

"And the second visitor?'

"Oh, he expected him," said the witness, with emphasis, "for I heard
him say, friendly-like: 'Oh, you've come!' or something like that. He
took him into the study when he came, flying down the stairs at the
ring. Then--"

Here Mrs. Vence went on to repeat how she had been sent to the kitchen
to return later with cake and wine. Afterwards she related what had
occurred until the arrival of Hall and the escape of the presumed
criminal.

"Did you hear any noise of quarrelling while you were in the kitchen?"

"No. I didn't. The kitchen's too far off."

The Coroner asked other questions, and received more or less
satisfactory answers, as Mrs. Vence seemed anxiously eager to be
frank. But, curiously enough, no mention was made of the missing
letter left by Hall. Either Purse had not told the Coroner about this,
or it had slipped his memory. Finally Mrs. Vence left the witness-box
to give place to Mr. Oliver Lemby.

He stated that he was a colonial from Australia, and had come to
England with his daughter three years ago. Having money, he had taken
his daughter into society, and there she had met the deceased, who had
proposed marriage. Witness frankly said that he approved of the
marriage, as Wyke was titled and wealthy, and, his daughter, on these
advantages being pointed out to her, was willing enough to do what she
was told. The marriage day was duly fixed, and then Sir Hector, for no
apparent reason, postponed the same and came down to live at
Hedgerton. Lemby stated how he had procured the address from Edwin
Craver, who had heard from his parents that Wyke was staying in the
parish, and related how he had come down on the night of the murder to
force Sir Hector to give an explanation. The rest of his evidence was
much the same as he had told Purse.

"So that's all I know," said the witness, fiercely. "My address is
Tenby Mansions, Earl's Court, and you can find me there any dashed
time you like. I am not afraid."

"There is no reason that I can see why you should be afraid," said the
Coroner, rather coldly. "You have given your evidence frankly enough.
But I ask you if you heard any noise or quarrelling while you were in
the drawing-room?"

"No, I did not. Had I done so I should have come down at once, as I
never object to being in a row."

"Did Sir Hector ever tell you that he was in danger of death?"

"Never. I should have dashed well protected him had he said that. I
wanted him to marry my daughter, and not to die in this infernal silly
way."

Afterwards the postman gave his evidence, saying he had knocked twice
at the door of Maranatha, and that at the second knock the door had
suddenly been opened, then a man had dashed out to disappear on the
bicycle into the fog. He also said that he had left the letter on the
hall table; but the Coroner did not take much notice of this
statement, little thinking how important it was.

Jervis followed, and related all that he knew, which mainly was a
repetition of what Sergeant Purse had said.

Then the doctor stepped into the witness-box. In his evidence he said
that a post-mortem examination had revealed the fact that deceased had
suffered from cancer.

"Ah!" said the Coroner, quickly, "that is a disease impossible to
cure. Do you think. Dr. Quin, that deceased may have taken his own
life on that account?"

"No," said the doctor, positively, "such a weak old man could not have
delivered so violent a blow. The knife was buried up to the hilt in
his heart, and had to pierce through a starched shirt-front and a
quilted jacket, both of which would have broken the force of the blow.
The body was clothed in a smoking-suit, if you remember, sir."

"Then you don't think that Sir Hector committed suicide?"

"No. I am quite certain that he did not."

The final witness was the police officer who had arrived from Waking.
It appeared that the red bicycle had been found in the stable of Jonas
Sorley, who had come to the police-office to confess this. Sorley was
a carrier, and saw the advertisement about the bicycle in the
newspapers. Therefore, he had communicated with the police. Sorley,
being ill, could not come to the inquest, but the officer brought his
sworn deposition.

From this it appeared that on the night when the crime was committed
at Hedgerton Sorley was jogging along in his cart from Bethley to
Waking, some twenty miles away. When he left Bethley there was no
bicycle in his cart, but when he arrived at Waking there was.

"The bicycle of Hall, the postman?" asked the Coroner.

"Yes, sir. It's the same number. But Sorley cannot say how the bicycle
came to be in his cart. It was nearly midnight when he arrived at
Waking."

This unsatisfactory statement completed the evidence, and there was
nothing for it but that the jury should bring in an open verdict,
which they accordingly did. Everyone agreed with this but the
buccaneer, who insisted to Sergeant Purse, when the proceedings were
over, that the escaped man was the assassin, and should be directly
accused.

"But we don't know his name, so how can a verdict be given against
him?" was the sergeant's reply. "An open verdict is sufficient. We can
search for the man, and when we find him we can hang him."

"Yes, when you find him," jeered Lemby, contemptuously. "You'll never
find him!"




CHAPTER VI.


With the open verdict, the red bicycle case, as it was called, ended
for the time being, as no new evidence was forthcoming likely to
elucidate the problem. Wyke's assassin had suddenly emerged out of the
mists to commit the crime, and had as suddenly vanished into them
again. In spite of all efforts it was impossible for the police
authorities to find him.

Some society papers gave many details regarding the life of the dead
baronet, but stated nothing of any moment. Sir Hector had a good
income and a good position, apparently being a harmless old
trifler, who idled luxuriously day after day. He had no relations,
therefore the title became extinct, while the property--so said the
newspapers--lapsed to the Crown. For a time the old dandy was missed
in certain circles, but, as usual, was speedily forgotten. Even the
hinted romance of Miss Lemby being engaged against her will to Wyke
ceased to interest people, and the girl herself was very glad that
this should be the case.

At Hedgerton the sensation lasted longer. But when Mrs. Vence departed
bag and baggage, when Sergeant Purse took his leave, and Lemby
returned to London, the excitement gradually died away. Maranatha was
again placed in the hands of old Pedder as caretaker, and again was
advertised to let furnished.

When Christmas was over and the New Year dawned, Oliver Lemby proposed
to his daughter that they should return to the Antipodes. The
buccaneer was now weary of the restraints of civilisation, and having
failed to marry Claudia to a titled husband, desired to go back to
his old free life. Father and daughter discussed the matter in the
drawing-room of their Tenby Mansion flat, and quarrelled openly. This
was scarcely to be wondered at, as Lemby had a violent temper, while
Claudia was not the girl likely to submit to being bullied. The pirate
was half annoyed and half pleased by her opposition.

"You're a chip of the old block, my girl," he said, smoking furiously,
"and can hold your dashed own with anyone; but you ain't going to hold
it with me."

"Oh, you'll listen to sense, dad," said Claudia, coolly.

"That's so," Lemby assured her, in quite a dry American style; "but
then you ain't talking sense. What's the use of staying longer in
this worn-out country when you can't get a husband."

"I've got a husband," declared the girl, equably.

"I take your meaning. But the husband you've spotted ain't got no
handle to his name. That Craver chap you mean, don't you? Not much.
Rank and riches for you, Claudia, and if you don't hook them, back you
go with me to the South Seas."

"I won't," said Claudia, firmly. "Go yourself, dad, and leave me
here."

Lemby, lounging in a deep chair with a pipe between his teeth and a
glass of whisky at his elbow, stared at her with half-closed eyes. He
privately decided that she was much too handsome to be allowed to
throw herself away in a hurry. Claudia had a fine figure, hair like
sunshine, and laughing azure eyes, together with a perfect complexion,
very red lips, and the whitest of teeth. She was tall and largely
made, most imposing in her looks, and carried herself so haughtily
that the stately Roman name suited her exactly. If Lemby was not a
gentleman, his daughter was emphatically a lady, for race showed
itself plainly in her slender hands and feet, as in her finely-cut
features. From her father she inherited her large frame and shapely
body, while her ripe beauty came from her mother. The buccaneer had
captured a gentlewoman, who was lured into marriage by his dare-devil
looks. But for many years he had been a widower.

"It was a mighty pity Wyke died," said Lemby, regretfully, and
ignoring his daughter's defiance. "He had a title, five thousand a
year, and a fine house in Devonshire, besides a position in society. I
reckon you'd have fitted the position first-class, Claudia. Blamed bad
luck, I call it, his pegging out under the knife."

"Well, dad, he's dead, so there's no more to be said," said the girl,
impatiently.

"There's a heap more to be said, my dear. No one gets the title, I
guess, as the old man had no relatives. But the cash, Claudia?"

"I saw in some society paper that it goes to the Crown," said Claudia,
carelessly, for she was young enough to care little for money, never
having felt the need of it.

"I ain't so sure of that," muttered her father, slowly drinking the
whisky to inspire him; "the old man was so much in love with you that
he told me he intended to leave you the dibs."

"If I married him, I suppose--not otherwise."

"That ain't certain, my girl. You were willing to marry him, so----"

"I wasn't!" she flashed out, sharply. "You forced me."

"Why shouldn't I force you? You are my daughter, ain't you?"

"Yes; but I'm not your slave. I didn't want to be Lady Wyke."

"No. You wish to be Mrs. Edwin Craver, and I'll jolly well see as you
don't. Seems to me, Claudia, that it would be only fair for him to
leave you his pile."

"Didn't he give you an explanation when you called?"

"No. I told you before that he didn't. Said as he'd come back to the
drawing-room to clear things up, and naturally didn't when he pegged
out in the study below. Anyhow, it's on the cards as he might have
made a will in your favour. And," added the buccaneer, emphatically,
"I'm dashed well determined to see the sharp as handles his business."

"Mr. Sandal, in Lincoln's Inn Fields?"

"That's him. Wyke told you as he told me about Sandal when he
mentioned that marriage settlements were to be drawn up. I guess I'll
look him up to see if the old man did the right thing by you. It's
dashed queer as he should have postponed the marriage when he
worshipped the blamed ground you walked on, Claudia, my girl."

"It is strange; it was strange," admitted Claudia, pondering. "I can't
understand it myself, although I am glad that he acted as he did.
Perhaps, knowing that I loved Edwin, he changed his mind about making
me his miserable wife."

"Miserable!" jeered the pirate, contemptuously. "Miserable with a
title and five thousand a year. Shucks! my girl, you're talking
through your hat. Well, I reckon I'll see Sandal, and learn if there's
a will in your favour."

"I don't want Sir Hector's money," said Claudia, setting her mouth
obstinately. "I don't accept a penny of his money, will or no will."

"Then I'll accept it for you," said Lemby, coolly, and heaved his big
body out of the chair. "We can't live on nothing, can we?"

Claudia turned sharply from the window, out of which she was looking.
"Live on nothing?" she repeated, blankly, for the words conveyed no
sense to her.

"That's it, my girl." Lemby stretched himself with a yawn. "My pile
never was a big one. It's time for us to get back to the Sunny South
and make dollars, failing the old man's cash dropping in."

"But I thought we were rich," expostulated Claudia, in dismay. "If
not, why did we come to England to live in so expensive a style?"

"Oh, I wanted to do the right thing by you, my girl," said the pirate,
truculently. "I saw as you were a high-stepper when I looked you up at
that blamed school in Sydney. I had enough to give us a few years of
luxury, so I yanked you home to snatch a husband of the sort I
wanted."

"In plain English," cried Claudia, turning very red, and clenching her
hands as she faced her father, "you took me into the slave-market; to
sell me to the highest bidder?"

"Shucks!" said Lemby, uneasily, for Claudia had a whirlwind temper,
which was rising rapidly.

"It's not shucks, or anything like shucks," she retorted, stamping her
foot. "I don't recognise your right to choose mv husband. I am a human
being as well as your daughter, and I intend to arrange my life for
myself."

"What about the ten commandments?" sneered Lemby, hedging. "'Children,
obey your parents,' ain't it?"

"'Parents, respect your children,'" counter-quoted the girl. "And how
can I respect you, dad, when you tried to force me into a disagreeable
marriage. Like a fool, I allowed you to bully me into promising to
marry Sir Hector. But now that he is dead and buried I shall act as I
please."

"I shan't let you."

"I shan't ask you to let me. See here, dad, it's time we understood
one another, as you are going the wrong way to work with me. Have you
any money?"

"Enough to get back first-class to Australia with a few dollars to see
the year out. And I guess I can raise enough in Sydney to hire a
schooner and to take up the copra business again. If I stay here I
can't get along anyhow. It depends if Wyke left you the dibs."

"I don't believe he has left me any dibs, as you call it," said
Claudia, who was now very pale, for the revelation had startled her
considerably. "Can't you leave me enough to live on for six months? I
can get a situation as a governess until Edwin is rich enough to marry
me."

"He shan't marry you," declared Lemby, looking fierce. "Craver's only
a manager in that blamed motor-car factory. He ain't even a partner."

"He will be a partner one day when he gets money to put into the
firm," said the girl in a low voice and keeping her temper well in
hand.

"And where's he going to get the cash? His father's just a blamed
sky-pilot in a dashed township, the place where Wyke handed in his
cheques. Craver will never be rich, and will never have a title, so he
don't marry you."

She clenched her hands, hardened her face, and stepped up to her
tyrannical parent looking just as fierce as he did. "I don't want a
title, and I don't want money," she said, passionately. "I want to
marry the man I love, and Edwin is that man. I intend to become his
wife, in spite of you."

"You just try it, that's all."

"I intend to try. I have begun to try."

"You'll obey me."

"I shan't. I'll obey my conscience."

"I'll twist your neck, dash you!" roared the buccaneer, infuriated by
this opposition, which he quite expected.

"Oh, no you won't!" Claudia slipped aside, as he lunged forward, and
placed the breadth of the room between them. "You were always a bully
father, and are just the kind of slave-driver who should be in the
forecastle of a tramp steamer. But you don't bully me. I'll die first.
So there," and she stamped.

"Dashed spitfire, you are," he growled. "Have it your own silly way.
But you don't marry that engineer bounder, mind."

"Edwin is not a bounder!" cried Claudia, indignantly. "He's a
bred-and-born gentleman. While I," she added, bitingly, "I am your
daughter."

"Oh"--Lemby began to laugh good-humouredly--"I see what you're getting
at, my girl. No, I ain't a gilded Lord, for sure, and never pretended
to be. I'm just plain Oliver Lemby, as deals square by them as deals
square with him. But your mother was a lady, Claudia, so your blood
ain't all mud, remember."

"Why don't you remember, dad," she retorted, angrily, "and treat me
with some sort of respect? I know you're kind-hearted, and mean well:
but your manners are awful. Be civil."

"I am civil--as civil as I need be to my own daughter."

"Because I am your daughter, that's no reason why I should be bullied.
But it's no use talking, dada," she ended wearily, "you'll never
understand."

"I understand this--that I'm going to move heaven and earth to get
that cash of Wyke's which ought to come to you," said Lemby, sullenly;
"and whether I get it or not, I've got to get out of this country, and
you too."

"Why have you to get out?" asked Claudia, stuck by the queer
expression on her father's florid face.

Lemby shuffled and twisted, evading a direct answer. "I ain't got any
dibs, for one thing. I told you so."

"But if you get this money of Sir Hector's?" asked the girl, trying to
arrive at his meaning, for she saw that there was something behind his
speech.

"I'll go, all the same." Lemby looked at the carpet and scowled.

"But why?"

"Because I choose to. That's why," he burst out furiously.

"Now, dad"--Claudia held up a warning hand--"we have had one scene, so
don't let us have another. You won't succeed in getting your way with
me."

"You are an ungrateful minx!"

"Oh" Claudia sat down with a careless shrug--"call me as many names as
you like. That matters little. But don't go too far."

"What will you do if--"

"If you go too far," interrupted the girl, her  breast heaving with
passion, and her eyes flashing, "I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll
leave this flat and go out to find a situation."

"Nobody will take you," said Lemby, uneasily, for he knew, what she
was capable of when her temper was aroused, as it certainly was at
present.

"That's my business, dad."

The buccaneer walked towards the door, halted there irresolutely, and
then looked round the room cautiously. After a long pause, he stole
forward lightly to bend down and whisper in his daughter's ear. "If
you don't come with me and light out straight, you'll see me in
trouble."

"What kind of trouble asked Claudia, shrinking back.

"Trouble of the worst. I've risked a lot to get that cash of Sir
Hector's."

"Risked what?" Claudia shivered and faltered.

"My good name, my liberty, my life."

"Dad!" She sprang up with a cry.

"My life," repeated Lemby, emphatically, and walked out of the room.




CHAPTER VII.


When her father left the room after giving his ominous hint, the girl
throw herself full-length on the sofa and covered her face.

In a frank manner Lemby had stated that he wanted money, and that he
had risked much to obtain the same. His reference to the chance of
losing good name, liberty, and life, could only mean that he was in
some way concerned in the Hedgerton crime. Claudia knew that he had
gone down to see Sir Hector and to demand an explanation--she knew
that he had actually been in the house when the death took place.
Certainly, on the face of it, he was exonerated by the evidence of the
policeman and the housekeeper; yet it now appeared that he was less
innocent than was supposed. The girl did not dare to think that he was
the guilty person, for, rough as were his manners, she could not
believe that he would so callously slay an old and feeble man. Still,
in a moment of impatience he might have had something to do with the
sinister affair. His own words hinted as much, and he had said just
enough to make Claudia long for her own peace of mind to know more.
The girl, with her face buried in the sofa-cushion, raged silently and
strongly.

Suddenly, a touch on her shoulder brought her to her feet with a loud
scream, and she quite startled the person who had thus aroused her. He
was a tall and handsome young man, with closely-cropped, brown hair, a
clean-shaven face, and shrewd eyes of hazel, merry and bright, but now
he looked quite dismayed at the dishevelled aspect of the girl. "My
dearest Claudia, what is the matter?"

"Oh, Edwin!" At the sound if his kind voice she broke down altogether,
and in a moment she burst into tears. "Oh, Edwin!" That was all she
could gasp out as she threw herself into his arms.

"My dear! My dear!" Craver sat down on the sofa and gently drew the
girl on to his knee to soothe her. "What is the matter? There! there!
Don't speak. Let me get you a glass of water."

"No," sobbed Claudia, hastily drying her eyes. "I'm behaving like a
fool. I'll feel better in a few minutes. But hold me tightly, Edwin.
Let me feel that I have someone who loves me."

Without a word the young man petted her and calmed her, and gradually
restored her to reason. Claudia's sobs grew less violent, her limbs
ceased to tremble, and shortly she slipped out of her lover's arms to
stand up. "I am silly," she confessed, and walked across the room to
look at her disorder in a mirror over the fireplace. "You beast!"
said Claudia, staring at her red eyes and tumbled hair. "Why can't you
behave," and she stamped viciously.

Craver rose and moved gently behind her to lay his arm across her
shoulder with a smile. Claudia appreciated the diplomatic way in which
he was dealing with her, and now that she was more composed turned to
face him squarely and take his two hands within her own.

"My dear," cried Claudia, bending forward to kiss him, "you always do
me good."

"I'm glad" Edwin returned the kiss with interest. "But what is the
matter?"

"Dad's the matter. He always is the matter, I don't mind his raging, I
am quite used to that, and he really can't help it. But when he
says----" She hesitated.

"Says what?"

"I can't tell you just now, as it upset me altogether. Wait for a
time, Edwin, and let us talk all round the shop. Then I can gradually
lead up to what he said. Oh, it's awful!"

"It must be," rejoined Craver, with a perplexed look, "to upset you so
much. I know you are not an hysterical girl, Claudia. Come and sit
down, so that we can talk at our ease, and, you can give me some tea
in half ah hour. I'm dying of thirst."

"You shall have some tea now, or you may die," said Claudia in a
lively tone, and touching the bell. "Luckily your father has gone out,
and will not be back for a long time. We'll be all alone."

"That will be Paradise," said Craver, gaily, and dropped into the deep
armchair, lately occupied by the pirate; while Claudia gave orders to
the neat maid-servant who appeared. "Come and sit down, dear."

"In this chair," replied Claudia, seating herself opposite to him, and
placing a light bamboo table between them. "We must be sensible."

"I get so much sense in business," sighed the young man, "that I come
here to indulge in a little delicious folly. Do you feel better,
darling?" and he leant his elbows on the table to touch her hand.

"Much better. You have given me strength, which I needed. And you are
so very strong, Edwin. Much stronger than father, as you don't waste
your powers in boasting and swanking."

"My dearest girl, you must not talk of your father in that way."

"What is the use of blinking at facts?" retorted Claudia, with a
pretty shrug. "I love dad, who is kind to me after his truculent
fashion. But he really does swank, as you know. Admit it at once,
sir."

"I admit it right enough. But he's a real good sort, you know,
Claudia."

"So long as he gets his own way he's a good sort," retorted the girl,
sharply; "but it never strikes him that I want my own way sometimes."

"As how?"

"I want to marry you."

"Well, now that poor old Wyke is dead, that's all settled, isn't it?"

"Not so far as dad is concerned. He wants me to marry money. I was
weak enough to give in to him over Sir Hector, but now I have to
fight, for my freedom, and you must help me."

Craver looked rather grim and very determined. "Oh, I'll do that. No
one marries you but me. You never would have become engaged to Wyke
had you----"

"Had I really and truly loved you," finished Claudia swiftly. "I know
quite well what you mean, Edwin. But you have never lived with my dad.
He would wear out the Archangel Gabriel to get his own way. I fought
and fought till I could fight no longer. Then I gave in. But fate has
now cut the knot, and I'll see that it isn't tied again."

"Your father will worry you, of course?"

"He's certain to. But I'll run away and become a governess. Oh, here's
Jane." She swept some papers off the bamboo table and helped to lay
the cloth and adjust the tea-things. "Thank you, Jane. I shan't want
anything more."

"I don't like the idea of your being a governess," said Edwin, who had
been carefully considering the proposition while the parlourmaid was
present, and argued about it now that she was gone. "You are too
handsome to be a governess."

"And not clever enough, you might add," retorted Claudia, pouring out
the tea; "but I must do something. Dad worries and worries and
worries. He wants to return to the South Seas to make more money, and
insists that I shall go with him."

"Oh, Claudia!" Craver dropped the piece of bread and butter he had
picked up. "Oh, Claudia!"

"It's all very well saying, 'Oh, Claudia'; but facts have to be faced.
And very uncomfortable facts, too, now that I am coming to them."

"Coming to what?"

"To the facts which upset me," Claudia pushed back her chair, and
leant her elbow on her knee and her chin on her hand. "Edwin, what do
you know about this dreadful murder of Sir Hector?"

Craver started so violently that he spilt his tea and had to set the
cup down in a hurry. "Good heavens, Claudia, what do you mean?"

"What I say. I speak plainly enough don't I?"

"What should I know about the murder except what I read in the
newspapers?" was Craver's reluctant reply. "Because it took place in
my father's parish that does not mean my having anything to do with
it."

"I never suggested your having," said Claudia, in a cross tone. "How
you do jump to conclusions. But dad was in the house when Sir Hector
was killed."

"Yes. Upstairs in the drawing-room. He came down when----"

"When the crime was committed. Mrs. Vence and the policeman said that
Sir Hector was dead before dad appeared in the study."

"Yes. So I read in the report of the inquest proceedings. Well?"

"Well if that is the case dad is innocent."

Craver stared. When Claudia first broached the unpleasant subject he
had turned pale, but now the colour was slowly creeping back into his
sunburnt face. "Of course, Mr. Lemby is innocent," he said, after a
pause. "There never was any question of his having anything to do with
the death."

"Sir Hector was rich," said Claudia, in apparently an irrelevant
manner.

Craver nodded, wondering what she meant. "Five thousand a year
according to the gossip of the newspapers."

"Well," continued the girl, "dad is poor, and wants money. He hoped to
get it by making me marry Sir Hector. But as I did not become Lady and
as I never can be owing to the death, dad is in a hole."

"My dear Claudia, I really don't know what you mean?"

"I'm just coming to the point now," said the girl, nervously, and her
lips quivered. "You know that dad went down to ask Sir Hector why he
had postponed the marriage?"

"Yes. Did he receive an explanation?"

"No. Sir Hector was about to give him one when the ring came at the
door, and Sir Hector went down to see the man who murdered him."

"He might not have murdered him," murmured Craver looking down at his
cup.

"Nonsense! Why should he have fled if he was innocent?" said Claudia,
hurriedly. "But let that pass, Edwin. The point is that dad did not
get an explanation; but somehow he has got it into his head that Sir
Hector may have left me the money by will."

"On what grounds does he believe that?"

"I can't tell you. He did not say. But to-day he has gone to see Mr.
Sandal in Lincoln's Inn Field, who is Sir Hector's lawyer. And when he
left this very room." continued Claudia, sinking her voice to a
frightened whisper, "he said that he had risked his reputation, his
liberty, and his life to get money."

Craver looked hard at the girl, and seemed to be about as nervous as
she was herself. "Did he say that, he had risked so much to get this
particular money of Sir Hector's?"

"No. But he more or less implied it."

"And you took it to mean that he had killed----"

"No." Claudia leapt to her feet with a look of positive terror on her
face, so greatly was she moved. "Don't say it. It's impossible. Dad is
rough and fierce but he would never kill a feeble old man like Sir
Hector. Besides, there was no reason why he should, as when I married
Sir Hector the money would have come to me as the wife while he lived
and afterwards the widow. And what I had I should, of course, share
with dad."

"You forget," remarked Craver politely, "that as the marriage was
postponed there was every chance that it might not take place."

Claudia's nostrils dilated and her bosom heaved. "Are you against
dad?" she asked sharply. "If you are, I wish you had let me know. Then
I could have held my tongue."

"I am not against your father," said Craver, steadily; "but I wish to
place all points before you. I do not believe Mr. Lemby is guilty,
although his sayings are dark and ominous."

"They upset me altogether!" cried the girl, restlessly. "Therefore,
Edwin, until you find out who stabbed Sir Hector, we cannot marry."

"Claudia!" He was dismayed by this speech.

"I mean it!" she declared, waving him back. "I shall never be happy
until the truth is known. Learn who murdered Sir Hector, and exonerate
my dad."

"I'll do my best, although you set me a hard task. But this money----"

"Well?" demanded the girl, seeing how nervous her lover was.

Craver moved slowly towards the door. "You will never get it. Nor will
your father. Sir Hector did not leave his fortune to either of you."

Claudia stared when her lover disappeared. She wondered if he knew
more about the crime than he admitted. Her father, her lover--was one
or the other guilty?




CHAPTER VIII.


When in the street, Craver turned over in his mind what the girl had
said relative to the hint given by her father. Undoubtedly Lemby had a
superlatively bad temper, and undoubtedly he had been in the house
when the crime was committed. Adding to this the fact that Wyke
disliked Claudia's father and had a bitter tongue, it did not seem
impossible that the pirate might have struck the blow in a moment of
anger. Before the arrival of the postman, and while Mrs. Vence was in
the kitchen, Lemby might have slipped down from the upstairs
drawing-room to commit the crime and then have slipped up again. But
against this was to be placed the fact that a second visitor was not
only in the house, but in the company of the baronet. Lemby could
scarcely have used the knife while the other man was present. On the
whole, Craver was perplexed by the situation, and wondered what he
should do. If Lemby took his daughter to Australia, Craver felt sure
that he would never see her again, as he himself was unable to leave
England. And Lemby, if implicated in the death of his proposed
son-in-law, would certainly return to his native land to escape
possible arrest. For quite ten minutes Craver stood by the Underground
Station at Earl's Court considering how be act. Finally, he made up
his mind as to his next step, and took a ticket to Blackfriars.

When in the train the young man reflected on the conclusion he had
arrived at. This was to follow Lemby to Mr. Sandal's office, and
frankly offer his assistance in extricating the pirate from his
dilemma on condition that Claudia should be allowed to marry him. It
was difficult to see how he could help the pirate since he knew so
little. Two heads are always better than one, and Craver believed that
Lemby would consent to the marriage in order to gain a friend while in
trouble. Craver alighted on the Blackfriars platform with the
conviction that he was going on a wild-goose chase. Nevertheless,
failing all else, he believed it was worth while to act as he
intended.

Edwin knew where Mr. Sandal's office was situated, as Sir Hector had
mentioned on a momentous occasion the name and address of his lawyer.
So the young man walked up to the Strand, and soon found himself in
Lincoln's Inn Fields. In a few minutes he was at the door of the
building in which Mr. Sandal's office was situated, and was mounting
the stairs. On inquiry it appeared that Lemby had arrived, and was
awaiting the interview with Mr. Sandal, who was engaged for the time
being. Craver rejoiced that there was a chance of seeing the pirate
before he interviewed the lawyer, and requested to be shown into the
waiting-room. The clerk opened a side door to admit him into the same,
and then closed it again. Seated near a table covered with magazines
and newspapers for the convenience of waiting clients was Lemby
reading one of the newspapers. He raised his eyes when the door
opened, and rose to his foot when he saw Craver. The astonishment of
the buccaneer was very apparent.

"What on earth are you doing here, Craver?" he asked in his truculent
way. "I did not know that Sandal was your lawyer?"

"Nor is he," replied Craver, taking a seat and thus forcing Lemby to
resume his former position. "I came here to see you."

"Oh, did you? And who told you that I was here?"

"Claudia."

"Miss Lemby to you, Craver," said the pirate, gruffly. "I suppose you
slipped in to see my daughter immediately my back was turned. A nice
way of behaving, I must say."

"I am behaving in a perfectly honourable way," retorted Craver, much
nettled.

"Well, I don't think so, dash you! I refuse to allow you to make love
to Claudia, as I don't intend you shall marry her. I told you so
before."

"You did, while Sir Hector was alive. Now that he is dead there is no
reason why I should not marry your daughter."

"There is every reason, and one confoundedly strong one." snarled
Lemby, glaring furiously. "You have no money. When Wyke was alive I
told you to keep away from my flat, and now that he is dead you might
have had the decency to do what I asked you to do."

"See here, Mr. Lemby." said Craver, steadily. "I love Claudia, and I
intend to marry her. She yielded to your pressing wishes and became
engaged to marry Sir Hector. He is dead now, and I intend to have my
innings."

"Like your dashed impertinence to think so!"

"Speeches of that kind won't turn me from my resolution, Mr. Lemby,"
said the young man, coldly.

Lemby appeared confused for the moment, and cast down his eyes. "I
won't have it," he declared with a growl. "Claudia's my daughter, and
she shall marry whom I choose."

"She won't. She shall marry me. It is about that matter I have come to
see you, Mr. Lemby."

"Oh, have you? And do you think that I am going to be spied upon and
followed and worried and chased? Well, you are mistaken. Clear out,
and mind your own dashed business."

Lemby was on the point of losing his temper, according to his usual
fashion; but Craver did not mind. The hotter Lemby got the cooler was
the young man, and the more composed was his speech. "I have come to
see after your business, Mr. Lemby," he said, significantly.

"I shan't allow you to meddle with that," snapped the angry pirate.

"It is better that I should meddle with it than that the police----"

"Here"--Lemby jumped up in a violent hurry--"drop it! You are going
too far, Craver. What the deuce have the police to do with me?"

"This much. They want to know exactly what took place at Maranatha
while you were in the house."

Lemby winced but still kept up his defiance. "I told all that I knew
at the inquest," he blustered, "and Sergeant Purse was quite
satisfied."

"Ah, so you think," hinted Craver, bluffing boldly; "but he may have
his suspicious of you. If he takes action----"

"Takes action." Lemby rose up, and sat down with a positive look of
terror on his face. "I don't know what you mean," he ended, doggedly.

"I mean that you want money, and that you risked reputation, liberty
and life to, get it." Craver looked significantly at his proposed
father-in-law.

Lemby recognised his own speech to Claudia. "You have been listening
to the conversation between me and my daughter," he said, fiercely.

"No, I have not. But after you left the flat I saw Claudia, and she
sought my counsel."

"It's none of your business, Craver, and Claudia is a minx for talking
to you about my affairs."

"It is my business," insisted the young man, firmly. "I hear that you
want Claudia to go with you to Australia, and I don't intend her to
go."

"Oh! don't you," sneered the other, "And how do you intend to stop her
going?"

"Ah! that remains to be seen."

"You're a confounded scoundrel!"

"Gently, Mr. Lemby," said Edwin, resolutely, keeping his temper. "If I
were what you call me, I could easily stop your projected journey to
Australia by informing Sergeant Purse what you said to Claudia. But I
don't intend to do that. I followed you here as your friend to offer
my services."

"I don't want them," vociferated the pirate, looking uneasy.

"Think again, Mr. Lemby. You are in a difficult position, and
notwithstanding your frankness at the inquest. Sergeant Purse may have
suspicions that you did not reveal all. You need a friend, and I am
willing to be that friend."

"At a price, I suppose?"

"Naturally. I wish you to consent to my marriage with Claudia if I
succeed in getting you out of this trouble."

Lemby rose again, and began to walk up and down the room like a caged
beast. "I am in no trouble," he raged fiercely.

"No, not now; but you may be. And your words to Claudia hint that you
expect some sort of trouble."

"She had no right to speak to you."

"Oh, I think she had," rejoined Craver, equably. "Claudia knows that I
love her and am her true friend. You have caused her much distress by
your hints that you are in danger, so it is right that she should seek
comfort from me. And as you are her father, it is not likely that I
will jeopardise your freedom."

"I am in no danger of losing my freedom," was the angry reply.

"Then why did you use those words to Claudia?"

"To make her do what I want."

"Well, Mr. Lemby"--Edwin rose with an air of finality--"you know your
own business best. I came here to offer my services on condition that
you allow me to marry your daughter. But as you refuse to listen to
sense you must be content to risk the suspicions of Purse. I apologise
for having troubled you."

"Here"--Lemby stopped the young man as he moved towards the
door--"don't be in a hurry. I expect to see Mr. Sandal every moment,
but we can talk for a few minutes. Are you honest?"

"Yes, I, am, and you know that I am."

"Well, then, leave matters as they are for a day or so until we can
have a long and exhaustive talk. I have come here, to see if Wyke has
left his money to Claudia, which he should do, considering how badly
he treated her. If he has acted fairly and squarely Claudia and I will
be in clover; if not, I may require your assistance."

"I am willing to give it if you will promise to remain in England."

"For the time being I shall remain," said the pirate, grudgingly. "I
have no reason to run away in spite of my speech to my daughter of
which you have made such clever use, dash you."

"Then I take it that you have nothing to do with the murder?"

"Yes, you can take it that way; I am perfectly innocent."

"Then why do you accept my assistance?" asked Edwin, calmly.

"I shall explain that when we have our talk later. Meanwhile, as I
have to see Sandal and arrange about the money, perhaps you will clear
out. It is necessary for me to think over matters before interviewing
the sharp."

"I should have thought you would have arranged matters by this time,"
commented Craver, sarcastically. "However. I will go. Remember you
have promised to remain in London for the time being."

"Yes," growled Lemby, savagely, "you've got the whip-hand of me."

"If you mean that I am likely to use the information supplied by
Claudia, to prevent your leaving, Mr. Lemby, I have not got the
whip-hand of you. I am not so mean as to employ tactics of a
dishonourable nature. All I say is that if you will stay in England I
am willing to help you in every way."

"Well, we'll leave it at that," said Lemby, ungraciously. "But, mind,
I don't say that you will marry Claudia."

"I am content to wait," replied Craver, coolly, and passed through the
door of the waiting-room at the same moment that a clerk opened it to
say that Mr. Sandal was ready to see Mr. Oliver Lemby.

The lawyer was a tall, thin, dried-up man, with a clean-shaven face
and two shrewd, twinkling black eyes. He had met Lemby before in
connection with the marriage settlements of Claudia, and did not like
him. Therefore Sandal received him coldly, and, having seated himself
at his desk, waited to hear what he had called about. Lemby, by no
means disconcerted by this chilly reception, plunged at once into the
matter. And, being nervous, he was the more truculent.

"This is a pretty kettle of fish," he said, in his gruff way.

"If you are referring to the sad death of Sir Hector Wyke," said
Sandal, in his dry, precise style, "it is a very painful matter."

"Why didn't you come down to Hedgerton to look into the affair?" asked
Lemby. "Don't you know that I wrote to you?"

"I received your letter, Mr. Lemby; there was no need for me to go
down personally. I sent a representative, who saw Sergeant Purse, and
did what was required. My representative was at the inquest, at the
burial, and at the police-office in Redleigh, where he learnt that no
trace could be found of the assassin. But you, Mr. Lemby," added the
lawyer pointedly, "were in the house when my late client was murdered.
Have you come to tell me something likely to lead to the detection of
the criminal?"

"No, sir, I haven't. I am as much in the dark as you are about the
matter."

"Then I fail to understand why you have come to see me," said Sandal,
coldly.

"Why?" Lemby grew angry. "I want to know what Sir Hector has done for
my daughter."

"Nothing." Sandal raised his eyebrows. "Why should he do anything."

"My daughter was engaged to marry him, and the marriage settlements
were drawn up by you."

"But they were not signed by Sir Hector," Sandal reminded him: "nor
did the marriage take place. Well?"

"Well," echoed the pirate, viciously. "Surely Sir Hector has provided
for my daughter in his will."

"No, he has not. There is a will dated many years ago, before Sir
Hector met your daughter. That will leaves all the property, real and
personal, to quite another person."

"Who to?" asked Lemby, rather ungrammatically.

"To Sir Hector's wife."

"What!" Lemby rose with a dazed air, scarcely believing his ears.

"To his wife. To Lady Wyke." The lawyer smiled grimly.




CHAPTER IX.


Having in his adventurous life become accustomed to unexpected
surprises, Lemby was rarely startled, and frequently boasted that
nothing could astonish him. But on this occasion he was not only
astonished but enraged. At the outset he blankly refused to believe
the lawyer.

"You are talking nonsense," he declared, roughly. "How
could Wyke have a wife when he was engaged to be married to my
daughter?"

"That is a fair question, which I shall endeavour to answer fairly,"
replied Mr. Sandal, ignoring the crudity of speech. "Sir Hector, it
appears, was married some twenty years ago to an actress. They did not
get on well together, and parted by mutual consent. Lady Wyke, under
her stage name of Miss Maisie Chain, went to America, and, after a
long silence, news came to Sir Hector that she had perished in a
theatre fire at Chicago. He quite believed that he was a widower, and
therefore felt himself at liberty to propose to Miss Lemby."

"It's all nonsense," repeated the pirate, furiously.

"Well, I don't wonder at your saying so," said Sandal, calmly. "I was
surprised myself when Lady Wyke turned up again. She has altered
little."

"Oh! So you have seen her before!"

"Yes. I have been Sir Hector's lawyer for many years, as we were at
school together and have always been friends. When he wished to marry
Miss Chain I tried to persuade him not to, but he was wilful, and
persisted in doing so. As I foretold, the match turned out to be an
unhappy one. When Sir Hector came to me with the news that Lady Wyke
was dead, I congratulated him on his release. She was a very
determined and trying woman."

Lemby clutched his head with both hands, leant his elbows on his
knees, and stared at the carpet. "You are telling me the truth, I
suppose?"

"Why, should I tell you a lie?" demanded Sandal, drily. "I wish myself
that Sir Hector could have married your daughter, who is a sweet girl.
She would have made him happy."

"How dare he make love to Claudia when he was already a married man!"

"Let me remind you, Mr. Lemby, that when Sir Hector asked your
daughter to be his wife he was a widower, or, at least, believed
himself to be so."

"Then why didn't he tell me so?"

"There was no need to tell you. Sir Hector very naturally wished to
forget the mistake he had made with regard to his marriage."

"It's a plot to rob my daughter of her rights!" shouted Lemby,
savagely.

"Lower your voice, if you please," said Sandal, sternly. "If you
cannot speak quietly I shall put an end to this interview. There is no
plot. I have the newspaper in which is the report of the fire at the
Chicago theatre and the death of Maisie Chain, who was really Lady
Wyke. Sir Hector left that with me, and it has remained in his deed
box ever since. As to your daughter's rights, she had none, seeing
that she was not married to my client."

"Are you sure, that this woman is Lady Wyke?"

"Yes, I am. I knew her well in the old days, when Sir Hector and I
were young men. I was present at the marriage, and there is a
certificate of that in the deed box also. I knew Lady Wyke immediately
she walked into this office some days after her husband was buried."

"How did she escape from the fire?" asked Lemby, sullenly, for he felt
that a fortune was slipping away from him.

"She was rescued, but owing to being stifled more or loss by the
smoke, it was reported that she had died. But being nursed carefully
she recovered, and remained quiet. Owing to the shock she did not
resume her stage career, so that is why neither Sir Hector nor myself
saw her name again. Had we done so, we should have known that she was
still living, and then Sir Hector, being an honourable man, would not
have courted your daughter."

"An honourable man!" snarled Lemby, who made no attempt to contain his
wrath. "Oh, yes, very honourable to leave my daughter without a
penny!"

"He had no reason to leave her anything," expostulated the lawyer,
mildly.

"Yes, he had. She was engaged to him, and he dodged the marriage."

"He did so because Lady Wyke in America saw a statement in an English
society paper which was sent to her that Sir Hector contemplated a
second marriage. She came over to England at once and let him know
that she was alive. For that reason Sir Hector postponed the
marriage."

"Then you knew why he did so?" foamed Lemby, clenching his hands and
looking dangerously savage.

"Not at the time. I was amazed to hear that the marriage was
postponed, as I knew how deeply my old friend was in love with Miss
Lemby. Only when Lady Wyke came here after his burial did I learn that
her letter to him, saying she was alive, made him put off the day of
his marriage with Miss Lemby."

"When he learnt that this woman was alive he should have made over a
good income to my daughter, so as to recompense her for the
disappointment."

"I don't agree with you," said Sandal, "for Sir Hector had no call to
do what you suggest. And I don't think that your daughter is
disappointed, seeing that she never cared for Sir Hector, and only
yielded to your wish that, the marriage should take place."

"That's a lie."

"It is not a lie. And I beg that you will not speak to me in that way.
Sir Hector told me himself that Miss Lemby was in love with a young
engineer calling himself Edwin Craver, and that it was you who were
compelling her to marry him. I pointed out to my friend that as he had
made one mistake it was foolish for him to make a second, since Miss
Lemby did not love him. But he was so infatuated with her that he
insisted upon getting his own way."

"He made a fool of my girl," said the visitor, sullenly.

"Indeed, he did not. His intentions were strictly honourable, and he
would have fulfilled them had not Lady Wyke made her appearance."

"Seeing now things stood, Wyke; should have told me all about them."

"I agree with you there. But he told no one, not even me. I knew
nothing until Lady Wyke walked into this office and explained
matters."

Lemby rose and stamped about the room. "It's all a lie! I don't
believe a word of what you say."

"Well, it is natural that you should have your doubts," rejoined
Sandal, coolly, and glanced at his watch. "But Lady Wyke will be here
in a few minutes, as I have to see her to-day in regard to the
property. Then she can tell you herself that what I say is true."

"Yes, I'll wait," snapped Lemby, and sat down again with a
determination to have it out with this undesirable woman, who had
risen from the dead to upset his selfish plans. "She sees you with
regard to the property?"

"Yes. By a will made shortly after his marriage Sir Hector left all
his property to his wife. That will has never been changed, and,
therefore, holds good."

Lemby contradicted. "Wyke told me that when he married Claudia he
intended to make a will leaving all his property to her."

"Quite so," said the solicitor, suavely. "And he would have done so
when he was married. But as the marriage did not take place, there was
no new will made."

"Wyke should have made the will before marriage."

Sandal laughed. "You are very ignorant of English law, Mr. Lemby," he
observed drily. "A will made before marriage is waste paper when that
marriage takes place. Until your daughter was Lady Wyke no disposition
of the property on the lines of marriage, save in settlements, could
have been made. Those settlements were drawn up, but not signed,
therefore they are useless. And now that Sir Hector is dead the
property goes to Lady Wyke by the only will which is in existence."

"Cannot it be upset?"

"No. The will is sound in law. I drew it up myself. And remember, Mr.
Lemby, that in justice the widow of Sir Hector should inherit the five
thousand a year which he died possessed of."

Lemby scowled at the carpet and revolved schemes. He wanted the money
badly, as he was worse off than Claudia knew, even though he had given
her a hint of coming poverty. But he saw no means of securing again
what he had lost unless Lady Wyke was disposed to be gracious, and
recompensed Claudia for her presumed disappointment. He therefore
determined to wait and see if Lady Wyke was a person whom he could
manage. Possibly he might coax or bully her into what he called
justice. And it was at this stage of his meditations that the wife of
Sir Hector entered the room.

"Good-day, Mr. Sandal," said Lady Wyke, in a high, shrill voice, hard
and rather rasping in its tone. "I fear that I am late."


Mr. Sandal assured the newcomer that she was not late, and placed a
chair for her near his desk. Lemby rose in a lumpish, ungracious
fashion and glared at the fashionable little woman as though he could
have slain her with a look. She cast a careless glance at him, looked
him over from head to foot, and then glanced inquiringly at the
lawyer.

"Is there any reason why this gentleman should wait?" asked Lady Wyke,
and raised a lorgnette to her fine dark eyes to criticise the pirate.

"Mr. Lemby will explain himself why he is here, Lady Wyke."

Mr. Lemby was in no hurry to explain himself. He stared wolfishly at
the woman who had put an end to his greedy hopes, and did not speak,
for quite two minutes. He noted that Lady Wyke was a smallish woman,
by no means in her first youth, with a slender figure and a very
perfect pink-and-white complexion, which was probably due to art. Her
features were cleanly cut, her teeth were white and regular, and she
had a pair of large dark eyes, which suggested those of an Andalusian
beauty. Nothing could have been more fashionable or accurate than
mourning.

Lemby, being a big man, liked little women, and could not conceal from
himself that Lady Wyke was particularly attractive. Yet he judged from
the hardness of her bright eyes and the unemotional tones of her
shrill voice that she was a cat. So he called her in his own mind, and
decided that only personal violence could reduce her to reason, and to
get the money by personal violence was quite, what the buccaneer would
do. He loathed Lady Wyke as a marplot, yet he could not deny her
attractions. At one the same time he would have liked to kiss her and
to strangle her.

"Well, Mr. Lemby," said Lady Wyke, sharply, for she objected to his
insolent scrutiny, "and why are you here?"

"To stand up for Claudia's rights," growled Lemby, in a surly manner.

"Claudia? And who is Claudia?" She stared impertinently through the
lorgnette.

"My daughter, who would have married Sir Hector had you not been
alive."

Lady Wyke dropped her glasses and burst into a shrill, unpleasant
laugh. "Oh, I remember"--she clapped her elegantly-gloved hands--"I
saw the announcement of the proposed marriage in a society paper which
I picked up in New York, and it was that which brought me over, to
tell Hector that he must not commit bigamy. Well, I'm sorry for your
daughter, Mr. Lemby, but I am Sir Hector Wyke's wife."

"Pardon me," put in Sandal, "you are his widow."

"Pooh!" said Lady Wyke, contemptuously. "How precise you are."

"It is just as well to call things by their proper names," said Lemby,
grimly.

"Oh, I'm a thing am I! Don't you think he is very ungallant, Mr.
Lemby?"

"I don't think anything about it," snarled the pirate, crossly.

Lady Wyke put up her lorgnette again. "No? You look as though you
acted rather than thought. I wonder if your daughter is like you."

"No, she dashed well ain't."

"I thought not. My late husband was a fool, but he was always a
gentleman, and would not have cared to marry a girl who used oaths and
bad grammar.

"Claudia speaks as well as you do, and is much handsomer and younger,"
retorted Lemby, spitefully.

"Really! You make me long to see this paragon. What is your Mr. Lemby,
as I should like to call," and Lady Wyke took out a set of ivory
tablets.

"I don't want you to call, nor does Claudia," growled Lemby, who was
exasperated the way in which the woman spoke.

"If you don't want to see me, why are you here, then?"

"I want justice done to my daughter. Wyke intended to marry her, and
settle money on her; and he's done neither."

"You can't expect a dead man to perform impossibilities, Mr. Lemby."
rejoined the widow sarcastically. "I understand what you mean. If you
will give me your address, I should call and talk the matter over."

Lemby shook his head. "There's not much to be got out of you."

"Dear me! how accurately you judge my character in five minutes.
However, I leave the matter to your own discretion. Give me your
address, and I shall pay a visit to see my rival and adjust matters."

Lemby, in a grudging tone, supplied the required information, which
the widow noted down swiftly.

"That is all I want," she said, with a nod, as she replaced the
tablets in her pocket. "I shall call to-morrow or the next day, Mr.
Lemby, Good-afternoon."

Lemby rose and stood, fingering his silk hat like a schoolboy. He felt
abashed in the presence of this domineering little woman.

She became impatient. "Don't stand there gawking. Go away.
Good-afternoon, Mr. Lemby," And without a word, Lemby shambled from
the room, snubbed into silence for once, in his life.




CHAPTER X.


A week went by and things remained as they were. Claudia attended to
her household duties, went shopping, and visited friends, while her
father smoked and ate and slept in somewhat animal fashion. All his
restlessness seemed to have departed since the failure of his scheme
to marry Claudia to Sir Hector, and he was content to live a listless
existence devoid of excitement. She had received a letter from Craver
relating what had taken place in the Lincoln's Inn Fields office, and
quite expected that her father would be angry with her for telling
secrets. But as he held his peace she avoided any further reference to
the ominous words he had uttered, and possessed her soul in patience
until such time as Edwin would be able to help her. Everything was as
dull as ditchwater, and Claudia disliked the whole position extremely.
But so far as she could see there was nothing to be done.

Lemby's real reason for staying so much at home was that he hoped to
be within doors to receive Lady Wyke. But as day after day went by and
she never put in an appearance, the buccaneer began to believe in his
own phrase, that she was "kidding him." Finally, when the week was
ended, he shaved and dressed to go out and enjoy himself, for things
were getting on his nerves, and he felt the need of change and fresh
air. Claudia suggested that she should go with him, as she felt hipped
herself. Lemby, however, roundly said that he wished to be by himself,
and therefore went off alone. But he was punished for his selfishness,
for during his absence Lady Wyke paid her promised call. She sent in
her card while Claudia was enjoying her solitary afternoon tea, and
the girl was very much amazed when she read the name. As her father
had not informed her that Sir Hector had been previously married, and
that his wife still lived. Miss Lemby believed that someone was
playing a game. Out of sheer curiosity she told the parlourmaid to
show in the visitor.

"You did not expect me?" questioned Lady Wyke, on arrival.

"No," answered Miss Lemby. "I am surprised to read the name on this
card."

"Strange," said the newcomer, thoughtfully. "Yet I explained
everything to your father a week ago in Mr. Sandal's office, and said
that I would call."

"My father told me nothing about the matter, Lady----" She hesitated.

"Lady Wyke," said the visitor, politely.

"Are you Lady Wyke?"

"I am."

"But I did not know there was any Lady Wyke."

"You know now."

"Had Sir Hector a brother, then? Has he come in for the title, and are
you his wife?" Claudia asked all these questions in one breath.

"Oh dear me, no, Miss Lemby. I was Sir Hector's wife, and I am his
widow. I see that your father has kept you quite in the dark. Why, I
don t know." Lady Wyke laughed in an amused manner, and selected a
comfortable chair. "As you have sat down, Miss Lemby, I presume that I
may sit also."

Claudia had indeed sunk into a chair, as the announcement took her so
greatly by surprise that she was unable to stand. "Are you in
earnest?" she asked her visitor, and taking no notice of the last
remark.

"Of course I am in earnest. If you doubt me, you can see Mr. Sandal,
who will show you my marriage certificate, and will tell you that, as
Sir Hector's widow, I inherit all his property."

"But Sir Hector was engaged to marry me," stammered the girl, feeling
dazed.

Lady Wyke waved her daintily-gloved hands airily. "Ah, poor man. He
believed that I was dead, and that he was free to marry again. I
learnt from a society newspaper in America, that such was the case,
and came over to tell him not to commit bigamy. For that reason he
postponed the wedding, and retired to Hedgerton."

"But why did he not tell me?" asked Claudia, growing crimson with
anger. "Well, my dear"--Lady Wyke shrugged her elegant shoulders--"it
might be that he hoped to gain time and think matters over. Perhaps he
would have divorced me, although without cause he could not have done
so. Perhaps he might have murdered me."

"I think he has behaved very badly!" cried the girl, with great
indignation.

"All men behave badly, Miss Lemby; they can't help themselves. But as
Sir Hector is dead, suppose we say no more about the matter. After
all"--she raised her glasses--"you don't look very broken-hearted."

"I am not," Claudia assured her. "I never loved your husband."

"Indeed! Then the title and the money attracted you."

"No. I was worried by my father into the position."

"I see. You love another."

"Yes." Claudia's eyes, from habit, wandered to a side table, on which
stood a silver frame containing the photograph of Edwin.

With the swiftness and grace of a swallow Lady Wyke swooped to the
other end of the room and took up the photograph. Then her face
changed, and, a variety of emotions displayed themselves rapidly.
Love, jealousy, fear, astonishment, and suspicion were all written
plainly for Claudia to see. "Why, it's him!"

"It is Mr. Edwin Craver, to whom I am engaged."

"That's a lie!" cried Lady Wyke, and threw down the photograph to face
The girl with a flushed face and hard eyes.

"Seeing that you do not know Mr. Craver, I do not see why you should
speak in that way," was Claudia's dignified reply.

"I do know him. I say that the photograph is one of 'Him.' I call him
that to myself, although until now I never heard his name," and she
clenched her hands so tightly that one glove split.

The more angry Lady Wyke grew the cooler Claudia became, she had
received two great shocks; one was when Lady Wyke announced who she
was, and the other on hearing about the recognition of the photo.
Danger was in the air and it was Claudia's nature to face danger
calmly. "Where did you meet him?" she asked.

"Oh, my dear," Lady Wyke was now quite her self-possessed self, "it is
quite a romance. I went to a motor-factory to buy a car, and there I
saw Mr. Craver, although I did not know his name, as I never asked it.
It was another man who attended to me, and I only saw Mr. Craver at a
distance. But he was so very handsome that I admired him exceedingly.
Although I am not so young as you are, Miss Lemby, I have the heart
and fresh feelings of a girl. After I left the factory I thought a
great deal about Mr. Craver."

"Did you indeed?" said. Claudia, hardly relishing this frank
confession.

"Now you are jealous. Well, I don't wonder at it. If I was engaged to
such a splendid young lover I should be jealous of everyone who looked
at him. However, I was beginning to forget him when I went to Hendon
to see the flying, and there saw Mr. Craver in an aeroplane."

"You never did," said Claudia, excitedly. "Edwin does not go in for
aviation."

"Indeed he does. He went up in an aeroplane and spun about the place
like a tee-to-tum, looping the loop, and soaring and all the rest of
it. It made me so giddy that I had to close my eyes. But when he came
down safely I went up to his machine and congratulated him on his
courage. Then, my dear"--Lady Wyke made a gesture of despair--"my
heart was wholly lost to him. His good looks, his bravery, his
charming manners--can you blame me?"

Claudia declined to say whether she blamed her or not. "You must be
making a mistake," she said, in a disturbed manner. "Edwin certainly
is in a motor factory, and you might have seen him in one. But he does
not go in for aviation. He would have told me had he taken up that
profession."

"Oh, I don't say that he is a professional," said Lady Wyke, readily.
"He is only an amateur, I fancy, and perhaps he did not tell you what
he was doing, lest you should worry. I know it would break my heart to
think that the man I loved was up in the air risking his darling
neck."

"I don't see why you should talk of Mr. Craver in that way, Lady Wyke.
He is engaged to me."

"For the time being, that is."

"For ever. How dare you hint at our parting."

"Well, my dear girl," said the visitor, impertinently, "you took my
husband, so why should I not take your lover?"

Claudia rose indignantly, and her mien was that of a queen in a truly
royal rage. "I won't allow you to talk to me in that way," she
declared, heatedly. "So far as I am concerned, I did not wish to marry
your husband, and I never knew that he had a wife already. My father
forced me to consent, but now that Sir Hector is dead I am going to
have my own way and marry Edwin. You have caused quite enough
mischief, Lady Wyke."

"Mischief, when I saved you from a marriage you disliked?"

"You did not save me. Sir Hector was murdered, and that saved me."

"One moment," said Lady Wyke, in cool tones, "you forgot that it was
my interposition which sent Sir Hector down to Hedgerton to consider
matters. Had he not gone there he might not have been murdered, so I
have saved you, in spite of all you say."

"Did you send him to Hedgerton to got him murdered?" asked Claudia,
scornfully.

Lady Wyke lost her breath at this insinuation, and rose indignantly.
When she got it again it was to protest. "You go too for. Miss Lemby."

"Not so far as you go, madam. How dare you come here and tell me that
you love the man I am going to marry?"

"And how dare you accuse me of murdering my husband?"

The two women faced one another and looked into one another's eyes,
each trying to bear the other down. The widow felt her inferiority
under the girl's indignant gaze, but managed to retreat gracefully.

"Oh, my dear, there is no use our quarrelling like two fishwives. Sit
down and let us talk."

"We have nothing to talk about, said Claudia, refusing to obey, for by
this time she had taken a deep dislike to Lady Wyke.

"Oh, but we have. Let us leave Mr. Craver on one side for the time
being. I told your father that I would call and see you. I am sorry
for you."

"Really. And why?"

"Because, by my reappearance and my husband's death you have lost a
title and a good income. I wish to make amends."

"I refuse to allow you to make amends."

"Now that I see you"--Lady Wyke put up her lorgnette again--"I am not
surprised. But your father wants money to compensate him for failure,
and I came here to offer it.

"My father is not at home," said Miss Lemby, coldly. "If you will make
an appointment you and he can talk the matter over. With my father's
concerns I have nothing to do."

Lady Wyke silently acknowledged that she was beaten, for the time
being at all events. Nevertheless, she as silently determined to get
the whip hand of this haughty girl and make her pay for such
insolence. The little woman liked no one to be insolent but herself.
Still, for the moment she veiled her enmity with Judas smiles. "We
part friends, I hope?" she said, with her sweetest expression.

"No," returned Claudia, uncompromisingly. "We part as we met--merely
as acquaintances."

"I am sorry." Lady Wyke became plaintive. "I like you, and I don t see
why you should not like me. And you know, Miss Lemby, we shall meet
often in Hedgerton when we go to live there.

"You may be going to live there, I am not."

"Oh, but you will. Now that you have mentioned Mr. Craver's name, I
remember that his father is the Rector of Hedgerton. Mr. Sandal told
me so, amongst other matters, when I made inquiries about the death of
Hector. And when you marry Mr. Craver, or course you will take up your
residence near his people.

"Will I?" said Claudia, unsmilingly.

"I think you should, so as to make friends with his parents. And I
shall be in the parish also, as I have taken that house my husband
died in."

"Maranatha?" Miss Lemby looked astonished.

"Yes." Lady Wyke shot a keen glance at her. "It is said to be unlucky,
but, of course, I think that is rubbish. I intend to stay there on the
spot, in order to search for the murderer of my late husband. We were
not particularly good friends; but I owe it to his memory to avenge
his death. And perhaps, when the truth is known to me, it need not be
known to others--if you give up the idea of marrying Mr. Craver."

"What do you mean?" Claudia turned cold as Lady Wyke halted at the
door.

"I mean,", said the other, "that your father was in the house when my
husband was killed. Think it over," and with a significant smile she
disappeared quickly.




CHAPTER XI.


The last words of Lady Wyke, taken in conjunction with the last words
of her father before he paid his visit to Sandal, alarmed Claudia
exceedingly.

The high-spirited girl spent a miserable time alone before her father
appeared on the scene. She employed a few minutes in wiring to Craver,
saying that she wished him to call. In one way or another Claudia
determined to have an explanation, so that she might know where she
was. At present she did not.

Mr. Lemby made his appearance shortly before seven o'clock, and seemed
to be in very good spirits. He asked for his dinner, declared that he
felt better, and treated himself to a sherry and bitters so as to give
zest to his meal. Then, the dinner having been cleared away, the two
sat down to talk. Claudia began abruptly.

"Lady Wyke was here this afternoon," she said, hurling the bombshell
at her father in the hope of startling him.

She failed to do so. "Yes, I know," he said, coolly. "I was wondering
when you would tell me about the matter."

"I waited for you to speak first," said Claudia, rather annoyed. "You
should have explained things to me long ago."

"I didn't think it was necessary," protested the pirate.

"Not necessary? Why, dad. Sir Hector wanted to marry me while he had a
wife living, and for that reason postponed our marriage."

"I know, confound you," growled Lemby. "But Wyke didn't know that his
wife was alive. If he had he would not have proposed to you. I suppose
she told you all about the dashed thing?"

"She explained much, but not all. I think you might speak, dad."

"Oh, I don't mind," rejoined the old man, good-humouredly, and then
and there related the past of the dead man. He stated how Lady Wyke
had been the actress Maisie Chain, and how Sandal had witnessed the
ill-omened wedding. Then he told Claudia about the separation, the
journey to America, the presumed death in the fire at the Chicago
theatre, and finally described how Lady Wyke had learnt her husband's
determination to marry again. "So she came over to prevent that," he
concluded, "and so completely knocked the old man off his perch that
he ran away to hide from her at Hedgerton."

"What did he intend to do?" asked Claudia, after she had digested the
story. Lemby shrugged his shoulders. "Ask me another, my girl? I don't
know. Whether he intended to lie low until he could get rid of her and
marry you, or whether he intended to stick to her and chuck you I
can't say. Seeing that she's a bit of a tartar, I guess he wanted to
divorce her if possible."

"Could he have done so?"

"Lady Wyke says he couldn't, as she has always kept herself
respectable."

"I don't think that Sir Hector was to blame," said Claudia, after a
pause "except in not telling me and you before he went to Hedgerton."

"I should have squeezed the explanation out of him when I paid him
that visit, my girl, if he hadn't gone to see the man who killed him."

"Do you know the girl who killed him?" asked the girl in a low voice.

"No, I don't," denied the pirate, roundly, but looking uneasy, "and I
wish you'd stop harping on that dashed murder, Claudia. Wyke's dead
and buried, and his widow has got the cash, so let the whole shoot
slide."

"How can I when you hinted that you were mixed up in the matter?"

"Oh, I only said that to get you to come to Australia with me," said
her father, rising with a yawn and stretching himself lazily.

"But Lady Wyke says the same thing."

Lemby dropped his arms and his mouth shut like a steel trap. "Tell me
what that dashed woman said."

Claudia repeated Lady Wyke's last words verbatim. "And she said that,
although the truth was known to her, it need not be known to others
if----"

"If what; if what? Don't stop," rapped out the buccaneer, sharply.

"If I refused to marry Edwin."

"Oh!" Lemby's black eyes grew larger and rounder. "Why did she say
that? She doesn't know Craver."

"Yes, she does. She saw him at the factory and at Hendon."

"What was she doing at Hendon?"

"Flying," said Claudia, curtly.

"You don't say so. I never thought he'd have the pluck to go up in an
aeroplane, my girl. I wish he'd break his dashed neck."

"How dare you say that, dad! Edwin is the bravest man in the world,
and if he broke his neck I should die. I love him. I love him and she
shall never, never take him from me."

"She. Who?"

"Lady Wyke. She has fallen in love with Edwin."

Lemby's face grew evil and lowering. "Then I again say that I wish
he'd break his dashed neck," he cried with an oath. "Confound the
fellow, he comes up against me at every turn. First, he tried to spoil
my plans with regard to your marriage with Wyke, and now he is my
rival."

"Your rival?" Claudia looked puzzled.

"Yes, hang him. I can't get the money for you by will, as everything
has been left to that woman. So I've got an idea that she might marry
me."

"Marry you?" Claudia started up from the chair she was seated in. "I
hope you won't be so silly as to marry at your age."

"Don't be insolent, my girl," retorted Lemby, for his vanity was hurt.
"I'm by no means an old man. There's many a kick left in me yet. Why
shouldn't I marry Lady Wyke? She isn't bad-looking, and has the five
thousand a year we want so badly."

"I don't want it!" cried Claudia, vehemently? "I wouldn't take a penny
of it, dad. She's a horrid and dangerous woman. I object to having her
for a stepmother, There!" and she stamped after her usual fashion.

"Well, then," snarled Lemby, crossly, "you can prevent my having my
own way by letting her marry Craver, since it seems he is in love with
her."

"He isn't in love with her. I never said so. She is in love with him.
As to letting her marry him, she shan't! You are cruel to suggest such
a thing."

Lemby clutched his head. "Dash it, things are so crooked that I must
straighten them out somehow by suggesting," he said, angrily. "And if
this young jackaroo is trying to spoil my plans again, I'll make it
hot for him. Upon my word, Claudia, I think it best that you should
marry the fellow, so that I may be able to make Lady Wyke my wife and
collar the dibs."

"She won't have you, dad."

"Oh, yes, she will." Lemby glanced at the nearest mirror, and admired
his big body, his black hair, his stalwart looks and general virility.
"I may as well tell you that I met her when she came downstairs after
seeing you, and I took her to a teashop to have a talk. We got on
famously."

"Did she tell you that she suspected you of committing the murder?"
asked Claudia, acidly, and not approving of this escapade.

"No, she didn't. If she had I'd have brought her to her senses."

"You'll never do that. She's too clever for you, dad."

Claudia had just uttered this remark in a very positive way when Jane,
the parlourmaid, showed young Craver into the drawing-room. Lemby was
by no means so pleased to see him as Claudia was, and looked at their
greeting glumly. He was quite annoyed when he heard that his daughter
had summoned this inconvenient third by telegram. Edwin, who looked
smart and well-groomed in evening dress, nodded coolly to his
prospective father-in-law and sat down. Then Lemby could contain
himself no longer.

"What the deuce do you mean by treating me as nothing in my own
house?" he demanded, clenching his big fists with a truculent air.

"I apologise if I have treated you impolitely," said Edwin, raising
his eyebrows; "but as you have never shaken hands with me, or bid me
welcome; I do not see what you expect me to do."

"Be civil," growled the buccaneer, and dropped into an armchair to
fill his pipe. "I'd have dropped you at sight with my little gun had
you behaved in this cheeky way to me in Australia."

"I'm not so easily dropped." retorted Craver, laughing, for the man's
childish behaviour was not worth noticing. "Two can play at that game,
Mr. Lemby. But as Claudia wants to tell me something, don't you think
you can treat me as your guest and with courtesy for a few minutes?"

Turning towards her lover, Claudia rapidly told him all about Lady
Wyke and her visit. Craver was amazed by the story, and could not
believe, that Wyke had been married.

"How do you know that this woman is not an impostor?" he asked Mr.
Lemby over Claudia's shoulder.

The pirate grunted. "She ain't," he declared, decisively. "Sandal
knows all about the marriage, and knows her and knows about the will
leaving the cash to her, hang her! She's not an impostor, worse luck.
And, what's more, she's a dashed pretty woman."

"Do you think so, Edwin?" asked Claudia, anxiously and significantly.

"Oh!" The young man smiled broadly. "Then she told you that she had
met me?"

"Yes. Both at Hendon and at your factory. Edwin, you did not tell me
that you went in for aviation."

"I was keeping it as a surprise for you. But I can explain all about
my reasons later. Meanwhile we have ample to talk about. Yes, I did
see Lady Wyke at the factory, where she came to buy a car. Afterwards
I saw her at Hendon, when she congratulated me on a successful flight.
She's a pretty woman created by her own art."

"What do you mean by that?" demanded Lemby, growling like a dog over a
bone.

"I mean that she is painted and powdered, and padded and overdressed,
and all the rest of it. She is mutton trying to look like lamb."

"Then you don't love her?" said Claudia, with a sob of relief.

"Darling," said the astonished young man, "are you mad? How could I
love a woman of that kind? And, remember, I have only seen her twice."

"She loves you, however," said Lemby, grimly.

Edwin stared at him. "Is this a joke?" he asked, sternly. "If so it is
not a good one, and you display bad taste in making it, Mr. Lemby."

"I am in earnest, as it happens," said the old man, drily, "and don't
tell me what's good taste or bad taste, dash you! Lady Wyke saw your
photograph over there, and recognised you, Claudia told her your name,
which she said she had never heard."

"Then she is telling lies," said Craver, calmly. "I was introduced to
her at the factory when I sold her the car."

"She said that another person attended to her," said Claudia, quickly.

"I attended to her. Lady Wyke is evidently an accomplished liar. As to
being in love with a man she has only seen twice, she must be joking."

"It didn't sound like joking," remarked the girl, wretchedly. "She
hinted that dad was concerned in the death of her husband, but that
she would say nothing if I refused to marry you."

"I'll twist her neck if she accuses me of a crime of which I am
innocent," was Lemby's observation; "and when, I marry her I'll soon
bring her to heel."

"Are you going to marry her?"

"Why shouldn't I, Craver? She's rich and dashed pretty, in my opinion.
I want money, and I can put up with her. Do you object?" he asked,
with a sneer.

"Not at all," rejoined Edwin, promptly, "I don't want her. I shall
tell her so if she makes advances to me--on one condition, that is."

Lemby scowled. "What condition?"

"That you allow Claudia to pay a month's visit to my parents at
Hedgerton Rectory. I have told them that I love her, and they are
anxious to see her."

Claudia, longing for peace and quietness, clapped her hands. "Oh, I
should like that above all things. Do say yes, dad."

To the surprise of both young people, the pirate agreed very amicably.
"The fact is, I haven't enough money to run this flat much longer," he
explained, coolly; "so if Claudia goes away for a month, I can stay
here on short commons. Mind, I don't say that I agree to your marrying
her, Craver. I let her go to Hedgerton for my convenience, not for
yours."

"Dad, how excessively rude," cried the girl, colouring.

"Rude or not, you can go. As to Lady Wyke, if Craver will sheer off, I
think I can bring her to reason. Wyke should have left the five
thousand a year to you, Claudia. So, as we can't get it by will, we'll
get it by marriage."

"I rather think you will find Lady Wyke a difficult woman to manage,"
said Edwin, warningly. "She's an adventuress of the worst type."

"Well, I'm an adventurer," retorted Lemby, "I know how to size her
up."

"What about her accusation, dad?"

"Oh, a wife can't give evidence against her husband," said Lemby,
coolly.

The young people, still mystified by the ambiguous way in which Lemby
spoke, glanced at one another.




CHAPTER XII.


It was with a heavy heart that Claudia went to Hedgerton. She could by
no means understand the behaviour of her father, who certainly talked,
in a most contradictory manner. At one moment he denied that he had
anything to do with the death of his old friend, yet the next hinted
at mysterious risks undertaken to obtain money.

Naturally, the change of scene, with new people to talk to, and with
new occupations, did her infinite good. To her the rectory was a haven
of peace, and Edwin a strong-armed man, who could and would defend
her. The welcome of Mr. and Mrs. Craver comforted her exceedingly, as
they were charmed with their visitor, and thoroughly approved of her
in every way, The Rector, who was a white-haired, gentle-faced old
gentleman, fonder of literature than of humanity, admired her beauty
greatly, while little Mrs. Craver pronounced her to be an uncommonly
sensible girl. Within the week, Claudia was comfortably settled in her
new surroundings, and was happier than she had been since her arrival
in England. On the plea that Mrs. Craver could teach her housekeeping,
she took her share of the work and became quite a busy bee. Her
prospective mother-in-law found her quite an able assistant. Poor,
weary Mrs. Craver had toiled and struggled and scrimped and screwed
for so many years alone that it was quite a relief for her to see a
younger person attend to the work. And Claudia enjoyed this
domesticity, greatly.

Lemby displayed no desire to call at the Rectory and see the parents
of the young man whom his daughter desired to marry, He remained in
London, as a gentleman-at-large, and still continued to live in Tenby
Mansions--that is, he camped there, for his hours were generally
passed elsewhere, although he returned nightly to sleep in the flat.
When he did write to Claudia, which was rarely, it was to congratulate
her that she had free board and lodging at the Hedgerton Rectory,
since money was so scarce. These letters made the girl work all the
harder, as she was too proud to live on strangers, and wished on all
and every occasion to make some return for bed and board and fire.
Ardent as, Mrs. Craver was about work, she took it upon herself to
restrain Claudia's zeal, and insisted that she should not do much.

"As a rule I have to drive people to work," said Mrs. Craver at
afternoon tea, "but you, my dear, require to be checked. I never met
anyone like you."

"So Edwin thinks," remarked the Rector, who had a book on his knee and
a cup of tea in his hand. "He says that Claudia is a pearl and far
above rubies in value. I quite agree with him."

"Oh, you must not think so highly, of me," said the girl with a blush.
"I am really a very ordinary kind of person. I love work."

"Then you are not an ordinary person," said the Rev. George Craver.
"It is very rarely one meets with people who love work. If Hedgerton
was filled with such people my task would be easier than it is."

Mrs. Craver shook her brisk little head, and her sharp face looked
sharper than ever. "The Hedgerton people are too self-complacent,
George. You can talk and talk and talk, but no impression can be
made."

"I think, that I am making an impression on Lady Wyke, Emma. She
attends the services regularly, and has done so since she came here a
month ago."

Mrs. Craver straightened her slim figure, which was clothed in the
shabby black silk, and looked severe. "Lady Wyke comes, to show off
her frocks. She is sinfully extravagant in dress."

"Oh, my dear Emma, you must not assign such a reason for her
attendance at church. She really is most attentive to the services,
and also she desires to help in the parish work. She told me so."

"She would tell you anything, George, and you would believe her. Who
is she?"

"Sir Hector's widow," said Claudia, looking surprised, at this
unnecessary remark. "Everyone knows that."

"Oh, yes," agreed Mrs. Craver, significantly. "She is the widow of
that poor man, sure enough. But who is she? Where does she come from?"

"She comes from London, Emma," said the Rector, humorously, "and she
lives in Hedgerton."

"Why does she live here, George?"

"Well, she must live somewhere."

"But not in the very house in which her husband was murdered, To my
mind, it is a ghoulish idea for her to rent  Maranatha, seeing, what
took place there."

"It is odd," admitted Claudia, musingly. "I wonder why?"

Mr. Craver reached forward to take another slice of bread. "It may be
that she wishes to learn who murdered Sir Hector, and, therefore,
thinks that she will be more successful if she remains in the house
where the crime was committed."

Claudia winced, and her thoughts flew to her father and his mysterious
remarks; to Lady Wyke and her ominous hints. "Has she discovered
anything yet?"

"No!" observed Mrs. Craver, sharply. "At least, she has said nothing
to us, although she has been here a month. And that reminds me,
George, that she has not called again since Claudia arrived."

"Well, Emma, she called on you and you called on her. The demands of
courtesy have been satisfied. We are dull people, you know, and she is
a smart lady. It is not to be supposed that she will find much
enjoyment in our society."

"Indeed, George, she would find our society very instructive. She may
be smart, as you say, but she certainly is not a lady."

Claudia nodded. "I did not think so myself when I saw her in Loudon."

"Ah, yes"--Mrs. Craver turned briskly--"of course, you saw her.
Considering how badly Sir Hector behaved to you, my dear, I wonder she
had the impudence to call. What courage she must have."

"Oh, I don't know, Mrs. Craver," Claudia shrugged, carelessly.
"Naturally Lady Wyke was anxious to see me, seeing that I was to marry
her husband. He was not to blame, poor man, as he quite believed that
she was dead."

"She had no business to come alive again," retorted Mrs. Craver. "Yet
I am glad, for Edwin's sake, that things have turned out as they have
done."

"My dear Emma, you couldn't expect Lady Wyke to allow her husband to
commit bigamy. Why shouldn't she come alive again, as you put it?"

"She should have remained always with her husband, as a true and
faithful wife should," replied Mrs. Craver, drawing up her spare
figure.

"I don't think that the separation was Sir Hector's fault," said
Claudia, after a pause. "He was a very polite and amiable old man. I
certainly did not wish to marry him, as I always loved Edwin. But my
father made me accept."

"Strange, my dear, seeing how strong-minded you are."

"You have not met my father," rejoined the girl, briefly.

"I don't think I want to. Of course, when you marry Edwin, he must
come to the wedding, I suppose, and give you away. But he is much too
dashing a gentleman for quiet people such as we are."

"Why, Emma," said the Rector, surprised, "I did not know you had seen
him."

"I saw him outside the doors of the Entertainment Hall when the
inquest was taking place. I happened to be passing on that day. Your
father, my dear"--she addressed Claudia--"is a handsome man; but I
should think he has a temper."

"He has," said the man's daughter, significantly. "Perhaps, if you
knew my father you would not want me to marry Edwin."

"What nonsense. I love you for your own sweet sake. Your father will
go back to Australia, I hope, and then we need not be bothered with
him."

"Emma! Emma!"

"Well, I can't help it, George. After all, in trying to make Claudia
marry that old man who died, Mr. Lemby did not behave very well."

"All the same, he is Claudia's father," said the Rector, reprovingly.

The girl flushed, and then turned rather pale, as she felt a trifle
embarrassed during this discussion. If Mrs. Craver talked of her
father in this way when he was absent, what would she say when he was
present. The precise, refined little lady would never get on with the
pirate, who was all that she was not.

Mrs. Craver, less observant than the Rector, accepted the reproof,
although she did not notice Claudia's change of colour, and went on to
make other remarks dealing with another subject.

"I only hope that Lady Wyke's example will not ruin the parish," she
observed. "She is an extravagant woman, and you wouldn't know
Maranatha now that she is living there. I'm sure when I called and saw
the quantity of new furniture she has, and the silk curtains, and the
fine pictures to say nothing of the many flowers and the expensive
china, I thought how rich she must be."

"She has five thousand a year," said Claudia. "That was the amount of
money left to her by her husband."

"Which would have been yours, my dear, had you married him. However,
it is just as well since you love Edwin."

"What is just as well, Emma?" asked Mr. Craver, who found his wife's
remarks a trifle confusing on occasions.

"That Lady Wyke should have come to life, and that Claudia should be
poor. I am sure that Edwin will become a partner in that motor firm,
and then he will be well able to support a wife. By the way, Lady
Wyke's motor-car was manufactured by Edwin's firm. Before you came
down, Claudia, she asked Edwin to show her how to drive."

"And did he?" asked Claudia, wincing when she thought of Lady Wyke's
admiration for her lover.

"No. He said that he was too busy and had to get back to town. And now
that I come to think of it George, Edwin really went back to London,
as he had to fly. My heart sinks when I hear of these aviation
accidents. A man with a mother should not fly."

"Nor should, an engaged man," chimed in the Rector, "and Edwin is
engaged. Don't you think, Claudia, that you could persuade him to give
up aviation?"

"I'll try." said the girl, with a faint sigh. "I don't like the idea
myself, but Edwin is very determined when he likes."

"Just like me," said Mrs. Craver, complacently. "I am always firm."

"Obstinate," said Mr. Craver, with a laugh.

Before his wife could argue that obstinacy and firmness were entirely
different, the parlourmaid entered with the information that Mrs.
Mellin wished to speak to her mistress. Mrs. Craver was surprised, as
this was not the day when washing arrived and the report of various
doings in the parish was made. Something unusual must have caused Mrs.
Mellin to come unexpectedly to the Rectory, so the eager little woman
hurried out to learn what was the matter. Mr. Craver frankly laughed
when alone with Claudia. His wife's energy, always amused him.

"Emma should have been a detective," he remarked to Claudia. "She is
always on the look-out for information, and knows everything that is
going on in the parish. Depend upon it, Mrs. Mellin, who is her
assistant-detective, has come with startling news, and Emma will
return to startle us with some kind of a storm in a tea-cup."

"Mrs. Craver is the dearest woman in the world," said Claudia, with a
sympathetic laugh, "and I like her mannerisms. To me she is kindness
itself."

"Who would not be kind to you, my dear."

Claudia was not emotional as a rule, but her eyes filled with tears at
the paternal tone of the Rector's speech. She leant forward
impetuously and took his hand. "You don't know how happy I am here,"
she cried, impulsively. "This place is like heaven to me. And yet
perhaps it would be wiser for me to go away and forget Edwin."

Mr. Craver patted her hand. "Why should you?"

"Oh, my father and I are a kind of stormy petrel pair of birds.
Wherever we go there is sure to be trouble. I should not like to bring
trouble into this haven of peace."

"We'll take the risk, Claudia. We all love you, and now that you are
here, here you will remain until Edwin makes you his wife. There is no
reason why you should go away."

"I shall stay here willingly," she said, with a sigh of relief. "I am
only too glad to stay here."

Just as she made this speech the door opened, and Mrs. Craver rushed
into the room with flushed face and startled eyes. Evidently Mrs.
Mellin had told her something of moment. "Oh, George"--she spoke while
moving into the room--"do you remember Laura Bright? I wonder I did
not recognise her."

"Laura Bright, Mrs. Mellin's sister, who ran away twenty and more
years ago?"

"Yes, yes! The same. I wonder I did not recognise her. She is Lady
Wyke. I mean Lady Wyke is Laura. And I never recognised her."




CHAPTER XIII.


Little Mrs. Craver was greatly excited over the discovery that Lady
Wyke was none other than flighty Laura Bright, the sister of the
humble washerwoman. It was not surprising that the Rector's wife had
not recognised her, as the brilliant woman of the world was very
different from the pretty, discontented, and unformed girl who had
gone away from Hedgerton some twenty and more years previous. Indeed,
Mrs. Mellin herself confessed that she would never have recognised her
sister, had not that sister called upon her to proclaim her identity.
Evidently Lady Wyke had no false pride, for she calmly stated who she
was, and talked over family affairs with Mrs. Mellin. Old James
Bright, who had been the father of the two women, was dead, and so was
the mother. The washerwoman's husband had passed away, leaving her
with one son, and Lady Wyke was a widow, with no child at all. It was
for this reason that she had called on Mrs. Mellin.

"You could have knocked me down with a feather, ma'am, when that grand
lady come along, saying as she was my very own sister Laura. Not a bit
of pride about her, ma'am, for she sat down and took tea, just as if
she was no one in pertic'ler."

"It does her credit," said Mrs. Craver, approvingly. "I think the
better of Lady Wyke for not being ashamed of her humble origin. She
has greatly improved from the flighty girl she was."

"Clever, ma'am," interposed Mrs. Mellin, proudly, "never flighty."

"Pooh, pooh! She was a very feather, Mrs. Mellin. But we won't discuss
her weaknesses. I suppose she called in order to help you?"

Mrs. Mellin rubbed her nose. "She did and she didn't, ma'am. So far as
I'm concerned, she said she didn't mind giving me a pound or so when
wanted. But she really called about Neddy."

"Oh, indeed. And what about Neddy?"

"Laura ses," Pursued Mrs. Mellin, wiping her mouth with a corner of
her well-known tartan shawl, "as Neddy is the only one of our family
left, and is as bewtiful as a angel and 'ave a voice like a bird. A
skylark she called 'im, and wants to git 'im singing in London."

"Ridiculous!" cried the Rector's wife, vigorously. "Let her give him a
good education and apprentice him to some trade."

"So I ses, ma'am, me bein' 'umble and Neddy my boy. But bless you,
ma'am, Laura wouldn't 'ear of it, sayin' as 'is voice was wonnerful,
and the gift of 'Eaven, which it 'ud be a shame not to 'ave 'eard. Had
a long tork with 'her I did, ma'am, and Laura ses, as she was on the
music-'all stage 'erself, and didn't see no-'arm in it, nohow. So she
ses as she's goin' to send Neddy to London to appear as the Skylark at
the Tit-Bits Music 'All."

"Ridiculous! Ridiculous!" said Mrs. Craver, again. "A choir-boy and a
music-hall. The two things don't go together."

"They won't, ma'am." retorted Mrs. Mellin, rather defiantly. "Neddy
'ull leave the choir when he becomes the Tit-Bits Skylark. Laura's
goin' to 'ave 'is voice trained with a pal of 'er's as sings 'isself,
and with 'im Neddy can stay, Laura payin' 'is board and lodgin'.
Week-ends he can come down 'ere for me to 'ave a look at 'im and look
arter 'is washing, never trustin' them London laundresses as I don't
no'ow. So there you are, ma'am. Fortune hev come to me and Neddy at
larst."

"I don't approve of it, Mrs. Mellin, and the Rector won't approve of
it either, you may be sure. I'll speak to him and to Lady Wyke
myself."

Mrs. Craver did so, but gained small satisfaction, for Lady Wyke
firmly held to her opinion and refused to listen to the little woman's
entreaties. As to the Rector, he also ventured on a mild remonstrance,
but Neddy's aunt quickly routed him. She declared that it was better
for Neddy to earn his bread by means of his great gift than to remain
in Hedgerton, loafing about and consorting with bad boys. In the end
Lady Wyke got her own way, as such a hard and determined woman would,
so Neddy arrayed in a new suit of clothes, was packed off to London
forthwith. He was more than willing to go, as he looked forward to a
life of excitement, while his mother was willing that he should try
his luck, as she hoped that his voice would win sufficient money for
him to support her in her old age. And as the two sisters were thus
agreed, neither Mrs. Craver nor the Rector could do anything, although
they highly disapproved of the step taken. But they fought desperately
that Neddy should learn a trade, and the battle was prolonged for
quite a month. At the end of that exciting time, the young scamp went
to London, and the fight ended in the triumph of his mother and aunt.
Mrs. Craver was much grieved over her defeat.

During the month things went on very smoothly. Edwin came and went,
attended to his motor work, and between times essayed flying with more
or less success.

Lady Wyke never came near the rectory during the four weeks, rather to
Miss Lemby's surprise. Claudia quite expected that after the visit
paid to the flat and the hint given that Lady Wyke would seek her out
again and still pursue her object, which was to take possession of
young Craver. But Sir Hector's widow remained ostentatiously away, and
Claudia saw her only in church and occasionally on the esplanade.
Short as was the time which had elapsed since her husband's death,
the widow was already changing her mourning for dresses less
aggressively dismal. From black her gowns turned into violet, and on
some days she appeared in grey, always looking smart and fashionable,
well-turned-out, and remarkably young.

With keen feminine instinct, Claudia guessed that Lady Wyke was on the
warpath, and still cherished a desire to marry Edwin. Seeing that she
had only met him once or twice, and that she knew he was engaged to
Claudia, it seemed ridiculous that she should hope to win him. Yet her
coming down to Hedgerton, her amelioration of mourning-frocks, and her
frequent attendance at church to win over Edwin's parents, all
suggested to Miss Lemby's clever and rather jealous nature that the
widow had not got over her infatuation. Those superior residents of
Hedgerton, who knew something of the outside world, invariably spoke
of her as "The Merry Widow." Claudia frankly hated her.

This being the case, it was unpleasant that she should meet with the
schemer unexpectedly and be forced to have a conversation.

It was now March and there crept into the keen air a breath of spring.
The sky was intensely blue, the chestnut buds were glummy, and the
wayside hedges were greening over with tiny leaves. As the village,
with its ancient fish-like smells, was not inviting, the girl often
walked along the verge of the cliffs beyond the Rectory, and watched
the murmuring waves ebbing and flowing on the sandy beach below. On
the day she met Lady Wyke the sunshine was unusually warm and
brilliant, and the azure of the sky, the deep blue of the sea, the
reddish stretch of cliffs, and the delicate, green budding of the
trees made up an uncommonly pretty picture. Claudia walked along for
quite a mile and then sat down to rest near a coastguard station. The
winds brought colour to her cheeks, sunshine light to her eyes, and
the girl looked extremely young and extremely pretty.

"A penny for your thoughts, Miss Lemby," said Lady Wyke, in her
shrill, sharp, and unpleasant voice.

Claudia started violently, as the newcomer had stolen up so quietly
behind that she was not aware, of her proximity until she spoke.
"Good-day, Lady Wyke," she answered, quietly, "I fear my thoughts are
not worth even the small sum you offer."

"Oh, I don't know so much about that." Lady Wyke, a brilliant figure
in black touched here and there with orange ribbons, leant with both
hands on the smart silver-headed cane which she carried. "Young girls
dream of satin frocks and orange-wreaths, of handsome bridegrooms and
the wedding march."

"You are not a good thought-reader," said Claudia, coldly.

"Ha! we all make mistakes. Then you were thinking of your father, and
of----"

"Of things which it is not necessary for you to know," interrupted the
girl, with provoking calmness. "My thoughts are my own."

"What an obvious remark." Lady Wyke put up her lorgnette and surveyed
Claudia, inquisitively. "Very obvious for so clever a girl."

"How do you know that I am clever?"

"Well, I think a girl with a shady father, who does her best to
ingratiate herself with prejudiced people because she wants to marry
their son is clever."

"What right have you to say that my father is shady?" asked Claudia,
still composed, and mistress of herself.

Lady Wyke laughed. "Oh, your father and I have had quite a
correspondence," she said, airily. "He was a great friend of my late
husband's, you know, and professes anxiety to help me discover who
killed poor Hector. He writes suggesting theories, and I write back to
say that he is talking rubbish. But I rather think," added the woman,
shrewdly, "that there is more in your father's attentions to me than
zeal for revenge on the man who murdered Hector."

"Indeed!" Claudia coloured as she knew very well what her father's
intentions were. "But all this does not warrant your calling him
shady."

"Well, no. All the same, I may have other reasons. Miss Lemby. I think
you are a nice honest girl----"

"Pardon me, but isn't this conversation rather personal?"

"I mean it to be," replied Lady Wyke, serenely. "You see, it is just
as well that you and I should understand one another."

"I see no reason why we should. We are strangers," retorted Claudia,
very much annoyed by the brazen impudence of the speaker. "Oh, I don't
think we are strangers, Miss Lemby, seeing that you were on the eve of
marrying my husband."

"Well, I didn t marry him, and what is more, I never wished to marry
him. It was my father's scheme to----"

"To get money," interposed Lady Wyke, softly. "Didn't I say that he
was shady, Miss Lemby? You, in a way, admit as much yourself."

"I admit nothing"--Claudia rose abruptly to her feet--"and I really do
not see, Lady Wyke, why you should force your company on me in this
way."

"There are many things you don't see, but will be made to see, my
dear," said the elder woman, insolently. "I saw you leave the Rectory
and followed you to this place so that I might talk to you quietly."

"I see no reason why I should listen," shaffed Claudia, restlessly.

"Oh, I think you will when I say what I have come to say," answered
Lady Wyke. "To tell, you the truth I quite expected you to call and
see me at Maranatha."

"I never had the least idea of continuing our acquaintance," retorted
the girl, pointedly. "Our last meeting in London did not make me long
to meet you again, Lady Wyke. Your last words hinted----"

"I shall talk about my hints on another occasion," interrupted the
other in sharp tones. "Meanwhile I have sought you out to make you an
offer."

"Indeed?" Claudia was quite unmoved.

"Yes. You are poor."

"That is my own affair."

"And your father is poor," continued Lady 'Wyke, taking no notice of
the interruption. "You both want money. Your father, as I can see very
well, is paying attentions to me in the hope that I may look
favourably upon his advances."

Claudia was persistently blind. "What advances?"

"Well, if you will have it, my dear, your father has more than hinted
that he desires to marry me. He could not get Sir Hector's money
through you, so he is now trying to get it through me."

"Is he? Well, Lady Wyke, with what my father says or does or thinks, I
have nothing to do. If he wishes to marry you, and accept him, I have
nothing to say. It is none of my business."

"But as your father's daughter----"

"Yes. I know all about that," flashed out the girl quickly, and with
flushed cheeks; "but there is no more to be said."

"There is this. That I do not intend to marry your father."

"That is his and your affair. It has nothing to do with me. What have
I to do with your intentions, Lady Wyke?"

"You may guess," rejoined the woman, in silky tones, "when I tell you
that I wish to marry Mr. Craver."

Claudia flushed still deeper, and looked indignant. Then the humour of
this insolence calmed her and made her laugh. And laugh she did, right
in the face of Lady Wyke's artificial beauty. "I am not afraid," said
Claudia, after looking her rival up and down with all the contempt of
youth for age.

The woman clenched her hands, grew a deep red, and quivered from head
to foot, as nothing could have been said, calculated to wound her
more. However, having an object to gain she kept her temper. "I said
before that you are poor, and so is your father. He can't get money by
marrying me, as I wish to marry Mr. Craver. But your father can get
money, and so can you, if you will stand on one side and refuse to
become Mr. Craver's wife."

"Oh, indeed! And how much do you propose to offer me as a bribe?"

Lady Wyke, thinking from the soft tone that Claudia was willing to
consider her proposal, became eager. "I shall give you a thousand a
year," she said rapidly, and advancing a step. "Think what you can do
with that! It is quite a fortune in Australia. You can return there
with your father, and keep him in his old age. Think, Miss Lemby--a
thousand a year!"

Claudia laughed again, and again Lady Wyke winced. "I don't think that
there, is any need to say more. Good-day," and she moved away.

"Stop, stop!" screamed Lady Wyke. "I want my answer."

Claudia looked over her shoulder laughing persistently. "There is no
answer."

"Very good." Lady Wyke quivered and turned pale under her rouge. "I
have made you a fair offer, and you have refused even to consider it.
Now look out for yourself and for your father."

Claudia laughed still louder, and continued to walk away. "Good-day,
Lady Wyke!"




CHAPTER XIV.


Needless to say Claudia did not report the conversation with Lady Wyke
to the Rector or to his wife, as neither of them would have
understood, so shameless a chase of age after youth. But the girl was
anxious to disburden her mind, and looked forward anxiously for the
arrival of Edwin, who was expected down to spend the usual week-end.
After luncheon the Rector retired to write his sermon, while Mrs.
Craver found that she had household duties to do. The young couple
were left alone, and forthwith Claudia related all that had taken
place on the cliffs. Her lover was greatly annoyed.

"But we can't talk over things quietly here," he said, taking
Claudia's arm and moving towards the dining-room door. "Mother is sure
to pop in and out when least expected, and I don't want her to hear
about Lady Wyke's vagaries."

"I have said nothing, Edwin."

He squeezed her arm. "That is wise of you, dearest. Let us go into the
garden and thresh the matter out. I have something to tell you also."

They found a secluded arbour at the bottom of what was called the
Laurel Walk from its hedges, and there sat down comfortably. It was
quite a place for lovers, and being springtime, they should have paid
their devotions to Cupid. But matters were much too serious for
trifling of this sort, and the golden hour was filled with the
discussion of important matters. Edwin's very first remark made
Claudia angry--and with her lover.

"Lady Wyke has ben persecuting me with personal attentions and with
letters."

"Oh!" The girl's eyes flashed and her cheeks grew red. "Why didn't you
tell me, Edwin?"

"I didn't wish to worry you, dear."

"Your worries are my worries, Edwin. I wish to be your comrade as well
as your wife. I think it is very unkind of you to keep silent."

"Well, you know, Claudia, a fellow does feel a bit of an ass in
talking about a woman running after him. Spare my blushes!"

"It's all very well turning it into a joke, Edwin," cried the girl,
indignantly, "but it is no joke. Lady Wyke is a most dangerous woman."

"Why, what harm can she do?"

"She can hurt my father, if her last threat is to be believed."

"Ah, but is it to be believed?" questioned the young man shrewdly.

"Yes it is. Lady Wyke is growing old, and, as you know, there is no
fool like an old fool. She has fallen in love with you, and will move
and earth to get you as her husband."

Edwin frowned. "That is quite true." Then he smiled. "She has asked me
to afternoon tea."

"Oh, what impertinence! You won't go."

"I leave the decision to you, Claudia," said Craver, drily.

"What does she wish to see you about?"

"I understand from her that she will explain when I call, not
before." There was silence for quite a minute. "You had better go,
Edwin," said, Claudia, becoming more her reasonable resolute self, and
speaking decisively. "I am quite sure that Lady Wyke suspects my
father with something in connection with the death of her husband. She
may even believe that he is guilty. Perhaps I was foolish not to stay
on the cliffs and hear what she had to say. But I was in a rage. I
only wanted to hurt her, and did so by laughing."

"You cut off your nose to spite your face." said Edwin, with a shrug.
"That is not like you, Claudia."

"No, it isn't," she answered penitently. "Usually I am calm and
self-possessed when there is trouble. But Lady Wyke makes me so angry
with her insolence that I lose control of myself. How has she
persecuted you, Edwin."

"I told you. Nearly every day she has written to me at the factory,
saying a great deal without making clear what she really does mean.
Three or four times she has been in town, and I have had interviews
with regard to the motor she bought. This was wrong, and that was
wrong, when, as a matter of fact, nothing was wrong. Then she wrote
inviting me to take her to the theatre; she asked me to dinner; she
sent me a box of cigarettes----"

"Oh!" Claudia was furious. "You returned the cigarettes?"

"Well, dear; I couldn't do that without appearing to be rude."

"Then you should have been rude, very rude. She deserves rudeness."

"But I refused the dinners and the theatres on the plea that I was
busy. I did not intend to see her to-day, but after her conversation
with you, I think it is just as well that she should understand
things."

"I agree. Tell her you intend to marry me and not her. Oh, what a cat
she is! What a persistent, spiteful cat!"

"She is showing her claws at any rate," said Craver, with a shrug. "It
is puzzling to know why she has taken this mad fancy to me."

"It's not puzzling at all," rejoined Claudia, promptly. "I took a
fancy to you myself. You are handsome and clever and----"

"Oh, spare my blushes!" interrupted Edwin again, and really did grow
crimson at these crude compliments. "You make me feel an ass. But
there is no doubt," he continued seriously, "that she means mischief
with regard to your father."

"You don't think that he is guilty, Edwin?" faltered the girl,
wincing.

"No, no! Certainly he is innocent. But he was in the house when Wyke
was murdered, and Lady Wyke may try to implicate him in the matter.
Sergeant Purse isn't very clever, you know, while she is; so she may
be able to twist him, round her finger. I'd better pay the visit,
Claudia."

"Yes. But don't--don't--kiss--her."

"Claudia!"

"I know I'm silly," said Miss Lemby, dismally; "but she's old and
desperately in love with you. I don't say that you'll kiss her----"

"Which you did," interpolated Edwin.

"But she may kiss you."

Very much amused, Edwin jumped up and swung Claudia to her feet, "You
are a silly child," he said fondly. "You are the only woman I ever
loved, or ever shall love. Will you come with me and keep guard?"

"No!" Claudia stamped viciously, "I couldn't keep my temper. She
certainly means mischief with regard to my father, Edwin, for she is
keeping him on the string."

"What do you mean by that?"

"I mean what I say. Dad wants to marry her and get the money. He said
so. She guesses that, and is allowing him to write her silly letters
so that she may keep in touch with him. For all I know she may ask him
to dinners and theatres, as she asks you. Dad is clever in some ways
but a fool in others."

Craver remembered the truculent manners of the buccaneer, and recalled
his dominating personality. "I don't think Lady Wyke will find him
such a fool as she imagines. He is quite capable of twisting her
neck."

"Oh!" Claudia turned pale. "That sounds as though dad was capable of
stabbing Sir Hector."

"He didn't do that," said Edwin decisively.

"How can you be sure?"

Craver hesitated in a most unaccountable manner. "Well, it might be
the other fellow who bolted on the bicycle, you know. If there had
been any evidence against your father he would have been arrested
after the inquest."

"That is true," sighed Claudia, with relief, "But what does Lady Wyke
mean by her hints?"

"I'm going to find out. Don't worry."

It was all very well for Craver to give this sound advice, but hard
for the girl to take it. Usually she was sensible, but the long
continued strain on her nerves was breaking her down. Also she was
jealous of her elderly rival, who was clever, rich, and persistent. Of
course, Edwin could be trusted, still he was only a man, and men are
wax in the hands of women.

Claudia would have liked to go also to Maranatha in order to protect
her man from the vile machinations of Lady Wyke, But she could not
trust herself. She would be sure to say something or do something
which would give her hostess the advantage, so it was wiser to risk
nothing. Edwin went alone, and then Claudia returned to her room to
spend an uncomfortable hour or so of suspense.

The young man walked briskly along the road and turned into Ladysmith
Road about four o'clock. He soon arrived at the square, red bricked
mansion and paused to stare at it. Maranatha had been greatly improved
by its present tenant. The lawns were trim and clean-shaven; the elms
were clipped, and looked more civilised, while the house itself had a
more inhabited and less dismal look.

Edwin nodded to himself in approval of Lady Wyke's cleaning-up and
restoration, then walked up the neat path and rang the bell. When a.
sedate-looking footman introduced him into the hall he shivered a
little, at the memory of the late tragedy, but recovered himself when
shown into the drawing-room. This, was upstairs, the very room where
Oliver Lemby had been waiting on that fatal night. But it presented
quite a different appearance now from what it did then, although the
visitor did not know this. Formerly dusty and untidy when attended to
by Mrs. Vence, it was now cheerful, bright, and comfortable. A fire
was burning in the grate, there was a new and brilliant carpet, while
the old-fashioned furniture had been renovated and polished so as to
look like new. Showy coloured rugs and draperies made the vast
apartment look gay, and everywhere there were hothouse flowers of
rainbow hues. The scent of pastilles burning in bronze vases made the
atmosphere languid, indisposing those who breathed it to
transformation from gloom to brightness as had taken place in
Maranatha.

And the author of the transformation rose from a sofa on which she was
reclining to greet her visitor. "I am so glad to see you," she said
softly, and he noted that her shrill voice was now low and gentle. "I
feared you would not come."

But Edwin was not to be taken in by her wiles, and only lightly
touched her hand outstretched in greeting. "I certainly came, Lady
Wyke," he observed, coldly, "because your letter intimated that you
wished to speak to me about something connected with the death of your
late husband."

"Does that interest you?" she asked, indicating a seat and sinking
down on to the sofa.

"Surely. You hinted to Miss Lemby that her father had something to do
with the matter, and for Miss Lemby's sake I am interested."

"Can't we leave the name of that girl out of the conversation?"

"I think not," said Craver, still coldly. "You forget that it is on
behalf of her father that I have come. You threatened, both in London
and on the cliffs the other day to do him harm."

"Oh!" Lady Wyke's brows contracted in a frown, "so that girl told you
of our conversation on the cliffs?"

"Yes. About an hour or so ago. In fact, the moment I arrived as you
might say, she told me everything."

"Everything?" repeated the woman, with emphasis.

Edwin nodded. "Even to the offer of one thousand a year."

"She should have had more sense than to say that," snapped Lady Wyke.

"Don't you think that we had better leave Miss Lemby's name out of
this conversation?" said Craver, tartly.

"I asked you to," she reminded him swiftly, "and you refused."

Craver could not deny this, and looked uncomfortable. "I have not much
time to wait, Lady Wyke," he remarked, looking at his watch with
pointed rudeness. "I must ask you to come to the point."

"Oh, there is plenty of time for that," she answered sweetly. "You
must have some tea first."

"Thank you. I am due back to tea at the Rectory."

"I think not. We have much to say to one another."

"About Mr. Lemby?"

"No." Lady Wyke looked at him so pointedly that he blushed. "About
yourself."

"I wish you wouldn't," he exclaimed, just like an unformed schoolboy.

"You wish I wouldn't what?"

"Talk like that."

"Talk like what?"

"Oh, we are speaking in a circle. See here, Lady Wyke. You asked me
here to say something about Mr. Lemby. I understand from your hints to
Claudia that you accuse him of murdering your husband."

"How crudely you put it." She raised her eyebrows. "I don't accuse
him."

"Then why I am here I don't know."

"You will know soon, Mr. Craver. I accuse someone else."

"Who is it?" The young man suddenly shivered, in spite of the warm
atmosphere.

"Who is he, you mean. Well; then, ask yourself who murdered my
husband."

"I don't know. How should I know?"

"Because you murdered him. It was you who escaped on that bicycle, Mr.
Craver, and it was you who stabbed Sir Hector in this very house."




CHAPTER XV.


Lady Wyke's sudden accusation of murder came like a bolt from the
blue, and so stunned Craver that he had not a word to say. While he
sat silent in the deep armchair, as white and cold and motionless as
any corpse, she touched the bell-button and ordered the footman who
appeared to bring in tea immediately, The footman arranged the
tea-table near the fire, and Lady Wyke sat down to attend to her
hospitable duties.

"Sugar, Mr. Craver?" she asked, when the tea was poured out.

If she could be composed so could he.

"Thank you. Two lumps," he said, and bent forward to accept the cup.

"You take it very well," said Lady Wyke, approvingly. "But then I know
you have plenty of courage. All aviators must be courageous, and you
are very successful I hear. I wonder if you would take me for a flight
one day?"

"Would you risk one with me?" asked Craver.

Lady Wyke laughed, settled herself amongst the cushions of the sofa,
and stirred her tea. "Oh, you mean that you might be inclined to tip
me out of the machine," she observed, looking at him straightly. "Very
naturally you should, seeing what I know. Still, I am willing to risk
a flight."

"What do you know?"

"I told you. I know that you murdered Sir Hector."

"I did not murder him," said Craver, steadily.

Lady Wyke shrugged her elegant shoulders. "Of course you say that. I
don't very well see what else you can say if you want to save your
neck."

"My neck isn't in danger."

"Oh, I think it is, and at my discretion"

"So you think."

"And so I believe, with every reason to believe," she retorted, and
yet looked uneasy. This calm way of taking so heinous an accusation
surprised and irritated her greatly. "Well, what have you to say?"

"A great deal."

"Hum! I told you that you would not get back to tea at the Rectory.
After all, we are very comfortable--at least I am."

"Well, I can't say that I am comfortable in the presence of a woman
who stoops so low to gain her ends; but let us get down to business."

"Business? You mean you wish to know why I act in this way?"

"Well, I have a sort of idea of your motive. Still--"

"Still, you must be blind," she interrupted, "not to see that I am in
love with you and wish to marry you."

"You go the right way about getting me to be your husband, I must
say," said the young man, sarcastically. "I shall love you immensely
if you succeed in leading me to the altar against my will. Get someone
else to woo you," he ended.

"No; I want you."

"You can't have me."

"Edwin"--she leant forward and extended her arms imploringly--"don't
be so cruel. It is not my fault that I have fallen in love with you.
The moment I met you I wished you to become my husband. After all, I
am not so old and not so ugly that you should scorn me. Also, I am
rich; I have brains----"

"With regard to that last," he interrupted, "I don't think you have.
Otherwise, you would scarcely proceed with your love-making in this
way."

"It is the man who should make love;" she panted, fiercely.

"I agree with you. Why, then, do you usurp the privilege of the male
sex?"

"I hate you!" Lady Wyke clenched her fists, as if about to strike him,
and glared viciously. "I hate you!"

"I prefer that," said Craver, serenely, and kept a cool eye on her
doings.

"Ah"--Lady Wyke looked up to the ceiling--"has this man any feeling?
How can he sit there and see a loving woman tear her heart to lay it
at his feet for him to trample on."

"Silly! Silly!" was Edwin's comment.

"Take care." The woman bent over him and hissed the word into his ear.
"I can hang you!"

"So you say," he replied, unmoved.

"So I say, and so I know," she shouted. "I know that you came down to
this house on the night when Hector was murdered. You stabbed him, so
that he might not marry that Lemby girl. You escaped on the bicycle.
You----"

"Stop. How can you prove all this?"

"Oh, I can prove it right enough. But I don't want to go--to--such
lengths." Lady Wyke burst into tears and took out her handkerchief. "I
wish you wouldn't force me to--to behave in this way. Oh, my darling,
I love you with all my heart and soul, I want to--to----"

Edwin sprang up as she stumbled forward, with the idea of throwing her
arms around his neck. "Don't go on acting like a fool," he said,
sternly. "If you must talk, talk sensibly. Otherwise I shall leave
immediately."

"I'll send the police after you," she threatened, furiously.

"Do so. You'll be no nearer to gaining your object."

Then Lady Wyke broke down. "Oh, Edwin! Edwin! Edwin!"

Purposely cool and pointedly rude Craver resumed his seat, lighted a
fresh cigarette and looked at her critically. "I wouldn't cry if I
were you, Lady Wyke. You can't afford to do so at your age without
spoiling your face."

"Oh, you brute!"

"Quite so; and, knowing that I am a brute, why, try to force me to
become your husband?"

"Oh, I don't know." She dabbed her eyes carefully with her
handkerchief. "Perhaps to make you smart for having treated me so
insolently. I won't give you up to that girl."

"There is no question of giving up. I am hers; I never was yours.
Come, Lady Wyke, don't you think we had better discuss matters
calmly."

"What matters?" she asked, wilfully dense.

"Well; the accusation, for one thing."

Lady Wyke did not reply. She was thinking how best to get the better
of this iceberg. Threats did not move him; passion did not appeal to
him; tears had no effect. Strange to say, the more he held out the
more she admired him. However, if she wished to gain him against his
will, and that she intended to manage, being so infatuated, the sole
thing to do was to talk business. He must be forced to see that she
had the upper hand, and if he did grasp that fact he might yield. But
even then she was not very sure of victory.

"Let us talk calmly," said Lady Wyke, lighting a fresh cigarette. "I
want to marry you, and I mean to have you. That is not an easy thing
for a woman to say to the man she loves."

Edwin admitted this, and suggested that she should lay her cards on
the table forthwith. "Then I shall show you my hand."

With an ironical smile she fumbled under the cushion and produced a
letter deliberately to pass over to him. "It's a copy," she observed,
while he read it. "You see, I can't trust you with the original."

"Well, perhaps it is as wise not to do so. H'm!" Edwin glanced over
the four or five lines and nodded. "This is my letter to Sir Hector
saying that I was coming down to see him that night at seven o'clock.
I wrote this letter--the original one, I mean--in answer to one which
your husband wrote me asking me to call. How did you get the original
of this?"

"From Neddy Mellin, my nephew. He took the letter from the hall table,
where it had been left by the postman on that night. He did not show
it to his mother, as he is clever, and hoped to get money for it."

"He read it, I suppose?"

"Oh, yes. The boy is far in advance of his years, and knows a thing or
two. He guessed that you were guilty, since the letter said that you
were calling to see Sir Hector. However, Neddy gave the letter to me,
thinking I could get some money for it for him. I told him to hold his
tongue, and, lest he should not, I sent him to London. He is quite
safe. Well, now, Mr. Craver, do you deny that you were in his house on
that night?"

"Oh, no," said Edwin, smoothly. "I came before my letter arrived, it
seems, as Hall brought it while I was in the house. Wyke wished to see
me with regard to his discovery that you were alive. He told me that
he could not marry Claudia, because you had turned up. But he loved
Claudia, and not being able to marry her thought he would make her
happy by giving her to me."

"He could, not help himself," said Lady Wyke, tartly.

"So he said. He heard my ring at the door, and came down to the study,
leaving Lemby in the drawing-room. Wyke told me that he hated you, and
did not intend that you should have his fortune. He intended, so he
said, to make a new will, leaving the five thousand a year to me, on
condition that I should marry Claudia. I agreed, and he took me out of
the study into the dining-room adjoining to show me some notes he had
made for a new will."

"Rather strange that he should keep those notes in the dining-room,"
sneered Lady Wyke, who was listening intently.

"It was strange. But then Wyke was not quite himself that night. Your
unexpected reappearance gave him a shock, because he hated you. Anyhow
he took me into the dining-room and showed me some papers. Afterwards
he went back to the study for other papers, and was away for some
time. I heard a cry and a fall, and after waiting for a moment or so I
went back to the study. There I saw Wyke lying dead on the hearthrug.
While I was bending over him, to see if he was really dead, Mrs. Vence
came in, dropped the tray, and fainted. Then came the postman's knock.
I lost my head, for in a flash I saw in what a dangerous position I
stood if I were discovered with the dead man."

"It seems to me," said Lady Wyke, deliberately, "that you kept your
head very cleverly, seeing how you saved yourself."

"I did that on the spur of the moment. I was very much afraid, and ran
into the hall, opened the front door, and dashed down the path. All I
wanted to do was to escape being recognised by Hall. Then I saw his
bicycle leaning against the fence, and immediately the idea came to me
of escaping. I used it as you know--and as everyone else knows. Where
I rode in the fog and the gloom, I scarcely knew; all I wanted to do
was to escape. Then I found myself on the Bethley Road, and saw the
carrier's cart joggling along with the man half asleep while driving.
I jumped off the bicycle and hoisted it on to the back of the cart, so
that no one should know where I had dropped off the machine. Sorley,
the carrier, found it, as you know, when he reached home at Waking. I
then walked back to the Bethley railway station and took the train to
town. That is the whole story, so you see that I am innocent."

"You make out a very good case for yourself," she said, coolly; "but
who will believe such a story? It is known that the Lemby girl wished
to marry you, and that you hated Hector for taking her from you."

"That is quite true. But I did not hate him after our interview in the
study and the dining-room. Of course, I pitied him."

"Yes, of course you did," scoffed the woman, "Anyhow, you are known to
have hated him as your rival, and the original letter I hold will
prove that you came down to murder him."

"I don't see that?"

"Sergeant Purse may see it."

"Well, then, show it to Sergeant Purse," said Craver, in desperation.

"Oh, no. I shall give you time to reflect. Take a week or a fortnight.
If you agree then to marry me I shall destroy the letter. If not----"
She paused and smiled.

"I'll take the fortnight," said Craver, heavily. "You are top dog this
time."




CHAPTER XVI.


At the Rectory, dinner was always placed on the table at seven
o'clock, it being a law of the Medes and Persians that everyone should
be in time. Yet, much to Claudia's distress, Edwin did not put in an
appearance until the meal was half over. His parents were speculating
as to what could be delaying him when he entered, cool and calm, but
somewhat pale. With an apology for his late arrival, and for not
having changed his dress, he sat down to cool soup and lukewarm fish.

Mrs. Craver felt annoyed, and said that she was. "Why did Lady Wyke
keep you such a long time?" she asked, indignantly. "It was most
inconsiderate of her. But, there, you can't expect manners from a
person of that class."

"She did not keep me, mother," answered, Edwin, without raising his
eyes, "for I left Maranatha some time ago, and have been walking about
ever since thinking things over in detail."

"What things?" asked the Rector, curiously, and Claudia's eyes mutely
put the same question.

"Those concerned with the murder of her husband."

"Then she did wish to see you about that crime?" said Mrs. Craver,
sharply.

Edwin nodded. "She to have a good opinion of my qualities as a
detective and asked me to help her to discover the truth."

"Well, I'm sure! And what next? As if you were in a position to waste
your time attending to that business."

"Well, mother, I nave promised to do so. After all, Lady Wyke is a
widow, and has no one to help her. Also, on behalf of the firm, since
she is a good customer, it is policy on my part to keep in with her."

"I don't see that, Edwin," observed the Rector, shrewdly. "After all,
you are an engineer, and not a detective."

"Oh, I don't mean to say that I am going to give up the substance for
the shadow," said Edwin, cheerfully; "that is, I don't intend to leave
my business to start on what may prove to be a wild-goose chase. But,
between times, and when I have an unoccupied minute or so, it is easy
for me to look round. And I think you are rather hard on Lady Wyke,
mother. She isn't at all a bad sort."

Mrs. Craver sniffed and straightened her spare figure. "I don't like
the woman."

"Well," remarked Edwin, with the air of a man closing a discussion, "I
have given her my promise to look into things, and I must keep it. For
that reason, I have not changed my clothes, mother. I have to return
to town to-night."

"Oh, Edwin!" cried Claudia, with dismay and with some reproach. "Can't
you stay until Monday?"

"Not if I have to keep my promise to Lady Wyke."

"Well, Edwin"--Mrs. Craver stood up to go--"a promise is a promise,
and you must not break your word."

After the dinner was finished, the young couple were left alone, and
Edwin poured himself out a glass of port wine, which he felt sadly in
need of. Claudia said nothing, but watched her lover carefully.

"I hate telling lies, in any case," said Craver, abruptly, "but it is
particularly difficult with regard to my own parents. Yet I can do
nothing else."

"You can tell the truth to me," suggested Claudia, quietly.

"I intend to. We won't be interrupted for at least fifteen minutes, so
we can talk without arousing the suspicions of father and mother."

"What do you mean?"

"Can't you guess after what I have said, Claudia? I lulled my mother's
suspicions regarding a possible flirtation of Lady Wyke with me by
telling a lie; and I said that it was Christianity to help the poor
widow--hang her!"

"Oh!" Claudia started and winced. "So she----"

"Exactly. Her flirtation is more serious than ever. She wants to marry
me and asked me to tea so that she might put the case plainly."

"She can't force you to marry her, Edwin?"

"She'll try to; and there is no doubt that she has me on toast."

Claudia rose from her chair, and came round the table to sit beside
him. "Do you mean to say that she can implicate my father in the
crime, and demand your hand as a promise of silence?"

"No. I mean to say that she can drag me into the matter."

"Impossible!" Claudia stared aghast. "What have you to do with the
death?"

"Nothing; and Lady Wyke knows as much. All the same, she can make
things very unpleasant for me, and will, unless I give you up and
marry her."

Claudia looked puzzled. "But how can she?"

"I'll toll you, dear." He took her hand and drew her to him. "Do you
remember the letter which Hall, the postman, delivered that night?"

"Yes. My father told me something about it, although it was not
mentioned at the inquest."

"Luckily for me it was not."

"Why? Oh, why?"

"Because I wrote it."

"You. And to Sir Hector?"

"Yes. Wyke wrote asking me to go down and see him at Maranatha
privately. I replied, saying that I would, and fixed the time. But,
owing to the lateness of the post, I arrived before my letter did.
Hall brought it, and left it on the table in the hall. It disappeared,
and Lady Wyke told me that Neddy Mellin took it when he came with the
washing just after the crime was committed. What his object was, I
can't say, although Lady Wyke hinted that he desired to get money.
However, the boy read the letter, and knew that I was coming to the
house. I can't say if he thought that I had already arrived, and was
the man who escaped on the bicycle. Lady Wyke got that letter from
Neddy, and made him promise to hold his tongue. She sent him to London
so as to get him out of the way. She now holds my letter making the
appointment, and threatens to show it to Sergeant Purse if I don't
throw you over."

"Oh!" Claudia stared straight in front of her, pale and dismayed. "It
is very terrible, and very complicated. Why did Sir Hector write to
you?" Craver told her rapidly and without further preamble. Thus,
Claudia learnt how the dead man intended to leave his money to Edwin,
and how he hated his wife. "It was to prevent her finding out his
intentions regarding the disposal of his property that he asked me to
come secretly to Maranatha," finished Edwin, quietly. "I did so."

"No one saw you; no one recognised you?"

"No one. I was muffled up in a heavy top-coat when I got to Redleigh
Station, and pulled my cap over my eyes so that the station-master and
the porters should not recognise, me. They did not, and then I walked
to Hedgerton to enter that accursed house, and--well you know the
rest."

"But how did you escape?"

This also Craver told her, and shortly Claudia was in possession of
the whole terrible story. Of course, she immediately saw in what peril
her lover stood, and how easily Lady Wyke could have him arrested.
"Oh, what is to be done?" she wailed, clasping her hands.

"The first thing to be done is for you and me to keep cool. The second
is to prevent father and mother knowing anything that we know. For
that reason I was obliged to tell lies, much as I dislike doing so.
The third thing, to be done is for me to go to London to-night and see
your father at Tenby Mansions the first thing in the morning."

"What good will that do?"

"Your father was in the house, and may know something of moment."

"You believe that he may be able to prove your innocence?"

"Yes, I think so. He was in the drawing-room sure enough; but I
can't believe that a man of your father's restless disposition
would stay quietly there. I believe that he came down the stairs and
saw--saw----" Edwin hesitated.

"Saw what?" asked Claudia, faintly.

"Saw who murdered Wyke."

"But who could have done so. Surely you don't believe that dad is
guilty?"

"No. Certainly I don't."

"And you are innocent also?"

"Absolutely."

"Then there was only Mrs. Vence in the house. Do you think that
she----"

"No," said Craver, decisively. "She had every reason to keep him
alive, and no reason at all to wish him dead. She didn't strike the
blow. Who did I can't say. I'm going to find out. Now you see,
Claudia, why I told my father and mother that I wished to assist Lady
Wyke. I must assist her, as otherwise I shall be put in gaol on a
charge of murder."

"She would never do that," exclaimed Claudia, flushing angrily.

"Oh, indeed she would. The woman is a perfect nuisance, and, although
I was as rude as possible to her, she would not sheer off."

"If I gave you up would she let you have that letter and hold her
tongue?"

"She says she would," was Edwin's cautions reply, as he rose and
glanced at his watch. "Anyhow, I have a fortnight to think over
things. In order to got the better of Lady Wyke and clear my character
I'm off to-night to begin my search for the true assassin. Come to the
gate and see me off, Claudia."

Neither the Rector nor his wife really learnt why Edwin took so abrupt
a departure. He made his apologies anew, shook hands with his father
and kissed his mother. Mrs. Craver accorded him a rather chilly
forgiveness, and remarked that he could not be so very fond of
Claudia, seeing that he preferred to leave her and go about Laura
Bright's business. However, Edwin laughed her into a better humour,
and then went off to Redleigh, on his motorcycle, to catch the nine
o'clock train to town.

The Rectory was very dull after this untoward departure. Mrs. Craver
being upset, retired early to bed, and insisted that her husband
should come likewise. As he had to rise for early celebration next
morning, he was not averse to doing what she asked, and the old couple
were safely tucked in by ten o'clock. Claudia, left alone, read a book
for a time, but was unable to fix her attention on the story, as she
was actually living a much more exciting one. Then she saw that the
servants were all in bed, and retired herself in the hope of getting
to sleep. Only in that way could she forget her troubles. But she
woo'd sleep in vain; she tossed and turned restlessly for quite thirty
minutes. At the end of that time she took a sudden resolution, and
rose to dress herself. It was not yet so late but what Lady Wyke might
still be up and about, so Claudia decided to call and see her.
Considering the primitive habits of Hedgerton, the project was rather
a mad one. Still, strong diseases require strong remedies, and in a
very short time Claudia, with the latch-key in her pocket, had slipped
out of the dark Rectory, and was on her way to Maranatha.

It was a bright, star-lit night, although there was no moon, and the
girl walked swiftly along the Esplanade towards Ladysmith Road.
Luckily, she met no one, not even Jervis, the policeman, as his
attentions on Saturday night were always given to the village in the
hollow. Claudia boldly rang the bell, and when the footman appeared,
sent in her card. The man seemed rather astonished at so late a
visitor, but took up the card to his mistress, and shortly returned
with the information that Lady Wyke would be pleased to see Miss
Lemby.

Claudia followed the servant up the stairs; she was ushered into the
drawing-room, and the door was shut behind her. So here she was in the
lion's den, alone and unsupported.

"This is a pleasant surprise, Miss Lemby," said Lady Wyke, moving
forward with outstretched hands. "Do tell me why you have come to see
me at this hour?" Claudia rejected the outstretched hands, and,
folding her own, spoke sternly to the point. "I have come to give up
Edwin to you," she said, calmly.

"Oh!" Lady Wyke laughed shrilly. "On what condition?"

"On condition that you save his life!"

"I accept!" said Lady Wyke. "His life is safe when he becomes my
husband."




CHAPTER XVII.


After the excitement of the evening and her swift walk in the keen air
at so late an hour, Claudia felt faint. Nor did the languid atmosphere
of the tropical drawing-room tend to restore her. The heat of the
large fire, the brilliance of the many lights, the multiplicity of
colours, and the odour of flowers mixed with the scent of the burning
pastilles, all made her sense reel and her eye grow dim. With a
violent effort she cleared her head of vapours, and became as composed
as formerly she had been agitated. Lady Wyke was pleased.

"You are worth fighting, Miss Lemby." she said, approvingly.

"Thank you for the compliment," retorted Claudia, sitting bolt upright
with a stern white face and steady eyes.

"Oh, it's no compliment," trilled Lady Wyke, like a bird, "it is the
truth. If you were a namby-pamby of the weeping kind I should despise
you. As it is, I respect you immensely. Few girls of your age would
act so sensibly."

"I am acting sensibly, as you call it, because I see no other way in
which to act. But although I have yielded for the moment, Lady Wyke,
don't think that I have given up all hope of regaining Edwin. That
Edwin will be my husband is a foregone conclusion. Aren't you ashamed
to get a husband on such terms?"

"Not a bit," said Lady Wyke, coolly. "He doesn't love me now, but he
will learn to love me. I suppose he is annoyed at you throwing him
over."

"I haven't told him," retorted Claudia, curtly. "He has gone to town."

"Oh!" Lady Wyke started and looked suspiciously at her visitor. "I
know that you can implicate Edwin in the murder by showing that letter
to Sergeant Purse," said Claudia, steadily. "All the same you know that
he is guiltless."

"Do I? Then who is guilty?"

"I can't say."

"Your father?" asked Lady Wyke, impertinently and with meaning.

"No!" Claudia started to her feet. "My father would never stab an old
man."

"Oh, I think he would to get money," retorted the hostess, leaning
back in her chair and smiling. "He is very much the man who would slay
and stab in order to get money. And from all accounts he needs money
very badly."

"Yes, I think he does," said Claudia, coolly, "else he would scarcely
have thought of marrying you."

The shot told, and Lady Wyke grew angry. "Look here, Miss Lemby, I am
scrupulously polite to you, and I expect politeness in return. If you
have nothing more to say you had better go."

"Oh! I have ever so much more to say. I will go when it suits me."

"You defy me," cried Lady Wyke.

"I do. I have given in over one thing because I can't help myself. I
am not going to give in over the question of staying or going. After
we have had an explanation, it is just on the cards that I may rescind
my surrender."

"Oh, indeed. Well, Miss Lemby, as it seems we are to have a talk, let
me offer you some refreshment. There is wine on yonder table."

"No, thanks."

"Well; then, go on; what have you to say?"

"This. That Edwin is innocent."

"Prove it," said Lady Wyke. "Edwin has told me everything," pursued
Claudia. "He came down here in answer to a letter from your husband
inviting him to an interview."

"Quite correct. The letter I hold is written in answer to one sent by
Sir Hector."

"Very good," remarked Miss Lemby, "we are agreed so far. Well, then,
Edwin told you, I presume, why Sir Hector wished to see him?"

Lady Wyke nodded. "Yes. I appeared and spoilt Hector's plan to marry
you. He knew that he had made a will years ago leaving his property to
me, and, as he hated me like poison he wished to make another will. He
would have done so after marriage, had you become his wife, since he
could not make it before the ceremony. But as I prevented the
marriage, and Hector did not wish to see me benefit in any way, he
proposed to make Edwin his heir on condition that he married you."

"I take it, then, that the will was not made when Edwin came here."

"No. What are you getting at? Do you mean to say that there is a will,
and that I have destroyed it?"

"Oh, no. But I merely point out that as no will was made Edwin had no
reason to murder Sir Hector."

"He murdered him because he did not wish Hector to marry you."

"You forget," said Claudia, coolly. "Your reappearance prevented Sir
Hector from making me his wife. Edwin had no reason to fear the
prevention of his marriage with me from that quarter. And as Sir
Hector wished to make a will in Edwin's favour, Edwin would scarcely
have been such a fool as to murder the man and spoil the chance of his
getting five thousand a year."

"I think you should have been a lawyer, Miss Lemby; you argue so
well."

"Thank you. But I should like to know, what you think of the case as I
have put it? You must see that Edwin had no reason to murder Sir
Hector."

"Oh, I see that!" sneered Lady Wyke, crossly. "The question is, would
a jury see it?"

"I think so. Absence of motive for the commission of a crime goes a
long way towards proving the innocence or an accused person. And
remember all the evidence is purely circumstantial."

"Circumstantial or not, I have the whip hand, and I mean to use the
whip."

"And I mean to try and get my lover as you are trying to do."

"As I have done," gasped Lady Wyke with fury. "He is mine! He is
mine!"

"Not yet! Oh, you thought I was in earnest when I surrendered him to
you." Claudia laughed insultingly. "What a fool you are. I have been,
bluffing you all along, you silly creature."

This series of insults made Lady Wyke lose her temper altogether, and
she became the fisherman's daughter straight away. She rushed across
the room to throw herself on Claudia and scratch her eyes out; but
Miss Lemby was prepared for the onset, and immediately grabbed her
hands so that she could not use them. Being much the stronger of the
two, she forced Lady Wyke over to the chair she had risen from and
made her sit down. Claudia was silent herself, but Lady Wyke screamed
so loudly that it was a wonder the servants did not come up to see
what was the matter. Lady Wyke bit and twisted; and cried and writhed;
but Claudia held her down firmly in the chair until she was exhausted.

"I think you will be quiet now, said Claudia, suddenly, as Lady Wyke
became weak, ceased to kick, and began to sob.

"I'd like to kill you," wept the beaten woman, crying her heart out.

"I daresay you would, if you had a knife or a pistol." jeered Claudia,
who was panting with her exertions; "but as you have only your hands,
and I am ever so much stronger than you are, it is just as well that
you have given in."

"I haven't given in, you common, vulgar creature," snarled Lady Wyke.
"I intend to marry Edwin in a month."

"You won't. He marries me."

"You have surrendered him to me to save his life."

"Oh no, I haven't. I have been bluffing you, as I said. Edwin's life
is quite safe from you, Lady Wyke."

"Is it, when I have that letter?"

"I defy you to produce that letter." retorted Claudia, arranging the
veil round her head, and looking in the mirror over the fireplace. "If
you do, there will be trouble. Edwin has a good defence, as I have
proved to you. No jury would convict him when no reason can be shown
for the commission of the crime of which you accuse him."

"He ran away; he ran away," panted Lady Wyke, who felt her defeat
sorely and physically.

"I daresay he did, because he lost his head for the moment. But he has
found it now, remember."

"I shall see Sergeant Purse to-morrow and show him that letter," said
the hostess, viciously, and stood up to smooth her ruffled plumes at
the mirror as her rival had done.

"Well, do so. You won't get Edwin in that way?"

"We'll see."

"Yes. We'll see. Good-bye, Lady Wyke, you'd better go to bed. I shan't
detain you any longer," and Claudia moved majestically towards the
door.

"Wait, I won't show that letter."

"That's your affair, and not mine."

"But," said Lady Wyke, with an evil smile, "I shall make it my
business to discover how your father murdered Hector."

"That will be difficult. He had no reason to murder him," so Claudia
said, but she winced for all that at the threat.

Lady Wyke saw her wincing, and regained a little of her former
dominance. "Yes, he had. Hector was going to leave the money to Edwin,
and your father knows that Edwin wouldn't have given him a shilling."

"He would have given me a shilling, and I would have given it to
father. I know you are trying hard to make me surrender, Lady Wyke,
but it won't do. Edwin has gone to London to see my father and make
things straight."

"He can't, he can't!"

"That remains to be seen. I defy you."

"I hear you," Lady Wyke burst out into a shrill laughter. "You defy
me, do you. Well, then I shall hang your father and marry Edwin and
see you ruined."

"Oh, so you admit that Edwin is innocent," cried Claudia, seizing this
admission. "I admit nothing, I shall act."

"Act as soon as you please." Claudia opened the door. "Good-night,
Lady Wyke."




CHAPTER XVIII.


Having, reduced her enemy to impotence, Claudia returned to the
Rectory, and slept the sleep of the just. But her slumber was due
rather to exhaustion than to placidity of mind; and on waking in the
morning, she began to realise that she had acted rather rashly.
Impulsively the girl had sought out her enemy, and impulsively, had
carried the war into the same enemy's camp. But had she been wise in
thus driving Lady Wyke into a corner? Sir Hector's widow was clever,
persistent, and dangerous, so that Claudia had no mean antagonist to
deal with. Enraged by an ignominious defeat, Lady Wyke might see Purse
and ruin Edwin without further delay. It was possible, if not quite
probable, that she would act in this way; and Claudia went, down to
breakfast, wishing fervently that the record of the previous night
could be obliterated. The girl recognised that she had been in too
much of a hurry to right the wrong.

All Sunday Claudia was worried and anxious, both in church and out of
church, before meals, during meals, and after meals. Of course, since
the Rector and his wife were to be kept in the dark, she had to feign
a cheerfulness which she was a long way from feeling. Even sharp Mrs.
Craver noticed nothing in the girl's manner likely to suggest
questions, and privately thought that if Claudia was quieter than
usual it was because Edwin had gone back to London so abruptly. Lady
Wyke did not come either to the morning or evening service, and the
Rector's wife speculated as to why she was absent.

In the afternoon, Claudia found it impossible to remain at home, so
she went for a brisk walk along the cliffs. Emerging from the Rectory
grounds she passed through a small wood, which sheltered the house
from the sea breezes, and took the meandering path along the verge of
the cliffs. On arriving at the coastguard station she paused for a
quarter of an hour to remove her hat and let the air breathe its cool
kiss on her locks. She had a headache, caused by her perplexity and
the peace around did it good, soothing the lingering pain and finally
taking it away altogether. Claudia set out on her return journey
feeling much better, and began to think that she was making a mountain
out of a molehill. But before she quite made up her mind to this
course she suddenly came across Neddy Mellin.

The boy was descending the zig-zag path which led to the beach
immediately below the Rectory, and, not being far distant, Claudia
recognised him at once. She then remembered, how Neddy had stolen the
fatal letter which implicated Edwin in the crime, and forthwith
resolved to ask questions. It required some diplomacy to ask the right
ones, so as to get right answers, for Master Mellin was a clever brat,
extraordinary sharp and suspicious. However, Claudia thought that she
could manage him, and, to attract his attention, raised her voice in
the Australian "Cooee!" Neddy turned his head and halted when he saw
her coming down the path. He liked Miss Lemby, as she was  a "very
scrumptious gal"--his own words--and, moreover, had given him a packet
of cigarettes, which was wrong of Claudia, considering the boy's
tender years. Neddy looked uncommonly smart in an Eton suit, which
suited his slim, well-knit figure perfectly. Decidedly, he was a
handsome lad, so angelic in appearance, that she wondered how he
managed to keep his shady character out of his face. Neddy was an
unscrupulous little wretch, he stopped at nothing to get his own way
and his own enjoyment, thereby greatly resembling his elders.

"You do look smart, Neddy," said Claudia, when she reached the boy.
"Why are you not in London?"

"I came down to see mother," said Neddy, whose diction, as the
listener noted, was much improved, even in the short time he had been
under tuition. "She always wants to see me every week, so that she may
know that I am safe. Coming down on to the beach, miss?"

"Yes. I am out for a walk. I have not been down this way before."

"It's just as well, miss," said Neddy, sagely, and led the way down to
the sands. "This place here is dangerous."

"Dangerous!" Claudia looked, at the billowy sand-mounds.

"Yes. See," and Neddy pointed to a distant patch of glistening sand,
which looked oozy and damp and treacherous. "Quicksands, miss."

Claudia stared and shivered. "What a nasty-looking place."

"Aye, and it is nasty, too, miss. Folks have told me again and again
how other folk have, been swallowed up yonder."

"There should be a sign that it is dangerous."

"There was a sign," chuckled Neddy, "but it was swallowed up also, if
you or me got in there," he added, fixing his innocent blue eyes on
the gleaming expanse, "we'd go down to hell."

"Don't talk like that, you horrid little boy."

"I'm not little, though I may be horrid, miss. I'm grown up, I am, and
next week I sing at the Tit-Bits, Music-Hall. 'Sally in our Alley's'
what I'm going to sing. The chap as teaches me says I'll make a hit.
It's good pay, too, miss, I do say. But there"--Neddy's face
fell--"I've got to hand over the dibs to my blessed mother."

"Why do you speak of your mother in that way?"

"Well, I can't call her my cussed mother, can I miss?"

Claudia laughed, and then became grave to rebuke him. "You are a
wicked boy to talk of your mother in that way. It is just as well that
she should get your salary. You are too young to know the value of
money."

"Oh, am I? Well, that's a good one. May I smoke?"

Claudia laughed again at this politeness, and sat down on a convenient
boulder. "You shouldn't smoke at your age."

"Who gave me cigarettes?" asked Neddy, shyly.

"I was very wrong to encourage you. I don't think," added Claudia,
with a view to arriving at the point she aimed at, "that your aunt
would give you tobacco."

Neddy sat down and lighted up with the impudent air of a robin. "I
take it," he remarked, coolly, "she smokes herself, and I sneak what I
want. Aunt Laura ain't bad. A dashing sort of woman, ain't she?"

"She'd box your ears if she heard you say that, Neddy."

"She wouldn't. Aunt Laura daren't lay a finger on me."

"Why not?" Claudia became aware that there was a threat hidden here.

"Because I know----" Neddy hesitated, and stole a cunning glance at
his companion. "Well, I know what I know."

"Lady Wyke has been very kind to you, Neddy."

"Kind? Oh, yes, very kind," Neddy sneered, and then smiled blandly.

"You're a wicked little boy, you know, to steal letters."

Master Mellin dropped his cigarette and looked startled. "She told
you?"

Claudia nodded. "Yes. She wants----"

"You needn't talk." Neddy waved his hand grandly. "I know. Aunt Laura
wants to marry the nut you're sweet on. I twigged that ages ago. She
didn't know how to manage to nab him, so I helped her."

"By giving her that letter?"

Neddy nodded in his turn. "I read it, you know miss," and he leered so
significantly that Claudia looked upon him as the leading pupil in Mr.
Fagin's evil Academy. "I'm rather sorry I did," went on Neddy, "as the
nut belongs to you, but only in that way could I make the old gal help
me."

"You unscrupulous little animal!" burst out Claudia, positively afraid
of the lad's shrewdness. "You have made a lot of mischief."

"I could have made more, miss. 'Spose I'd given that letter to old
Purse?"

Claudia shivered, and saw the necessity of propitiating him. "You
didn't do that, I am glad to say."

"No. 'Cause I like Mr. Craver. He's a good sort, and has promised to
give me a ride in his aeroplane."

"Why did you steal the letter at all?" asked Claudia, nervously.

"Well, you see, I arrived just when that old cove was slaughtered. Old
Mrs. Vence, she wouldn't let me see the corpse as much as I wanted to,
so I nicked the letter lying on the hall table just to punish her. You
see, if the letter was missing I guessed she'd get beans. When she did
I intended to bring the letter back."

"But she didn't get beans as you call it."

"No. Rum thing, as nothing was about that letter, miss. Well, then,
when I saw that nothing was asked at the inquest, I opened the letter
and read it. I'm fly enough to know as it meant Mr. Craver was in the
house when the old cove died, seeing the letter said as he was coming.
But I didn't go for to say a thing, knowing Mr. Craver ain't at all a
bad sort, nor his pa and ma either. I stowed away the letter, telling
no one, not even mother, and only showed it to Aunt Laura when she was
sweet on Mr. Craver."

"You might have thought of me, Neddy."

"Didn't know you then, though it was Hedgerton talk as you were going
to marry Mr. Craver. Aunt Laura she got the letter before you came
down. When you came and were nice to me and gave me cigarettes. I was
sorry. But don't you be afeared, miss. Mr. Craver didn't do it."

"How do you know?" asked Claudia, eagerly.

"Ah, that's tellings." Master Mellin winked.

"I shall ask Sergeant Purse to make you say what you mean!" cried
Claudia.

Neddy laughed. "Then all about the letter will come out, and Mr.
Craver will be put in chokey. There ain't no sense, in that."

"Do you know the truth?"

"No." Neddy looked innocently surprised. "How should I know the truth?
I only come to Maranatha just after the old cove had been murdered.
But I'm uncommonly certain as Mr. Craver hadn't no hand in the
business."

"Can you help me to prove that?" pleaded Claudia, who saw very well
that the boy was a valuable witness if dealt with diplomatically.

"I can give you a tip," said Neddy, after a pause.

"Give it to me, then."

"Go and ask Sergeant Purse to show you the knife as was used."

"What good will that do?"

"Well," said Master Mellin, shrewdly, "it seems to me, though, I'm
only a boy, as Sergeant Purse ought to hunt for the cove as owns that
knife. It was sticking in the heart of the old cove you know, and the
sergeant has it. I saw it at the inquest, and it don't seem to be the
kind of knife Mr. Craver would use, nohow. Mr. Craver, he cut on
Hall's bike; but the cove as did the trick, miss, cleared out in
another way."

Claudia asked further questions, and received evasive answers. Master
Mellin evidently had said all that he intended to say at the moment,
so there was little use in prolonging the conversation. Along with the
boy, Claudia climbed up the path again, and left Neddy again at the
Rectory gate. In a most polite way, he lifted his straw hat in
farewell; but she detained him for a few minutes, in the hope of
getting him to say more. He smiled like an angel, shook his head like
an old man, and resolutely refused to open his mouth. There was
nothing for it but to let him go, which Claudia did.

All the same, his hint about the knife dwelt in her memory. It was
indeed, strange, that the police authorities had not followed up this
important clue. Without doubt, if the knife was a peculiar one, which
Neddy hinted, its owner might be discovered; and once he was found,
then the truth would become known. Miss Lemby retired to bed on that
night resolved to see Sergeant Purse on the morrow and learn what she
could. Having been engaged to Sir Hector, there was ample excuse for
her to ask questions. In the anxiety and interest caused by Neddy's
conversation Claudia quite forgot her tussle with Lady Wyke, and
passed a better night in consequence.

By three o'clock next day she found herself standing with her bicycle
before the door of the Redleigh Police-office, and entered to ask for
the sergeant. Luck stood her friend, for the sergeant, usually out on
his rounds, happened to be in and disengaged. Claudia was admitted
into the sanctum of the official, and was amiably received by the
foxy-faced little man. As usual, he was as dry as a mummy in his
looks, and his eyes were more than ever like those of a rat. He was
uncommonly polite to Miss Lemby, since he knew her story, and was
sorry for her.

"I hope you've got over it, miss," said the sergeant, placing a chair
for his visitor. "It was a hot time for you, that same murder."

"I am getting over it," Claudia assured him with a faint smile. "And
it was a very painful time as I respected Sir Hector."

"I don't think he behaved very well, Miss Lemby."

"Oh, I think he did. After all, sergeant, he did not know that his
wife was alive, you know. It was all a mistake. But I have called to
ask if you have a clue to the assassin?"

"No, Miss Lemby. I quite understand why you should come and ask, as
naturally, you'd like to see the villain hanged. Lady Wyke would like
to see it also. I can't catch him, however. He went off on that
bicycle, and vanished into thin air, like those witches in the play."

"Well, Mr. Purse. I have been thinking over the matter," said Claudia,
with diplomatic frankness, "and it occurred to me that you should
follow the clue of the knife. You have it, I believe?"

"Oh, yes," Sergeant Purse rose and went to a shelf at the further end
of his office to fumble there, "but I don't see, how we can follow
that clue."

"Why not? Someone told me that the knife was a peculiar one. Can't you
trace it to the shop where it was bought?"

"It's an idea certainly, Miss Lemby," said Purse, returning with a
parcel in his hand. "Look at the knife yourself. It is a peculiar
one."

He untied a string and unrolled several sheets of paper. Then Claudia
saw a sailors clasp-knife with a handle of black bone decorated with
three broad stripes of inlaid silver. "This is the knife, Miss Lemby."
said the officer. Claudia gasped and felt herself grow faint. The
knife belonged to her father.




CHAPTER XIX.


How Claudia managed to leave the office of Sergeant Purse and reach
homo she never clearly knew. In some extraordinary way she contrived
to keep from fainting and maintain her composure, so that the officer
suspected nothing. After a time she complained that the room was
close, and she felt that the fresh air would do her good. Purse, quite
ignorant of the true cause of this unexpected nervousness, accompanied
her outside and helped her to mount her bicycle in a most amiable way.
As she rode off he thanked her for the suggestion she had made, and
declared his intention of following the clue of the knife. All the way
to Hedgerton Claudia thought over what she had done, and reached the
Rectory in quite a fainting condition. Little Mrs. Craver met her at
the door and ascribed her pale looks and nerveless limbs to the long
ride. Claudia gladly accepted the excuse and the scolding and the
order that she should lie down, as she wished to avert suspicion, and
also to be alone to think over matters. Never in after years did the
girl forget that next hour.

Lying on her bed, with her face pressed against the pillow, Claudia
kept assuring herself that she was mistaken. It was sinful of her to
suspect her father of such wickedness, and she deserved to be punished
for even thinking of such a thing. But the question which agonised her
was: What did this particular knife mean in relation to Wyke's death?
There was only one answer to the question. The knife had been found
sticking in Wyke's heart, and the man who thrust it into that same
heart was the criminal. Her father was the man--her father was the
criminal. Claudia remained all that evening in bed, and again Mrs.
Craver ascribed the weakness to the exhausting ride on the bicycle to
Redleigh.

All the long night she pondered and thought and reasoned, and cried
out against her reason. When the dawn came she rose and took a cold
bath, which refreshed her. There was no excuse for her to remain in
bed for the day, so Claudia, wan and haggard, went down to breakfast.
There she heard news which cheered her up.

"Edwin is coming here to-day in his aeroplane, my dear," said Mr.
Craver, who was reading his letters. "He will be here at two o'clock
this afternoon. What excitement this will cause in Hedgerton."

"I only hope Edwin won't break his neck," cried Mrs. Craver,
wrathfully. "Oh, how foolish the rising generation is! There's nothing
to hold on by in one of these airships, and if he falls he will be
killed."

Naturally, the Rector, wishing to give the villagers pleasure, did not
keep the news to himself. He told his wife to tell the servants, and
the servants told everyone that came on that morning to the Rectory.
By noon the whole of Hedgerton knew that Master Edwin was arriving in
an airship, and great was the excitement. From what the young man had
said in his letter it was known that he would alight on the cliffs,
where there were vast spaces along which the aeroplane could run when
it settled down like a bird. Consequently, long before two o'clock the
coastguard station was surrounded by crowds people. In their anxiety
to see the latest invention of science and to witness the conquest of
the air by man, the whole population of the little village assembled
on the cliffs. Claudia came also with the Rector and Mrs. Craver, who
were both very anxious and very proud of the coming event. The girl
glanced round to see if Lady Wyke was present, but could not see her.
She did not even catch a glimpse of Neddy, and learnt later from his
mother that the boy had returned to town on the previous day. Claudia
drew a deep breath of relief at the news. She knew very well that
Neddy could be trusted to be silent; yet it was a comfort to know that
he was absent. Miss Lemby could not explain to herself why it was a
comfort; but somehow she felt more at ease without this Puck in an
Eton suit hovering round. And, as Lady Wyke was also conspicuous by
her absence, Claudia abandoned herself to the general excitement of
the coming arrival of Edwin from the skies.

"I do wish Edwin would come," said Mrs. Craver again and again as the
hour drew near. "Do you think he has met with an accident, George?"

"Let us hope he hasn't, my dear," answered the Rector, who was
likewise anxious. "But he is not due yet, so we have no reason to
think that anything sad has happened!"

"There he is! There he is!" shouted a keen-sighted coastguard, who had
a spyglass at his eye. "Yonder he comes."

"Where? Where? Where?" shouted everyone, much excited, and looked
north, south, east and west without seeing anything.

The coastguard ran with his spyglass to the Rector. "Look, sir! Over
yonder--over yonder!" and he pointed seaward.

With a trembling hand, the Rector adjusted the glass, then uttered'
and ejaculation of thankfulness. "Yes. The aeroplane is coming along
like a great bird. Emma----"

"Don't ask me to look, George. I am trembling all over."

But Claudia looked and saw a black speck glowing larger as it came
nearer. In a few minutes the hum of the aeroplane was distinctly
heard, and with the naked eye everyone could see the machine swinging
towards the cliffs high in the blue. The excitement was intense. Mrs.
Craver had to be supported by Claudia, so weak did she feel at her son
soaring in space. Nearer and nearer came the black dot, louder and
louder became the burr of the aeroplane, and finally, like a great
dragonfly it swept in huge circles over the land, and settled like a
feather, running along the ground swiftly in its impetus until willing
hands laid hold of it to bring it to a standstill. Then the crowd
rushed to gather round, to cheer, to ask questions, and to examine the
first aeroplane which had ever been in this out-of-the-way parish.

Mr. Craver, with his wife on his arm, pushed his way to the front,
with his usually dreamy eyes alight with excitement. "I congratulate
you, my son."

"Oh, Edwin! Edwin!" sobbed the usually unemotional mother, and clasped
him in her arms as he alighted from the machine. "It's wonderful, but
horrid. I know you'll be killed."

"I'm safe enough now, anyhow, mother," said Edwin, cheerfully.

"Where's Claudia?"

"Here," said the girl in a low voice, for she felt faint now that the
strain was over, and all her old fears began to reassert themselves.

"Why, darling, what is the matter?" asked her lover, hastily.

"Nothing--nothing--that is, I'll tell you when you come home."

It was not easy for the hero to reach home. He had to submit to
incessant handshaking; he had to get his aeroplane under shelter; and
it had to be attended to in other ways connected with the engine and
wide-spread wings. There was an old barn on the cliffs which Edwin had
arranged to use for his machine long ago, so it was run into this, and
the doors were closed, much to the regret of the crowd anxious to
contemplate the wonder. Edwin promised to give an exhibition on the
morrow, and then walked home with his parents and Claudia.

As Mr. and Mrs. Craver were both asking questions concerning his
flight from Hendon all the way, Claudia had no opportunity of speaking
to her lover. But on arrival at the Rectory the watchful mother gave
the girl the opportunity of having a quiet moment with Edwin. Mrs.
Craver drew her husband away, saying that it was best to leave the
young people to themselves, and so the couple found themselves in the
drawing-room. Edwin at once demanded why Claudia looked so ill, and
she explained how she had bearded Lady Wyke, how Neddy had advised her
to search for the owner of the knife, and how the sight of the knife
in the Redleigh Police-office had informed her that the owner was none
other than her own father.

"Isn't it dreadful," Edwin? sobbed flic girl, when she had finished
her breathless narrative; "but father can't have murdered that poor
old man."

"Of course he didn't," said Edwin, cheerfully, although he was more
startled by the news than Claudia guessed. "We shall ask for an
explanation. I am sure he will give one."

"You don't think he is guilty, Edwin?"

"No, I don't, dear. Appearances are rather against him, as they are
against me. But I am innocent, and so is your father."

"Did you see him in London? You went up to see him, remember."

"No, I did not. He was absent when I called at Tenby Mansions."

"Oh we must see him! We must see him!" cried Claudia, wringing her
hands.

"We shall see him together," said Craver, soothing her gently. Don't
worry, my darling. I feel sure that everything will come out right.

"But Lady Wyke?"

"She won't do anything. She is not sure of her ground. All the same,
Claudia, it was a risk going."

"Yes, I know. But I wanted to hear what she knew."

"There is another person who knows more. We must see her, Claudia. If
anyone knows the truth of this crime, it is Mrs. Vence."




CHAPTER XX.


The company of Edwin was very welcome to Claudia, as she now had an
outlet for her grief. She could talk freely to him and receive the
comfort which she very greatly needed, although even his consoling
words did not entirely quieten her. Like the girl, Craver could not
bring himself to believe that the buccaneer was guilty. There seemed
nothing for it but to see the man and question him closely.

Claudia therefore determined to journey to London, not only to
interview her father, but also to see Mrs. Vence. Edwin's suggestion
that the old housekeeper should be questioned struck the girl as
remarkably sensible. Mrs. Vence had been in the house when the crime
took place, and although she had given evidence with apparent
frankness at the inquest, it was just possible that she might have
withheld certain facts. If forced to speak she might say something or
suggest something likely to throw more light on the darkness which
environed the tragedy. She resolved to see the housekeeper first and
her father afterwards. What with Mrs. Vence's story and the pirate's
explanation the truth might come to light.

The difficulty was to find Mis. Vence, who had disappeared into the
unknown immediately after the inquest. Since leaving Hedgerton, so far
as was known, she had given no sign of her existence, and Claudia
wondered how the address of the old creature could be found. Finally,
she resolved to ask Mrs. Mellin when that good lady came with the
washing to the Rectory.

Mrs. Mellin had never seen Mrs. Vence, as Neddy had always taken the
clean linen to Maranatha and had conducted the business between the
housekeeper and the laundress. But Mrs. Mellin might have learnt
something from Neddy, who was always very inquisitive regarding other
people's affairs. It was possible that Mrs. Vence had mentioned her
destination to the boy in which case he would certainly have repeated
the information to his mother. Therefore she waited for the coming of
the washerwoman to carry out her scheme.

For over a week Edwin remained in Hedgerton, and daily flew the
aeroplane over land and sea, much to the delight of the parishioners.
The spectacle attracted man, woman, and child so greatly that there
was little work done in the village during these exciting days. They
talked of northing else, and the faces were always turned skyward to
see the aeroplane skimming and rising and sinking and falling, and
generally disporting itself into space. The Rector and his wife,
seeing what command their son had over his machine, lost much of their
dread of an accident. It was mainly for this reason that the young man
brought tie aeroplane to Hedgerton, and gave daily exhibitions of his
skill. Once his parents became used to aviation, he guessed that they
would not worry over his ascents at Hendon.

Claudia, of, course, never believed that any accident would befall her
lover and did not need any proof that he was a competent pilot. It was
firmly fixed in her mind that Edwin was destined to save her father,
to cut the claws of Lady Wyke, and to marry her. Nothing would happen
to him likely to prevent his carrying out this programme, as she felt
convinced. Therefore, she saw Edwin soar without feeling the slightest
anxiety, and even offered to accompany him. But this her lover would
not agree to. His nerves were not strong enough to permit his carrying
in the perilous machine all that he valued on earth. So Claudia
remained on the ground and Edwin skimmed the clouds, both resting
content in the knowledge that everything was alright, or would be
right in future.

Lady Wyke had not come to see the arrival of Craver because business
had taken her to, London. When she returned, a note inviting the young
man to Maranatha arrived at the Rectory, Claudia did not wish Edwin to
go, but the visit was paid all the same, as Craver thought it was just
as well to try and learn what Lady Wyke intended to do. Claudia's
interview must have enraged her, and it was possible that she had gone
to London to take steps likely to make immediately public things best
kept private. After some discussion Miss Lemby saw that it was best
Edwin should have the interview, and accordingly, she gave him
permission. So Edwin sought Maranatha towards the end of the week; and
Claudia, during his absence, questioned Mrs. Mellin.

The washerwoman arrived on her usual day, and Claudia managed to
attend to the sorting of the clean linen herself. As there was no time
to be lost and the kitchen was empty for the time being, Claudia put a
point-blank question. "Do you know where Mrs. Vence is to be found?"
she-asked abruptly.

Mrs. Mellin stared. "Lor' bless my soul, miss, 'ow should I know?"

"I thought Mrs. Vence might have told you where she was going when she
left Hedgerton."

"Well, she never did, miss. I didn't 'ave much truck with Mrs. Vence,
for Neddy took the washing to the 'ouse and brought it back again.
Never did I set eyes on that ole woman, 'cept I saw 'er in the
distance at the inquest. An' may I be so bold, miss, as to know why
you was so wishful to find 'er?"

Claudia was quite prepared for this leading question, and saw no
reason for making a secret of her intentions. "Well, you know, Mrs.
Mellin, I was engaged to marry Sir Hector, when it appeared that his
wife was already--I mean, still in existence."

"An' a good thing she turned up, miss," said Mrs. Mellin, with
dignity, "else a wicked case of bigamy would 'ave bin in the papers,
my sister Laura not bein' a lamb to lie down quiet-like.

"Well, then," pursued Claudia, when she was allowed to speak, "I
naturally feel that the assassin of Sir Hector should be captured and
punished. It struck me that Mrs. Vence may know."

"Lor' bless me, miss, she said all she could say at the inquest."

"Ah, but did she? That is what I wish to find out, Mrs. Mellin.
However if you don't know her address--"

"I really don't, miss," interrupted the washerwoman; "but Laura might
know."

"Lady Wyke?"

"My sister, miss. Lor to think as I should be connected with the
gentry. Long may they live in the land. Not as Laura's proud, she
'avin' proved otherwise by comin' to me, who am 'er own born relative,
an' taking Neddy in 'and. Yuss, miss. Laura might know, as she 'unted
up Mrs. Vence arter the inquest to 'ear what she'd to say concernin'
the tragidy. It ain t much use you seein' Mrs. Vence, miss, if I may
be so bold as to say so. Laura didn't find nothin' to 'elp catch the
gory villain who bolted on the bike, so I don't expect as you'll git
anythin' out of 'er."

"All the same if you can get the address I should be glad."

"I'll try my hardest, miss, Heaven bless, you," said Mrs. Mellin, and
this particular conversation ended with the entrance of the Rector's
wife, to whom the washerwoman dropped a curtsey. Claudia, having done
the best she could, went away to attend to other work, leaving Mrs.
Craver to count the washing and hear the news. There was much to be
done upstairs, as spring-cleaning was in progress, so Claudia worked
like a Trojan, both to help her prospective mother-in-law and the
aching of her own heart. While working and giving her attention to
every-day things, she could not worry, and managed to pass the time
profitably, and tolerably easily until Edwin returned. She heard his
step in the hall immediately he opened the front door and flew down
swiftly, all agog for news.

"Well? Well?" she asked, I anxiously, and drawing him into the
sitting-room.

Edwin put his arm round her waist and looked at her queerly. "I am
coming in for a fortune," he observed, in an abrupt manner.

Claudia stared. "What do you mean? Sit down and explain."

Edwin sat down and did as he was told. "Lady Wyke is furious at you,
and wants to make you suffer for shaking her as you did. She told me
that she never did believe me guilty, and only said so to annoy you
and to trap me into marriage. She thought that I would give in, and
make her my wife rather than face the worst."

"Well, she found out when I saw her that she was mistaken," said
Claudia, tartly. "Yes, she did, and now has gone on a new tack. She
doesn't intend to force me into marriage, because she cannot. But she
went to London the other day to make a will in my favour. Yes, you may
stare, Claudia, but Lady Wyke told me that if she dies I got five
thousand a year. The will is made, signed, and witnessed, and Mr.
Sandal holds it."

"Pouf!" said Claudia, contemptuously. "Mr. Sandal knows that the will
is wastepaper. I wonder Lady Wyke thinks you are such a fool as to be
taken in with that bluff."

"Is it bluff!" asked Edwin, looking puzzled. "How?"

"Why, don't you know that a will made before marriage is null and void
if the marriage takes place?"

"No. I never knew that. Few people do know it, I fancy."

"Lady Wyke believed that you were ignorant, and so has simply been
trying to bluff you into marriage with her. She has made the will to
bribe you; but she knows that if you marry her the will becomes
wastepaper. See?"

"I see. Anyhow, whether the will is destroyed by her or not, I don't
intend to marry her. Therefore, unless she alters the will, it stands
in my favour. Not that I want the money, Claudia."

"Nor I," said the girl. "However, you made Lady Wyke understand that
you would remain true to me?"

"Yes. And she made me understand that she was heartbroken, and had
done what she could to help me by making this ridiculous will. And she
won't proceed about my affair, as she sees that by so doing she will
be no closer to her goal. For the time being she intends to remain
quiet, in the hope that this business will soften me."

"But you told her it wouldn't?"

"I did. Only she won't believe me. However, Lady Wyke is safe for the
time being, so meanwhile we can see your father and Mrs. Vence, and
get at the truth of the matter. As to the will, we needn't think
anything more about it."

Claudia agreed with this, and wondered that so clever a woman as Lady
Wyke was should act foolishly. Then she related the conversation with
Mrs. Mellin to Edwin, and hopefully said that the address of Mrs.
Vence would surely be forthcoming.

Edwin demurred. "Not if Lady Wyke has to give it," he said. "She ii
not such a fool as to let you find out anything from Mrs. Vence likely
to spoil her game."

But the young man proved to be a false prophet, for Mrs. Mellin
arrived on that same evening with the address. It appeared that Mrs.
Vence was living in a Pimlico lodging-house, and for the time being
was out of work. Possessed of this information, Claudia arranged to go
to London next day with her lover.

Next morning Edwin fixed a sidecar to his motor-bicycle, and ran
Claudia into Redleigh in time to catch the ten-thirty London express.
In an hour and a-half they arrived in town. Then Edwin went to Tenby
Mansions at Earl's Court to prepare Lemby for his daughter's visit,
and Claudia took an Underground train for Victoria, in order to seek
Mrs. Vence in Pimlico. Craver wished to come also, but Claudia
insisted that he should look after her father. It was necessary that
she should see him as soon as possible, and as the buccaneer was here,
there, and everywhere, she urged that Edwin would find him and watch
him and hold him at home. With this agreement the young people parted,
Claudia promising to be at the flat at three o clock, or a trifle
later.

There was no difficulty in finding the whereabouts of Mrs. Vence, as
the very dingy lodging-house she lived in was not far from Victoria. A
slatternly woman with a suspicious eye admitted grudgingly that Mrs.
Vence was indoors, and, after some arguing, conducted the visitor into
a dirty bedroom on the third floor. Here sat Mrs. Vence near the
window, coughing and sneezing and groaning and moaning. Her ancient
face was more withered and brown and seamed with wrinkles than
formerly, and on the whole she looked very old and worn and
disagreeable. With a shawl round her head, and a little table covered
with medicine bottles at her elbow, the old woman sat with her back to
the window, shivering with ague and whimpering with pain. Claudia's
stately beauty seemed to annoy her, for she snarled when her visitor
sat down, and they were left alone by the slatternly landlady.

"I don't want fine ladies to come and see me, drat you," grumbled the
old creature, crossly. "I'm ill with inflewinzy, I am, and I do hope
as you'll get it."

Claudia smiled at this amiable wish, and apologised. "I am sorry you
are ill, Mrs. Vence. But I have called--"

"About gitting me to look arter your house?" interrupted Mrs. Vence.
"Well, then, I can't, me being that ill as never was."

"No. Don't you know my name? I gave it to the landlady. Lemby is--"

"Ho!" Mrs. Vance coughed and stared and grunted after her scrutiny.
"So you're his daughter, are you?"

"I am the daughter of Mr. Oliver Lemby, if you mean that," said
Claudia, with dignity, "and I have called to----"

"Ho!" Mrs. Vence coughed and for the third time. "I know why you've
called, my lady. And it 'ud hev been better if you didn't hev called."

"Why?" Claudia was startled.

"'Cause I thought as every think was dead and done with about that
murder. I hev 'ad it on my nerves day and night, wondering if I should
speak or not."

"Speak?" The girl rose and turned white with emotion. "My father----"

"Yuss," said Mrs. Vence with relish, "your dear par murdered him sure
enough."




CHAPTER XXI.

"That's a lie," said Claudia, calmly, and without rising.

Mrs. Vence spluttered and shook with wrath, in her rage it seemed as
though she were about to rise up and denounce her visitor. But a fit
of coughing prevented her, and by the time it was over she felt too
weak to scold. "It's the truth," she muttered sulkily, and took a
wineglassful of medicine.

"Prove it!"

Claudia, who had entered the room anxious and perturbed, was now quite
calm in asking questions.

Mrs. Vence was patently surprised to see how quietly the girl took the
dreadful charge. "You don't seem much upset!" she croaked. "I thought
you loved that par of yours, as a gel should."

"I do love my father," was Miss Lemby's steady reply, "and for that
reason I decline to believe what you say."

"Then why come here to worrit me?" gasped the old woman, crossly.
"Ain't I got enuff to put up with at my age without silly gels coming
to tell me as I'm a liar. I can't say nothin' else."

"You can; you must. My father explained his movements at the inquest,
and his testimony was accepted as exonerating him. And let me remind
you. Mrs. Vence, that at the inquest you brought no charge against
him."

"'Cause I warn't certain," retorted the old woman, promptly. "'Twas a
nasty case, and I didn't want to be mixed up in it more'n I could
help. I said as little as I could, and afterwards, when that Lady Wyke
come and see me----

"Did she come and see you?" interposed Claudia, anxiously.

"Don't I say she did, cuss you?" growled Mrs. Vence hoarsely. "Of
course she come and see me, to arsk if I know'd of anything likely to
show who killed her old man. I told her what I told you, and she said
as I'd better keep silent till she wanted me."

"She intended to accuse my father, then?"

"Yus. I s'pose so, when she was ready. And I thinks," added Mrs.
Vence, with a dry cough, "as she's gitting ready; for she's arsked me
down to Hedgerton at the end of the week--four days off, that is,
miss."

"Are you going?"

"How can I say. If the inflewenzy lets me. I may. It means money in my
pocket, and, not having a sitivation for months, I want money."

"What have you to say?" demanded Claudia, sternly.

"Say? The truth!" snarled Mrs. Vence, crossly. "And don't arsk me to
say anything else, I beg, my mother having bin a Baptist and perticler
proper."

"What is the truth?"
"Well, your par was in the droring-room with the barnit when he come,
and I crep up to listen to what they was saying, as I don't hold with
folk heving secrets fro' me. I had my eye and my ear at the keyhole
time and time about."

"What did you hear? What did you see?"

"I heard my master explaining as he couldn't marry you 'cause he was
married already. Then your par guv a screech and swore awful. I peeped
in at the keyhole, and saw him take out a clasp-knife and run at the
old man. The barnit, he just laughed and waited, so your par didn't
know what to do. Then at that moment come the ring at the door. I
tumbled down the stairs and let in that gent as bolted on the bike
later."

"Do you know who he was?" asked Claudia, anxiously.

"No, I didn't, him being muffled up," growled Mrs. Vence.

"What happened then?" asked Claudia, quickly.

"What I said at the inquest. Sir Hector, he took the new gent into his
study, and told me to bring cake and wine in a quarter of an hour. I
said I was in the kitchen, but," said Mrs. Vence, with a leer, "I
wasn't there the whole time. Oh, no, bless you. I wanted to see what
it all meant!"

"And you listened?"

"I listened and looked," retorted the housekeeper, shamelessly. "My
master and the new gent talked about some will, and then the barnit
took the gent into the dining-room to show him some papers. Then,"
said Mrs. Vence, earnestly, "I saw that par of yours coming down the
stairs; with the clasp-knife open in his hand, looking savage-like. I
was so feared that I ran back to the kitchen just as I heard Sir
Hector returning to the study. Then I comes in with the cake and wine
some time later, and found my master lying dead on the rug, and the
gent as bolted on the bike bending over him."

"And my father?" faltered Claudia, with a sinking heart. "Oh, he got
back up the stairs, and didn't come down until that there postman and
the police came. Clever, he was. But he didn't know as I'd seen him
coming down to stick the old man. You know, miss, how the post come,
and how the gent opened the door?"

"Yes, yes; I know." Claudia rose with an effort. "All you say sounds
reasonable, enough, from your point of view."

"It'll be the same fro' the jury's point of view," snapped Mrs. Vence.

"I don't believe it," cried Miss Lemby in despair. "Whatever you may
say, my father is innocent. You didn't see him strike the blow."

"But he comed down the stairs with the knife," grinned the
housekeeper. "Oh, he did it right enuff--your par, I mean. I believe
that boy saw it, too."

"What boy? Do you mean Neddy Mellin?"

"Yus. He was in the house--in the kitchen with me."

"But he said he came with the washing later."

"Then he's a liar," said Mrs. Vence, morosely. "He come earlier, and
was keeping me company in the kitchen. An imp, he is; not as you knows
him, miss."

"I know him very well," said Claudia, secretly glad to hear that the
boy had been on the scene, as his evidence would be valuable. "He is a
great friend of mine. I shall see him and make him tell me
everything."

"He won't; he won't," said Mrs. Vence, hurriedly, and appeared to be
somewhat discomposed, as if she feared she had let out too much.

"Oh, yes, he will, Mrs. Vence. I saw him the other day, and he
half-promised to tell me the truth. I'm going now."

"Pity you ever came," snarled the old woman, restlessly. "You're only
bringing your par to the gallers. If you speak to that imp, he'll put
a rope round the neck of your par for sure."

"Neddy will do nothing to harm me and mine, as he is fond of me."

"Oh, is he? Then he'll hev to tell lies to save your par."

Claudia hesitated at the door. "I tell you what, Mrs. Vence," she
said. "When you come to Maranatha I shall got my father and Mr. Craver
to meet you and Lady Wyke and Neddy. Then we can thresh the matter
out."

"You'd better bring that Sergeant Purse also," taunted Mrs. Vence, "as
he'll be on the spot to gaol that par of yours. Git on; git out.
You've worrited me with your cussed nonsense."

Claudia, having executed her purpose, left the woman still coughing,
and swiftly ran down the stairs. At the end of the narrow street, and
when she emerged into the main thoroughfare, she hailed a taxi.
Shortly she was driving towards Earl's Court, anxiously considering
what was best to be done. It was a very pale-faced girl who entered
the tiny drawing-room in the Tenby Mansions flat. Mr. Oliver Lemby was
there stretched at length in his favourite chair, and smoking his big
pipe. He looked unkempt and uncivilised, while the room had a
neglected look. Claudia felt as though she was entering into the den
of a bear, and the growl with which Lemby received her aided the
illusion. But that Edwin was sitting in an adjacent chair and was
ready to support her, Claudia would probably have burst into tears
over this reception. What with the wear and tear of the last week, and
the trying interview with Mrs. Vence, her nerves were worn thin. She
felt that she could not bear much more strain on them.

"Well, my gal," roared The pirate, "you've making a nice hash of
things."

"Don't talk like that to Claudia, Lemby," said Edwin, sternly, as the
girl sank exhausted in a chair. "Don't you see she is worn out."

"I shall talk to my own daughter as I please, hang you!"

"No you won't! Claudia is engaged to me, and I shall protect her, let
me tell you, Lemby, that your position is not so safe that you can
afford to go on in this way."

"My position is as safe as yours," growled the buccaneer.

"That isn't saying much," replied Craver, with a shrug. "I am in a
difficult position also. I have explained to you that I was in the
house."

"Yes; and I believe you scragged the old man."

"Mrs. Vence says it was you, father," said Claudia, faintly. Lemby
rose and dashed his pipe to the ground, opening and shutting his hands
in ungovernable rage. "Where is the old wretch?" he shouted. "Only let
me got a grip of her and I'll send her to kingdom come."

"Claudia, you are quite faint. Don't say another word for a few
minutes, and drink this glass of wine, it will revive you."

"Thank you, Edwin." Claudia willingly accepted the offer and sipped
the port, while her father strode up and down the room like a caged
beast, cursing and storming, and generally conducting himself like a
wild man of the woods. Edwin sat beside Claudia and attended to the
girl, occasionally glancing at the buccaneer with a contemptuous
smile. The sight of this somewhat calmed Lemby, who became ashamed of
his want of self-control. With a final oath he flung himself into his
chair and sulkily demanded what was to be done. Since his daughter was
still too upset to speak, Edwin spoke for her.

"Let us hear Claudia's report of her interview with Mrs. Vence," he
suggested.

The wine did Claudia good, and shortly she felt much more like her
ordinary self. Without wasting further time she related tersely what
had passed between herself and the housekeeper, Edwin listened
attentively without making any remark; but Lemby growled and cursed
under his breath the whole time. "Before I left," concluded Claudia,
"I suggested that dad and Edwin and I should meet Lady Wyke, Mrs.
Vence, and Neddy at Maranatha to come to an understanding. Mrs. Vence
goes down to Hedgerton at the end of the week."

"I'll go, too," cried the pirate, rising to again stalk up and down
the room. "Do you think that I'm going to have these lies told about
me?"

"Are they lies?" asked Edwin, quietly.

Lemby hesitated, "The most part are lies," he said, sulkily.

"And what part is the truth?"

"That about my drawing my knife on Wyke," admitted Lemby, after a
pause. "I did get in a rage when Wyke told me that he was already
married, and I did take out my knife to frighten him. But I didn't
mean a dashed thing, you know, as it ain't my way to kill silly old
buffers. 'Sides, he'd pluck, he had, as he stood quite still when I
made a run at him, and only laughed."

"So Mrs. Vence said, dad."

"Well, she told the truth for once. I was in a rage, but I couldn't
hit a man who stood up to me unarmed. I'm a white man, I am."

"You said at the inquest that Wyke did not explain anything to you in
the drawing-room," said Edwin, refusing to endorse Lemby's good
opinion of himself. "Yes, I did--and for why? Wyke waited till I
cooled down and took the knife from me, still laughing. Then came the
ring at the door. He was in a hurry to see you, Craver, I expect, for
he blamed well bolted down the stairs and forgot to lay down my
knife."

"He took it with him?" gasped Claudia, leaning forward.

"Don't I say he did?" growled her amiable parent. "Yes, he took the
knife with him, being in such a hurry. I didn't leave the drawing-room
for ever so long, and Mrs. Vence is a liar in saying that I did. I
waited until I heard voices, then came down and found that the old man
had passed in his cheques. When I saw it was my knife sticking in his
blessed old heart I made up my mind to say as little as I could. And
that," ended Lemby, turning towards Edwin, "was the reason as I lied
about his making explanations in the drawing-room. What else could I
do?"

"Nothing," said Craver, promptly; "being innocent, there was no need
for you to incriminate yourself. This is the truth, I suppose?"

"Yes it is. Why should I tell lies."

"Well, you did, you know, at the inquest. Anyhow, we have your story
and the housekeeper's story. Now we must learn what Neddy Mellin has
to say."

"I am sure that the boy knows the truth," said Claudia, positively.
"Mrs. Vence admitted that he was in the kitchen all the time. She
seemed sorry that she told me so."

"I daresay," remarked Edwin, "she has said too much. Well, Lemby?"

"I'll come down to Hedgerton with you," said the pirate, promptly.

And in this practical way the matter was settled.




CHAPTER XXII.


All this time Lady Wyke gave no sign of her intentions. After her
interview with Craver, when she assured him that a will had been made,
in his favour the wily woman remained silent. Perhaps she was waiting
for the young man to take the bribe and marry her, trusting to his
ignorance of the law concerning wills being rendered null and void by
marriage. Perhaps she was waiting for the arrival of Mrs. Vence, in
order to collect evidence and send Claudia's father to the gallows. No
one could tell what she meant to do.

In spite of the dark clouds by which she was surrounded, Claudia felt
happier when she returned to Hedgerton Rectory. Her father was with
her, and Edwin also; so, protected in this way, she somehow felt safe.
Assured by Lemby that he was guiltless, and believing implicitly that
he had spoken the truth, Claudia felt convinced that Lady Wyke would
not be able to ruin him. Doubtless her father had his faults; and his
foolish rage, which had led him to draw his knife on Wyke, had placed
him in an awkward position. All the same, it was not to be thought of
for one moment that he would be allowed to suffer for a crime, of
which he was wholly innocent. And, indeed, as the girl reflected, Lady
Wyke could not herself be positive of his guilt, or she would long ago
have had him arrested. Much of the truth had come to light concerning
the Hedgerton tragedy; but more had to come before the assassin of
Wyke could be placed in the dock. Since her father was innocent and
Edwin was innocent, Claudia could not think who was guilty. In the
railway carriage, when on the way to Redleigh, she asked Edwin's
opinion.

"H'm!" said the young man when thus appealed to. "It is difficult to
say, my dear girl. The truth may be found in Lady Wyke's past life."

"What do you mean, Edwin?"

"Well, you see, Lady Wyke knew that her husband had made a will in her
favour, for when she called on Sandal to say that she was alive, and
to stop the marriage with you, she made sure that there was no new
will. Now let us suppose that she learnt Wyke's intention of leaving
the money to me, so that I could marry you, is it not likely that she
would try and stop him making the new will?"

"Yes," said Lemby, from his corner of the compartment, "it blamed well
is. Do you mean to say, Craver, that Lady Wyke murdered the man
herself?"

"No. Because, so far as we know, she did not come down to Hedgerton
until after the murder. If she had, her sister, Mrs. Mellin, would
have recognised her. But Lady Wyke might have hired someone to stab
Sir Hector."

"Pigs might fly," said the pirate, disbelievingly and vulgarly. "Why.
beyond yourself and myself, there was no one in the house at the
time."

"Neddy was in the house," suggested Claudia.

"Pouf!" said her father, contemptuously. "You don't mean to say that
such a small boy struck so vigorous a blow."

"No, I don't. But Neddy might know if a third person came to Maranatha
on that night."

"I wonder if Mrs. Vence killed the man herself?" murmured Edwin,
thoughtfully.

"Of course not!" cried Claudia, quickly. "She had every reason to keep
Sir Hector alive, seeing that she had lost a good situation by his
death."

"Well, I give it up in despair. What do you think, Lemby?"

"I don't think at all," growled the big man, truculently. "It's a
dashed mystery, it is. If your theory is correct, and Lady Wyke hired
someone to stab the old man so that he mightn't make a new will, the
cove must have sneaked in by the back door."

"If he did Neddy will know, because he was in the kitchen long before
the crime was committed," said Miss Lemby. "Mrs. Vence admitted as
much."

"If Neddy saw any third person enter in that way, Mrs. Vence saw him
too," declared Edwin, positively, "for she was in the kitchen also."

"Not all the time, Edwin. She was running about the house listening,
and looking through keyholes, as I told you."

"It is a mystery," sighed the young man, after a pause. "All we can do
is to wait for the arrival of Neddy and Mrs. Vence."

"Mrs. Vence will be down on Saturday and Neddy on Sunday," said
Claudia. "You know he sings at the Tit-Bits Music Hall this week."

"He hasn't made his appearance yet," growled Lemby. "Since you spoke
of the brat I have looked at the newspapers for his appearance.
Anyhow, whether he comes or not I'm going to see Lady Wyke."

"What for?"

"To ask her to many me," said Lemby, coolly.

"She won't," said Craver with a stare of astonishment. "You are the
most hopeful man in the world if you think so, Lemby."

"It's cheek as does it, Craver. Anyhow, I'm going to have a shot at
it. She can but say no."

"It strikes me, Lemby," said the young man, drily, "that she'll say
much more." By the time the conversation reached this point, the train
was slowing down alongside the Redleigh platform. Edwin got his
motorcycle out of the luggage-room where he had stowed it, and,
placing Claudia in the sidecar, whirled off to Hedgerton. Lemby
engaged the same trap as he had formerly taken when paying his visit
to Wyke, and hoisted his portmanteau on to the seat beside Sankey. He
did not intend to go to the rectory, as knew that he would feel
uncomfortable in the company of two such precise people as the Rector
and his wife. Therefore he ordered Sankey to drive to the Jack Ashore
Inn, where he had talked with Sergeant Purse.

Claudia and Edwin were welcomed back joyfully to the Rectory, for the
old couple had missed them sorely. Mrs. Craver, being the soul of
hospitality, was vexed to hear that the girl's father had gone to the
inn instead of coming to the Rectory. She was anxious to make his
acquaintance and see at close quarters what he was like. Of course,
she had beheld him afar off when the inquest was taking place; but she
naturally desired to talk to him and examine him and learn all about
him. She little guessed that Claudia was relieved at her father's
decision to go to the Jack Ashore. The girl had an uneasy feeling that
prim Mrs. Craver would not approve of the tyrant. It was with some
uneasiness that she waited for the call Lemby proposed to pay, for the
purpose of making acquaintance with the Rector and his wife. But he
never came, either to dinner nor after dinner. Although Claudia was
relieved in one way, she was annoyed in another, as she did not wish
Mrs. Craver to think that her father was entirely devoid of manners.

The fact is that Lemby quite intended to go to the Rectory for his
meal and to meet his prospective relatives. But after he had settled
himself at the inn, he began to think that it would be just as well to
get the interview over. There was no doubt about it that Lady Wyke was
in a position to make things hot for him if she used the evidence of
Mrs. Vence, so that the buccaneer thought that he would close her
mouth by requesting her hand in marriage. It was ridiculous to think
for one moment that she would prefer a battered old pirate such as he
was to a smart and handsome young fellow like Craver. But Lemby had
always made his way by sheer audacity, and he hoped to storm Lady Wyke
into submission. In this truculent frame of mind he set out for
Maranatha shortly after six o'clock.

When he sent in his card Lady Wyke received him at once, and he looked
upon this reception as a good omen. He little knew that the little
woman wished to learn the plans of her enemies, and had received him
so blandly with the object of pumping him. For the purpose of
conquest, and to show that he knew what civilisation was, Lemby had
arrayed himself in evening dress. He looked a fine, handsome man, when
he entered the big drawing-room, and the mellow light of the lamps
took years off his life, as they did off the life of Lady Wyke. She
came forward with a smile to greet him, looking remarkably attractive
and well preserved in a gorgeous dinner-gown of crimson and black.

"I am so glad to see you, Mr. Lemby," she said, graciously. "We have
not met for ever so long, although we have had much correspondence."

"I reckon," said the pirate, coolly, "that the correspondence wasn't
over-satisfactory to me."

"Ah, but you must make allowances for a woman's whims," said Lady
Wyke, with equal coolness. "I read between the lines, you know."

"Then you must guess why I have called."

"Perhaps I do, and perhaps I don t. Anyhow, Mr. Lemby, as you are
here, you may as well have dinner with me."

"I thought you'd ask me," said the buccaneer, with has ineffable
audacity, "so I got tidied up on purpose."

"So clever of you," said his hostess, with a queer smile, and rang the
bell to order that another knife and fork should be placed on the
table.

The two chatted about this matter and that. They discussed the news in
the daily papers, they talked about various other experiences in
America and in the South Seas, and touched upon every subject save on
that which was nearest to their hearts. Both wished to break the ice
and converse about the murder, but neither would speak first on so
serious a subject. By the time the dinner-gong thundered both were
quite friendly yet got quite watchful. It, seemed as though the
good-fellowship of the meal was necessary to break down the reserve
between them. But the moment had not yet come.

"Give me your arm, Mr. Lemby," said Lady Wyke, languidly graceful, and
showing nothing of the vicious cat who had fought with the man's
daughter. "I'm sure you must be hungry."

"I live on love," said the pirate, gruffly, and, as he thought,
gallantly. "You must be hungry, then, as there is nothing for you to
eat of that nature."

Lemby turned aside the arrow with a laugh, and shortly found himself
seated at a beautifully-decorated table, to eat a delicately-cooked
dinner. He did full justice to the admirable dishes and to the very
excellent wine, while Lady Wyke ate little and amused him with
desultory conversation. All the time she was watching him, wondering
why he had called and what he was trying to do. So far she could not
fathom his motives; but when champagne had loosened his tongue and
tobacco had soothed his nerves--if he had any--she hoped to learn all
she desired to learn. But during dinner she purposely kept off the
subject of the murder, and it was only when they returned to the
scented drawing-room that she spoke. Then the pirate, in a comfortable
armchair, sipped his coffee and smoked an excellent cigar, while his
hostess trifled with a cigarette and began to talk sense for the first
time during the evening.

"Well, Mr. Lemby," she said, resolutely, "let us get to business."

"What business?" asked the buccaneer, wilfully dense.

"That about which we correspond," said Lady Wyke, promptly. "You said
that you would assist me to learn who murdered my husband so I presume
you have come to tell me something about your discoveries."

"I haven't made any you don't know anything about," said Lemby,
incoherently.

"What do I know?"

"You dashed well know that Craver was the man who sloped on the
postman's bike on that night. You tried to rope him into the business,
hut failed."

"For the time being I have failed, Mr. Lemby; but I may rope him in,
as you put it, later. Well, and what else do I know?"

"You know that Mrs. Vence is a liar."

"Oh, do I?" Lady Wyke raised her eyebrows.

"Yes. Claudia saw Mrs. Vence the other day--yesterday, in fact, and
she said----"

"Mrs. Vence or Claudia? Do be accurate."

"The old woman," growled Lemby, who did not like to be interrupted.
"She said as how I came down the stairs with my knife and murdered
Wyke."

"Well, the knife with which the crime was committed is yours, you
know."

"Who says so? How do you know?"

"Mrs. Vence says so. She told me."

"Then she's a liar."

Lady Wyke shrugged her shoulders. "You'll have to make a stronger
defence than that Mr. Lemby. We may as well be plain with one another.
I have asked Mrs. Vence to come down here, and she will be in this
house on Friday evening. I shan't be here to receive her,
unfortunately, as I have to go to London to get that will of mine
destroyed."

"What will?"

"One I made in favour of Mr. Craver."

"He told me," nodded Lemby. "Silly business, seeing that a marriage
makes it so much waste paper."

"Oh, Mr. Craver has found that out, has he?" said Lady Wyke calmly. "I
thought he wasn't clever enough. Yes, it was a false move on my part,
and I'm going to tear up the will. It's of no use now. I only made it
to try and get Mr. Craver to marry me. Well, then, I'm going up on
Friday for that purpose, and will return on Saturday evening. But you
must not see Mrs. Vence in the meantime, and I shall leave word that
she is not to see you. When I return, then, in my presence, you can
meet her and defend yourself."

"It's all dashed rot!" cried Lemby, with disgust. "I never killed the
man, nor did Craver."

"Then who did?"

"Might have been Mrs. Vence."

"Rubbish! It was her interest to keep him alive. She lost a good
situation by my husband's death remember."

"It might have been Neddy. He was in the house all the time."

"So Mrs. Vence says. But a boy like that--pooh!"

"Might have been yourself."

Lady Wyke laughed. "I was in London at the time, and can prove that I
was. I don't think, however, that I'll be called upon to defend
myself."

"Why not?" said Lemby, significantly. "I might suggest that to
Purse----"

"And you will unless I agree to marry you," finished the woman,
coolly.

"That's right smart of you," Lemby assured her. "I came here to ask
you to marry me. Craver won't have you; he set on Claudia."

"I haven't lost all hope yet of getting him," said Lady Wyke through
her clenched teeth, and looked at the man in a lowering way.

"Shucks! There's no chance there. Marry me."

"No. But I'll make a bargain with you."

"What is it?"

"If Edwin will not marry me he must be hanged. Help me to hang him,
and I'll become your wife."

Lemby was quite unmoved by this villainous proposal. "No, ma'am, that
wouldn't be dealing square. I must think of my gal, you know. Try
another man for the job. I'm no saint, but I draw the line at your
suggestion."

"I shall try no other man," cried Lady Wyke, standing up and smiling
strangely; "and, indeed, I need no assistance. I can prove Mr.
Craver's guilt. Mrs. Vence is coming down, Neddy is coming down,
and I have him in a trap. If Mr. Craver is not in gaol by Monday
afternoon----"

"Well, ma'am?" Questioned the pirate, roughly, and bending forward.

"I'll marry you when and where you like."

"It's a bargain," said Lemby, gruffly; "and I'll twist your neck if
you break it."




CHAPTER XXIII.


Mr. Oliver Lemby did not trouble to see Lady Wyke again. The two quite
understood one another, and there was no need for further
conversation. Seeing what Claudia had learnt from Mrs. Vence, the
pirate was indeed surprised that Sir Hector's widow intended to leave
him alone and get Edwin arrested. Being so passionate and vindictive a
woman, it was natural enough that she desired rather to see Craver in
the dock than at the altar beside Claudia. Since she could not get him
herself--and she had tried every means in her power to win him--it was
plain that she intended to see him hanged rather than permit him to
marry her rival. Her motive was easily guessed, but what puzzled Lemby
was how she meant to bring about her aim. The evidence of Mrs. Vence,
as the pirate knew, was against him, and involved him deeply in the
crime. Therefore it did not seem much good for the widow to bring the
housekeeper down to Hedgerton in order to implicate Edwin, which, on
the face of it, she could not do. The sole way in which Lemby could
conjecture Lady Wyke intended to act was that Neddy would be used to
accuse Craver. But then Neddy liked Craver, and was friendly to
Claudia, so he might not be inclined to the woman's bidding. And, so
far as could be seen. Lady Wyke had no means of compelling the boy, or
Mrs. Vence either, to give false evidence. It was all a mystery.

It said a good deal for Lemby's nerves that he was able to enjoy
himself in Hedgerton with the sword of Damocles hanging over his head.
But enjoy himself he did, and made himself very agreeable to the old
people. Claudia's fears proved to be groundless, for her father
behaved with unusual meekness, and showed the best side of his
character. Lemby was not altogether bad, and had many good points.
Refined he assuredly was not, but he had the breezy, gay air of a
soldier of fortune, which fascinated the Rector and his wife. They had
never before met with such a one, and the novelty of his conversation
charmed them. The pirate talked of adventures in the South Seas, of
wanderings in Patagonia, Peru, and Brazil, and of strange doings in
Australia. A tendency to exaggeration and boastfulness which
characterised his speech made Mr. Craver dub him Parolles, after the
personage in Shakespeare's comedy. But Lemby, ignorant of literature,
took this as a compliment, which amused the Rector greatly. On the
whole, Claudia found that her father was a greater success than might
have been hoped for, and therefore breathed more freely. He certainly
behaved very well for a man of his loose habits and loose upbringing.

The pirate did not tell his daughter how Lady Wyke had arranged to
marry him if Edwin was arrested. In the first place, he did not see
how she was going to bring about such a catastrophe, and in the second
he saw no reason to worry Claudia. If nothing happened before Sunday,
then Craver determined to force his way into Maranatha, along with
Claudia and Lemby, in order to face Mrs. Vence in Lady Wyke's
presence. Matters, as he said, must come to a climax somehow and at
some time. Things could not go on as they were doing.

"Didn't Lady Wyke, say what she intended to do?" Edwin asked Lemby for
the fourth or fifth time on Saturday morning.

"No," said the buccaneer, with an unmoved face, and lying glibly. "I
called to see her. I had dinner with her, and after dinner I asked her
to marry me. She said that she would think about it."

"Rather strange, Lemby, considering Lady Wyke must know how Mrs. Vence
accuses you of committing the crime."

"I told her that the woman was a liar, and she believed me," said
Lemby.

"Hum!" replied Craver, doubtfully. "I don't think that Lady Wyke is a
woman to be so easily convinced. She'll have you arrested, my friend."

"She may do the same to you, Craver."

"Well, she might. Going by circumstantial evidence, things look very
black against us both. Your use of the knife and my use of the
postman's bicycle both go to show that each had a finger in the pie.
If Sergeant Purse knew----"

"I don't care whether he knows or not," broke in Lemby. "I'm willing
to stand my trial if you are."

"Well," said Craver, with a shrug, "we may both be placed in the dock.
It all depends upon Lady Wyke and Mrs. Vence. I suppose you know that
she arrived at Maranatha last night. Mrs. Mellin told Mrs. Craver, and
added that Lady Wyke had gone to town. It is strange that Lady Wyke
didn't wait to see her visitor."

"Oh, I can explain that," said Lemby, stolidly. "Lady Wyke told me she
was going to London to destroy that silly will she made in your
favour. She admitted that it didn't work since you refused to marry
her."

"I should think I did refuse," said Edwin, heatedly. "I marry Claudia,
or no one, Lemby. However, Lady Wyke went to London at mid-day on
Friday, and Mrs. Vence arrived at Maranatha late last night. I wish
you could see her."

"I can't. Lady Wyke said that she would give orders that Mrs. Vence
was not to see me except in her presence."

"She'll see the lot of us in her presence," said Edwin, grimly.
"To-morrow or on Monday we go to Maranatha and thresh the whole matter
out."

"I'm agreeable," said Lemby. "What are you going to do to-day?"

"I have to see about some repairs to my aeroplane, and late in the
afternoon I intend to take a flight. Will you come with me?"

"No, thank you."

Craver then left the buccaneer with the Rector, and walked along the
cliffs to the barn where his aeroplane was sheltered. The building was
a tithe barn standing on glebe land belonging to the Rector of
Hedgerton, but, being little used, had fallen into decay. As it was a
very large erection with brick walls and thatched roof, Edwin had
cleverly turned it into a shelter for his aeroplane by breaking down
the front and adding huge double doors. There was ample room for the
machine, notwithstanding the wide spread of its wings, and it slipped
in and out very easily. In the barn there was a loft which nobody
used, and the rude ladder from the ground to the opening overhead had
long since been taken away. Mr. Craver did not trouble about the loft,
but left it to the rats and owls, to the nesting of starlings and
swallows. He was content to have the roof rainproof and the doors
stout, so that the machine could be kept dry and wholly safe from
robbers. On the whole, it was a most convenient place for the
aeroplane, as the machine had plenty of room outside when it emerged
to run for the time before ascending. Nothing could have suited
Craver's purpose better.

To Edwin's surprise he found Neddy Mellin hovering round the barn when
he arrived, trying the doors and peeping in at various points. The lad
looked rather pale, but was as smart as ever in his Eton suit. Craver
wondered why he had come to Hedgerton, considering that he was engaged
to sing at the Tit-Bits Music Hall, and might necessarily be supposed
to have remained in town for the Saturday matinee.

"What the dickens are you doing here, Neddy?" he asked, sharply.

"I'm trying to get a squint at your aeroplane, sir," said Neddy,
smartly touching his hat. "There isn't any harm in that, is there,
sir?"

"No. I don't mean that. Neddy. But why aren't you singing?"

"Well, sir, I've got a touch of hoarseness, and the cove as teaches me
said I'd better wait until next week. I was going to sing 'Sally in
Our Alley' this week, but I didn't. I'm choky, sir."

The boy certainly spoke in rather a hoarse manner, and Edwin advised
him to go homo and surrender himself to his mother's care. "The wind
is rather keen, Neddy, and you might catch a fresh cold."
"Oh, I'm all right, sir," said the lad, indifferently. "Mother only
bothers me with her medicine and coddling. Do let me have a look at
the machine, sir, and do take me up with you this afternoon."

"I can't do that unless your mother consents, Neddy." said Craver,
kindly. "But by all means you can look at the aeroplane."

He unlocked the doors and conducted the delighted boy into the vast
interior of the barn. The next two hours were spent joyfully by Neddy
in assisting Craver to do the necessary repairs, and he proved to be
very useful in getting what was wanted. With the eager curiosity of
his age the lad examined every portion of the machine and asked
innumerable questions. All these Edwin answered good-naturedly. Once
or twice it was on the tip of his tongue to question Neddy about the
events of the night when Wyke met with his death, but on swift
reflection he decided to wait for a more fitting occasion. As the boy
was devoted to Claudia and very grateful to himself for being allowed
to help with the repairs, Edwin believed that he would not side with
Lady Wyke, however much she wished it. Therefore he was quite content
to wait. Later on, when Claudia was with him, they could examine the
boy together and learn what he really knew likely to reveal the truth.

About twelve o'clock Edwin found that he had left a particular screw
at home, and went back for it. Neddy offered to go readily; but Craver
alone knew where the screw was to be found, and went himself. He left
Neddy in charge of the barn and the aeroplane, warning him not to
allow anyone to enter. With great pride the lad took up his post as
sentry, and Edwin ran back across the wide spaces of land to the
rectory, intending to return immediately. But he was prevented from
doing so.

"I saw Mrs. Vence on the esplanade," said Claudia, meeting her lover
at the gate. "I saw her when I went out for an errand for your
mother."

"Did you speak to her?"

"No. I was some distance away, and when she saw me she ran off."

"Ran off! That old woman?"

"Oh, Edwin, she is very quick on her legs, and got out of the way in a
most surprising manner. Afterwards I met Mrs. Mellin down in the
village, and she told me that Mrs. Vence was looking for Neddy."

"What does she want with him?" asked Craver, suspiciously. "I don't
know. Perhaps she wants to tell him to hold his tongue, and is afraid
lest we should question him."

"I haven't questioned him yet, Claudia; but now that I know Mrs. Vence
is on the warpath I shall ask him immediately I return to the barn. It
is just as well for us to learn what he knows before Mrs. Vence gets
hold of him. All the same, I don't see why she should tell him to hold
his tongue."

"We don't know if she intends to do so, Edwin. It is only a guess on
my part, dear. Is Neddy still with you?"

"Yes. He has been with me for the last two hours helping with the
repairs. I suppose his mother knows where he is."

"Yes. She said that Mrs. Vence sent a message from Maranatha asking
that Neddy should come to see her, and Mrs. Mellin replied that he was
at the barn on the cliffs with you. He told his mother that he was
going to try and see the aeroplane. Then, I suppose, Mrs. Vence came
out to look for him."

"She hasn't been near the barn, at any rate. Claudia, I am very
suspicious of that old woman. It seems to me that she wants to make
Neddy hold his tongue."

"Why should she?"

"Oh, I don't know," Craver pondered, deeply. "After all, she may have
slipped the knife into Wyke herself. Remember, he brought it down the
stairs and may have laid it on the study table when speaking to me.
Now that I come to think of it." added Edwin with a start, "he did. I
remember distinctly."

"Why didn't you say so before?"

"I forgot. All this business is refreshing my memory. Remember,
Claudia, I was very upset at the moment, and my mind was somewhat
clouded. It's only coming back to me bit by bit. Yes, Wyke did have
the knife, and did throw it on the table before he took me into the
dining-room. He returned there, and perhaps Mrs. Vence met him with
the knife in her hand to----"

"Edwin! Edwin! We can't be sure. She had no reason to murder Sir
Hector."

"Has she any reason to force Neddy to hold his tongue?"

"We don't know if she has any such intention, Edwin."

"Let us find out, Claudia. Wait for a minute. I want to find a screw,
and then we can both go back to question the boy. We must examine him
before Mrs. Vence puts her oar in."

Claudia consented, and Edwin ran into the rectory. He was a long time
away, as he could not find the screw. When he did return, he set out
at once for the barn with Claudia. By this time he had been absent
fully three-quarters of an hour. Never thinking of the shock that was
waiting for them, the young couple walked leisurely towards the barn
and along the cliffs, chatting easily. Shortly they arrived at the
building, but could see no sign of Neddy outside, although Edwin
expected to find him doing sentry-go. With an exclamation of vexation
at Neddy's negligence, he stepped within, and then cried out;
"Claudia! Come quick."

The girl, who was listening behind, ran in to see Craver stooping over
the insensible form of the lad. Neddy was lying face downwards and
bleeding from an ugly wound in the head, evidently inflicted by some
blunt instrument. To all appearances he was dead.

"Oh, Edwin! who has done this?" cried Claudia, piteously, as she knelt
beside the poor boy's body.

"I suspect Mrs. Vance, although I have no reason to believe so. We
must carry him to the rectory, Claudia, as we can do nothing with him
here."

"Is he dead?"

"I think not. Only stunned. Wait a minute. Claudia, I'll ask one of
the coastguards to watch the barn and get another to help."

Edwin ran off, while Claudia tried to staunch the wound with her
handkerchief. Shortly the young man came back with the two men, and
while one remained to guard the machine, the other assisted Edwin to
carry the insensible hoy to the rectory. Mrs. Craver received them at
the door, and was loud in her expressions of regret. A messenger was
sent off for the doctor and for Mrs. Mellin, while Neddy was attended
to by the rector's wife and by Claudia.

The two did all they could to revive him. But the blow had been so
heavy that the boy was quite stunned. Nevertheless, after much trouble
with brandy, and bathing and smelling-salts, the boy vaguely opened
his blue eyes. At once his gaze fell on Claudia bending over him. His
lips moved.

"She did it."

"Who?"

"Mrs. Vence."

"Why, Neddy?"

The boy's gaze wandered, and he showed signs of relapsing into
insensibility again. But Claudia, knowing what was at stake, asked the
question again.

"Mrs.--Vence--murdered--the--old 'un!" Then Neddy's eyes closed and
again he became insensible.




CHAPTER XXIV.


After that momentary gleam of consciousness, Neddy relapsed into
insensibility, and became dead to the world for a long time. Mrs.
Mellin arrived in tears, and insisted that the boy should be removed
to her own poor home, so that he might be nursed and looked after. But
the doctor, who was by this time on the spot, urged that the poor lad
should be taken at once to the Redleigh Hospital, as it was probable
that an operation would be necessary. The rector agreed with this
suggestion, and after a lengthy argument Mrs. Mellin was induced to
consent to the arrangement. A motor-car carried both Neddy and his
mother to Redleigh, and everything possible having thus been done for
the victim, it now remained to find the assailant. It was fortunate
that the boy had been able to give the name of the person who struck
him down, as it made things easier for the police. While Neddy was
being attended to, Edwin wired to Redleigh for Sergeant Purse, and he
was expected to arrive every moment. But before the officer came the
injured boy was removed to the hospital.

While the rector and his wife were talking over the untoward event,
Claudia managed to draw her lover into another room for a private
conversation. This privacy was necessary, as, knowing what they did,
the young couple could not converse freely in the presence of Mr. and
Mrs. Craver. Edwin still wished to keep them in ignorance of what was
going on, as things were not yet shipshape. When Claudia had Edwin to
herself, and bluntly asked what he was going to do, he quite as
bluntly answered her.

"I'm going to tell the whole story to Sergeant Purse," he said,
firmly.

"But you and dad may be arrested if you tell the truth," protested the
girl uneasily.

"I don't think so. Remember, in your presence and in the presence of
my mother, Neddy has accused Mrs. Vence of the crime. Until she is
caught, and the truth of the statement is proved, Purse may have us
watched, but he certainly will not arrest us."

"Do you think that Mrs. Vence is guilty, Edwin?"

"I am sure of it. Otherwise, why should the boy say so."

"Mrs. Vence was certainly uneasy when she let slip the fact that Neddy
was in the house all the time," said Miss Lemby, thoughtfully.

"I quite understand that," replied the young man, promptly. "In the
heat of the conversation she said too much. Like many another clever
criminal, she gave herself away."

"But why should she murder Sir Hector?"

"That is what we have to find out, and will learn when she is
arrested."

"Hiding somewhere, Claudia. From what Mrs. Mellin said, she knew where
the boy was to be found, and probably followed him. I daresay she was
lurking round the barn while Neddy was assisting me with the repairs,
but, owing to my presence, did not get a chance of harming him. Then,
when I came back for the screw, she took the opportunity and, as she
thought, killed the one witness who could prove her guilt."

Claudia nodded. "It seems to be plain enough. But are you wise in
telling the sergeant what you and dad have had to do with the crime?
Would it not be better to wait until Mrs. Vence is arrested and
confesses her guilt?"

"No, Claudia," said Edwin, positively. "I must speak out now. There
has been quite enough of this hole-and-corner work. Your father and I
are both quite innocent, and for our own safety we must put ourselves
under the protection of the law; otherwise the deuce, knows what will
happen."

Claudia, after some consideration, agreed with this view, but begged
Edwin not to confess until her father was consulted. The young man had
no objection to taking this course, and in order to lose no time he
set out for the inn with the intention of bringing Lemby back to the
rectory. Then the three could wait for the arrival of Purse and the
statement could be made. So matters were arranged; but, as Fate would
have it, Claudia and her lover met the sergeant driving along the
esplanade while on their way to the village. He stopped the trap when
he saw them and made inquiries.

"What's this about your having found out who murdered Sir Hector
Wyke?" asked the lean little man, abruptly. "I just received your
message, Mr. Craver, and came on at once. Three or four policemen are
following."

"You will need them all, and need Jervis, too, in order to catch Mrs.
Vence," said Craver, promptly. "She is the culprit."

"Who says so?"

"Neddy Mellin." And Edwin gave a hasty sketch of what had happened, so
as to put Purse in full possession of the facts.

When he had concluded, the sergeant whistled. "Fancy that, now. I
never should have suspected that old woman. She gave her evidence very
clearly at the inquest, and put me off the scent by her very
clearness. I should like to see the boy and question him."

"You can't," said Claudia, quickly. "He only became conscious enough
to tell, in my presence, and in the presence of Mrs. Craver, who had
struck him down. Now he is insensible again, and has been taken to the
Redleigh Hospital."

"Oh, has he? I wish I had seen him before he went. However, I can call
at the hospital when I return."

"That won't do much good, sergeant," said Craver, with a shrug. "The
boy is not able to recognise anyone or to talk at all. Better come
with me and with Miss Lemby, here, to see her father, who is at the
Jack Ashore."

"What for?" asked Purse, suspiciously.

"We have something to tell you."

"In connection with the death of Sir Hector Wyke?"

"Yes. It won't take long to put you in possession of what we know, and
then you can search for Mrs. Vence." Purse drew out his watch. "I'll
give you half an hour," he said, pompously. "We can then go back to
the Rectory. I have told my men to meet me there. In fact, Mr. Craver,
I expected to find you there also."

"You would have," said Edwin drily, "but that the necessity arose of
my going to see Mr. Lemby about what we have to tell you."

"And Miss Lemby?"

"She wishes to be present, although she has nothing to do with the
mater."

"Oh, but I have," chimed in Claudia. "I can tell the sergeant what
Mrs. Vence said to me the other day."

Purse grunted and looked suspiciously at the girl, then, with a nod,
agreed to do as he was asked. The Redleigh trap was dismissed, and the
trio walked on to the inn. There, in the very room wherein the officer
had seen Lemby prior to the inquest, he saw him again. The pirate was
startled and disturbed by this invasion of his privacy, and when Edwin
privately told him of the determination he had arrived at, he hoarsely
objected. But matters had gone too far for these objections to have
any weight, so in the end Mr. Lemby was quite agreeable to say what he
knew. Then the quartette took their seats, and Purse produced his
pocket-book.

"Anything you say will be used in evidence against you," he recited,
in quite a mechanical way. "Now, Mr. Craver."

Edwin related in what way he was connected in the matter, and Purse
started when he heard that the man before him was the hero of the red
bicycle escapade. But he did not interrupt, and speedily noted down
all details. Lemby followed immediately on Edwin's heels, and
recounted the episode of the knife, which he bluntly acknowledged to
be his. Then Claudia took up the tale, and put the sergeant in
possession of all facts connected with the hunt for the assassin,
including her visit to Mrs. Vence and the statement of Neddy that the
old woman was the culprit. All these things the officer took down, and
scribbled furiously. When he had finished, and his book was replaced
in his pocket, he looked steadily at the three people before him.

"You have all acted wrongly," said the sergeant, in a harsh, official
voice. "I should have known of these things long ago."

"We were not bound to incriminate ourselves," said Edwin, smartly.

"I could have helped you."

"Not you, confound it!" growled Lemby, aggressively. "If we had owned
up before the truth became known you would have run us in. Come now,
confess."

"Well, it is probable that I should," admitted the sergeant,
reluctantly. "After all, things look black against you and against Mr.
Craver here."

"Of course. And that is the dashed reason why we held our tongues."

Purse, after reflection, made no answer to this, and rose to intimate
that the conference was at an end.

"The next thing to be done is to find this old woman," said the
sergeant.

"Wait a moment," said Lemby, rising. "How do we stand?"

"Where you were," said Purse, gruffly. "I don't intend to have you
arrested, if you mean that. But until this business is cleared up by
the arrest of Mrs. Vence, I'll keep an eye on you."

"That is only reasonable," said Edwin, readily. "However, I beg one
boon of you, sergeant. Don t let my father or my mother know anything
about what we have told you."

"If Mrs. Vence is arrested, the whole story must come out, sir."

"Then wait until you do arrest the woman. But until Mr. Lemby and I
are free from danger, I don't wish my parents to know."

"Fair enough," growled the sergeant "I'll hold my tongue. Now come
along. She can't have gone far, and we'll soon lay hands on her. The
old wretch, to cheat me so! Hang her! She has pulled the wool over my
eyes."

There was no doubt of this. Mrs. Vence had proved too clever for Purse
at the inquest, and it seemed as though she would again escape him.
All that afternoon search was made throughout Hedgerton, but without
success. The servants at Maranatha stated that Mrs. Vence had left the
house hours ago and had not returned. An inquiry at Mrs. Mellin's
cottage showed that the old woman had not been there. Various people,
questioned by the police, stated that they had seen the housekeeper
wandering about the esplanade, and a coastguard remembered to have
noticed her on the cliffs. These were searched, the beach was
examined, the woods round Hedgerton were explored, and the village
itself was beaten for the fugitive, but all unsuccessfully. It seemed
as though Mrs. Vence had taken wings to herself and had flown away.
Yet it seemed ridiculous to think that so old and so infirm a woman
could escape so easily. By the time it was four o'clock the sergeant
was furious at being made to look such a fool. But swearing did not
help him. Mrs. Vence had vanished, and was nowhere to be found.

"Well," said Purse, when he came across Edwin and Claudia at the barn,
whither they had gone to look at the aeroplane, "what's to be done
now?"

"You can't find her?" said Miss Lemby, anxiously.

"No. You know the old wretch by sight. See here, take this police
whistle, and if you spot her, blow for all you are worth."

"But I am not likely to see her," protested Claudia. "If a clever man
like you can't find her, how do you expect me to?"

"See here, young lady," broke in the irate officer. "Mrs. Vence is
hiding. While the police are about she'll not show. I intend to
collect my men at the rectory and then come along to have a talk with
the coastguard yonder. There is a man there I want to examine. Now,
when Mrs. Vence sees that the coast is clear she may venture out, as
she won't take any notice of you. Keep your eyes open and blow the
whistle if you see her. That's all I ask."

"You ask a great deal, sergeant," said Claudia, drily. "And my
father?"

"He will remain at the rectory with my men. Will you do what I ask?"

"Yes. But I warn you that I don't anticipate success," said Claudia,
slipping the whistle into her pocket.

"Neither do I. But I'm grasping at straws," growled the sergeant, who
was very hot and very angry.

He was turning away from the barn to go to the rectory and collect his
men, when Edwin stopped him for a moment. "Have you any objection to
my taking a flight, sergeant?" he asked. "I want to try my machine now
it is repaired?"

Edwin quite expected the man to object, but, to his surprise, the
sergeant at once assented. "Seeing you going away on the aeroplane
will make Mrs. Vence think that we have given up the hunt, and she
will venture out to escape. Go, by all means, Mr. Craver. I'll come
back to see you start."

Purse hurried away, and Edwin made ready his machine. He only intended
to take a short flight over the water and then return, as he merely
wished to see if the repairs were all right. To provide against
accidents he placed a coil of rope on the pilot's seat. It might be
wanted, and it might not. All the same, it was just as well that it
should be there. Shortly, and just when Purse returned from the
rectory, Edwin was ready, and called two or three coastguards from
their station to assist in the ascent. While they ran the aeroplane
along the ground to give it the impetus to rise, Purse cast his eyes
here, there, and everywhere, in the hope of seeing Mrs. Vence. Why he
expected her to remain in the vicinity of her crime it is impossible
to say. But he could not help thinking that she was lurking about
close at hand. However, his attention was called from watching by the
ascent of the great machine, which rose majestically into the air,
swept round in a great circle, and then turned its nose seaward.
Looking up and following its flight, Purse walked along towards the
coastguard station, leaving Claudia seated in the shadow near the
front of the barn. She was behind one of the double doors, and could
not be seen from within.

For a time Claudia watched the aeroplane swooping and soaring and
dipping and rising in the rainbow-coloured sunset sky. When it
dwindled to a mere black dot she let her eyes sink to the ground, and
blinked to got the dazzle out of them. Suddenly she heard a stealthy
noise, and looked through the aperture between the door and the barn,
where it swung on its hinges. To her surprise, she saw someone
climbing actively down the wall, having emerged from the trapdoor
leading to the loft. There was no ladder, as has been explained, so
the person in question had to descend like a monkey, using feet and
hands to cling to the rough wail, A glint of sunshine showed Claudia a
blue dress and a red knitted shawl, so she was not long in doubt as to
whom the individual was. Evidently Mrs. Vence, after striking down the
boy, had climbed up into the loft in order to hide, and now that she
believed the coast to be clear was trying to escape into the open. No
one had ever thought of searching the loft, so the astute old woman
had shown uncommon sense in choosing her hiding-place.

With bated breath Claudia rose silently and waited patiently, drawing
the whistle from her pocket, Mrs. Vence, quite ignorant that she was
being watched, crept down like a huge bat, and then made a run for the
door. Just as she emerged, Claudia sprang at her and the old woman
uttered a shriek like the cry of a trapped animal. Afterwards she
became silent and fought viciously. But Claudia, knowing what was at
stake, held on tightly. In the struggle the woman's spectacles fell
off, then her bonnet and a mass of false hair. She was unmasked.

"Lady Wyke!" gasped Claudia, "Lady Wyke!"




CHAPTER XXV.


"Lady Wyke! Lady Wyke!" babbled Claudia, dazed by the amazing
discovery.

"You beast!" snarled the detected murderess, and wrenched herself
free, to run swiftly across the open space between the barn and the
zig-zag path which led down to the beach.

Claudia, seeing her quarry escaping, recovered her senses promptly,
and blew a shrill call on the police whistle. In a moment Sergeant
Purse, at the not too distant coastguard station, heard the signal,
and came running out. He saw in a moment the flying figure of the
woman, and sped towards her like a deer, in order to intercept her
before she reached the cliffs. At the same time Claudia sprang forward
also, and reached the fugitive almost at the same time as the officer.
Purse laid hands on his prey just as she reached the opening of the
path, and dexterously flung her on the ground. Lady Wyke, seeing that
she was lost, howled like a wild beast, and swore like several
troopers in her anger and baffled rage. But the sergeant paid no
attention to her curses. When he rose she was lying on the ground with
handcuffs on her wrists. Claudia silently stood looking down on her
captured enemy, not knowing whether to laugh or cry, so unstrung did
she feel. Unable to say a word, she turned red and white alternately,
and awaited events.

"Get up, Mrs. Vence," said Purse, briefly.

"It's--not--Mrs. Vence," quavered Claudia, in a shaky voice. "It's
Lady Wyke."

"Gosh!" gasped the sergeant, astonished for once in his official life.
"Do you mean to say that she murdered her husband?"

There was no answer from either woman. Lady Wyke rolled on the dry
grass cursing freely, while Claudia sat down on a convenient rock to
clasp her hands tightly and keep herself from trembling--in fact, from
breaking down altogether. No one else was at hand, as the policemen at
the rectory had not heard the whistle, and Purse had waved back the
coastguards who seemed disposed to approach. He did not wish anyone
should share the glory of his capture, and desired then and there to
hear Lady Wyke's story, so that he could be sure he had arrested the
right person.

"Now, then," said Purse, shaking his finger at her sternly, "what have
you to say, madam? Remember, anything you do say will be used in
evidence against you."

"Oh," sneered Lady Wyke, looking very white and very vicious, "and you
think that I'll be fool enough to speak after that warning. How dare
you arrest an innocent person such as I am!"

"You are guilty," said Claudia, hoarsely. "You murdered Sir Hector."

"It's a lie."

"Neddy Mellin can prove it."

"Then until he does, I am guiltless," raged the woman, furiously.
"Take these handcuffs off, man."

"Oh, no," said the sergeant, smoothly. "I have arrested you as Mrs.
Vence, who struck down that boy. Afterwards you can be arrested for
the murder of your husband as Lady Wyke."

"I didn't kill him, I tell you," she snarled viciously. "As to the
boy, I never saw him."

"Rats!" growled Purse inelegantly. "If you are innocent of assault,
why did you hide in that loft?"

Lady Wyke scowled, and saw that there was no escape from the lesser
crime. "I only hit the boy lightly to punish him for telling lies."

"You stunned him. He is dangerously ill," said Claudia, quickly.

"Then how can he accuse me if he hasn't his senses about him?"

"He recovered for a moment to say that you had struck him, and he gave
the reason why you did so."

"And the reason?" demanded the woman, with a sneer.

"You murdered your husband."

"Did he say that in those exact words?"

"No. He said that Mrs. Vence had murdered Sir Hector."

"Well, I am not Mrs. Vence, I am Lady Wyke."

"Rot!" said the sergeant, angrily. "What the deuce are you wasting my
time for in telling lies? You are Lady Wyke sure enough, but you have
been masquerading for some purpose as an old woman under the name of
Mrs. Vence."

"You can prove nothing against me, said Lady Wyke, sullenly.

"Yes, we can. An operation will restore young Mellin to health, and
his evidence will hang you."

"Hang me?" Lady Wyke shivered.

"Yes. There is no escape, But you had better not say any more. I don't
want to trap you into a confession. Get up and come along with me. I
must take you to Redleigh Goal."

"Oh," groaned the woman, looking at her handcuffs and then wrathfully
at the white face of Miss Lemby, "and to think that the girl should
get the better of me! But I'm not beaten yet."

"Here, get up and come along," said Purse, harshly, and bent to lift
her.

"Wait!" shrieked Lady Wyke, who now saw that there was indeed no
escape, and that the time had come for her to pay in full for her
wickedness. "I have a word to say first."

"Say it then," growled the officer, sharply, "and be quick about it."

The captured woman thought for a few moments, and then began with a
sigh to confess her wickedness, and continued with frequent sobs. Bad
as she was, Claudia was quite sorry for her apparent misery.

"I'll tell the truth," said Lady Wyke, in a melancholy tone, but it
became sharper when Purse began to recite his formula. "Don't bother
me," she said, tartly, "but take out your pocket-book and note down
what I say."

"I'm ready," said the sergeant, stolidly, when her command was
complied with. Lady Wyke nodded, looked at her fettered hands, and
shivered. "I never thought that I'd live to have these on," she said,
sullenly. "However, the game's up, and that girl yonder has won. It's
no use beating about the bush any longer. I did murder my husband."

"Oh!" gasped Claudia, shrinking and wincing.

"Yes," went on the woman plaintively. "I killed him, with the knife of
your father. To begin at the beginning"--her voice shook, but she made
an effort and continued slowly--"when I saw in America that Hector was
going to marry you. Miss Lemby, I came back to stop him from
committing bigamy."

"He thought that you were dead."
"Well, I wasn't. I returned and saw Sandal to prove my identity. I
also learnt that the will made by Hector shortly after our marriage,
which left his property to me, was still in existence. Then I
interviewed Hector, and we had an unpleasant scene, as you may guess.
He did not want to tell you the truth immediately, but wished for time
to think over matters. To do so he proposed to go into hiding in the
country, because he was afraid lest your father should come and worry
him."

"My father did find him out," said Claudia, while Purse went on busily
taking notes. "He learnt from Edwin where Sir Hector was."

"Add Edwin knew because his father was Rector of Hedgerton. Well,
than, as you may guess, I was not going to let my husband give me the
slip, so I said that I would go with him. He objected, as he had fixed
upon Maranatha, in Hedgerton, as his hiding-place, and knew that I
came from there. He did not wish my sister, who was only a
washerwoman, to know that I was his wife. I therefore said that I
would make myself up as an old woman, and go as his housekeeper."

"And your husband consented to this absurd idea?" I asked Purse,
doubtfully.

Lady Wyke smiled drily. "He couldn't very well object, could he," she
demanded, "seeing that I had the inside running? Since he was anxious
to hide the truth about his first marriage from that girl yonder, he
had to do what I wished, as he knew that I could give the show away.

"Well, then, being an actress, I was quite able to turn myself into an
old hag. I was Lady Wyke in London, but I arrived at Maranatha as Mrs.
Vence. Afterwards, when the house was more or less ready, Hector
arrived, and we pigged it there for some time. Hector could not
make up his mind to tell you of my reappearance, Miss Lemby, and so
dilly-dallied day after day. I kept mostly indoors, while occasionally
Hector walked out, although he discouraged people calling, which was
natural, considering he did not feel inclined for company. I
particularly refused to see my sister, Mrs. Mellin, lest she should
recognise me through my disguise. But I got Neddy to bring the
washing, and my nephew and I became very friendly."

"Did he know, then, that you were his aunt?" asked Claudia, and Purse
mutely put the same question.

"No. He never knew at all that Mrs. Vence and Lady Wyke were one
and the same person, which said a good deal for my cleverness in
making-up."

"I never guessed myself," said Miss Lemby, shaking her head.

"Another tribute to my talents," cried Lady Wyke, ironically. "Well,
then, the whole reason why I disguised myself at Hector's request, and
watched him, was to prevent him from making another will. I fancied
that he wanted to leave the money to you, Miss Lemby, and naturally I
hated you. I pigged it as my husband's housekeeper for some time, as
you know, and watched him carefully. Then, on that particular night
Mr. Oliver Lemby arrived, and saw my husband in the drawing-room. I
then----"

"Wait a bit," broke in Purse. "Was the boy Mellin in the house then?"

"Yes. He arrived early with the washing, and was eating some bread and
honey in the kitchen. I excused myself, and left him there while I
went up to spy at the drawing-room door keyhole. I wished to find out
if Hector was saying anything about leaving the money to you, Miss
Lemby. I saw what I told you in London, when you truly believed that I
was Mrs. Vence. Your father threatened Hector with his knife, and then
came the ring at the door. I ran down to open it, but did not know
that the newcomer was Mr. Craver. While he asked for my husband,
Hector came running downstairs with your father's knife in his hand.
He pushed me aside, told me to go to the kitchen and bring
refreshments in a quarter of an hour, and then took the stranger into
his study. I did not go to the kitchen, but listened. Then I heard
Hector say that he intended to leave the money to MV. Craver, and knew
that the stranger was Edwin. Afterwards Hector conducted Mr. Craver
into the dining-room to show him some papers. What they were I don't
know, and why they should be in the dining-room I don't know either.
But then Hector's papers and letters were always all over the place.
He was a most untidy man.

"I stole into the study, and saw Mr. Lemby's knife on the table, where
Hector had left it. I was furious at the thought of Hector making a
new will and leaving the money to another person. The devil entered
into me, for I swear that I had no idea of killing him until then.
Hector came back for a moment and faced me as I was holding the
knife. Without waiting, I sent the knife straight into his false
heart. He gave a cry and fell. Then I heard Mr. Craver move in the
next room--the dining-room. I turned to fly, and saw Neddy Mellin
looking at me. He had seen all. I dragged him into the kitchen, and
made him promise to hold his tongue. He was scared, and did so. Then,
while Mr. Craver was bending over the body, I came in with the tray
and dropped it. The postman's knock----"


"Yes, yes, yes!" said Purse, closing his pocket-book; "we know all the
rest. Mr. Craver escaped on the bicycle. Hall and Jervis and Lemby
arrived, and you played the innocent goat."

"She did more than that," said Claudia, looking very sick and white.
"She tried to implicate my father and Edwin when she knew they were
innocent."

"Oh, that was a part of my game," said Lady Wyke, lightly. "But you
know now why I went to buy a motor. It was to make Edwin's
acquaintance. Then Neddy gave me the letter he had taken from the hall
table, and I knew that I had the upper hand of your lover. I must say
that, seeing how I could have ruined him, he was brave to stick to
you, Claudia. As to that pirate Lemby----"

"That's enough," said Sergeant Purse, suddenly. "I have heard all that
I want to hear. Now come to Redleigh Gaol."

"One minute," said Lady Wyke, staring across the water. "There is the
aeroplane, sergeant. Won't you wait for its arrival, and let we say
good-bye to the man I love, and for whose sake I have ruined myself?"

"No. Come along," and Purse laid his hand lightly on her arm, never
thinking but what she would obey, "come to Redleigh Gaol."

"Death rather!" shrieked Lady Wyke and, handcuffed as she was, sprang
down the path in a moment. How she kept, her balance was a wonder but
keep it she did, and before the two on the cliffs could gather their
senses together she was down on the beach. The aeroplane came nearer
and nearer.

"She means to drown herself!" cried Claudia, and sprang in pursuit,
while Purse, wholly taken by surprise, blew his whistle loudly.

At once three or four men came running from the coastguard station,
and followed the sergeant down the path. But Claudia, determined to
prevent her rival from escaping punishment, was already in pursuit.
She soon dropped to the level of the beach, and scrambled over the
boulders on to the smooth sands. Lady Wyke was speeding ahead like a
swallow, but lingered when she saw Claudia at her heels. The girl got
within touching distance of her, when the woman, with an insulting
laugh, darted off again. Claudia followed unthinkingly, and almost
before she knew what had happened, found herself in the middle of the
fatal quicksands, which had been pointed out to her by Neddy.

Lady Wyke was already sinking fast, and laughing loudly. "I've got
you; you are trapped! No Redleigh Gaol for me, and no Edwin for you!
I'm not beaten yet, I'm not beaten yet!"

Claudia shrieked as she felt herself in the grip of the cruel sands.
Purse and the coastguards uttered shouts of dismay, for it appeared to
be impossible to save the two women. At once two of the men scrambled
back up the cliff to get ropes and boards for the rescue. But all the
time Claudia and the rival who had lured her to destruction were
sinking deeper and deeper, Lady Wyke, in particular, going down
swiftly, as she had ran on to the sands first. Claudia was following
quickly. All at once both women heard the buzz of the machine, and
looked up to see the aeroplane directly overhead. Edwin dropped
swiftly downwards as he recognised the peril, and soon came near
enough to recognise who were in danger. With a white face, but
perfectly calm, he dropped the rope coiled on the pilot seat, and
guided the aeroplane down a short distance above the heads of the two.
Lady Wyke uttered a cry of rage as she saw Claudia grasp the rope, and
cling to it for dear life.

"It's not fair; it's not fair!" she screamed. "She shan't be saved! Me
too; me too!" and she shook her ironbound hands impotently at the
aeroplane. Purse and his men looked on aghast, for Lady Wyke was now
up to her middle in the sand.

There was no word, from Craver, and no cry from Claudia. The rope had
dropped truly, and one end was in her hands, while the other was
fastened to the seat of the machine. Edwin kept his engine going at
full speed, swung low, and then curved for the ascent. The rope
tightened, there came a steady pull, and Claudia was plucked from
peril, just as the sands had her in their grip up to the knees. With
an angry, despairing cry, Lady Wyke saw her hated rival swinging in
the air and borne out of danger as the aeroplane slanted skywards with
a rush. Then the pilot descended lower and lower gradually, until the
rescued girl, now on firm ground, was able to let go her hold. With a
faint moan she did so, and sank insensible on the sands, while the
aeroplane rose in the air to sweep upward majestically, to skim over
the cliffs, and finally to alight with a run near the barn.

But Lady Wyke saw nothing of this. Swiftly and surely the greedy sands
sucked her down into their depths. Her waist, her shoulders, her neck
disappeared, while the sergeant and the coastguards looked on
helplessly. With ropes and board the rescuers scrambled down the
cliffs just as the miserable woman's black head vanished for ever.
Without a sound, she went down into the halls of death, by a far more
cruel road than the one she had forced her husband to travel. And when
Claudia awoke from her death-like trance she was lying in the
sheltering arms of her lover.

"Lady Wyke?" she murmured, feebly. Edwin silently pointed to the
quicksands, which gleamed and glittered, and appeared to smile in the
evening light. There was not a sign of the evil woman who had been
swallowed up by them. And the incoming tide began to break in little
waves over her nameless grave.




CHAPTER XXVI.


With the death of Lady Wyke and the discovery of her wickedness came
the end of trouble. There certainly remained a little to be endured by
those connected with the tragedy, for the whole strange story was made
public. That led to an invasion of Hedgerton by reporters,
photographers, and many morbid-minded people in search of sensation.
The Rectory was besieged, and Edwin, to protect Claudia from worry,
was compelled to grant interviews. The girl herself remained in her
room for some days, as she had received a severe shock. But that did
not prevent her portrait from appearing in the illustrated papers,
since it was procured from Mr. Lemby.

The pirate was in his element. Far from disliking such publicity he
gloried in it, and turned it, to good account. Money was what he
wanted, and money was what he intended to get--as much as he could
conveniently screw of this person and that. He charged for interviews;
he had his photograph sold in the streets and in shops; he swanked and
swaggered all over the place with a view to impress everyone with his
importance. And he succeeded; for the case caused such a sensation
that an enterprising music-hall manager offered the buccaneer an
engagement at a large weekly salary. Mr. Lemby, therefore, appeared in
a kind of Captain Kidd costume to relate wild adventures in the South
Seas and in Australia. Both Edwin and Claudia were horribly ashamed.
As for Mrs. Craver, her indignation knew no bounds.

"What kind of a man is this," she wrathfully demanded, "to have such a
daughter as you, Claudia? People didn't do these things when I was a
girl."

"It won't last long," replied Claudia with a sigh. "Very soon the
novelty will wear off, and then father will go back to Australia."

"I'm sure I shall be glad." said the little lady, drawing herself up
in a dignified way. "And I don't mean any disrespect to you, my dear,
when I say so. You are a sweet girl, and will make Edwin an ideal
wife. Your father is fascinating in some ways, and has many good
qualities. All the same, he should not try and make capital out of
this dreadful case."

Claudia quite agreed with this view. But it was impossible to stop the
pirate from taking every advantage of what had happened. As he had
entered upon this new career within a week from the death of Lady
Wyke, he was absent from Hedgerton and did not remain to worry her.
That was something gained, as she had Edwin to herself, and in many
ways was perfectly happy. After the storm had come the sunshine, and
now that there was no bar to their union the young couple determined
to get married as soon as possible. Only when she was Mrs. Craver
junior did Claudia feel that she would be safe from the vagaries of
her piratical father.

The Rector and his wife were both shocked when they learnt the truth.
In fact, the whole parish was shocked, as everyone knew Laura Bright,
although, as Lady Wyke, she was a comparative stranger to the friends
of her youth. Poor Mrs. Mellin wept at the outset over her sister's
terrible fate; but when she learnt that it was Laura that had tried to
kill Neddy she dried her tears and refused to mourn. People talked to
her and asked questions, but the old washerwoman behaved with great
dignity, and declined to say a word about the dead. She could not say
good and she did not wish to say bad, so she wisely held her tongue,
and was greatly commended for her reticence by Mrs. Craver, who
approved of her attitude.

As for Neddy, he gradually recovered his health. An operation restored
his senses, and careful nursing at Redleigh Hospital did the rest. In
a remarkably short space of time, considering the nature of the
injury, he was quite his old bright, clever self. Then Mrs. Mellin
took him home again with the intention of keeping him under her eye
for the rest of her life. But the lad, having tasted the joys of
London, refused to remain at Hedgerton. As soon as he was well enough
he returned to town and sought out the music-teacher with whom he had
been placed by his dead aunt. The man gladly took him in charge, and
in due time Neddy appeared at the Tit-Bits Music Hall with immense
success. Known as "The Skylark" he became quite a favourite, and made
a great ideal of money. To his honour, it must be said that he gave
the greater portion of his earnings to his mother, and these she
placed in a bank to his credit, refusing to touch a shilling herself.
The shock sustained by the boy did him much good, as it sobered his
character, and gave him experience. On the whole, he turned out very
well, and Mrs. Mellin never regretted letting him have his own way;
with regard to the singing. And, like his mother, Neddy never spoke of
Lady Wyke. She was dead and buried in the quicksand, so there was no
more to be said.

The quicksand had a wonderful fascination for morbid people. Many came
down to Hedgerton during the summer for the express purpose of staring
at the terrible grave of the miserable woman. Consequently all the
lodging houses in Hedgerton were full, and the season was the best,
ever known. In fact, the publicity given to the quiet little place by
the tragedy induced strangers to come down and stay there. When they
found what a charming resort it was, and how good the air was for
nerves, many remained, and building operations on a large scale took
place. Within a few years the locality was quite populous, so Lady
Wyke did good for her native village by her death, although she had
done nothing for it while living. But in this connection it may be
mentioned that Maranatha was pulled down. No one would rent it owing
to its ill-omened history, so it was finally destroyed, which was the
most sensible thing to be done. Its site became tea-gardens, and the
proprietors of these did a large business, notwithstanding the fact
that, many people shook their heads and declared that even the ground
was accursed.

But all this improvement of Hedgerton, which made it a thriving
seaside resort, took place long after Claudia and her lover were
happily married. After the first shock was over, and the greedy desire
of the public for further details was satisfied, Edwin broached the
subject of marriage with Claudia in the drawing-room of the Rectory.
Mr. and Mrs. Craver were present and thoroughly approved of their
son's wish that the ceremony should take place as soon as possible.
They loved Claudia, and, sympathising greatly with what she had gone
through, were anxious to make her happy. And what better fortune could
they wish her than to be the wife of the man she loved?

"I shall never be quite satisfied until I call you my wife, darling,"
said the young man, fondly. "There is no reason why we should not
marry at once."

"I have no money," faltered Claudia, "and my father----"

"Oh, never mind your father, my dear," interrupted little Mrs. Craver.
"If I have said anything about him to wound you, I'm sure I'm very
sorry. Let him go his own way, for he has many good qualities. We want
you. As to money, Edwin earns enough to keep you in tolerable luxury."

"I don't want that, I want Edwin."

"You shall have both, dear. And as a wedding-present," added the young
man with a smile. "I am going to give you a promise that I shall not
fly any more."

"Oh," cried Mrs. Craver, clasping her hands tightly, "I am glad. Of
course, I am used to it now, but really, Edwin, my heart is in my
mouth every time you go up in that horrid aeroplane."

"Oh, don't call it horrid, Mrs. Craver," expostulated Claudia,
hurriedly. "Think of how it saved my life. Nothing but the aeroplane
could have rescued me."

"Along with Edwin's presence of mind, of course," said the Rector,
thoughtfully. "And it was providential Edwin, that you took that coil
of rope along with you, otherwise----" He shrugged his shoulders.

"Otherwise I should have gone down with Lady Wyke," said Claudia,
trembling.

"Don't talk of her dear," said Mrs. Craver, trembling also. "I wish to
forget Laura Bright entirely. To think of her wickedness in luring you
on to that quicksand! It was cruelly clever. She meant to kill you."

Edwin nodded. "I suppose the sight of the quicksands from the top of
the path suggested that way of hurting Claudia," he remarked.
"Handcuffed as she was, Lady Wyke saw no other way of getting even
with us. And it was wonderful to think how she got down that steep
path without breaking her neck."

"Didn't you guess what she intended to do, Claudia?" asked the Rector.

"No. I ran after her believing that she intended to throw herself into
the sea and escape punishment. But she waited until I nearly reached
her, and then ran fairly into the quicksand. I followed unthinkingly,
and then----" The girl shivered, for the recollection of her escape
was very dreadful.

"Don't let us talk any more about it," said Edwin, soothingly.

They could not, for at that moment a visitor was announced. This was
none other than Mr. Sandal, who stalked into the drawing-room, tall,
thin, and dried up in his looks. Edwin and Claudia were surprised to
see him, and when he was introduced to the Rector and Mrs. Craver they
looked at him apprehensively. He saw their dismay, and smiled in his
dry way.

"I am not always a bird of ill-omen, Mr. Craver," he said to Edwin;
"and on this occasion I come as the dove of peace rather than as the
raven of misfortune."

"What do you mean?" asked the young man, doubtfully. "I mean," said
the solicitor, taking an official-looking document out of his pocket,
"that I have here the will of Lady Wyke made in your favour."

"Oh, but that was all nonsense," said Craver, quite taken aback. "Lady
Wyke only, told me that she made a will in my favour to trick me into
marriage. I did not know, until Claudia here explained, that marriage
destroyed a will."

"It does, Mr. Craver; but, as no marriage took place, this will holds
good. It was none of my business to contradict my late client; and, as
she insisted on making you her heir, she did so. Of course," added the
lawyer quietly, "I did not know that she intended to marry you, or I
should have pointed out that the will should be executed after the
ceremony."

"Well, Mr. Sandal," asked Claudia, impatiently, "what does it mean?"

"It means that Mr. Craver here inherits five thousand a year." There
were exclamations, and everyone looked startled. "I won't take a penny
of that miserable woman's money!" cried Edwin, violently. "Don't be
silly, Edwin!" said Mrs. Craver, sensibly. "You will do move good with
the money than she ever did. Take what you can get, and be thankful."
"What do you say, father?"

"I say accept, my son. Although she did not mean it. Providence, in a
wonderful way, has guided her to make reparation to you and to Claudia
for all the misery she has brought on you."

"Claudia?"

"I don't know what to say," said the girl, nervously. "I leave it to
you, Edwin."

"Be wise, my dear sir; be wise," warned Sandal, seeing the young man
still hesitate. "I accept," said Edwin, after a few moments' thought.
"After all, I have acted honourably, and there is no reason why I
should be quixotic."

"None in the world," said Sandal, drily. "I congratulate you on your
good sense, Mr. Craver. Come up to town when you can, and I shall
place you in possession of the property." He rose to go.

"Stay to dinner," urged the Rector, hospitably.

"No, my dear sir, no. I have to return to London at once. The trap
which brought me from Redleigh is waiting to take me back again. I
hope to come down on another and still happier occasion."

"What is that?" asked little Mrs. Craver, sharply.

"When Miss Lemby and Mr. Craver are married," complimented the old
lawyer, with a courtly bow, and took his leave in his usual stately
fashion.

Amidst the loud congratulations of the Rector and his wife on the
great wealth which had come to them, the young couple  saw the
friendly lawyer down to the gate.

Sandal refused to say a word about Lady Wyke, even though Edwin gave
him a hint. He stepped into Sanky's trap and drove off, leaving two
very happy people behind him.

"Five thousand a year!" said Claudia, drawing a deep breath. "I can
scarcely believe it. Why do you laugh, Edwin?"

"My darling, I was thinking how annoyed your father will be. He
schemed for this money, and has lost it. We have not schemed, and it
has come to us."

Claudia laughed also, "I really cannot sympathise with dad," she
observed. "I tell you what, Edwin. After dad gets over this music-hall
craze of his, let us allow him an income, on condition that he goes to
Australia. He will be much happier there, while he will only worry us
here. I hope," ended Claudia, remorsefully, "that I am not a bad
daughter in saying this?"

"'No, dear, no." Edwin petted her. "Your father is a trial, and is one
of those parents who make one wonder why the fifth commandment was
ever given."

"He means well, Edwin."

"To himself he does. No, Claudia, don't try to cry up your father's
virtues, for he has very, very few. I shall be glad to see the last of
him, and so will you." Claudia could not deny this, and they leant
comfortably over the gate to talk of more agreeable subjects.

"What will you do with all this money?" said the girl. "Oh, that is
easily settled," said her lover, putting his arm round her waist.
"First we get married; second, we shall go a trip round the world for
a couple of years, so as to make us forget all these terrible
troubles. Then we shall return when your father is safely settled in
Australia, and build a house near this rectory. I shall go back to the
motor factory, and live the steady life of a business man who has a
charming wife to welcome him home."

"And you won't fly any more, Edwin."

"No; never again. The aeroplane will go back to town by rail. Seeing
what happiness has come to us, I shall not tempt Providence. Hullo,
here's the post!" It was indeed Hall, who came up the road on his
bicycle. Edwin took the letters, which were all for the Rector. After
a word or two, the postman got on his machine, and moved swiftly away.
Edwin watched the red bicycle pass out of sight. "A machine like that
saved my life," he said, gravely. "If I hadn't got away on that night
I should have been hanged by this time." Claudia threw her arms round
his neck. "Don't Edwin! Let us try and forget all about that terrible
time. Come inside."

"All right. We can pass the evening along with father and mother,
building castles in the air."

"Come in, dear, come in. I never wish to see a red bicycle again."

"Nor do I," said the young man, laughing; "bat we can't abolish
post-men, you know, dearest. There, I shan't say another word. All our
trouble has gone down the road with the rod bicycle. And now----"

"Now I have you, and you have me," said Claudia, with a kiss. "Come
inside."


[THE END.]











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Red Bicycle, by Fergus Hume

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE RED BICYCLE ***

***** This file should be named 55748.txt or 55748.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/5/7/4/55748/

Produced by Charles Bowen from images provided by the
Taranaki Herald and Papers Past, National Library of New
Zealand

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

