The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Amethyst Cross, by Fergus Hume

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.



Title: The Amethyst Cross

Author: Fergus Hume

Release Date: December 23, 2017 [EBook #56230]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMETHYST CROSS ***




Produced by Charles Bowen from page scans provided by La
Trobe University, Australia











Transcriber's Notes:
     1. Page scan source: http://
        arrow.latrobe.edu.au/store/3/4/6/3/1/public/B14644101.pdf
        (La Trobe University, Australia)





[Illustration: Front cover]

THE AMETHYST CROSS






-------------------------------------
_BY THE
SAME AUTHOR_
-------------------------------------

THE MYSTERY
OF A SHADOW
-------------------------------------
CASSELL AND COMPANY, LTD.

LONDON, PARIS, NEW YORK, TORONTO
AND MELBOURNE
-------------------------------------






[Frontispiece: "'Father!' she shrieked!" (_see page 194_.)]






THE
AMETHYST CROSS



BY
FERGUS HUME

AUTHOR OF "THE MYSTERY OF A HANSOM CAB,"
"FLIES IN THE WEB," "THE PURPLE FERN,"
"THE MYSTERY OF A SHADOW," ETC.



WITH COLOURED FRONTISPIECE BY
C. DUDLEY TENNANT




CASSELL AND COMPANY, LIMITED
LONDON, PARIS, NEW YORK, TORONTO AND MELBOURNE
1908






ALL RIGHTS RESERVED






CONTENTS

CHAPTER

I.       THE BEGINNING OF A MYSTERY
II.      THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS
III.     ANOTHER MYSTERY
IV.      A FAMILY HISTORY
V.       MRS. WALKER'S OPINION
VI.      PURPLE AND FINE LINEN
VII.     AFTER MIDNIGHT
VIII.    UNDER A CLOUD
IX.      TWO GIRLS
X.       THE _DEUS EX MACHINA_
XI.      THE SEAMY SIDE
XII.     A COUNTERPLOT
XIII.    MRS. WALKER'S VISIT
XIV.     THE FAMILY LAWYER
XV.      A STARTLING LETTER
XVI.     RECOGNITION
XVII.    DISGRACE
XVIII.   LADY CHARVINGTON'S ACCUSATIONS
XIX.     MR. HALE EXPLAINS
XX.      JOURNEYS END IN LOVERS' MEETING
XXI.     TWO INTERVIEWS
XXII.    THE PLOT
XXIII.   ONE PART OF THE TRUTH
XXIV.    ANOTHER PART OF THE TRUTH
XXV.     REVENGE
XXVI.    THE END OF IT ALL






THE AMETHYST CROSS




CHAPTER I
THE BEGINNING OF A MYSTERY


THE blackbird knew. He had paired for the fifth time in as many years,
and esteemed himself wise in the matters, of love. Therefore, from the
budding chestnut wherein his nest was built, did he sympathetically
watch the bachelor and maid who sat below. They were lovers as he knew
very well, for only lovers could have gazed so persistently into one
another's eyes, and therein did they behold each other as each wished
to be. Which sentence is cryptic to those who are not lovers as these
were.

They might have looked at the smoothly-flowing river, singing quietly
to itself not a stone-cast away, or round a tangled garden, delicately
beautiful with the young greenery of May, or up into the azure depths
of a sky, flecked with silvery clouds. But they preferred--wisely it
may be--to look into each other's eyes, to clasp hands and to remain
silent with that eloquent muteness, which is the speech of true love.
Oh! the blackbird knew the meaning of these things very thoroughly,
and chuckled with such glee that he finally broke into glorious song
concerning the new love, the true love, the old love, the bold love,
which comes evermore with the blossoms of spring. But these
inhabitants of Paradise did not require the bird to reveal the
obvious. Their hearts were also singing the song of the early year.

"It can't last for ever," murmured the maid dreamily, "it is too
beautiful to last, since we are but mortal."

"It shall last for ever; it must," corrected the bachelor, wise in
that wisdom of the gods, which comes to wooers, "for we love with our
souls, dearest, and these cannot die."

She knew that he was right, for her heart told her so. Therefore did
they again look into one another's eyes and again become silent, while
the fluting blackbird explained more than mere human speech could
render. And he, perched on a swaying bough, was only too willing to
interpret. He knew: he was wise. And listening Nature heard
complacently. To such ends had she shaped her children; for such a
reason had she provided their Arcadia.

As Arcadia, like Marlowe's hell, is not circumscribed, it chanced that
this especial one was by Thames-side, and those who dwelt therein were
up-to-date in looks and dress and manners. Only their feelings were
those of classic times, and as he told her the old, old story, which
is ever new, she listened with the instinctive knowledge that the tale
was wonderfully familiar. She had read it in his eyes, after the
manner of maids, long before he dared to speak.

And this river Paradise was not wholly unworthy at so comely an Adam
and Eve, although limited in extent and untrimmed in looks. Lord
Beaconsfield declared that the most perfect garden is that cultivated
to excess by man and then handed over to the caprice of Nature. The
owner of this demesne apparently subscribed to this dictum, for the
garden, well-filled with expensive flowers and shrubs, had long since
relapsed into wildness. On either side of the narrow strip of land,
sloping gradually to the stream, extended low walls of mellow red
brick overgrown with dark-green ivy. The flowerbeds were luxuriant
with docks and nettles and charlock and divers weeds: the pathways
were untidy with lush grass, and the tiny lawn at the water's edge was
shaggy and untrimmed. A wooden landing-stage floated near shore at the
garden's foot, and to this was attached the young man's boat. At the
far end of this neglected domain could be seen a thatched cottage with
whitewashed walls and oblong lattices quaintly diamond-paned. So
rustic and pretty and old-world did it look that it might well have
been the fairy-dwelling of a nursery tale. And the lovers themselves
were young and handsome enough to deserve the care of the fairies.

He was tall, slim, well-formed, and Saxon in his fairness. His curly
hair--so much of it as the barber's shears had spared--was golden in
the sunlight, as was his small moustache, and his eyes were bravely
blue, as a hero's should be. The white boating-flannels accentuated
the bronze of his skin, and revealed the easy strength of an athlete.
He looked what the girl took him to be--a splendid young lover of
romance. Yet he was but a City clerk of prosaic environment, and his
youth alone improved him into Don Juan o' Dreams.

The girl resembled Hebe, maidenly, dainty, and infinitely charming; or
it might be Titania, since her appearance was almost too fragile for
the work-a-day world. With a milky skin; brown-haired and brown-eyed;
with a tempting mouth and a well-rounded chin, she looked worthy of
any man's wooing. She was sweet and twenty; he but five years older,
so both were ripe for love. And then the spring, joyous and fresh, had
much to do with the proposal just made. Her answer to his question had
been tunefully commented upon by the irrepressible blackbird, who
expressed no surprise when the echo of a kiss interrupted his song.

"But my father will never agree, George," sighed the girl, after this
outward and visible sound of acceptance.

"Dearest Lesbia"--he folded her manfully in his arms--"I don't
see why your father should object. I am not rich certainly, as a
stockbroker's clerk doesn't earn large wages. But for your dear sake
I shall work and work and work until I become a millionaire."

Lesbia smiled at this large promise. "We may have to wait for years."

"What does it matter so long as our hearts are true?"

"They may grow sick with waiting," said Lesbia, sighing. Then she
proceeded to look on the practical side of their idyll, as the most
romantic of women will do at the most romantic of moments. "You earn
only two hundred a year, darling, and my father--so far as I know--can
give me nothing. He has his pension from Lord Charvington, and makes a
small income by his work in the City, but"--here came a depressing
pause.

"What does Mr. Hale do in the City?" asked George abruptly.

Lesbia opened her brown eyes. "I don't know, dear. He goes there two
or three times a week, and always seems to be busy. I have asked him
what his occupation is, but he only laughs, and declares that dry
business details would not interest me. I am sure no girl ever knew so
little of her father as I do. It's not fair."

"Strange!" murmured the young man meditatively. "I never see Mr. Hale
in the City, and although I have asked several people, no one appears
to know the name. Of course, darling, the City is a big place, and
your father may do business in a quiet way. Still it is odd that no
one should know. I wish I did. I might help him."

"In what way?"

"Well, Lesbia, the wages I receive at Tait's office are small,
and--and--and"--here George flushed for no apparent reason--"and there
are other things to be considered. If I could only get something else
to do I should leave Tait's. Your father might be willing to let me
enter his office, you know, and then I could work up his business,
whatever it might be."

The girl nodded. She was a matter-of-fact young woman. Since Hale's
income was limited she was compelled, as housekeeper, very often to
consider ways and means. "You might speak to my father."

"And may I mention our engagement?" he supplemented.

"No-o!" Lesbia looked doubtful. "I had better announce that. Father
has a temper, and if he grew angry, you might grow angry also."

"Oh no." George was entirely in earnest when he said this. "I should
always remember that he was your father and that you love him."

Lesbia again looked doubtful. "Do I love him?" she mused.

"One is supposed to love one's father," suggested George.

She stared at the river. "Yes! I suppose so. Honour your parents, and
so forth. I don't honour my father, though--his temper is too bad. I
am not quite sure if I love him."

"Oh, my dear." George looked nervous.

"Don't make any mistake, dear boy. I like my father, since we are good
friends, and usually he is kind--that is, when he is not in a rage.
But then, you see, sweetest," she sighed, "he is nearly always in a
rage about some trifle. Look at the garden," she waved her hand
vaguely, "I wanted to hire a gardener to make it look more
respectable, and father was furious. He declared that he did not want
people to come spying round the cottage. Spying! Such an odd word to
use."

"Your father is an odd man," said George ruefully, "and he certainly
has not been over-hospitable to me. Perhaps he guesses that I have
come to steal his jewel, and one can't be hospitable to a robber."

Lesbia pinched his chin. "You silly boy, my father doesn't think so
much of me as you do. I sometimes wonder," she went on sadly, "if he
loves me at all. I am very much alone."

"He doesn't treat you badly?" demanded George with sudden heat.

"No, dear, no. I shouldn't allow anyone to treat me badly, not even my
father. But I fancy he regards me as a necessary trouble, for
sometimes he looks at me in a disagreeable way as though he fancied I
was spying."

"Why do you use so disagreeable a word?" asked the straightforward
clerk.

"My father used it himself in the first instance," she rejoined
promptly; "perhaps because he doesn't want anyone else to meet the
queer people who come to see him,--generally after dark. Men who smell
of drink, who use slang and dress like grooms,--certainly not
gentlemen. Of course I never talk to them, for when they appear, my
father always sends me to my room. I'm sure," sighed the girl
dolefully, "that if it wasn't for old Tim, the servant, I should be
quite alone."

George hugged her. "You shall never be alone again!" he whispered, and
Lesbia threw her arms round his neck with great contentment.

"Oh, darling, you don't know how good that sounds to me. If it were
only true. You see, my father may object."

"He can object until he is tired," cried the ardent lover. "If he does
not make you happy I must. And when he sees this----"

"Oh!" Lesbia clasped her hand in delight at the sight of a cheap
turquoise ring, "how lovely!"

George frowned at the mean gift. "It was all I could afford," said he.

"It is all I want," she said, as he slipped it on her engagement
finger, "it's not the cost, or even the thing. It's what it means.
Love and joy to you and me, dearest boy."

But George, having a generous heart, still lamented. "If I hadn't to
keep my mother," he said ruefully. "I would save up and give you
diamonds. But two hundred a year goes a very little way with my
mother, even when her own small income is added. You see, dear, she
never forgets that my father was the Honourable Aylmer Walker, and she
will insist upon having everything of the best. This is a beastly
cheap ring, but--but----"

"But you denied yourself all manner of nice things to buy it for ME,"
finished Lesbia, pressing a kiss on his willing cheek.

"No, dear, no," he said valiantly, "only a few pipes of tobacco."

"You dearest donkey," cooed the girl, more touched than she chose to
confess, "doesn't that show me how you love me. As to the ring," she
surveyed the cheap trinket critically, "it is exactly what I wanted.
The stones are the colour of your dear eyes."

George, man-like, was delighted. "You know the colour of my eyes?"

Lesbia boxed his ears delicately. "I knew the colour exactly one
minute after our very first meeting."

"Did you love me then?"

"No. Certainly not: how conceited you are."

"Then why did you notice my----"

"Oh, a woman always notices these things, when a man is nice."

"And you thought me nice?"

Lesbia fenced. "Good-looking, at all events. You wore a dark flannel
suit striped with pale green."

"So I did," cried George, delighted, "it was at Mrs. Riordan's picnic
near Bisham Abbey a year ago. And you were there."

Lesbia laughed and nursed her knees. "I must have been, since I can
describe you so exactly. What did I wear, dear?"

"I don't know," said George promptly.

"Oh!" she was quite disappointed, "and you call yourself a lover?"

"I do," he rejoined stoutly, "for, as I fell in love with you the
moment we met, I saw only your eyes and your angel face. How could you
expect me to remember a mere dress when----"

"Oh, what nonsense--very nice nonsense; still nonsense."

"I like talking nonsense to you."

"And I like to hear it from you. But it isn't bread and butter."

"You're thinking of afternoon tea," said George Walker audaciously.

"No. I'm thinking of how we are to live when we marry."

The mere mention of that delicious word made George forget the warning
conveyed by the sentence. "Marry! Marry you! Oh, heaven!"

"A pauper heaven, I fear," said Lesbia; then fished in her pocket,
"see, the only valuable thing I possess, besides your love. It is for
you."

"Oh, my dear, it's not a man's ornament."

"As if that matters, since I give it to you," she said, laughing. "I
must give you something, and this is all I have to give."

She held out her hand, on the palm of which rested an amethyst cross
formed of four deeply purple stones, set lightly in gold filigree,
with a loop at the top for the necessary chain to pass through. Not a
very uncommon ornament at the first glance, George decided, although
very beautiful. But on looking more closely he became aware that there
was something bizarre about the thing. In the centre where the four
stones met was a tiny cube of malachite, graven with a golden crown
and inscribed with minute letters. The pansy-blossom hue of the stones
contrasting with the vivid green of the cube gave the ornament rather
an uncanny look.

"What a queer thing," said George, transferring the cross to his broad
palm.

"Yes! isn't it?" said Lesbia eagerly, and then brought out a
magnifying glass. "And the inscription is still queerer."

George poised the powerful glass over the slab of malachite, and with
some difficulty deciphered the golden Gothic letters. "'Refuse and
Lose,'" he read slowly. "Now what does that mean?"

"You stupid darling," cried Lesbia, pinching his ear, "can't you
see? If you refuse the cross--which is married life; you lose the
crown--which is me."

Walker thrust the cross into his pocket, handed back the magnifying
glass and solemnly embraced the girl, "I'll take the cross and the
crown and you, and everything I can get," he whispered in her ear. "I
don't exactly see the meaning, of course, but----"

"Was there ever such a dense man?" Lesbia demanded of the blackbird in
despair. "It's a religious symbol, of course. If you refuse to bear
life's cross in the way you should, you lose the crown which ought to
be yours in heaven."

George took out the ornament again and looked at it seriously. He had
a considerable strain of the Puritan in his nature, to which the idea
appealed strongly. "I shall certainly not refuse life's cross," he
declared soberly, "and may we both some day wear a crown in a better
world."

"My darling, my dearest, my best," she murmured, embracing him fondly.
The touch of seriousness in George's gay disposition enhanced his
value in her eyes. She approved of so sterling a character.

"Where did you get the cross?" asked Walker, while the jewels winked
in the sunshine. "From your father?"

"No!" she replied unexpectedly. "He doesn't know that I possess such a
thing. But my nurse, old Bridget Burke--Tim's mother, you know--who
died last summer, gave it to me on her death-bed and warned me not to
tell my father about it. She said that it came from my dead mother,
and was to be given by me to the man I loved. So you see, my darling,
that even though it is a woman's ornament, you must take it."

"I'll wear it round my neck," declared George. "It will bring me good
luck, I am sure."

"So Bridget said," observed the girl promptly. "She had the 'sight,'
you know, George, and declared that the cross would bring me luck and
money and love and position. I don't know how, unless it is by
marrying you."

"Ah, my love," said George somewhat sadly. "I can only give you my
heart. Money and position must come later. But if we both obey the
inscription and bear the cross we shall win the crown of success in
the end. Look how the gems flash, Lesbia--an earnest of the future."

While they were both admiring the cross, a tall, lean man, perfectly
dressed in a Bond Street kit, came softly down the grassy path. He
looked like a gentleman, and also like a hawk, and his pale eyes
wandered from one bent head to the other until they dropped to the
flash of the jewelled cross, which glittered on Walker's palm. Then
the newcomer started nervously, and took a step nearer to observe.
Lesbia and her lover looked up as the shadow of the man fell across
them, and in the movement they made, the cross fell on the grass.

"Oh, father, how you startled us," cried the girl, springing to her
feet.

Mr. Walter Hale did not reply. His eyes were still on the purple
stones of the cross, and when his daughter stooped to pick it up, he
twitched his fingers as though anxious to take it from her. "Where did
you get that?" he demanded abruptly and harshly.

"Bridget gave it to me, and I have given it to George," she said,
handing the ornament to her lover. "It belonged to my mother."

"It did," said Hale sharply, "and therefore must not pass out of the
family."

"It won't," said Lesbia cheerfully; "George is to be my husband."

Mr. Hale frowned. "You have yet to gain my permission," he said in dry
tones. "Meanwhile, Mr. Walker, give me back the cross."

"No!" said George, who did not like the tone of his future
father-in-law and could be obstinate when necessary. "Lesbia gave it
to me, and I intend to keep it."

"Lesbia had no right to give it to you," cried Hale, his voice rising,
and he extended his hand to take his desire. But Walker was too quick
for him and dexterously swerving, shot the cross into his pocket.

"It is Lesbia's first present to me," said he, excusing his obstinacy.

"She has no right to make you presents," foamed the other, who had now
entirely lost his temper.

"She has the right of a lover," retorted George coolly.

"There can be no question of love between you and my daughter."

The girl moved to her lover's side, very pale and very defiant. "That
is for me to decide," she said coldly, but with determination.

"You go against your father, Lesbia?"

"For the first time in my life. And why not, when the matter is so
important?"

Hale bit his lips and tried to stare her down: but as her eyes did not
drop before his own he was the first to give way, and did so with
inward rage. With an impatient shrug he wheeled to face young Walker.
The two presented the striking contrast of untainted youth and
artificial age too much versed in the evils of life. And youth had the
advantage, for--as in the case of Lesbia--the older man tried to
dominate without success. He was forced to take refuge in idle
threats.

"If you do not give me back that cross, it will be the worse for you,"
remarked Hale, very distinctly and with menace.

George clenched his fists, then, with a glance towards Lesbia, ended
the argument by stepping into his boat. As he rowed off, Hale, who had
not attempted to stop him, turned bitterly to his daughter.

"You have ruined me," he said between his teeth, and returned hastily
to the cottage.




CHAPTER II
THE UNEXPECTED HAPPENS


To say that Lesbia was amazed conveys imperfectly her state of mind.
The sudden arrival of her father, the hasty departure of her lover,
the mysterious incident connected with the amethyst cross, and the
still more mysterious remark which Mr. Hale had made--these things
perplexed and, very naturally, alarmed her. At once, with the
swiftness of an imaginative brain, she conjured up visions of disgrace
and shame and criminal publicity, going too far in her surmises, after
the fashion of such a brain. For after all, as a calmer reflection
suggested, there was nothing in what had taken place that should
induce such happenings, although there were several disquieting hints.

For a few moments the girl remained where she was, too agitated to
move; but when Hale disappeared into the cottage, and George's boat
vanished round a bend of the shining river, she woke to the fact that
for her own peace of mind it was necessary to ask questions. At once
she ran up the grass-grown path, and speedily found herself in the
narrow passage, which led right through the house from back to front.
But she only entered to hear the street door bang, and flew to open it
again in the hope of catching Mr. Hale before he could go far away.
But the man must have made good use of his legs, for when she peered
out into the quiet side street she noticed that it was empty. This
vanishing of her father without an explanation dismayed her more than
ever, and in the hope of gaining some sort of information she sought
Tim in the tiny kitchen, calling on him loudly. A soft voice like a
well-tuned lute answered her from the scullery.

"Ah, Miss Lesbia, and what wud ye be after spoilin' yer pretty voice
for now? Don't ye, me darlin', don't ye!"

"Why has my father gone out, Tim?" asked Lesbia sharply.

An odd little man emerged from the scullery and stood coolly rubbing
his nose-tip with the toe of the boot he was polishing. "An' how
should I know, miss? Didn't he come tearing through the passage, as if
the divil wor after him, an' lape like a trout int' the street? Sure
ye must have seen the masther rampagin' yersilf."

"I know that father came and found me with George and----"

"Ah, thin, 'tis Garge, is it?" muttered Tim, beginning to brush
mechanically.

"And rushed away in a temper because George would not give him my
amethyst cross."

Crash went the boot on the floor, and the blacking-brush followed,
while Tim stared out of his melancholy grey eyes as though he saw a
ghost. Decidedly the ornament was causing a considerable sensation,
although Lesbia could not understand why her father should rage, any
more than why Tim should stare. "Like a stuck pig," as she said,
inelegantly. And the annoying thing was that he did more than stare.

"Oh, blissid saints in glory!" groaned the Irishman, crossing himself.

"What on earth do you mean?" asked the girl, tartly, for she was
beginning to weary of these mysteries.

"Oh, blissid saints in glory!" Tim moaned again, and, picking up the
boot and the brush with the expression of a martyr, went into the
scullery to peel potatoes.

Lesbia, who was a determined young woman, followed, quite bent upon
getting at the root of the disturbance.

"Come and talk, Tim."

"Sure an' I must git the dinner ready anyhow, Miss."

"Come out, or I'll come in," cried Lesbia, standing at the door.

"Sure ye wudn't dirthy th' clothes av ye," coaxed Tim, and very
unwillingly scrambled back into the cleaner, drier kitchen with the
tin basin of potatoes in his huge fist.

He was certainly an ugly, under-sized man, and looked like the wicked
dwarf of a fairy tale. But the similarity was all on the surface, for
Tim Burke was as good and devoted a little Paddy as ever dipped his
fingers into holy water. But his appearance was not prepossessing, for
he was broader than he was long, and on a pair of hunched shoulders
was set askew a gigantic head much too large for his squat body. His
short legs were crooked, and he usually walked in a crab-like fashion
in unexpected directions--that is, whither his brain did not direct
his legs to go. He was barely five feet high, and his shaggy beard was
as red as the untidy hair covering his poll. He was quite a
monstrosity.

Nevertheless, Tim had his good points, for Nature had given him
beautiful grey eyes, pathetic as those of a dog, and a sweet
sympathetic voice, which sounded like a mellow bell. To hear Tim sing
Irish ditties of the heart-breaking sort was a treat not to be met
with every day, but he rarely sang them, save to Lesbia, whom he
adored. And small wonder, for she alone was kind to the odd, uncouth,
little man. Mr. Hale, whose selfishness was phenomenal, treated Tim
like a white slave and, indeed, he might be called one, seeing that he
worked like a horse and received no wages. Yet he was an admirable
housekeeper and a magnificent cook. With such qualifications he could
have procured a well-paid situation. Yet, for Lesbia's sake, he
remained at Rose Cottage, watching her like a cat a mouse, but with
more amiable intentions. She was the legacy which his mother Bridget,
the girl's nurse, had left him on her death-bed, when she died some
twelve months before.

Lesbia, looking like a fairy princess attended by her dwarf, perched
herself on the kitchen table with a severe face. To lose no time while
being questioned, Tim set to work peeling the potatoes, for Mr. Hale
growled like a bear when his meals were not placed punctually on the
table. As he peeled each potato, he dropped it with a splash into a
bucket of clean water and rarely raised his sad eyes to the face of
his young mistress during the conversation which ensued. Also--and
this Lesbia noticed--he conversed very reluctantly, and every
admission was wrung from unwilling lips.

"Tim," said his mistress severely, and beginning at the beginning,
"you are the only son of my nurse, Bridget Burke."

"I am that, Miss, her only boy, Miss, and a good mother she was to
me."

"A good nurse also, Tim. She loved me."

"An' who wudn't, ye pretty creature? Ain't I devoted to ye likewise,
me darlin'? Answer me that now?"

"I shall do so," said Miss Hale significantly, "when our conversation
comes to an end."

Tim groaned and winced. "Bad luck to the crass," he breathed, "an' may
the Vargin forgive me for sayin that same."

"Why, bad luck to the cross?" demanded Lesbia, coming to the point.

"An' how shud I know, me dear?"

"But you do know," she insisted. "Tim, your mother gave me that
cross."

"Did she now?--the owd fool."

"How dare you, Tim, and Bridget dead? She was your mother."

"Deed an' well she might be, Miss, for an uglier owd woman nivir could
be found in County Clare, forby she left it for this blissid country
whin I wor a gossoon."

"Did my father bring her over from Ireland, Tim?"

"Not he," Tim shook his Judas-coloured head. "Divil an eye did the
pair av us clap on the gintleman for many a long day. Wasn't I a
bare-futted brat runnin' wild about Whitechapel till my father--rest
his sowl--wos tuck by the police for shop-liftin'--bad luck to thim?
An' he died in gaol, poor man--ah, that he did, laving me mother an'
me widout bread in the mouths av us."

"What did Bridget do then, Tim?"

"Sure she come to Wimbleton or a place hard by," admitted Tim
reluctantly, "sellin' apples an' nuts, an' a mighty bad thing she made
by the sale."

"I want to know exactly how she came to be my nurse?" said Lesbia.

Tim bent over the potatoes deeply interested in the peeling. "Why,
Miss, your father--" here he swallowed something--"the masther, Miss,
and a kind, good gintleman, tuck pity on her and give her the
situation as your nurse, me dear."

"But my mother?"

"Oh, howly saints, an' how cud she say anything whin she wos dyin' an'
you but a year old? But my mother nursed you like her own choild,
Miss, till ye went to that school at Hampstead. But ye came back here
just whin she was dyin', poor sowl."

"I did, a year ago," said Lesbia significantly, "and in time to
receive the cross, Tim."

"May the father av lies fly away wid it!" groaned the dwarf. "An' may
the saints forgive me for the wicked wish."

"Whatever do you mean, Tim?"

"Mane, ah, nivir ask me what I mane. But the crass isn't with ye now,
an' ye'll be the betther widout it."

"Oh!" Lesbia slipped off the table with a heightened colour, "does
that mean it is unlucky? I gave it to George, you see, and----"

"Ah, divil doubt but what you'd give the head av ye to Garge,"
grumbled Tim, taking up the tin of peeled potatoes. "Ah, well, 'tis
betther he shud have it nor you, me dear."

"But why, but why?" asked Lesbia, frantic with curiosity.

"Ah, nivir ask me, Miss," replied Tim enigmatically, and departed to
continue his culinary work; also--as she could see--to avoid further
questioning.

Failing Tim, the girl resolved to learn what her father would say,
when at dinner. This was a meal which Mr. Hale never missed, as he was
devoted to the pleasures of the table and appreciated Tim's excellent
cooking. He always arrayed himself in purple and fine linen to do
justice to the viands set before him, and it was the rule of the
cottage that Lesbia should also dress appropriately. Her father prided
himself upon being ultra-civilised, and would have eaten a red herring
with sartorial ceremony. The table was admirably laid with crystal and
silver and valuable china, and--decorated with flowers in graceful
vases--looked extremely pretty. Tim, in a livery of his master's
devising, acted as butler, and the wines were as good as the food,
which is saying a lot. Mr. Hale might live in a humble cottage and
might mix with queer people, but he was a sybarite, who enjoyed the
good things of this life artistically prepared. The room was
beautifully furnished, and Lesbia was more beautiful than the room.
Therefore, on this especial night, Mr. Walter Hale had both his palate
and his eye gratified. His ear was not ministered to quite so
pleasantly, as, after dinner, and when Tim had left the room to
prepare the coffee, he renewed the subject of the cross with his
daughter.

"Lesbia," said he, fixing his eyes on her somewhat flushed face, and
looking extremely high-bred, "why did you give away that cross?"

"Bridget, who presented it to me on her death-bed, said that I was to
bestow it on the man I meant to marry. I have done so."

This was a very defiant speech, and Hale frowned. "I shall not allow
you to marry young Walker," he said distinctly.

Lesbia shrugged her shoulders with indifference. This was not the way
to manage her. "I am sorry, father, as I have decided to become his
wife."

"He has no money, you silly girl. I know for a fact that he is paid
only a small salary by Michael Tait, who is a screw and a skinflint
where his own pleasures are not concerned. Moreover, Walker has to
support his widowed mother, and she is not likely to welcome a
daughter-in-law who will curtail her comforts, such as they are. A
hard woman, Lesbia, a very hard woman, my dear. I ought to know, as we
have been acquainted for years."

The prospect did not seem alluring, but love sustained the girl.
"George might get a better situation," she ventured to remark, a
trifle anxiously. "Why," she added, this as though the thought had
just struck her, "he might help you, father."

Hale spilt the port wine he was pouring into his glass. "What's that?"

"You need not speak crossly, father," replied Lesbia, puzzled by the
sharpness of his tone. "I merely suggested that George might enter
your office, and then he----"

The man rose suddenly and began to pace the room with the glass
of wine in his hand. But the look he cast upon his daring child
was so grim that the unfinished sentence died on her lips.
"'George--might--enter--your--office!'" he repeated slowly, and ended
with a cynical laugh. "Humph! I wonder now----" he laughed again and
checked his speech. Then he finished his glass of wine and returned to
the table. "When does Walker come to see you again?" he asked
abruptly.

"To-morrow night at six o'clock," said Lesbia, promptly. "He rows down
the river from Medmenham, or walks along the towing-path, every
evening."

"A devoted lover truly," said Hale drily, "and how long has this
pretty wooing been going on?"

"For a few months," said Lesbia, rather alarmed by the stern
expression of her father's face. "Don't be angry. After all, it was
you who introduced me to George."

"The more fool I, seeing his age and looks and poverty. Lesbia!" he
placed his knuckles on the table and leaned across it. "You must marry
my friend, Captain Sargent."

"Ex-Captain Sargent," cried Lesbia scornfully, and rising
unexpectedly. "I shall do nothing of the sort. I don't even like him."

"Pooh! Pooh! Pooh! He is a gentleman----"

"So is George."

Hale rapped the table sharply. "Do not interrupt, you minx. Sargent
has retired from the army, it is true. But he has a good income and a
pretty bungalow at Cookham. We were in the same regiment until I left
the service some fifteen years ago; so I know him well. He will make
an excellent husband--a very excellent husband indeed."

"But, father, he is nearly as old as you are."

"What of that? Sargent is a handsome man and looks young."

Lesbia bit her lip, and tapped her foot on the ground. "I shan't marry
him."

Hale scowled. "You shall. I am your father and you shall do as you are
told, my dear. And if you don't marry Sargent you shall certainly not
marry Walker, unless----" he stopped suddenly.

"Unless what?"

"Unless you get that cross back from him," stormed Hale angrily.

Lesbia was nothing if not direct, and the mystery of the cross piqued
her exceedingly. She ventured on a leading question. "Why do you want
that cross so much, father?"

"It belonged to your poor mother," said Mr. Hale sentimentally, "and
means more to me than you can ever guess. I missed it from your
mother's jewel-case when she died; but I never expected that Bridget
Burke, who was supposed to be the soul of honesty, had stolen it."

"No! no. I don't believe Bridget would have stolen anything."

"Bridget would have done anything that suited her," retorted Hale
grimly, "and if she came by the cross honestly--say by your mother
giving it to her--why did she not let you show it to me?"

"I can't guess: perhaps she thought you would take it from me."

"I might and I might not," replied Hale hesitatingly, "but at all
events I should not have allowed you to give it to young Walker. You
must ask him to return it at once."

"I shall not," said Lesbia determinedly.

"You shall," cried Hale, and their eyes met like those of two duelists
crossing swords. But the father's eyes fell first. "You dare to defy
me."

"Not exactly, but----"

"I want no explanations, thank you; but I'll make a bargain with you.
If Walker returns that cross he can have you as his wife. If not, I
shall refuse to allow him to haunt the cottage or pay attentions to
you. And remember, Lesbia, that I hold the purse-strings."

"George can keep me," panted Lesbia, her colour rising.

"George has to keep his mother. Marry him without a dowry and see what
the Honourable Mrs. Aylmer Walker will say."

"You cannot give me a fortune, father."

"I can give you two thousand a year if you are obedient," said her
father coolly, and walked towards the door. "Think it over, Lesbia,"
and he left her to meditate on the astounding news.

Lesbia was naturally astonished, since she never dreamed that her
father was so wealthy. Everything in the cottage was good of its kind,
and even luxurious, and the living was excellent. But at times Hale
appeared to lack ready money, and frequently impressed upon Tim that
it was necessary to be economical. Why then should he act in this way
when he appeared to be rich, and why should he offer so large an
income on condition that the cross was returned? So far as Lesbia
understood her father's hard nature, he was not a man to pay
generously for a merely sentimental idea.

However, the fact remained that if she could get the amethyst cross
returned, she could marry George and bring him a substantial dowry.
After much reflection, she determined to ask George for the ornament.
After all, she could easily give him something else, and it was worth
satisfying her father when so much was at stake.

For half a moment Lesbia thought that she would put on her cloak and
hat, and walk along the towing-path to Medmenham in the hope of
meeting her lover. It was now half-past eight, as dinner had taken
place at seven.

Mr. Hale had gone out, and Tim, as was his custom on fine evenings,
was paddling about in a boat on the river, sometimes rowing and
sometimes fishing. She was alone and the solitude was becoming
irksome. A great wave of desire for love and sympathy came over the
girl, and she longed to see George Walker immediately, not only to
tell him of her father's offer, but to be petted and kissed and
comforted. But a few minutes' reflection showed her that it was not
advisable that she should walk alone to Medmenham, especially as the
chances were that she might not meet her lover. It was true that he
would certainly be at home, but Lesbia did not know Mrs. Walker and,
from the description given by her father, hesitated to meet that
formidable lady. On the whole, then, she decided, it was better to
wait until George came as usual on the ensuing evening.

Being alone, it was difficult to find entertainment. Lesbia played the
piano for a few minutes: then she read and afterwards enjoyed a game
or two of Patience. Finally, feeling bored in the lonely house, she
retired to bed about ten o'clock. There she speedily fell asleep, and
dreamed that all obstacles were removed, and she was George Walker's
wife. When she put out her light, neither Mr. Hale nor Tim had
returned.

Lesbia's sleep lasted for some considerable time. Then she suddenly
sat up with her senses keenly alive to every sensation. It seemed to
her that George had called her, and that she had awakened in answer to
his cry. And it was a cry for help, too! With a sensation of alarm,
she sprang from her bed, and opened the lattice to look down the
garden and across the river. There it flowed silvery in the calm
moonlight: but she heard no cry and saw nothing. Yet the call for
help had been very distinct. Lesbia was not superstitious, and had it
been broad daylight she would have laughed, at such midnight fancies.
But in the mysterious moonlight--alone in the house so far as she
knew--and at the hour of twelve o'clock, her heart beat rapidly, and a
cold perspiration broke out on her forehead. George was in danger: she
was sure of that. And George had called to her in a dream. What was
she to do? In which direction was she to look?

The first idea that came into her head was to see Tim, and explain. He
would not laugh at her fancies, as he had many of his own. Lesbia
threw on her dressing-gown, slipped her feet into shoes, and went down
the narrow staircase, taking a lighted candle with her. In the hall
all was quiet, and she paused here for a single moment, wondering if
it was worth while to awaken Tim with such a fantastical story of
midnight terrors. Just as she was deciding that it would be wiser to
return to bed, she heard a groan, and in her fright nearly dropped the
candle. But being a brave girl, she plucked up courage and listened.
There came a second groan--from the parlour. Lesbia immediately opened
the door and entered. There on the floor she saw a man bound and
gagged and stiff, with nothing alive about him but his eyes. And those
were the eyes of George Walker.




CHAPTER III
ANOTHER MYSTERY


Lesbia Hale was small, fragile and, in a degree, romantic; but in
sufficiently strange contrast, her frame was strong and her nature
practical. An ordinary girl would have screamed and fainted, or
perhaps would have run away. Lesbia did none of these things. She
turned pale, it is true, and she trembled violently as she stared with
dilated eyes at the bound form of her lover. Then it came upon her
with a rush that immediate aid was required, and without even calling
for Tim, she set down her candlestick on a convenient chair, and knelt
beside the unfortunate young man. He was certainly in a very bad way;
but how he came to be in such a plight, Lesbia, with characteristic
commonsense, did not wait to inquire. The first thing was to loosen
him, and revive him with wine: then she could ask questions. The
answers promised to be interesting.

First she dexterously removed the handkerchief from across his mouth,
with which George had been gagged in a clumsy manner. This she threw
aside with a passing thought that later she would learn to whom it
belonged, and then proceeded to unloosen the knot of the rope with
which her lover was bound. There was only one rope and only one knot,
and when she had disentangled the somewhat complicated fastening, she
unwound the cord which curled round him from his broad shoulders to
his ankles. With his arms glued to his sides and his feet pressed
closely together, George Walker had been tied up with yards of
brand-new manila rope, so that he could not move, and was trussed as
stiffly as any fowl prepared for the market. And the person or persons
who had bound him thus, to make assurance doubly sure, had struck him
a heavy blow on the back of his head. Lesbia discovered this by the
half-dry blood which clotted his curly hair.

"What does it all mean?" asked Lesbia, when George was free from his
bonds, and lying almost as stiffly without them as he had when bound.
But the young man did not reply, for the very good reason that he had
fainted. At once Lesbia kissed him, and then went to the parlour door
to summon Tim.

She called loudly, quite heedless of the fact that she might waken her
father, who did not approve of young Walker. And even if he did not,
it was necessary that he should come to aid the unfortunate man. So
while the French clock on the mantelpiece struck a silvery twelve,
Lesbia shouted at the full pitch of her healthy young lungs. In a few
minutes the alarmed voice of Tim was heard, and by the time she was
again kneeling beside George, the dwarf shuffled hurriedly into the
dimly-lighted room, half-dressed, a candle in one hand and the kitchen
poker in the other.

"The saints be betwixt us and harm, Miss Lesbia," cried Tim, who
looked scared out of his senses, "what's come to you?"

"What's come to George, you mean," said Lesbia, looking up. "See, Tim,
I heard him call me and came downstairs a few minutes ago to find him
bound and wounded. Don't stand there shaking, and don't chatter. Get
the brandy and heat some water. He has fainted, and we must bring him
to his senses."

"But how the divil did Masther Garge come here?" demanded Tim, aghast.

"How should I know?" retorted Lesbia impatiently. "We can ask him when
he is able to speak. Go and do what I tell you while I waken my
father."

"Sure the masther isn't in, Miss," expostulated Tim, backing towards
the door. "He wint out afther dinner to spind the night wid Captain
Sargent at Cookham. An' that we shud have the bad luck av this, while
he's away. Oh, Miss Lesbia, wasn't it burglars I was thinking av? But
nivir murder, save the mark, an' sudden death at that."

"It will be sudden death if you don't get that brandy. Stop!" Lesbia
started to her feet. "I'll get it myself. Go and heat the water to
bathe his wound."

She ran into the dining-room and procured the spirit, while Tim went
to stoke up the kitchen fire. Lesbia forced George's teeth apart and
poured the brandy wholesale down his throat. The ardent liquor revived
him, and he opened his eyes with a faint sigh. "Don't speak, darling,"
she whispered, with a second kiss, and then set to work chafing his
limbs. By the time Tim appeared with a jug of boiling water, the young
man had quite recovered his senses, and attempted to explain.

"No," said Lesbia sharply, "you are too weak as yet. Bring a basin,
Tim, and a sponge. We must bathe his head."

Considering she had no practice Lesbia performed her Good Samaritan
task very dexterously and, having sponged the wound--a nasty, jagged
blow from some blunt instrument,--bound up her lover's head with that
cleverness and tenderness which come from love. When he had quite
recovered--save for a trifling weakness--she made him lie down on the
sofa, and fed him with weak brandy and water. Tim meanwhile lighted
the lamp, and exhausted himself in guessing the reason for the
condition of young Walker. "It's that blissed crass," moaned Tim,
moving round like an unquiet ghost, "bad luck to the same! Didn't I
say it wud bring throuble?"

"You did, Tim, you did," assented Lesbia, who was seated by the now
recovered man, and looking somewhat weary after her exertions, "but as
George is comparatively well, he can explain."

"The cross is quite safe," said Walker faintly. "I left it at home.
Oh, my head, how it aches. No wonder, when such a heavy blow was
struck."

"Who struck it, dear?" inquired Lesbia.

"I don't know," George's voice was weary. "It's a long story."

"Drink some more of this," said Lesbia, holding the glass to his pale
lips, "and wait until you feel stronger."

"Oh, I'm much better now," he replied, pushing the brandy and water
away, "but I shan't be able to go to the office to-morrow morning."

"Beg-ad, it's to-morrow morning already!" said Tim, glancing at the
clock. "Half-past twilve as I'm a sinner, an' here's Miss Lesbia an'
mesilf sittin' up like the quality. Oh, the sowl av me, what will the
masther say?"

"What can he say?" demanded Miss Hale tartly. "Father can't hold you
and me accountable for the unexpected."

"Unexpected, indeed," breathed George. "Who would have thought that I
would have been struck down on the towing-path. I can't guess the
reason, Lesbia, it's beyond me."

"The crass! the crass!" muttered Tim, shaking his shaggy head.

"What do you know about it?" demanded Lesbia.

"Divil a thing, but that it brings bad luck," answered Tim sturdily.

"It is not altogether bad luck that George has been brought here for
me to attend to him," she retorted.

"No, dear," Walker patted her hand, "this accident shows me what an
angel you are. But how did I come here?"

"Don't you know who brought you?"

"I know nothing from the time I was struck down on the towing-path
near Medmenham, until the moment I saw you standing in yonder doorway
with a candle in your hand."

Lesbia knitted her pretty brows. "I can't understand. Some enemy----"

"I have no enemies," murmured George positively.

"Then it's a mystery," declared the girl, still more perplexed. "Tell
me exactly what took place."

Walker passed his hand wearily across his forehead, for his head ached
considerably. "After leaving you with your father, darling, I rowed
back to Medmenham, and went home to the cottage. My mother was not
within, as she had gone up to town early in the day and did not intend
to return until to-morrow----"

"That's to-day, begob!" interpolated Tim, again looking at the clock.

"Then it is to-day she returns," said Walker, in a stronger voice,
"about three in the afternoon. But to continue, Lesbia, I had my
dinner and smoked a pipe. Then I grew restless, wondering if you were
having a bad time with your father on my account. I thought he would
make things unpleasant for you, and determined to come down and see
what had happened. That was about ten o'clock."

Lesbia patted his hand. "You need not have troubled, dear. My father
and I got on very well together."

"I did not know that, and so was anxious. I ferried over the river to
the towing-path, and walked down towards Marlow, intending to cross
the bridge and come here."

"I was in bed at ten."

"So soon. I thought you might be sitting up."

"Well, I did not expect you, dear," explained the girl. "As Tim was
out on the river, and my father had gone away, I found it dull. I went
to bed because I could think of nothing else to do. Then I fancied I
heard you calling for help, and came down to find you gagged and
bound."

"I did not call for help because I was gagged," said George, "and
almost insensible. I expect you were dreaming."

"A very serviceable dream," said Lesbia drily. "Go on, George,
darling."

"About half way between Medmenham and Marlow, while I was walking
along in the moonlight, I heard a soft step behind me, and turned to
see a man almost on top of me. I had not even time to see what he was
like, so quickly did he attack me. Aiming a blow at my head with a
bludgeon, he struck me hard, and I fell insensible on the path."

"And then?"

"Then I woke to find you looking at me in this room. That's all."

Lesbia examined her lover searchingly. He wore white flannel trousers,
a silk shirt, a white flannel coat, and brown shoes. His panama hat
was missing.

Then Lesbia uttered an exclamation, and pointed to his pockets. All
these, both in coat and trousers, were turned inside out, and the
buttons of his shirt were undone, as though he had been searched to
the skin. "It's robbery," said Lesbia firmly.

"Robbery! Impossible! Why should anyone rob a pauper like me? I have
nothing."

"You have the crass!" murmured Tim, who was squatting on the floor,
and who looked like a goblin.

"Tim." It was Lesbia who spoke. "Do you think that Mr. Walker was
attacked to get the amethyst cross?"

"Faith, an' I can't say, Miss. But me mother--rest her sowl--towld me
that the crass brought bad luck, and it's come to Masther Garge here.
Maybe it's only talk, but there you are," and he pointed to the young
man.

Walker reflected for a moment or so, while Lesbia turned over Tim's
explanation in her mind. "I daresay he is right," said George
pensively, "and you also, Lesbia. I was rendered insensible so that I
might be robbed, as is proved by my pockets being turned inside out.
As the only article of value I possessed was the cross, and I only
acquired that yesterday evening, I expect it was the cross this man
was after. If so, he must be very much disappointed, for I left your
gift in the drawer of my dressing-table, before I came to see you at
ten o'clock."

"What was the man like?"

"I told you that I only caught a glimpse of him," said Walker
fretfully, for the conversation wearied him. "He seemed to be a tall
man, and was roughly dressed. His soft hat was pulled over his eyes,
and--and I know, nothing more about him."

Seeing that he was still weak, Lesbia stood up. "You can lie here on
the sofa and go to sleep," she said softly. "To-morrow morning we can
talk."

"But I have to get to London by the eight o'clock train--the office!"

"Bother the office!" said Lesbia inelegantly. "You are not fit to go
to the office. Try to sleep. Tim, give me that rug you brought. There,
dear," she tucked him in. "I have left a glass of water beside you.
Tim can come in every now and then to see how you are."

"Augh," groaned Tim, yawning, "it's just as well, Miss. I cudn't slape
forty winks, wid blue murther about. But the masther will come back
after breakfast, an' what will we say at all, at all?"

"Say," snapped Lesbia, who was at the door, looking extremely weary.
"Tell the truth, of course. My father will quite approve of what we
have done. George, don't talk to Tim, who is a chatterbox, but go to
sleep. You need all you can get, poor boy."

George, already nearly asleep, murmured an incoherent reply and,
leaving Tim to watch over him, Lesbia returned to her room, but not to
sleep for at least an hour. Lying on her bed, she tried to fathom the
mystery of this assault upon her unoffending lover. Apparently the
cross had to do with the matter, as George had never been attacked
before. And then in a flash the girl remembered that her father was
desirous of regaining the ornament, and apparently, from the way in
which he had talked, was prepared to go to great lengths to get it.
Could it be that he had struck down her lover? He had been absent all
the evening, and would be absent all the night, at Sargent's Cookham
cottage, according to the message he had left with Tim. He did not
like Walker, and moreover was tall, as the assailant had been. It
really seemed as though Mr. Walter Hale had taken the law into his own
hands and, to get back his property, as he averred the cross to be,
had committed something uncommonly like highway robbery. Lesbia
worried over the problem half the night, as she could not believe that
her father would act so basely. Finally, towards dawn she fell into an
uneasy sleep.

It was ten o'clock when she woke, and at once her thoughts reverted
to the late exciting event. No such sensational happening had ever
before disturbed the quietness of the riverside cottage, and the
mystery which environed it was an added fascination. As Lesbia slowly
dressed--and in her prettiest frock for the sake of George,--she again
wondered if her father was connected with the assault and the
attempted robbery.

George could only have been attacked for the sake of the amethyst
cross, and her father alone--so far as she knew--desired that cross.
Yet if Mr. Hale was guilty, why had he brought his victim into his own
house? No one else could have brought George, for no one else could
have entered. Lesbia had no great love for her father, since he
invariably repelled all her proffers of affection; but she now felt
that she could actively hate him for his wickedness in so dealing with
the man she loved. And yet, as she reflected when she descended the
stairs, she could not be sure that her father was guilty, even in the
face of such evidence.

When Lesbia entered the dining-room she found George quite his old
self. The night's rest had done him good, and a cold bath had
refreshed him greatly. With Tim's willing assistance he had made
himself presentable and, save for a linen bandage round his head,
looked much the same as he had done on the previous day. He came
forward swiftly with sparkling eyes, and took Lesbia in his arms,
murmuring soft and foolish words, after the way of lovers, even less
romantic.

"Darling! Darling! Darling! How good you have been to me."

"I could have done no less for anyone," replied Lesbia, leading him to
a chair. "Sit down, dearest, you are still weak."

"On the contrary I am quite strong, although my head still aches a
trifle from that cowardly blow. Besides, I am hungry, and there is Tim
bringing in a magnificent breakfast. Sweetest and best," he went on,
leading her to the well-spread table, "this is just as if we were
married. You at the top of the table and I at the bottom. Give me a
cup of coffee, Lesbia, and I'll serve out the eggs and ham. Tim, you
needn't wait."

Tim grumbled a trifle, as he loved to wait on Lesbia, But he was an
Irishman and appreciated a love affair. It did not need much
cleverness to see that young Walker wished to be alone with his
beloved, if only to enjoy the unique situation. Tim therefore departed
and the couple had their breakfast in heavenly solitude. Lesbia wished
to talk about the adventure on the towing-path, and to ask questions,
but George positively refused to speak of anything save the most
frivolous matters.

"Your father will return soon," he explained, passing his cup for more
coffee, "and then I shall have to tell my story all over again. Let us
talk about ourselves and of our future."

Lesbia, after a faint resistance, was only too pleased to obey, so
they had an extremely pleasant meal. The room was cheerful with the
summer sun, which poured in floods of light and warmth through the
windows, and the feeling of spring was still in the air. Most
prosaically they enjoyed their food and unromantically ate a large
breakfast, but all the time they kept looking at one another and
relishing the novel situation. It was brought to an end only too
speedily by the sudden entrance of Mr. Hale. Tall, lean, cold and
stern, he appeared on the threshold, and stared in surprise at the way
in which young Walker was taking possession, not only of his house but
of his daughter.

"What the devil does this mean?" asked Hale, politely indignant.

"Look at George's head," cried Lesbia with a shiver, for her doubts
returned fortyfold at the sight of her aristocratic father.

"That explains nothing," said Hale drily, "perhaps, Mr. Walker, you
will undertake to tell me how it comes that I find you making yourself
at home in my poor abode?"

George, who was perfectly cool and collected, told his story. Hale
listened, much more discomposed than he chose to appear, and at the
conclusion of the narrative asked one question, which showed where his
thoughts were.

"The cross," he said eagerly, "have you been robbed of the cross?"

"No," answered Walker positively, "although I believe that I was
attacked for the sake of it. But luckily I left it in the drawer of my
dressing-table. Can you guess who attacked me?"

"No," said Hale coolly, "I cannot."

"Still, if you know about the cross----"

"I only know that it belonged to my wife and that I want to get it
back as soon as possible. Lesbia should never have given it to you. As
to your being attacked so that you might be robbed of it, I can't
believe that story. The cross, as a jewel, is not so very valuable.
Besides, no one but myself and Lesbia and Tim knew that you had it. I
presume," ended Hale, in his most sarcastic manner, "that you do not
suspect any one of us three."

"Oh no," rejoined Walker promptly, and spoke as he believed in spite
of the troubled look which Lesbia cast on him. "Still----"

Hale threw up his hand to interrupt. "We can talk of your adventure
later, Mr. Walker. After all, the cross may have something to do with
the way in which you were assaulted, although--as I said--it appears
unlikely. I want to recover it immediately, and am the more eager, now
that I have heard of your adventure. Give me a note to your mother
saying that the cross is to be given to me, and I shall consent to
your marriage with Lesbia."

George looked at the girl, who nodded. "Let my father have back the
cross, since he so greatly desires it," she said. "I can give you
something else, dear. I am willing to pay that price for my father's
consent."

George shrugged his shoulders. "It is immaterial to me," he said
calmly, "so long as you are pleased, dear. I only wished to keep the
ornament as your first love-gift to me. Have you a pencil, Mr. Hale.
Thank you."

He scribbled a note. "To Jenny, our maid-servant," he explained, when
handing it to the tall, silent man, "she will admit you into my
bedroom and you will find the cross in the right-hand drawer of my
dressing-table."

"But your mother----"

"My mother went to London yesterday and will not be back until three
o'clock to-day. If you like to wait I can go over with you later."

"No," said Hale brusquely, "your mother might make objections. I know
how difficult she is to deal with. I'll go myself: you stay here with
Lesbia."

George was nothing loth, and when Mr. Hale departed he walked with his
beloved in the garden. They should have talked of the adventure, and
Lesbia should have told George the thought that was uppermost in her
mind--namely, that her father was cognisant of the assault. But she
did not care to make such an accusation upon insufficient grounds, and
moreover hesitated to accuse her father of such a crime. She therefore
willingly agreed to postpone all talk of the adventure until Mr.
Hale's return, and surrendered herself to the pleasure of the moment.
The lovers spent a long morning in the garden of love, gathering the
rosebuds which Herrick recommends should be culled in youth. Time flew
by on golden wings, and Hale was no sooner gone all the way to
Medmenham, than he seemed to come back. He could not have been away
for more than five minutes, as it appeared to these two enthralled by
Love. For them time had no existence.

But their dream of love fled, when Hale came swiftly down the path
looking both angry and alarmed, and, indeed, perplexed. "The cross has
gone," he said.

"Impossible," cried George, starting to his feet, astonished. "I left
it----"

"The cross has gone," repeated Hale decisively, "your cottage has been
robbed, burgled. I repeat, the cross has gone."




CHAPTER IV
A FAMILY HISTORY


After delivering his message of woe, Mr. Hale sat down on the garden
seat under the chestnut tree, and mechanically flicked the dust from
his neat brown shoes with a silk handkerchief. He was perfectly
arrayed as usual, and on account of the heat of the day wore a suit of
spotless drill, cool and clean-looking. But if his clothes were cool
he certainly was not, for his usually colourless face was flushed a
deep red and his eyes sparkled with anger. Lesbia, who had risen with
George, looked at him with compunction in her heart. After all--so her
thoughts ran--she had suspected her father wrongly. If he had attacked
George to regain this unlucky cross, he assuredly would not now be
lamenting its loss. And yet if he were innocent, who was guilty,
considering the few people who knew that the ornament was in
existence? Tim might--but it was impossible to suspect Tim Burke, who
was the soul of honesty.

"Well," said Hale crossly, "what is to be done?"

He looked directly at George, who faced him standing, with a look of
perplexity on his handsome face. "Are you sure that the house has been
robbed?" he asked doubtfully.

Mr. Hale shrugged his shoulders. "I usually say what I mean," he
remarked acridly. "I took your note to Medmenham, and found the local
policeman conversing with your mother's servant. From her I learned
what had taken place, and, indeed, she was telling the constable when
I came up."

"Well?"

"It seems," pursued Hale, producing a cigar, "that Jenny--as she is
called----"

"Yes, yes!" broke in Walker impatiently, "go on."

"Well, then, Jenny rose this morning to find the window of the
drawing-room wide open. Nothing was touched in that room. But your
bedroom was ransacked thoroughly. Your clothes were strewn about, and
apparently every pocket had been examined. The drawers were opened,
and even the bed had been overhauled. There was no sign of the
burglar, and Jenny swears that--sleeping at the back of the house--she
heard nothing."

"And what has been stolen?" asked Lesbia, hesitatingly.

"Only the cross."

"Are you sure?"

"Absolutely! I gave Jenny the note and together with the policeman
who, by the way, is a bucolic idiot, she took me to the bedroom. I
examined the right-hand drawer which was open, as were all the other
drawers, and found that the cross was missing. Jenny declared that
nothing else had been taken. Of course the girl was in a great state
of alarm, as she was the sole person in the house, and she feared lest
she should be accused. Also, and very naturally, she was surprised at
your being away, Walker."

George nodded. "I daresay. It is rarely that I sleep away from home,
and when I do I give notice. Humph!" he sat down on the grass opposite
Mr. Hale and gripped his ankles. "What do you think, sir?"

Hale made a vague motion of despair. "What can I think? I know as much
as you do, and nothing more. Would you mind my putting you in the
witness-box, Walker?"

"By no means. Ask what questions you desire."

"And I shall be counsel for the defence," said Lesbia, sitting down
beside her lover with rather a wry smile. It appeared to her that Mr.
Hale wished to recall his offer to let the marriage take place: also
that he wished to get George into trouble if he could. But how he
proposed to do so the girl could not tell. However she was anxious and
listened with all her ears. Mr. Hale raised his eyebrows at her odd
speech, but took no further notice of it. He was too much interested
in his examination.

"Lesbia," said Mr. Hale quietly, "gave you the cross yesterday evening
in my presence, so to speak. What did you do with it?"

"I slipped it into my breast-pocket," said Walker promptly, "and rowed
back to Medmenham, as you saw. On arriving, I placed it for safety in
the drawer of my dressing-table. Then, later, as I explained at
breakfast, I came down to see Lesbia and was assaulted by an unknown
man."

"Did you show the cross to anyone, say to Jenny?"

"No. And if I had shown it to Jenny, it would not have mattered. You
do not suspect an honest girl like her, I presume."

"Honest girls may yield to the temptation of stealing such a fine
ornament as the cross," said Hale drily. "However, it may set your
mind at rest if I say that I don't suspect Jenny. Had she stolen the
cross, she would not have had the imagination to upset the room and
leave the window open, so as to suggest burglary. But think again,
Walker; did you show the cross to anyone after leaving this garden?"

"No," said George positively, "I certainly did not, that is, not
voluntarily."

"Ah! then some one else did see it," said Hale, with satisfaction and
with marked eagerness. "Come, man, speak up."

"I had almost forgotten," said Walker slowly. "Perhaps the blow on my
head made me forget; but I remember now."

"Remember what?" asked Lesbia, as eager as her father.

"That those gipsies saw the cross."

"Gipsies?" Hale and his daughter glanced at one another.

"Yes. I was walking up the lane to my home when I passed a gipsy
encampment. While doing so I pulled out my handkerchief, and the
cross--which I had placed in my breast-pocket--fell out. The
handkerchief twitched it, I suppose. It flashed down on the grass, and
the glitter caught the eye of a man lounging near the caravan. He came
forward and pointed out where it had fallen, as I had not noticed its
whereabouts for the moment. By the time I picked it up two or three of
the gipsies had gathered round, and saw me restore it to my pocket.
Then I thanked the man and went home."

Lesbia clapped her hands. "Why it is perfectly plain," she cried,
delighted. "That man must have assaulted you on the towing-path to
steal the cross. Not finding it on you, he robbed the house. What do
you think, father?"

Hale nodded. "I think as you do. So the best thing to be done will be
to come and see the constable, or the inspector here in Marlow. We
must have those gipsies searched before they go away. The encampment
was still there this morning; but I saw signs of removal."

George leaped to his feet. "Yes, it must be so" he cried eagerly. "I
daresay the man robbed me--the cross being flamboyant is just the
thing which would attract him."

"Then we must see the inspector. I must get the cross back. It is a
pity I remained at Cookham last night with Sargent. Had I been here, I
should have gone at once to Medmenham."

"But it was midnight, father."

"I don't care. The mere fact that Walker here was assaulted would have
proved to me that the cross was wanted. Since he left it at home the
thief would probably have burgled the house. I might have caught him
red-handed. Oh, why didn't I come home last night?"

Mr. Hale was genuinely moved over the loss of the ornament. And yet
Lesbia could not think that it was mere sentimental attachment
thereto, as having belonged to his dead wife, that made him so
downcast. Also in itself the cross was of comparatively little value.
Lesbia's suspicions returned, and again she dismissed them as
unworthy. Moreover, if Hale had assaulted George and had committed a
burglary he would not be so eager to set the police on the track.
Whosoever was guilty he at least must be innocent. Cold as her father
was to her, and little affection as she bore him, it was agreeable to
find that he was honest--though, to be sure, every child expects to
find its parents above reproach. Perhaps a sixth sense told Lesbia
that her father was not all he should be. In no other way could she
guess how she came to be so ready to think ill of him. But up to the
present, she had suspected him wrongly, and so was pleased.

Hale and young Walker went to the Marlow police-office and explained
in concert what had occurred. The officer in charge of the station
heard their tale unmoved, as it was nothing more exciting than a
robbery by a vagabond. He went with them personally to Medmenham, and
there met the village constable, who presented his report. This did
not include any reference to gipsies. His superior--whose name was
Parson--questioned him, and learned that the thief or thieves had left
no trace behind, and--on the evidence of Jenny the maid--had stolen
nothing save the cross. Parson then went to Mrs. Walker's house and
questioned the girl.

Jenny was naturally much agitated, but was reassured by George, who
declared that no one suspected her. "I should think not, sir," she
cried, firing up and growing red. "I didn't even know that the cross
you speak of was in the house. You never showed it to me, sir."

"No," acknowledged Walker truthfully, "I certainly did not."

"Did you see any of those gipsies lurking about the house?" asked
Parson.

"No," said Jenny positively, "I did not. Mr. George went out for a
walk at ten o'clock, and I lay down at half-past. I never knew
anything, or heard anything, or guessed anything. When I got up at
seven, as usual, and went to dust the drawing-room, I found the window
open. And that didn't scare me, as I thought Mr. George might have
opened it when he got up."

"But you knew that he was not in the house?" said Hale alertly.

"I never did, sir. I went to wake him after I found the drawing-room
window open, and found that he hadn't been to bed. The room was upset
too, just as you saw it. If I'd known that I was alone in the cottage
I should have been scared out of my life; but I thought Mr. George
came in late, and had gone to bed as usual. I nearly fainted, I can
tell you," cried Jenny tearfully. "Fancy a weak girl like me being
left alone with them horrid gipsies down the lane! But I slept through
it all, and I never saw no gipsies about. When I saw the bedroom upset
and that Mr. George wasn't there, I called in Quain the policeman.
That's all I know, and if missus does give me notice when she comes
back I'd have her know that I'm a respectable girl as doesn't rob
anyone."

Jenny had much more to say on the subject, but all to no purpose; so
the three men went to the camp. They found the vagrants making
preparations to leave, and shortly were in the middle of what promised
to be a free fight. The gipsies were most indignant at being accused,
and but for a certain awe of the police would certainly have come to
blows with those who doubted their honesty. The man who had seen the
cross accounted for his movements on the previous night. He was in the
village public-house until eleven, so could not have assaulted Walker
on the towing-path, and afterwards was in bed in one of the caravans,
as was deposed to by his wife. In fact, every member of this
particular tribe--they were mostly Lovels from the New Forest--proved
that he or she had nothing to do with either the assault or burglary.
Finally, Parson, entirely beaten, departed with the other two men, and
the gipsies proceeded to move away in a high state of indignation.

"Do you really think that they are innocent?" asked Hale, who surveyed
the procession of outgoing caravans with a frown.

"Yes, I do," said Parson, who was not going to be taught his business
by any civilian.

"So do I," struck in Walker. "All the men who saw the cross have
accounted for their whereabouts last night. They were not near my
mother's house, nor across the river on the towing-path."

Hale smiled drily. He had no opinion of Walker's intelligence, or of
that which Mr. Parson possessed. "Rogues and vagabonds--as these
people are--stand by one another, and will swear to anything to keep
one of their number out of gaol. I don't put much faith in the various
alibis. You should have searched the caravans, officer."

"And the men and women also, I suppose, sir," said Parson quietly. "I
had no warrant to do so, let me remind you. Even gipsies have their
privileges under the English law. Also, if anyone of these men were
guilty, he could easily have passed the cross to one of the women, or
buried it. I might have searched and found nothing, only to lay myself
open to a lecture from my superiors."

"Still," began Hale, unwilling to surrender his point of view, "let me
remind you, Mr. Parson, that----"

"And let me remind you, sir," broke in the officer stiffly, "that only
this ornament you speak of was stolen. If a gipsy had broken into the
house he would certainly have taken other things. And again, no gipsy
could have carried Mr. Walker into your parlour, seeing that not one
member of the tribe is aware of your existence, much less where your
cottage is situated. I am ignorant on that score myself."

Having thus delivered himself with some anger, for the supercilious
demeanour of Hale irritated him, Parson strode away. He intimated
curtly to the two men, as he turned on his heel, that if he heard of
anything likely to elucidate the mystery he would communicate with
them: also he advised them if they found a clue to see him.

Hale laughed at this last request. "I fancy I see myself placing the
case in the hands of such a numskull."

George shook his head. "If you do not employ the police, who is to
look into the matter?" he asked gravely.

The answer was unexpected.

"You are," said Hale, coldly and decisively.

George stopped--they were walking back to Marlow when this
conversation took place--and stared in amazement at his companion.
"Why, I am the very worst person in the world to help you," he said,
aghast.

"To help yourself, you mean. Remember I promised to consent to your
marriage to Lesbia only on condition that I got back the cross."

"It is not my fault that the cross is lost."

"I never said that it was," retorted Hale, tartly. "All the same you
will have to find it and return it to me before I will agree to your
marriage with my daughter. It would have been much better had you
handed it over to me last night."

"I daresay," said George, somewhat sulkily, "but I'm not the man to
give up anything when the demand is made in such a tone as you used.
Besides, I don't see how I can find the cross."

"Please yourself, my boy. But unless you do, Lesbia marries Sargent."

"Sargent!" The blood rushed to Walker's cheeks and his voice shook
with indignation. "Do you mean to say that you would give your
daughter to that broken rake, to that worn-out----

"Ta! Ta! Ta!" said Hale, in an airy French fashion, and glad to see
the young man lose his temper. "Sargent is my very good friend and was
my brother officer when I was in the army. He would make Lesbia an
excellent husband, as he is handsome and well-off and amiable,
and----"

"And an idiot, a gambler, and a----"

"You'd better not let him hear you talk like that."

Walker laughed. "I fear no one, let me tell you, Mr. Hale. Mr. Sargent
or Captain Sargent as he calls himself----"

"He has every right to call himself so. He was a captain."

"It is not usually thought good manners to continue the title after a
man has left the army," said George drily, and recovering his temper,
which he saw he should never have lost with a hardened man like Hale.
"You, for instance, do not call yourself----"

"There! There! that's enough, Walker," cried the elder man
impatiently. "You know my terms. That cross and my consent: otherwise
Lesbia marries Sargent."

"She loves me: she will never obey you," cried the lover desperately.

"I shall find means to compel her consent," said Hale coldly. "Surely,
Mr. Walker, you have common sense at your age. Sargent has money and a
certain position you have neither."

"I can make a position."

"Then go and do so. When you are rich and highly-placed we can talk."

Hale was as hard as iron and as cold. There seemed to be no chance of
getting what was wanted by appealing to his tender feelings, since he
had none whatsoever. But after swift reflection Walker thought of
something which might make the man change his mind.

"Listen, Mr. Hale," he said, when Lesbia's father was on the point of
moving away from a conversation which he found unprofitable and
disagreeable. "I did not intend to tell you, but as my engagement with
Lesbia is at stake I will make a clean breast of it."

Hale wheeled round with a cold light in his eyes. "Are you going to
confess that you stole the cross and got up a comedy to hide the
theft?"

George laughed. "I am not clever enough for that. But it is about a
possible fortune that I wish to speak--one that may come to me through
my mother."

"A fortune." Hale flushed, for only the mention of money could touch
his hard nature. "I never knew that your mother had money."

"She has not now, but she may have."

"Go on," said Hale, seeing that the young man hesitated, and watching
him with glittering eyes. "I have known your mother for years, but she
never told me either that she had money or expected any."

"I should not tell you either," said Walker bluntly, "and so I
hesitated. I have no business to interfere with my mother's affairs.
However, I must speak since I want to marry Lesbia."

"I am all attention."

"My grandfather left his large fortune equally divided between his two
daughters. One was my mother; and her husband, my father, ran through
the lot, leaving her only a trifle to live on. I help to keep her."

"This," said Hale coldly, "I already know."

"But what you don't know is that my aunt--my mother's sister, that is,
ran away with some unknown person during her father's lifetime. He was
angry, but forgave her on his death-bed and left her a fair share of
the money--that is half. As my mother inherited fifty thousand, there
is an equal amount in the hands of Mr. Simon Jabez, a lawyer in
Lincoln's Inn Fields, waiting for my aunt should she ever come back."

"And if she does not?" asked Hale anxiously.

"Then, if her death can be proved, the money comes to my mother."

"Humph! But you say your aunt ran away with someone--to marry the man,
I suppose. What if there is a child?"

Walker's face fell. "The child inherits," he said softly.

Hale laughed harshly. "You have found a mare's nest," he said coolly,
"and I see no reason to change my decision with regard to your
possible marriage with Lesbia. Your aunt may be alive and may appear
to claim the money. If she is dead, her child or children may come
forward. On the other hand, if your mother does come in for the fifty
thousand pounds you speak of she is, as I know, a hard woman."

"I agree with you," said the young man, moodily and sadly. "She
is as hard as you are, Mr. Hale. But if she inherits my grandfather's
money--that is, my aunt's share--she has no one to leave it to but me.
I am an only child."

"Your mother," said Hale deliberately, "is hard as you say; that is,
she is as sensible as I am. If you marry against her will, she will
not leave you one farthing of this money, which, after all, may never
come into her possession."

"But why should she object to Lesbia?" asked George, "when she meets
her and sees how lovely she is----"

"Bah!" Hale looked scornful, "you talk like a fool. As if any woman
was ever moved by the beauty of another woman. Besides, your mother
hates me; we are old enemies, and rather than see you marry my
daughter she would go to your funeral with joy. If you married against
her will--as you assuredly would in making Lesbia your wife--she would
leave you nothing. And I also dislike the match on account of your
mother."

"But why are you her enemy, and she yours?" asked George, bewildered.

"That is a long story and one which I do not intend to relate unless
driven to speak. If Lesbia marries you she will lose two thousand a
year which I can give her when I die. If you want to drag the girl you
love down to poverty, Mr. Walker, then marry her secretly. I tell you
that if you make Lesbia your wife neither I nor your mother will help
you."

"And yet you said----"

"That you could make Lesbia your wife, if you found the cross. Yes, I
did say that, and I still say it. If you get me the cross, you shall
marry her and have the two thousand a year when I die. But it would be
wiser for you to leave Lesbia alone and marry----"

"Marry whom?" asked George, his cheeks flaming.

"Maud Ellis," retorted Hale with a sneering laugh, and turned away.




CHAPTER V
MRS. WALKER'S OPINION


After that one extraordinary adventure which broke so remarkably the
monotony of George Walker's life, things went very smoothly for a
time. That is, they progressed in their usual humdrum way, which was
trying to the young man's ambitious spirits. He wanted to marry
Lesbia, to make a home for her, to attain a position, which her beauty
would adorn; and he saw no means of doing so. He went regularly to the
office, earned his small salary, and dreamed dreams which could never
be realised, at least, there appeared to be no chance of realisation.
What could a man of moderate attainments, with no money and no
friends, hope to do in the way of cutting a figure in the world?

Mrs. Walker duly returned home, and Jenny gave her a highly-coloured
account of the burglary, which she heard in stern silence. She was a
tall, grim woman with a hard face and a stiff manner, and was
invariably arrayed in plain black gowns devoid of any trimming
whatever. Her hair, still dark in spite of her age, was smoothed over
her temples in the plain early Victorian manner, and her pale
countenance was as smooth as that of a young girl. That she was a
gentlewoman could easily be seen, but her manner was repellent and
suspicious. Also, her thin lips and hard grey eyes did not invite
sympathy. How such a Puritanical person ever came to have a handsome,
gracious son such as George, perplexed more than one person. The
general opinion was that he inherited his looks and his charm of
manner from his late father. Report credited the Honourable Aylmer
Walker with more fascination than principle. And truth to tell, his
posthumous reputation was better than that which he had enjoyed when
living.

Having ascertained the facts of the burglary and the loss of the
amethyst cross, Mrs. Walker held her peace, and did not discuss the
subject with her son. George, indeed, ventured upon a lame
explanation, which she received in dead silence. After the hint given
by Mr. Hale, the young man was not desirous of disclosing his
engagement to Lesbia, and a discussion about the stolen cross would
inevitably lead to the truth becoming known to Mrs. Walker. Sooner or
later he knew that he would have to speak, but he postponed doing so
until he could see his future more clearly. If he could only procure a
better post in the City, he could then afford to keep Lesbia in
comparative comfort, and pass a love-in-a-cottage existence. But until
he was in a position to do so, he avoided confiding in his mother.
Also, Mrs. Walker was not a sympathetic mother, and would certainly
not have encouraged the young man's love-dream.

But one evening Mrs. Walker unexpectedly broached the subject at
dinner. This was seven days after the adventure of the cross, and
during that time George had never set eyes on Lesbia. Several times he
had rowed as usual to the garden's foot, but had waited in vain for
the girl's appearance. An inquiry at the house provoked no response,
as neither Tim nor Lesbia came to the fast-closed door. George in
despair had written, but to his anxious letter had received no reply.
Lesbia remained silent and the cottage barred and bolted, so George
began to believe that Hale had smuggled away his daughter, lest she
should elope with the lover of whom he so strongly disapproved. This
state of uncertainty wore Walker's nerves thin, and he lost his
appetite and his night's rest. Mechanically he went to Tait's office,
did his daily work, and returned home again, fretting all the time
after the girl who was beyond his reach. He even tried to see Mr.
Hale, but that gentleman was conspicuous by his absence. Never was a
lover in so dismal a situation.

On this especial evening George, in evening dress, faced his silent
mother at the dinner-table. Mrs. Walker wore a plain black silk gown,
perfectly cut, but wholly unadorned. Like Mr. Hale, she always
insisted upon a certain style being observed and dined, so to speak,
in state. The tiny room was well furnished with the remnants of her
former prosperity, and looked like the abode of a gentlewoman. Nothing
could have been more perfect than the table appointments and, if the
food was plain, the way in which it was served left nothing to be
desired. Jenny, neatly dressed, waited deftly and, at the conclusion
of the dinner, placed a decanter of port before George, along with a
silver box of cigarettes and a dainty silver spirit lamp.

As a rule, Mrs. Walker withdrew at this moment to enjoy her coffee in
the drawing-room, while George sipped his wine and trifled with a
cigarette, but on this occasion she remained. "You can bring my coffee
here," she said to Jenny, in her unemotional voice.

George wondered at this departure from the usual routine, for his
mother had never broken the domestic rule she had instituted as far
back as he could remember. However, he did not feel called upon to say
anything but poured out a glass of port, and lighted a cigarette. When
Mrs. Walker obtained her coffee, and Jenny had departed, she spoke to
her son through the gathering twilight.

"I have received a letter from Mr. Hale," said Mrs. Walker in her
coldest voice, and sat bolt upright with her eyes on the comely blonde
face of her son.

"What!" George flushed and started, and laughed nervously. "That is
very strange," he said after a pause, "Mr. Hale has never written to
you before."

"There are reasons why he should not have written to me before, as
there are reasons why he writes to me now."

"May I know those reasons?" asked George quietly, but inwardly
anxious.

"Certainly!" Mrs. Walker was disagreeable but excessively polite, as
she never forgot her manners, whatever the provocation. "In fact, I
have waited to explain them. But I think you had better tell me your
story first."

"What story?"

"That of your engagement to Lesbia Hale, and of the cross which was
stolen from this cottage."

"What!" George rose restlessly and grew redder than ever. "You
know----"

"I know everything," said his mother imperiously. "Mr. Hale is annoyed
by the way in which you are haunting his Marlow cottage, and has asked
me to use my influence with you to stop the annoyance."

"That is quite likely," rejoined George, fuming, "but I decline to
give up Lesbia. Mr. Hale knows that."

"He knows, apparently, that you are obstinate and foolish," said Mrs.
Walker in a chilly manner. "And as your infatuation--for it is nothing
else--can lead to nothing, I must ask you to stop these hopeless
visits."

"Mother, if you knew Lesbia----"

"I know that Lesbia is the daughter of a man whom I despise and hate,"
said Mrs. Walker, moved to cold anger, "and my son shall never marry
her."

"You have not the power to stop the marriage," said George quietly.

"That is quite true. I have no money to threaten disinheritance, and
no legal power over a man who is of age. I might indeed appeal to your
affection, but I fear that it would be useless."

George flung his cigarette out of the window, and thrust his hands
moodily into his pockets. "Affection is a strange word to use between
us, mother," he remarked bitterly. "You have always been strict and
straightforward, and painfully polite. You have given me a good
education, and you have instructed me in good manners. My home," he
looked round, "or rather your home, you permit me to share."

"Pardon me, George, you forget that you contribute to the domestic
economy of this home, such as it is. Go on."

"I mean," cried George desperately, for her manner chilled him, "that
you have never been a mother to me in the accepted sense of the word."

"I have done my duty," said Mrs. Walker without flinching.

"Duty! duty! what is duty when I wanted love? I have lived in a
freezing atmosphere which has nearly changed me into a statue. Can you
wonder that I sought out someone to love?"

"Perhaps not, since you are young and foolish, but I regret that the
someone should be a girl that I cannot possibly receive as my
daughter-in-law."

"What do you mean by that?" demanded George sharply.

"Nothing detrimental to the girl," replied Mrs. Walker calmly. "She
may have all the beauty in the world, and all the virtues, and
probably has, in your eyes, but she is Walter Hale's daughter and so
cannot be mine."

"Why do you hate Mr. Hale, mother?"

"That," said Mrs. Walker, sitting very upright, "is my private
business."

"But when it interferes with my happiness----"

"I cannot help that," she said rigorously. "What is past is past, and
what is dead is dead."

"I don't understand you."

"I do not mean that you should. But I would point out that your
association with this girl, has already led you into danger. You have
been assaulted and robbed, and have come into contact with the police,
which is always undesirable. Renounce Lesbia, George, lest worse
befall."

"The robbery and the assault are mysteries."

"None the less they are dangerous. I can explain no more than you can;
but Mr. Hale is a dangerous person, to my knowledge, and----"

"Tell me what you know," interpolated her son.

"No," said Mrs. Walker, with iron determination. "It would do no good
to break the silence of years. All I can say is that you shall never
marry the girl with my consent."

"And if I do without it," chafed George, irritably. "Then you will
never set eyes on me again," returned Mrs. Walker quietly.

"Mother!"

The woman calmly finished her coffee and rose noiselessly. "The time
may come when I can explain," she said in her precise voice.
"Meanwhile I can only command you, or implore you--whichever you
please--to leave this girl alone and go no more to the Marlow
cottage."

"I don't see why I should obey you blindly," cried George angrily. "At
least give me a reason for your objection to Lesbia."

"I have given it: she is the daughter of Walter Hale."

"And are the sins of the father--whatever they may be--to be visited
upon the child, mother?"

"Quoting the Bible will not alter my determination," said Mrs. Walker,
absolutely cold and impassive. "You must do as I request or be
prepared to see me no more."

"Mother, can you not explain about this mysterious cross----"

"No."

"You refuse to."

"I mean that I cannot. I know nothing about the cross, or about the
assault made on you, or indeed about the burglary. All I do know is
that Mr. Hale is a dangerous man, and is connected with dangerous
people--what has occurred proves it."

"But surely you don't think that Mr. Hale is connected with these
mysteries?"

"I think nothing because I know nothing!" She moved swiftly forward
and placed a slim hand on her son's broad shoulder. "Be wise and give
up this girl. The wife who is waiting for you will suit you better."

George grew crimson. "The wife!" he stammered.

"Maud Ellis! Mr. Tait's niece. She loves you, and she has told me so.
If you marry her she will bring you money, and her uncle will forward
your interests. To-morrow you are stopping for the week-end at Mr.
Tait's house. Before you return here on Monday ask Maud to be your
wife."

"I shall do nothing of the sort," said George fiercely. "How can I
propose to one girl, when I love another?"

"Maud Ellis adores you, George."

"I know she does: it seems conceited to say so, but I am quite aware
of her adoration. And I don't like it. She is rich and handsome and
all the rest of it, and a marriage with her, means my getting on in
the office. All the same, I--I--I--" he hesitated, then finished his
sentence with a rush, "I love Lesbia, so there is no more to be said."

Mrs. Walker removed her hand and glided to the door again, her cold
self. "I quite agree with you," she said, exasperatingly cool.
"However, you know my determination. Act as you please."

"And affection?" called out George as she opened the door.

"Must give way to commonsense."

When alone, the young man dropped into a chair and looked moodily at
the disordered dinner-table. He was very much to be pitied for having
such a mother. Of a warm affectionate nature, George hungered for some
object upon which to expend his love. Mrs. Walker had always been a
granite image, unapproachable and chill. No doubt she was fond of her
handsome son in her own cold way, but she had never given him the
maternal love he craved for. It was small wonder that the boy had gone
afield to find some satisfaction for his craving. Lesbia supplied the
want, and on her side found the same joy as her lover in their mutual
affection. Mr. Hale in his way was as cold and repellent to her as
Mrs. Walker was to her son. Yet these two people, not giving the
longed-for love themselves to their children, were trying to rob
hungry hearts of spiritual sustenance--a dog-in-a-manger attitude
which did not commend itself to George.

He felt that he and Lesbia were severely alone, conscious only of each
other and environed by mysteries, which neither could understand. Mr.
Hale could explain, and so could Mrs. Walker, but no explanation was
volunteered, and George did not know where to look for an elucidation
of their several attitudes. Mrs. Walker certainly professed herself
ignorant of the amethyst cross mystery, and apparently spoke truly, as
her dislike to the match with Lesbia appeared to be wholly based upon
her hatred of Walter Hale. And that hatred had to do with Hale's past,
of which George knew as little as he did of the past of his mother.
But Hale knew something about the cross, which accounted for his
extraordinary behaviour, although he declared that he did not know who
had stolen it. George was also greatly perplexed to know who had taken
him to the Marlow cottage while he was insensible. Sitting in the
chair with his eyes on the ground, he frowningly perplexed himself
with these problems. It was all of no use, so he brushed aside the
troubles and, after changing his evening dress for boating flannels,
went to the river. He hoped by exercise to rid himself of these
phantoms, so indistinct and yet so real.

Having launched his boat and settled to work, George spun down the
stream, the current and his own efforts carrying him along with what
appeared to be lightning speed. The attention required in looking
after the slight craft prevented his thinking of his mysterious
troubles, and his spirits began to rise. At Henley lock his course was
stayed, for as he swung into the gates he became aware that another
boat was in the lock, and that Tim occupied that same strange shallop.

The two men recognised one another at once, and a very natural
question leaped to Walker's lips.

"Lesbia?" he gasped.

"Thrue for ye," grumbled Tim, who looked more misshapen that ever in
the dim light. "It's from the young mistress I come. Whist now, sor,
an' let me clear out av this divil of a place."

George backed his boat out of the lock and Tim muttering under his
breath, followed closely. Then the little man paddled his clumsy craft
into the near bank, and beckoned George to come also. In a few minutes
the two boats were amongst the rustling sedges side by side, and
Walker waited breathlessly for Tim to speak.

The sky was filling with shadows, but there was sufficient light for
George to see that Tim looked both sorrowful and worried. The sight of
the dwarfs sad face revived his terrors.

"Lesbia," cried George again, and gripped Tim's arm fiercely. "She is
well?"

"Well in body but sick of heart," said Tim dismally. "Augh, the poor
mistress, and how can she be well wid the divil's divarsions bein'
played round her?"

"I have tried to see her----"

"Divil a doubt of it, sor. And ye've sint letthers likewise."

"She never answered," breathed George sadly.

"An' how cud she whin she nivir recaved thim same. Answer me that now,
sor."

George sat bolt upright in his boat. "Never got my letters! Then
how----"

"Ah, be aisy now, me dear young masther," pleaded Tim, and took a tiny
note from his pocket. "This was all the mistress cud write, being
watched like a mouse, an' by a cat too, divil take the slut."

George scarcely heard what Tim was saying. He was devouring two or
three lines of Lesbia's dear writing, which stated that she would
always be true to him, and that Tim would reveal all.

"Reveal what," cried the young man, kissing the letter before
transferring it to his pocket.

"The divil's divarsions," grumbled Tim. "Write an answer, sor."

"I have no pencil, no paper," said George in dismay. "But tell me
exactly what has occurred, Tim, and then I'll see what can be done."

Tim nodded. "Sure, it's dying for you she is, me dear sor. The masther
wants her to marry the Captain, bad luck to his sowl!"

"I know that, but----"

"Howld yer whist, sor," growled the little man, flinging up his long
arm. "I have mighty little time to spake. The masther doesn't trust
me, forby he knows I wish to see me dear mistress happy wid you, sor,
so he's got a she-divil in the house, Mrs. Petty by name, who kapes a
watch inside. Thin there's Captain Sargent's man. The Shadow they call
him for his thin looks, though Canning is his name, bad luck to it. He
watches outside, an' whin your boat comes in sight he passes the worrd
to Mrs. Petty an' she--may the father av lies fly away wid her--shuts
Miss Lesbia in her room."

"But this is tyranny!" cried George, exasperated. "Do you mean to say
that Mr. Hale has his daughter watched in this manner?"

"Ay an' I do, and he'll have her watched till she goes to church wid
Captain Sargent, or until ye git back that crass. But nivir fear, sor,
Miss Lesbia has a fine spirit of her own, and she'll stick to ye
through thick an' thin, like the brave young lady she is."

"What's to be done?" asked George, in dismay.

Tim leaned forward. "Write a bit av a letther and sind it to me,
Mister Timothy Burke, Rose Cottage, Marlow. Thim two divils, Mrs.
Petty an' The Shadow, to say nothin' av the masther, won't stop that.
Thin I'll find means to pass it to the mistress."

"Yes! Yes, Tim. I'll do that. But the tyranny----"

"Whist now, for time passes, me dear sor. I heard the masther sayin'
that Captain Sargent was goin' to stay wid Mr. Tait at Hinley. Spake
to him, sor, to that same Captain."

"But what can I say?" demanded George, more and more perplexed.

"Sor," cried Tim gruffly, "as ye're a man ye can break the head of the
divil." And with this advice Tim pushed his boat again into midstream.




CHAPTER VI
PURPLE AND FINE LINEN


Mr. Michael Tait dealt principally in stocks and shares, but was not
above any scheme, however wild or however shady, which promised to
result in large profits. His motto was: "Make money honestly if you
can, but make money!" and he consistently acted up to this advice
throughout a long career of speculation. He was not so much a spider
sitting in a web to lure unwary flies, as an octopus who stretched out
tentacles in every direction to draw victims into his maw. He indulged
in dozens of enterprises, both openly and secretly, but all with the
aim of making as much cash as possible. That many of these schemes led
to much misery, that is, the misery of other people, he never stopped
to inquire. And even if he had done so he would have taken no note of
the answer. The race was to the swift and the battle to the strong, in
Mr. Tait's humble opinion, and those who failed either in fighting or
running had to make the best of their plight.

In appearance Michael Tait was a squat, burly, sturdy man, with sandy
hair and whiskers, and a pair of cold blue eyes devoid of all
sympathy. He dressed expensively, wore a profusion of jewellery, and
was rarely without an excellent cigar sticking out of his mouth. For
the sake of luring his victims he cultivated a jolly, free and easy
manner, and exhibited an external good nature which deceived many. To
quote Tennyson's cutting line, he "snake-like slimed his victim e'er
he gorged," and acted the Pharisee by largely advertising his
charities. He was looked upon generally as a good fellow, rough, but
really kind-hearted, and possessed of a true Christian spirit. As a
matter of fact, Mr. Tait knew very little of Christ and His teaching,
and would not have subscribed to it, save by word of mouth, had he
been aware of its spirit. But he passed as a good man, because he went
to church and talked largely of helping the poor.

This prop of British commerce, as he was wrongly described by a too
ardent reporter, possessed a regal country house at Henley, where he
entertained largely. Also he had chambers in town, but these he only
used on rare occasions when business or pleasure prevented him seeking
his true home. Mrs. Tait had mercifully passed away many years
previously, under the delusion that Michael was a good man, and the
Henley mansion was managed by Maud Ellis, who was the stockbroker's
niece.

Miss Ellis was a young lady of five-and-twenty, certainly not
bad-looking, although she could not be described as beautiful. Like
her respectable uncle, she was of the sandy type, but, unlike him, she
possessed a tall, full figure, finely-shaped. As she always dressed in
exquisite taste, and had a personality of the semi-hypnotic kind, she
was regarded as a desirable woman. The fact that she was her uncle's
heiress also may have had something to do with this opinion. Maud was
extremely cunning, and as selfish in her way as Michael was in his. He
sought money, she admiration, and they did very well in their efforts
to attract both. And it was this clever young woman who had chosen to
fall in love with George Walker.

Of course she knew that he was a bad match, that he did not love her,
and that as his wife she would hold no very exalted position. But the
fact was that the girl, after playing with various suitors, like the
princess of a fairy tale, with no serious intentions, had been snared
herself. Whether it was Walker's good looks, or his kind heart, or his
charm of manner, it is impossible to say; perhaps one of the three,
perhaps the three together: but Miss Ellis assuredly was violently in
love with the young man. Having arrived at the conclusion that life
would be miserable without him, she set to work to make him propose,
thinking that she would have small difficulty.

To her surprise, however, George proved to be quite impervious to her
sparkling conversation and clever display of her somewhat limited
charms. He was polite to her and nothing more, although she made her
uncle ask him again and again to the palace at Henley. This conduct
piqued Miss Ellis, but did not altogether displease her, as it gave
her an opportunity of exercising her talent for intrigue.

From a mere fancy, her passion deepened to ardent love, and she swore
mentally that by hook or by crook she would force the young fellow to
make her Mrs. Walker. Rarely a week passed without George being asked
to Henley, and Maud did her best to subjugate him. But George being in
love with Lesbia had a very strong shield to oppose to her love darts,
and managed to avoid the amorous pitfalls she spread for him. For six
months the chase of this unwilling victim had been going on, and as
the quarry always dodged just as the huntress was on the verge of
capture, this middle-class Diana concluded that there was another
woman in the case. With a view to learning the truth, she watched and
made stealthy inquiries, so that she speedily learned of George's
infatuation--so she called it--for Lesbia Hale. To detach him from
Lesbia became the object of her life, and it was she who suggested to
Mr. Hale that Lesbia might profitably marry Captain Alfred Sargent.

As Hale approved of Maud's cleverness, and was frequently indebted to
her for getting what he wanted from Tait, he did his best to fall in
with her plans, the more so, as he did not care whom his daughter
married, provided it was to his interest.

Maud promised, if the marriage was brought about, to interest her
uncle in a wild-cat scheme of Hale's contrivance. So the loving father
did his best--as has been seen--to force his child into the arms of a
man she loathed. George knew nothing of all this intrigue, and kept
away from the Henley mansion as much as he could without openly
offending his employer. But when he heard from Tim that Captain
Sargent was to be a member of the Saturday to Monday house-party, he
determined to accept this latest invitation. An interview with Sargent
might clear the air of all these mysteries, and George--hating the
ex-captain--was not averse from breaking his head as Tim had advised,
if there was no other way of releasing Lesbia. Also George fancied
that Mr. Hale--a frequent visitor--might be enjoying Mr. Tait's
hospitality, in which case he could speak to him and remonstrate about
this tyranny to which Lesbia was subjected.

When George arrived in time for afternoon tea on Saturday, he found
that his own hopes and those of Tim were realised--that is, both
Walter Hale and Captain Sargent were present. Hale looked as lean and
grim and smart as ever, while greeting the flushed young man with the
air of a perfect stranger. Maud, who presided at a dainty tea-table,
saw that flush, and from the juxtaposition of Hale guessed its reason.
She was therefore none too pleased, but veiling her annoyance with a
sweet smile, she called the new arrival over to her side, and poured
him out a cup of tea.

"You are quite a stranger, Mr. Walker," she said graciously, devouring
him with her cold, grey eyes, which only lighted up when they rested
on his face.

"I was here three weeks ago," said George politely, and accepting
cake. "It would rather bore Mr. Tait if I came here oftener."

"It would never bore me," breathed Miss Ellis, "and my uncle is always
very glad to see you. He looks upon you almost as his son."

George flushed again and looked awkward. "It is very kind of Mr.
Tait," he remarked coldly, "seeing that I am only a clerk in his
office."

"Uncle was only a clerk once," said Maud, smiling. "And look what he
is now, Mr. Walker. Some day you will be like him."

"I don't think so," said George, looking across to the stout,
ungraceful form of the successful stockbroker, who was being waited
upon hand and foot by two society ladies of the smart set, anxious to
secure tips.

Maud took his remark in its wrong sense. "Oh, you must hope," she
declared playfully. "With influence," she spoke meaningly, "you will
do much."

"I have no influence," returned the young man coldly.

"That is your own fault," retorted Miss Ellis. "The tide of fortune is
flowing past your door, and you will not launch your boat."

"I am waiting for a passenger," said Walker, thinking of Lesbia.

Jealous and cunning as she was, Maud was quite taken in for the
moment, and smiled graciously. She fancied that he referred to her.
"You need not wait long," she hinted.

George found the situation intolerable, and on the spur of the moment,
although it was neither the time nor the place to be confidential, he
spoke out. There should be no further misunderstandings if he could
help it. "My waiting depends upon Mr. Hale," he said bluntly.

Maud bit her thin lip, and leaned back, with an artificial laugh.
Inwardly she was furious, as she now knew that his remark had referred
to "that girl," as she contemptuously called Lesbia. But she was too
much the woman of the world to reveal her feelings and, moreover,
utilised his observation to learn as much of the truth as possible.

"Ah," she said archly, "a little bird told me that Mr. Hale has a
beautiful daughter. But I understood that she was engaged to Captain
Sargent."

"She is engaged to me," flashed out George, quite forgetting that he
was speaking to a jealous woman.

"Ah!" said Miss Ellis again, controlling her countenance with
difficulty; "the course of true love is not running smoothly. Poor Mr.
Walker, I must help you to gain your wife."

"You!" blurted out George like a fool.

Maud sat up and erected her crest like a snake. "Yes, I," she said
haughtily, anxious only for the moment to save her womanly pride. "Why
should I not help a friend? I look on you almost as a brother."

Still like a fool, George believed her, and indeed her indignant
manner would have deceived a much cleverer man. He was very young and
very green, and in Maud's designing hands could be moulded like wax.

She could have struck him in the face for the insult he had offered
her, but hiding her rage under a friendly smile, she laid her plans to
entrap him beyond hope of escape. "I shall get Mr. Hale to bring his
daughter here," she said quietly, "and then you can talk to her at
your leisure."

"Oh, how good you are," cried George delightedly. "I am sure you will
love Lesbia: she is so beautiful and charming--as you are," he added
with an afterthought.

Again the impulse came to Maud to strike him, and again her worldly
training came to her aid. "Hush!" she said softly, "you will make
Captain Sargent jealous. I believe he overheard."

"I don't care if he did," said Walker defiantly.

"Then I do," retorted Miss Ellis, who could not resist paying him out
a trifle, much as she loved him. "I don't want you to quarrel here.
Now go and talk to Captain Sargent while I receive these new people."

Several ladies and two gentlemen entered at the moment, and she went
forward to greet them, followed by her uncle. George left the chair he
had occupied near the tea-table, and strolled across the room--not to
Sargent, but to interview Mr. Hale.

That gentleman saw him coming, and moved away from the person to whom
he was speaking, in order to find a secluded corner. He saw that his
would-be son-in-law was coming to converse with him, and guessing the
subject of his conversation, wished to settle the matter without
scandal. George, as he surmised, was too frank to be diplomatic, and
if within the hearing of others, might say too much. But he need not
have been afraid. George, having been schooled in social usages, by
his mother, was perfectly capable of acting as a well-bred man.

"I have called twice or thrice to see Lesbia," said George, sinking
his voice to a judicious whisper, "but I have not been successful."

"That is as it should be," rejoined Mr. Hale coldly. "I do not wish
her to see you, and I have taken steps to prevent her from seeing
you."

It was on the point of George's tongue to say that he knew what
precautions had been taken, but to speak openly would lead to the
betrayal of Tim, which was not to be thought of. However, he was as
blunt as he dared to be. "It is tyranny to keep a young girl shut up,"
he snapped angrily.

"You are the cause of her seclusion," retorted the elder man, "and as
her father I have a right to act as I please."

"There are law and order in this country," said Walker heatedly, and
would have continued to speak with vehemence, but that Hale prevented
him.

"You are right, and I take advantage of such law and order to prevent
my daughter from marrying a man I disapprove of."

"Why do you object to me?"

"We discussed that before and I gave you my answer. Also, if you will
remember, I gave you a chance of having things your own way. It is my
desire that Lesbia should marry my friend Sargent, but if you will
recover that lost cross for me, I will permit her marriage with you."

"I can't find the cross," growled George sullenly.

"Then you can't marry Lesbia," replied Hale, very distinctly, "and as
you are forcing me to curtail Lesbia's liberty by haunting the house,
I must ask you, in her interests if not in mine, to discontinue your
persecution."

George looked at the cold grim face before him, very straightly. "I
love Lesbia, and I intend to marry Lesbia," he said quietly.
"Therefore I shall do all in my power to see Lesbia. As to Captain
Sargent----"

"Hullo!" remarked that gentleman, who was strolling--perhaps
purposely--within ear-shot. "What about Captain Sargent?"

He was a slim, thin, delicate-looking man of the
mutton-dressed-as-lamb type, that is, he did not look his age, and
affected a pronouncedly juvenile fashion, a trifle over-done. His
collars were too high, his ties were too brilliant, and his clothes
were aggressively new. To look at his array he might have just left an
army-crammer's, and had apparently stopped short at "the young
lieutenant" epoch, which is the era of the male peacock. As to his
looks, these were of the colourless faded type; his face was pale, his
eyes were pale, and his hair--what there was of it--was also pale. In
fact, Sargent looked like a sheet of paper prepared for sketching, and
could have painted upon the background of himself any character he
wished to represent, provided it was not a strong one. The contrast
between his washed out personality and young Walker's vivid virility
was most marked.

"What about Captain Sargent?" repeated this product of civilisation, a
trifle more aggressively since George hesitated to speak. "Finish what
you have to say, Mr. Walker."

"Certainly," replied the younger man coolly. "I am the more willing,
as Mr. Hale is present. In a word, Captain Sargent, I love Miss Lesbia
Hale, and I intend to marry her. You wish to make her your wife, and I
do not intend to let you have your way."

"All that in a word," sneered the captain, with a disagreeable look in
his pale grey eyes.

"Yes. In a word to the wise."

"And suppose I am not wise?"

"It matters very little to me if you are wise or not," retorted
George, who was not to be put down by sneers. "Lesbia is to marry me,
so that is all about it."

Sargent glanced at Mr. Hale, who was quite unruffled. "I presume her
father's wish counts for something?"

"Not when it conflicts with her happiness."

"What do you say, Hale?"

"I have said all that I intend to say. Walker knows my views."

"He does," broke in George, "and he does not subscribe to them. I give
you warning that I intend to marry Lesbia. As to you, sir," he turned
so fiercely on Sargent that the man gave back a step. "If you make
Lesbia unhappy, or bother her in any way, I shall make myself very
unpleasant."

"Dear me!" sneered the captain in feigned alarm. "What a terrible
Turk!"

George stared coldly at his rival, and deliberately turned on his heel
without speaking further. He had declared open war, and he was pleased
that he had done so. Now--with a clear conscience--he could haunt the
Marlow cottage and see Lesbia and woo Lesbia and carry off Lesbia,
without feeling that he was acting otherwise than as a gentleman and
an ardent lover. "Damn the fellow!" breathed Sargent, who had reddened
under Walker's contemptuous gaze. "What's to be done, Hale?"

"Nothing," rejoined that gentleman sternly. "If you find that cross,
you can marry Lesbia; if Walker finds it, he can make her his wife."

It was a pity that George did not overhear this speech. He would have
been interested to hear that Sargent also was seeking for the
mysterious ornament to which Hale appeared to attach such value. The
captain looked at his friend curiously. "Why do you want this cross so
much?" he asked.

"That's my business. What you have to do is to find it;" and in his
turn Mr. Hale went away, leaving Sargent caressing his moustache in
some perplexity.

Presently, everyone went to dinner, which was a banquet delicately
cooked and splendidly served. Tait was quite devoted to the pleasures
of the table, and paid his chef a large salary. The food was perfect
and the wines flowed freely, so that by the time the guests repaired
to the drawing-room, everyone was in the best of spirits. The
house-party was a large one, as there were about twenty people
present, and not one of these would have been acceptable in a Sunday
school. There were ladies belonging to the smart set, perfectly
respectable from a worldly point of view, but who cared for nothing
save bridge and dress, flirtation and pleasure. There were also men,
some with titles, and many with brains of the speculative money-making
order.

Tait was not entirely in society, but by reason of his wealth and
public position as a philanthropist hovered on the fringe of it. He
helped social butterflies to make money on the Stock Exchange, lent
sums large and small to ladies who could advance him in Mayfair and
Belgravian circles, and was always open to consider any scheme which
promised to bring in cash. Thus his house-parties were composed of a
heterogeneous mass of people, good or bad, titled and untitled, gay
and grave. But a general air of restlessness prevailed, and in that
splendid mansion one and all appeared to dance along a golden road,
which doubtless led to the Pit, and were personally conducted by the
cunning, self-indulgent, worldly old stockbroker, who might have
passed as Mammon in the flesh.

After dinner, the party split up into sections. Some ardent gamblers
sat down to bridge; a few restless spirits went to dance, and a group
gathered round a young man at the piano who sang the latest comic
songs.

There was plenty of champagne, together with cigars and cigarettes of
the best, so the fun waxed fast and furious, and as the hours drew on
to midnight everyone grew more or less excited. Within bounds, of
course, as Maud Ellis was too clever to permit the Henley palace to
earn a name for Neronian extravagance. The entertainment just paused
on the verge of an orgy; but under Maud's skilful management did not
over-step the mark.

That young lady had been watching George all the night although she
did not speak to him again. Towards twelve o'clock, she found herself
near him, and rallied him on his pensive air. "Don Quixote in love,"
she said in an airy manner.

Then she lowered her voice impressively. "Meet me in the
picture-gallery at three o'clock," she said, "for Lesbia's sake."




CHAPTER VII
AFTER MIDNIGHT


Had George been more of a man of the world he would have wholly
mistrusted Maud, and would have declined her invitation to meet him in
the picture-gallery in the small hours of Sunday morning. It would not
have been credited by a judge of human nature that one woman would
make such an appointment with the man she loved to plead the cause of
her rival, or to give a helping hand to bring about a marriage which
was dead against the feelings of her heart. But George, in spite of
his years and virile looks, was an unsophisticated man, who could
not guess what was below the surface. He was a kind of society
tender-foot, and perhaps this in some measure constituted his charm in
the eyes of Miss Ellis, who had experience enough to fit out a dozen
men and at least two women. At all events, although he wondered that
her liking for him--as he termed it--had lapsed so suddenly, yet he
determined to keep the appointment and to listen to any scheme which
she might propose, likely to accomplish the marriage with Lesbia. In
this way are strong men twisted to feminine purposes by women, and
from Samson downwards no man has been sufficiently cunning to get the
better of his Delilah. There was therefore some excuse for George.

His attention was drawn from his own thoughts by a lively discussion
going on between Mr. Tait and three or four ladies, with a sprinkling
of men. As it was now long after midnight some people had retired to
bed, and others were preparing to follow. But Tait was a night bird
who liked to stay up as long as possible--probably because, as a
robber of widows and orphans, his pillow must have had its thorns. To
entertain those guests who remained wakeful, and especially the
feminine portion thereof, he mentioned that he had lately come into
possession of some wonderful jewels which a famous, or rather
infamous, _demi-mondaine_ of Paris had sold. Of course, the ladies
were more than anxious to see these gems, both on account of their
beauty and value and because of the celebrity of their former owner.
They one and all clamoured for a sight of them, and as Mr. Tait had
purposely stimulated their curiosity to keep them from retiring, he
was not unwilling to gratify their wish. He therefore led the way to
the picture-gallery, and pointed out a small narrow door at the end of
it.

"There is my safe," he said proudly, "or rather my strong-room."

"Queer place for a safe," drawled Sargent, with a shrug.

"And for that reason the safer. We are all friends here," Tait glanced
round graciously, and looked more like a Silenus than ever, "so I do
not mind revealing the whereabouts of twenty thousand pounds' worth of
jewels. But no thief would dream that my safe was here. And even if he
did," added the stockbroker, drawing out his watch-chain, "the safe
cannot be opened save by this key."

"But it might be broken open," George ventured to remark.

Tait laughed in a jolly manner. "It would take the cleverest thief in
London to break into my safe, and there are only two keys to open it.
I have one on my watch-chain, and Maud, my niece, has the other."

The guests looked at one another. Had not Tait been flushed with wine
and excitement he would not have been thus free in his speech, and he
was not a man who talked at large as a rule. But the lateness of the
hour, the presence of many people, the lights, the music, the
gambling, the wine, and the chatter had unloosened his usually
cautious tongue. Maud frowned when her uncle spoke so rashly, as she
thought that he was a fool to do so. Certainly there was no one
present who would have broken open the safe, since everyone was
respectable, even if--as the word goes--rackety! All the same the
revelation of the whereabouts of the safe and the information so
guilelessly supplied was risky, to say the least of it. Miss Ellis
shook her head at her venturesome uncle.

"Don't say too much," she remarked in a low voice, "even this safe may
not be strong enough to withstand a burglar of the new school."

"Well, I don't care," cried the stockbroker recklessly, inserting his
key into the lock, "my jewels are insured. Come, ladies, you can all
feast your eyes, and--as I have bought the gems to sell them again--I
am open to an offer."

He said this jokingly, yet meant to sell if he could. Some of the
guests drew back rather annoyed, as they thought that Mr. Tait was
going too far in importing City manners into his house-party. Maud,
ever watchful, again whispered to her uncle, but he shook her off, and
entered the strong-room--now open--to bring out the jewels. When the
box which contained them was placed on a near table, and the contents
were displayed, all thought of Tait's bad manners disappeared in
amazement and delight at the sight of the precious stones.

These were truly beautiful. Many were set in tiaras, bracelets, rings,
chains, lockets and in various ornaments for the hair and corsage. But
other stones lay loose and glittering, to be arranged and used as
required. There were diamonds, sapphires, rubies, emeralds and many
inferior gems, the whole forming a dazzling heap, which made every
mouth water with avarice. But for Tait's estimate, those present--and
some were good judges of jewels--would have deemed the radiant pile
worth twice the amount mentioned.

"Try them on, ladies," said the genial stockbroker. "Try them on. We
are all friends here!" and he placed a tiara on the head of his niece,
who stood near with a frown on her face. She began to think that her
uncle was crazy to display his wealth in this reckless manner.

In a few moments some of the female guests were glittering with
jewels, and surveying themselves delightedly in hand-mirrors which had
been brought by Tait's order. The stockbroker himself, with a cynical
smile, looked at their avaricious faces, and listened with sneering
pleasure to the delighted little screams which they gave at intervals.

Jewels have a much greater effect on women than on men, and there was
not a woman present but would have gone great lengths for the sake of
possessing even one of the ornaments. Gretchen was not the only woman
who could be lured by the glitter of gems, which is so much superior
to the mere gleam of gold. And Tait, amidst this splendour, looked
more like Mammon than ever.

But this early-hours-of-the-morning pleasure came to an end in fifteen
minutes, and the ladies, taking off the jewels, restored them to their
owner. Tait was really glad to get them back, and counted them
carefully, for the look in the eyes of some of the ladies actually
frightened him, and he half thought that they would run away with the
treasures. However, he made sure that every one of the ornaments had
been given back, and replaced them in the box, which he deposited in
the safe. After that, the guests went to bed, and the gallery, with
the strong-room carefully locked, was left in silence and darkness.
But the sleep of many was disturbed by the thought of that Nibelung's
treasure, so near at hand, and yet so impossible to obtain.

George was indifferent to the gems, as he thought that Lesbia's eyes
were brighter and much more beautiful. He left the gallery while Tait
was displaying his hoard, and retired to the very comfortable bedroom
which Maud's care had provided. As a mere clerk he should not have had
such luxurious surroundings, or, indeed, have been in the splendid
house at all; but she loved him, and could not do enough for him.
Therefore, George was housed like a king, and, after the manner of
youth, took his comforts easily. It never occurred to him that in his
humble position he had no right to be pampered and petted. By right of
good looks and delightful manners, he had hitherto gone through the
world very much spoiled by the fair sex. He therefore took everything
as his right.

While waiting for three to strike from the stable clock--it was now
two--he seated himself before the fire and, lighting a pipe, gave
himself up to dreams of Lesbia. In one way or another he was
determined to make her his wife, but it was difficult to see how he
proposed to keep her on his small salary, particularly when much of
that same salary was required to support his mother.

But that George indulged in the rosy dreams of youth and had such a
profound belief in the kindness of fortune, he would have dismissed
his proposed marriage as an impossibility. Hale was against it, and so
was Sargent: his mother did not approve of the marriage, and there was
Maud Ellis to be considered. A more hopeful man may well have been
despondent: but not George. He felt sure that everything would come
right, and that life was a fairy-tale in which the fated prince--who
was himself--carried off the lovely princess--who, of course, was
Lesbia. And she was in an enchanted castle--so he glorified Rose
Cottage--watched by two dragons, Canning and Mrs. Petty--but helped
also by a faithful dwarf, by name Tim Burke. Finally, there was Mr.
Hale as the wicked magician to be reckoned with, and perhaps Maud
might act as the malignant fairy; but somehow the marriage would be
brought about, and in some way sufficient money would be provided, so
that the prince and princess could live happily ever afterwards.

Lesbia would not have thought in this comfortable fashion in the face
of such obstacles as barred the way to the altar: but then she was
much more practical than her lover, in spite of the fact that she
dwelt in seclusion, while he battled in the work-a-day world.

And then, as George fondly imagined he had discovered a few hours
previously, Maud Ellis was not the wicked fairy after all. Rather was
she about to play the agreeable part of the fairy-godmother, and bring
together two lovers parted by adverse circumstances.

When Maud afterwards thought of the trust George placed in her she
wondered at his folly, and had a contempt for his upright character
that could estimate human nature so highly. But George never doubted
for one moment but that the appointment was made in all good faith and
for the express purpose of helping his suit with Lesbia. He therefore
waited impatiently for the striking of the clock. Only once did it
cross his mind as odd that Maud should choose that hour and that
meeting-place to forward his interests, since she could easily have
spoken to him in a convenient place and at a becoming hour in the
morning. But he brushed this thought aside as unworthy of her kind
heart, and when the hour of three chimed out, he opened his door
softly and slipped out to keep his appointment.

George had stayed so frequently at the Henley mansion that he knew his
way to the picture-gallery exceedingly well. Also, it was Mr. Tait's
hobby to have the corridors and many of the rooms lighted in a subdued
manner all night. It prevented burglary, he declared, and certainly
the sight of an illuminated house would daunt those who prefer to work
in darkness or only by the light of a bull's-eye.

George, therefore, found himself in a soft glow when he emerged from
the bedroom and stole on tip-toe towards the head of the stairs. Here
he descended and took his way towards the back of the house to the
picture-gallery. This portion of the great mansion was not lighted,
which seemed odd, remembering what Mr. Tait said about light scaring
burglars, and seeing also that the safe was placed here. But whatever
was the stockbroker's whim, George found the long gallery in darkness,
and as he had entered by a door placed directly in the middle of it,
he halted there doubtfully. He could see no light, save what filtered
through the sky-lights, and did not know where Maud waited for him. At
the far end of the gallery were double glass doors, leading down steps
into the gardens. These were usually shuttered at night, but George
noted with some surprise by the gleam of starlight which came through
them that on this special night the shutters had not been put up. This
was strange, considering the valuables which were concealed in the
safe; but then, as the young man reflected, it was also strange that
Tait should place his treasure-house at the other end of the gimcrack
gallery, which could be so easily broken into. But, after all, on
the authority of Poe's tale of the Purloined Letter, the more unlikely
a place in which valuables are hidden the safer they are. Not one of
the London fraternity of thieves would believe that the wary
stockbroker would be so foolish as to place his safe or strong-room,
or treasure-house, or whatever he liked to call it, in such a
locality. Therefore, no creature of the night would come to rob. There
was considerable method in Tait's apparent madness after all.

But George had scanty time for such reflections, as the hours were
swiftly moving towards dawn, and he yet had to converse with Maud. His
eyes grew more accustomed to the semi-darkness of the gallery, and he
glanced up and down to see if he could espy the darker form of the
girl.

At this moment he heard the clink of metal upon metal. The sound came
from the direction of the strong-room, and, as he turned his gaze
thereto, he suddenly saw a vivid stream of light, proceeding
apparently from a bull's-eye. In a flash it struck him that the
strong-room was being burgled, and almost without thinking he uttered
a loud cry and sprang forward to lay hands on the thieves.

The light disappeared as he raced up, and when within measurable
distance of the safe he stumbled over a body, motionless on the floor.
It was that of a woman, as Walker could tell by the draperies he
mechanically clutched in his fall. Before he could pick himself up,
two dark forms dashed past him towards the glass doors. George,
anxious only to lay hands on the thieves, ran down the gallery at
their heels and left the woman where she was. The intruders easily
opened the double doors, which evidently had been left ajar.

George followed, and saw two men race across the lawn and into the
belt of trees which girdled Mr. Tait's mansion. As he increased his
speed he shouted loudly for assistance.

By and by, lights were seen moving in the upper windows of the great
house, and into the corridors poured many guests and servants, all in
various stages of undress, and all scared by the midnight alarm. Tait,
with a dressing-gown thrown hastily over his burly form, pushed his
way through the throng down the stairs, and the guests streamed after
him. Everyone knew what was the matter, for a wakeful servant had
heard the shout of "Thieves!" and the ominous word had hastily passed
from lip to lip.

"I expect my jewels are gone!" panted Tait, waddling towards the
gallery at the head of a picturesque mob.

In a second the electric lights were turned on and the gallery blazed
with light. Tait uttered a cry of alarm, which was echoed by those
behind him, and there was cause for surprise. The door of the
strong-room stood wide open, and some distance away lay the insensible
body of Maud Ellis, dressed in the attire she had worn during the
previous evening. While some of the ladies attended to the girl, Tait
with surprising agility plunged into the strong-room, and then they
heard him bellow bull-like in mingled rage and astonishment. A moment
later he emerged.

"The jewels are gone! the jewels are gone!" he shouted, purple with
wrath. "Here, some of you, go to Henley for the police; search the
grounds, examine the house, and----"

"The doors are open, sir," cried a footman.

"The thieves must have escaped. After them! after them!" bellowed
Tait, in a frenzy of rage.

"Your niece, man, your niece," said a gentleman who was supporting the
unconscious Miss Ellis; but Tait only swore the more.

"Confound my niece. I have lost twenty thousand pounds' worth of
jewels."

Several people looked disgusted at this callousness. A young doctor,
who was stopping in the house, and who was feeling Maud's pulse,
looked up. "Miss Ellis has been chloroformed," he remarked quietly.

Tait bent down and lightly touched the gold chain which was round the
girl's neck. "The key of the strong-room is gone," he cried furiously.

"No doubt," explained the medical man. "Miss Ellis has been rendered
insensible and then was robbed of the key. But who----"

"How did Maud come to be here at this hour?" demanded Tait savagely.
"Go for the police, some of you," he shouted, stamping furiously. "I'm
not going to lose a fortune in this way."

"It's useless; the thieves have escaped," cried a voice at the end of
the gallery, and George bounded in at the open door.

"Walker," cried the stockbroker, recoiling. "What are you doing here?
What do you know about this?"

"I came downstairs and heard the thieves at work," explained George
quickly. "I tried to lay hands on them, but tumbled over the body of a
woman on the floor, and----"

"It is Miss Ellis," said the young doctor, looking up. "Do you know
how she came to be here?"

George hesitated. He could not--for the sake of Maud's reputation--say
that she had appointed a meeting with him, and did not know how to
explain.

Tait noted his momentary hesitation, and turned on him furiously. "How
do you come to be here?" he demanded. "What makes you wander about my
house when everyone is in bed?"

"Ah," said Mr. Hale, pushing his way through the frightened crowd,
"that is very suspicious. Speak out, Walker!"

"I heard a noise and came down," cried George, making the first excuse
which entered his head.

"No one else heard a noise," remarked Sargent, who was at Tait's
elbow.

"I was wakeful," retorted Walker sharply; but on every hand he saw
incredulous looks, and realised with a chill that he was suspected.

Tait grunted, and looked at the young man with a lowering brow. "Who
are the thieves?" he demanded. "How many of them are there?"

"I saw two men, but could not catch a glimpse of their faces. I think
they were masked," said George readily, and again saw disbelief
written on the faces around him. "But may I suggest, Mr. Tait, that
you send for the police at once. The thieves made for the wood round
the house and may escape."

"I daresay they have escaped," grunted Tait, savagely. "The servants
are searching the gardens. Meanwhile let us revive Maud, and hear what
she has to say."

"She is coming round now," said the doctor, and even as he spoke, Maud
opened her eyes in a vague, unseeing way.

"Carry her up to bed," said Tait harshly. "I'll have an inquiry made
into this as soon as dawn comes and the police arrive. Meanwhile you
can all retire. Mr. Walker, remain here and explain."

"I have explained," said George proudly. "I have nothing more to add."

Tait shook his head doubtfully, and whispers went round, which
indicated suspicion of the truth of Walker's explanation. By this time
Maud, more or less sensible, was on her feet. Her eyes wandered here
and there until they alighted on the young man.

"You!" cried Miss Ellis, with a loud wail. "Oh, George, you!"




CHAPTER VIII
UNDER A CLOUD


There was very little sleep for anyone during the remaining hours of
darkness, and after breakfast--an unusually dismal meal--the guests
one and all showed a desire to get away from their host.

Mr. Tait certainly was not amiable, since he had suffered so great a
loss, and growled like a bear with a sore head. Not being a gentleman,
he could not control his temper, and made himself so openly
disagreeable, that everyone wanted to leave forthwith. But until the
police had made inquiries, it was impossible for either man or woman
to depart without becoming suspected.

Throughout that wretched Sunday, the men were miserable and the ladies
hysterical. Tait, no longer the jolly Silenus, or even the gracious
Mammon, moved amongst his friends with looks of suspicion for all.

The police duly arrived, and searched the gardens and the house, but
in no way could they trace the thieves. George stuck persistently to
his story, which, of course, was true, save for the excuse which he
gave for coming down the stairs. And it was this false portion--this
weak subterfuge--which made Mr. Tait suspicious. He knew that George
was hard up, and said as much to him in a quiet corner.

"What has my being a pauper to do with your loss?" demanded Walker,
firing up on the instant.

Tait shook his bullet head and scowled with his little pig eyes. "My
jewels are worth twenty thousand pounds," he retorted.

"I don't care if they are worth twenty millions," said George, turning
pale, for he realised his employer's meaning. "I know nothing about
them."

"You were in the gallery when----"

"I came down to the gallery because I heard a noise," interrupted
Walker furiously. "I told the police the story I told you. I did my
best to catch the thieves, and now you have the audacity to accuse
me."

"I don't exactly accuse you----"

"It looks very like it."

"You must admit that your conduct is suspicious," protested the
stockbroker.

"I admit nothing of the sort."

"People don't wander about a house after everyone is in bed, without a
reason," snapped Tait, with a searching glance.

George bore the scrutiny without flinching. "I have explained how I
came to be wandering about," he declared proudly. "I was sitting by my
fire, and on hearing a suspicious noise I came down, with what result
you know. How dare you accuse me?"

"I tell you again that I don't accuse you," vociferated Tait crossly.
"But you have acted foolishly to say the least of it."

"How else could I have acted?"

"On hearing the noise you should have aroused me."

"Had I done so I should not have been in time to see the thieves."

"What good did you do by seeing them, since they have escaped? That
is," added Tait slowly, "if there were two men. Stop!" he threw up his
fat hand as the young man was about to speak angrily; "it is no use
going round the bush. You may be innocent or you may not be. Your
story may be true or it may be the reverse."

"Mr. Tait"--George held his temper under by mere force of will--"why
should I rob you?"

The stockbroker opened his pig's eyes. "Why!" he demanded in
amazement, "do I not know that you are desperately poor? Didn't
Hale tell me only the other day that you wanted to marry his daughter,
and could not do so for want of money? Oh, there are plenty of reasons
why you should take twenty thousand pounds' worth of jewels. They
can be unset and sold, in which case they will be difficult to
trace. Had they been bank-notes, I don't believe that this
burglary--so-called--would have taken place."

George curled his lip. "You put things very clearly, sir," he said
quietly, "and on the face of it, I admit that my conduct looks a
trifle suspicious."

"A trifle!" cried Tait scornfully. "Very good indeed. A trifle! Why
not admit that you came down to steal the jewels, and went out to bury
them in some safe place, returning, when the alarm was given, to tell
us this cock-and-bull story of two thieves?"

George winced and grew white at this very plain speaking. But he kept
his temper, for to have lost it at the moment would have been
dangerous. He saw very well that he was in a tight place.

"I ask you only one question, Mr. Tait," he said calmly. "Who gave the
alarm?"

"I do not know," said the stockbroker sullenly. "I heard a cry of
thieves, and help, and blue murder, and came down to find everyone
else aroused."

"Then I may tell you that I gave the alarm, sir."

"_You_ say so," sneered the other.

"I say so because it is true," rejoined Walker, throwing back his head
indignantly. "I shouted in the gallery when I saw the light, and I
cried out again when I followed the thieves. I lost them when they
bolted into the wood girdling this place. Now, I ask you, sir, would I
have given the alarm had I been guilty?"

"No--_if_ you gave the alarm, that is. But I don't believe you did."

"In other words you think that I am guilty?"

"Upon my word, Walker, it looks very much like it."

"Then why not hand me over to the police?"

The stockbroker moved uneasily and wiped his damp, red face. "Your
mother is an old friend of mine," he said hesitatingly; "I think of
her."

"That is very good of you," said the ungrateful George; "but I would
rather you believed in my innocence. I have no wish to hide myself
behind any woman's petticoats."

"Not even behind Maud's?"

"I don't know what you are talking about," said George stolidly,
determined to hold his peace about the lady even to her uncle. "Miss
Ellis and I are very good friends, nothing more."

"You know that she loves you. I should never have asked a mere clerk
from my office here, but that she loved you. I disapproved of her
infatuation, but I gave in to her since I am your mother's friend."

"You are slightly incoherent, sir, and entirely wrong. Miss Ellis and
I are friends; nothing more. And to return to the subject of the
burglary, may I remind you that the police have discovered that the
safe was not broken into, but that the door was opened with a key? The
key, I notice, is still on your watch-chain. How then could I have
opened the safe?"

"Perhaps you think that I stole the jewels myself?" sneered Tait
coolly. "I may remind you, in my turn, that Maud also has a key."

George sprang to his feet and clenched his hand. "You dare to
insinuate that I got it from Miss Ellis, and----"

The door opened as he spoke, and Tait, who was facing it, glanced over
the young man's shoulder. "Here is Maud for herself. Perhaps she will
explain."

It was indeed Miss Ellis, looking very white and pinched. Her eyes
were red-rimmed, her mouth was drooping, and she confessed to a
headache, which was not to be wondered at, seeing what she had gone
through.

"That chloroform is horrible stuff," complained Maud, sinking into a
chair.

"Have you seen the inspector?" said Tait, giving his niece very little
sympathy for her wan looks.

"Yes; I have told him all I know."

"Perhaps you will repeat what you have told him to your uncle, Miss
Ellis," remarked Walker, still standing very stiff and very proudly.
"He has accused me of getting the key from you to rob the strong-room,
and swears that I have buried the jewels somewhere in the garden."

"That is absurd," said Maud, looking at her uncle, while a red spot of
colour burned on either pale cheek. "I don't believe that you have
anything to do with the matter."

"Then what did you mean by addressing Walker as you did, when you
revived in the gallery?" demanded Mr. Tait sharply.

"I simply said, 'Oh, George, you!'" said the girl quietly; "and that
because I felt glad he was there to help me."

"He didn't help you in the least," remarked Tait grimly.

"He would have had I asked him," she retorted. "Would you not, Mr.
Walker?"

"Certainly."

"It's not George this time, then," muttered the stockbroker. "Well,
Maud, perhaps you will tell me what you were doing in the gallery."

Maud's eyes sought those of the man she loved, but she replied without
hesitation. "I'll tell you what I did not tell the police, uncle. The
inspector believes that I came down because I heard a noise."

"Like Walker here."

"He did not come down for that reason."

Tait looked at George with triumph in his eye. "I thought not," he
said.

"If he said that he did, he said so to shield me," pursued Miss Ellis,
and looked gratefully at the confused young man.

"What do you mean by that, Maud?" asked Tait tartly.

"I made an appointment with George in the picture-gallery at three in
the morning, as I wished to help him to marry Lesbia Hale."

"Why, I thought you loved Walker yourself!" cried the astonished
stockbroker.

"So I did--so I do," breathed Miss Ellis, drooping her sandy head.
"But, to my mind, love means sacrifice. George--for I have the right
to call him so now--George would not have been happy with me, as he
loved Lesbia Hale, so I arranged to give him up to her, and to make
things right with her father. For that reason I waited for him in the
gallery. There I was suddenly pounced upon, and a handkerchief soaked
in chloroform was clapped over my mouth. I daresay the person who
did it, stole the key from the chain round my neck, and opened the
strong-room to steal the jewels. But I knew nothing from the moment I
became insensible until I revived to find you all standing round me.
That is the story I have told the inspector, save that I kept quiet my
appointment with George."

"Then you believe him to be innocent," said the stockbroker,
confounded by the frankness of this story.

Maud arose indignantly. "The man I love can never be guilty," she
cried.

George blushed a rosy red. He saw that he had not behaved over well to
this brave girl, who had so cleverly exonerated him, although he
really had no reason to accuse himself of duplicity towards her. But
in a confused way he felt that she was heaping coals of fire on his
head, and was more drawn to her than he had ever been before. Here,
indeed, was a friend worth having. With Lesbia as his wife and Maud as
his friend, life would indeed be joyous.

In his innocence it never struck the young man that no male can drive,
either in double harness or in tandem fashion, two women who both love
him. He thought that Maud, having discovered that the true meaning of
love was sacrifice, behaved thus because of her newly-acquired
knowledge. "Thank you, Miss Ellis," he said simply, but his looks
implied volumes more.

Tait was displeased. He had no grudge against George, whom he liked
well enough; but he did not like his solution of the mystery to be
thus upset.

"You mean well, Maud," he said at length, "and you have shielded
Walker very cleverly. All the same, I cannot accept your explanation."

Miss Ellis rose in alarm. "Uncle, do you mean that you will have Mr.
Walker arrested when you know that he is innocent?"

"For his mother's sake I shall not do that," said the elder man; "but
if Mr. Walker will give back the jewels I will not dismiss him from my
office."

"I have no jewels to give," cried George recklessly, and his face
flushed a deep red. "As to remaining in your office, do you think that
I would continue to serve a man who suspects me of such a wicked
crime? I shall never return to your office, Mr. Tait, nor shall I
re-enter your house until my innocence is made clear. If the police
arrest me----"

"They will not do that," interrupted Maud quickly; "I promise you.
There is no evidence against you. I don't know who chloroformed me,
but you are innocent, I swear. My uncle will take no steps."

"For Mrs. Walker's sake," interpolated the stockbroker unctuously.

"So you can leave this house when you will," continued Maud,
"knowing--" she seized his hand--"that I at least, believe you
guiltless."

"Thank you!" said George, and kissed her hand. "Mr. Tait, if you and
the police want me you know where to find me." And he stalked out of
the room with his head in the air. Maud Ellis looked after him with
hungry looks, and heaved a deep sigh when the door closed.

Within the hour George had asked permission of the inspector to leave
the house, and obtained it. Whatever the guests believed, the police
apparently--thanks to Maud's report--accepted him as a wholly
guiltless person. He gave his address to the officer, so that he might
be called as a witness in the event of the thieves being brought to
book, and then shook the dust of that splendid Henley mansion from his
feet.

He was glad to get away, for several people looked at him askance, and
evidently there was an uneasy feeling that he knew more than he would
confess. But no one hinted openly that he was concerned in the
robbery. It was merely thought that his presence in the gallery
required a more reasonable explanation than the weak one of having
heard a noise. Still, George could not help feeling that he was
suspected by the guests and servants, and it was gall and wormwood to
the proud young man that this should be the case.

Walker carried his portmanteau down to the river, as he had rowed up
to Henley from Medmenham. It was now late in the afternoon, and with a
heavy heart he prepared to launch his boat and return.

The news that he had to take to his mother was unwelcome, and he
wondered how she would receive the information that he had left Tait's
office. Mrs. Walker's circumstances were very desperate, as her income
was so small, and she greatly depended upon her son's earnings. The
present phase of things would be worse than ever, and George winced as
he contemplated the coming interview.

Just as he was about to step into the boat, Mr. Hale, cigar in mouth,
sauntered up and addressed him. Walker was in no mood for
conversation, and would have pushed off with a curt nod, but that the
elder man uttered a sentence which made him pause indignantly. "So
Tait didn't have you arrested, Walker," said Mr. Hale cruelly.

George turned pale, and looked straight at the speaker. "If you were
not Lesbia's father," he said quietly, "I should fling you into the
river for those words."

"I quite believe you would and could," rejoined Hale, looking
admiringly at the splendid figure of the young man; "but that will not
make you any the more innocent."

"If I were guilty--if Mr. Tait believed me to be guilty, I should have
been arrested long since," said Walker with an effort, "the mere fact
that I am permitted to leave the house shows that I am considered
guiltless."

"Tait was always absurdly good-natured," said Hale coolly, again
risking a plunge into the river.

George looked at him again. "You believe that I stole those jewels?"
he asked.

"Of course I do. You made a lame excuse for being in the gallery at
night, and evidently went out after two pretended thieves so as to
hide your plunder. I didn't believe you had it in you. See what love
will do."

"Love?"

"Yes. You are poor; you want to marry Lesbia, and so tried the short
cut to wealth. Presently, when things have blown over, you will dig up
the jewels and sell them to some fence. Then you will come to me with
a cock-and-bull story about a legacy being left to you--perhaps you
will inherit that fifty thousand pounds which is waiting for your
mother's sister. Of course, knowing the source of your legacy I shall
say no."

"You have said no already," replied Walker quietly, although he longed
to knock this sneering man of the world into the water. "Don't say any
more, sir, else I may forget that you are Lesbia's father." And George
took up his oars and pushed off into midstream.

Hale lingered on the bank, still scoffing. "I shall tell Lesbia
everything, Walker," called out Mr. Hale, clearly and slowly. "She
will never marry you now, my dear burglar."

The unhappy lover pulled swiftly down stream with those last words
ringing in his ears. Could he indeed trust Lesbia to continue her
engagement in the face of his being accused of a sordid crime? He knew
that she loved him as dearly as he loved her, and would go through
fire and water to prove that love. All the same, there was something
so mean and contemptible about stealing from a friend's house, that
even her great love might not be proof against her father's story.
George clenched his teeth and pulled for dear life in order to control
his emotion. He could do nothing in the face of all that had taken
place, save wait patiently. Trusting in Tait's friendship for his
mother and in Maud's loyalty, he knew that he would not be disgraced
openly: but the idea that Lesbia might believe him guilty was
desperately hard to bear. Still, she loved him, and he trusted in her
love. That was all he could do, for a glance around showed him that he
was helpless amidst the black circumstances which had so suddenly
environed him.

Mrs. Walker heard a bald, blunt tale from George and said very little
in reply. Not even when he declared that he had thrown up his
situation did she rebuke him. On the contrary she rather applauded.

"As my son," said the stern, cold woman, "you could do nothing else."

"Then you do not believe that I am guilty?"

Mrs. Walker looked at him scornfully. "Our relations as mother and son
have never been sentimental," she said quietly, "but you should know
me better than to ask me that."

"Thank you, mother," said George simply, for such a speech meant much
from the Spartan woman, who was usually so reticent.

"I want no thanks for being just," she remarked coldly. "What you have
to do is to clear your name by searching for these thieves."

"How am I to do that?"

"I leave it to your own cleverness. Meanwhile I shall see Mr. Jabez,
and get him to advance us sufficient to live on until your name is
cleared and you have got another situation. As to this girl, Lesbia,
give her up."

"Never! Never! Never!" said George. His mother looked at him coldly
and disapprovingly, and left him in silence.

But matters turned out as she wished. Within three days a tearful note
came from a distraught girl to her anxious lover--a note of a few
words--"I believe you to be innocent but we can never marry, and we
must never meet again," said the note, and it was signed stiffly
"Lesbia Hale."




CHAPTER IX
TWO GIRLS


If the course of true love did not run smoothly with George, the girl
he loved found it speeding roughly also.

Lesbia was as anxious to see her lover as he was to meet her; but
parental displeasure and parental authority stood like a wall between
this new Pyramus and Thisbe--a wall which could by no means be
overleaped.

As Tim had informed George, his master had engaged Mrs. Petty as a
housekeeper, and so the domestic arrangements of Rose Cottage were
temporarily removed from the hands of Lesbia. Also, in conjunction
with The Shadow, Mrs. Petty acted both as a spy and a gaoler. It was
infamous, as Lesbia felt, that she should be watched in this fashion;
but as she had no money and no friends and no place whither she could
go, there was nothing left for it but to wait, until such time as Mr.
Hale became more reasonable.

Mrs. Petty was a stout, plethoric woman, with an aggressive manner and
a loud, common voice, who probably had been a Margate lodging-house
keeper of the worst description. She was a born bully, and within ten
minutes of her entry into the house Tim learned to loathe her with all
the fervour of an Irishman, impatient of restraint in any form.

Mrs. Petty tried similar tactics and treatment on Lesbia, but was met
so firmly, and put in her place so quietly, that--being a coward at
heart, as all bullies are--she left the girl as severely alone as was
possible, while executing Mr. Hale's instructions. These were to keep
a strict eye on his daughter, and to prevent the intrusion of George
Walker. Mrs. Petty, after several rebuffs, contented herself by
watching from afar, and managed by always being on the spot when
Lesbia least expected her, to fulfil her contemptible duty. For the
rest of the time she worried Tim and looked after the domestic economy
of the cottage.

The Shadow, as became his nickname, was a less aggressive personage.
He was really called John Canning, and formerly had acted as valet to
Captain Sargent. But that gentleman, being anxious to marry Lesbia
whom he greatly admired, and hating George as a too-handsome and
over-young rival, had suggested to his friend Hale that Canning should
act as an inoffensive dragon to keep away the young man. Hale quite
approved of this, as Canning could guard the garden, while Mrs. Petty
kept watch on the girl in the house itself. Canning, therefore, glided
unostentatiously into his position and, although Lesbia disliked the
creature because he carefully kept George away, she had not the same
hatred for him that she cherished for Mrs. Petty. At his worst Canning
was a harmless individual, condemned to do the dirty work of others,
because he had not sufficient brains to earn an honest wage in an
honest manner.

His nickname had been given him because of his marvellously thin
looks, and these were certainly remarkably noticeable. At one time, as
he confessed to Lesbia, he had exhibited himself in a travelling
caravan as The Living Skeleton, but having slightly increased in
weight he had been discharged. What his leanness must have been
originally it is hard to say, as even now, he was but skin and bone
and, being tall, looked like a line--that is, he was length without
breadth. His hands resembled a bird's claws, his legs were like
sticks, and his skull would have served for a death's head, so devoid
was it of flesh. With his lean, clean-shaven face, with his straight,
jet-black hair, which he wore rather long, and with his skinny,
lengthy, narrow figure encased in shabby broad-cloth, he looked
positively uncanny, and rude boys made remarks about him when he
walked abroad. He glided about like a shadow, haunted shady corners
like a shadow, and spoke in a whisper as a shadow should. The name
fitted him exactly, and he looked a creature of the night, quite out
of place in the cheerful sunshine.

Lesbia did not approve of him at first, for obvious reasons, and even
disliked him actively when she found how he dogged her footsteps. But
it so happened that the gods chose to turn her heart to a friendless
man, and the consequences of the change were more far-reaching than
she guessed at the moment.

The days went by very heavily, since her heart was with George and she
could not see him. Certainly she contrived through the ever-faithful
Tim to get a note transmitted to him--the same that George read on the
river. And under cover of Tim's name he sent an answer which assured
her that he was still faithful and still loving and ever hopeful of
better days. Lesbia carried about that letter in her bosom day and
night and read it when she felt particularly down-hearted, which
happened not infrequently. She also waited and she also hoped. Then an
event occurred, which in after-time showed how mysteriously things
work out to their hidden ends.

The Shadow fell ill in spite of the warm summer weather. Being of a
sickly constitution, he unexpectedly caught influenza, and was forced
to go to bed in the little room near Tim's sanctum. Hale, who had a
horror of sickness, at once decided to turn him out; but Sargent, also
afraid, refused to permit the valet to return to his Cookham house.
There appeared to be no refuge for the miserable man but the hospital
or the workhouse, until Lesbia suddenly asserted herself and insisted
upon nursing him back to health. Mr. Hale objected, but his daughter,
for the first time in her life remained firm and, having already
sufficient troubles on his hand without creating more, he yielded in
the end. Moreover, he thought that acting as a sick-nurse would give
Lesbia something to do and take her thoughts away from George. So she
was permitted to nurse Canning, while Mr. Hale betook himself to
Tait's sumptuous mansion at Henley.

Mrs. Petty declined to look after the sick man, so Lesbia took full
charge of the case, and was assisted by Tim. Not that Tim approved of
The Shadow: but, being tender-hearted, he considered him a poor
creature, and so acted the part of the Good Samaritan.

Canning grew delirious and seemed in danger of passing away: but
Lesbia set herself to struggle with death, and in the end she
conquered.

When the man was sane again and rapidly regaining his strength, Tim
told him all that the young mistress had done. It was then that the
Irishman saw two big tears roll down the thin cheeks of the spy.

When Lesbia entered to see how he was, he spoke weakly but to the
point. "I have been kicked about all my life," said The Shadow
brokenly, "and no one has ever said a kind word to me. Mr. Hale and
Captain Sargent have treated me worse than a dog, and but for you,
Miss Lesbia, I should have been thrown out to die in the street. You
hate me because I was set to watch you----"

"I don't hate you now, Canning," she interposed, hastily. "After all,
you only performed the duty you were set to do by my father."

"And by Captain Sargent," whispered The Shadow. "Don't forget Captain
Sargent. I never shall," and his weak hand clenched under the
coverlet. "But you have acted like an angel, Miss Lesbia, and some day
I may be able to repay you for what you have done."

"I only did my duty," said the girl, tucking him in.

"You are the first woman or man who has ever done duty by me in this
world," said Canning, the tears rolling down his face. "I know what I
know, and some day you may want my help. You shall have it. Yes! you
shall have it at whatever cost."

"What do you know?" she asked wonderingly.

"Never mind." He turned his face to the wall. "When the time comes,
call upon me, and I will help you."

Nothing more was said at the moment, as the man was not sufficiently
recovered to talk much. Lesbia thought occasionally of what he had
said, but could not entirely understand his meaning, unless it was
that he would shut his eyes to the coming of George, should that young
man choose to risk a visit. But the days went by and George did not
come, for, as Canning was sick, Mrs. Petty kept a very strict watch on
the girl.

Gradually the words of the sick man were forgotten by Lesbia and, when
he went away entirely recovered, she forgot him, having more important
matters to think about.

It was shortly after Canning's departure that Hale returned from
Henley with a story which made Lesbia write--and write willingly--the
letter of dismissal, which had broken Walker's heart. After she sent
it away her father patted her shoulder, and spoke kindly to her.

"You are now acting as a sensible girl," he said, with chill
politeness; "and there is no longer any need for Mrs. Petty to remain.
I know that you do not like her, so I shall send her away this
evening. Canning has also gone and will not return. Things can revert
to their original course, and you can manage the house along with Tim.
But remember, Lesbia, that if your heart softens towards this scamp, I
shall recall both The Shadow and Mrs. Petty to watch over you."

Lesbia, with a white face and set lips, looked straight at her father.
"I will neither write to George again, nor will I see him," she said,
with a stifled sob. "But whatever you say about his guilt, remember
that I do not believe it. He is innocent."

"Then why not stick by him?" asked her father cruelly.

"You know well enough why I do not: why I cannot. George and I are now
entire strangers, and must remain so until the mystery of this
burglary is cleared up."

"It will never be cleared up, because there is nothing to clear up,"
said her father calmly. "George stole those jewels of Tait's for your
sake, and it is only Tait's friendship for his mother and Maud's kind
heart that prevented Walker being arrested and condemned as a thief."

Lesbia's lip curled. "I mistrust Miss Ellis's kind heart," said she.

Hale shrugged his thin shoulders. "You can do what you like about
that," he remarked carelessly, "but remember that she holds George in
the hollow of her hand. All you have to do is to forget him and marry
Sargent."

"No!" said Lesbia positively. "I shall never see George again, since
circumstances are too strong for him and for me. But I will never
marry Captain Sargent. Be sure of that."

"He loves you, and----"

"I don't love him. Say no more, father. What I say, I stand by."

"You said much before which you have not held by," retorted Hale, his
temper rising; "and circumstances may prove too much for you. However,
Sargent can wait, and so can I. Meanwhile, since you have dismissed
this young fool, you are free to come and go as you desire."

"One moment," said Lesbia, as her father turned on his heel, "what
about that amethyst cross?"

Hale wheeled round with a colour in his parchment cheeks, and a
suspicious look in his cold, grey eyes. "What do you mean?"

"You declared that if George recovered the cross, he could marry me."

"I hold to that, since I am not a man to go back on my word."

"But how can I marry George when you say that you can prove he is
guilty of this burglary?"

"Maud Ellis can prove it, not I," returned Mr. Hale. He paused and bit
his lip hard. "I believe in the face of Walker's new escapade that he
knows who took that cross. His former behaviour may have been a sham,
as was his acting in the gallery. Let him bring me the cross, and
perhaps after all he may be able to marry you,"

"I shall never marry him until his character is cleared," said Lesbia
firmly.

Hale shrugged his shoulders again. "You will find it difficult to
clear him, my dear," he sneered, and went away.

Mr. Hale would have spoken rightly in connection with a less
determined girl. But Lesbia, for all her fragile looks, was very
determined and also very much in love with George Walker. Appearances
were against him, and, judging by circumstantial evidence, he
certainly was guilty. But Lesbia could not bring herself to believe
that the man she loved had sunk to being a common thief. Now that she
was free to leave the cottage and wander whither she would, it was an
easy matter to seek out George at Medmenham, and ask direct questions.

But this Lesbia did not do, because her father had detailed fully all
that Walker had said and all that he had done, so there was no more to
learn in that quarter. Moreover, Hale had stated with a sneer that
Maud Ellis was desperately in love with the young man, and Lesbia
recalled George's hesitation about speaking of his desire to leave
Tait's office. "There are other things to be considered," Walker had
said, and then had blushed. Now the girl knew intuitively that he
referred to Maud Ellis.

Lesbia's face grew flushed and angry as she thought of her rival. She
trusted George, who was her very own, but instinctively she knew the
wiles of women, and dreaded lest her letter of dismissal should throw
the young man into the arms of the stockbroker's niece. Thus it came
about that Lesbia's meditations led her, not to Mrs. Walker's cottage
at Medmenham, but to the splendid mansion at Henley, where Maud Ellis
was waiting for George to come to her.

Maud had learned from Mr. Hale that George had received his letter of
dismissal from Lesbia, and so waited to catch him on the recoil. He
would certainly come back to her who had so boldly stood by him when
he had been accused. But as the days went by George did not come, and
Maud's heart grew sick, for she was honestly in love.

Her uncle was absent in the City, still seeking for the lost jewels,
and the local police together with a couple of detectives from
Scotland Yard were doing their best to solve the mystery. But all
efforts were in vain. No trace had been found of the thieves, and the
jewels could not be recovered. Tait invited no more people to his
Henley mansion, and remained a great deal in London grumbling over his
loss. Maud would have gone up also, but that she waited vainly at home
in the hope that George would come to her for consolation.

One afternoon while she was thus waiting, and had arrayed herself in
her prettiest frock on the chance of a visit, the footman intimated
that a young lady wished to see her. She had no card, said the
footman, and had simply stated that her name was Miss Lesbia Hale.

Maud's eyes flashed when she heard the name of her rival, and she
ordered the man to lead the guest at once to the long drawing-room.
Miss Ellis was desperately anxious to see the face that had captured
the heart of George Walker. Before repairing to the drawing-room, she
altered a few things about her dress, for, being very much the woman,
she knew that she was about to meet a dangerous foe. A man would not
notice a dress overmuch, but a woman would, at the very first glance,
and Maud was determined that there should be no flaw in her armour, so
far as frocks and frills went.

Lesbia, very pale, but quite calm, waited impatiently for the
appearance of Miss Ellis. When that young lady sailed into the room
with outstretched hands and a beaming smile, Lesbia rose with a stony
face and a cold, distant manner. Maud's hands fell, when she saw that
she was being kept at a distance, and she became formal also. In her
heart she grew angry, when she saw Lesbia's beauty, for being very
sensible, she knew that her own looks were much inferior. A shade
passed over her face, but soon was replaced by a malicious smile. Maud
knew that, beauty or no beauty, she held the trump card and could win
the game at her leisure. Lesbia saw that smile.

"I know why you look like that," she said abruptly. Maud straightened
her neat figure, and raised her sandy eyebrows.

"What a very strange speech to make at our first meeting, Miss Hale!"
she said, coldly and superciliously.

"Ah," retorted Lesbia. "You see that I am not used to society."

"Is there any occasion to tell me that?" asked Maud, sweetly.

But Lesbia was too desperately in earnest to be daunted by such feline
talk. "There is no occasion to tell you many things," she said, "nor
is there need for beating about the bush. My father has told me
everything."

"About what may I ask?"

"About this burglary and about George."

"George?" Miss Ellis raised her eyebrows again. "George?" she
repeated.

"I have the right to call him so," rejoined Lesbia hotly. "I am
engaged to him, Miss Ellis."

"Was engaged, I understand."

"Yes." Lesbia suddenly looked fatigued and would have dearly liked to
sit down, but pride prevented her. Maud saw this and scratched again.

"Won't you sit down?"

"No, thank you!" replied Lesbia, stiffening. "I am only here for a few
minutes, and can say all that I have to say in that time."

Miss Ellis flicked a scented handkerchief across her lips to hide a
smile, and looked searchingly at her visitor's white face. "I really
don't know why you talk to me like this."

"Oh, yes you do. In the same way I knew why you smiled when you
entered. You think that you can win the game. But you shan't!"

"What game?"

"The game we play for George. My father has told me all. I love George
and you love him also."

"Your father seems to be very well-informed," sneered Maud, flushing.

"He usually is," Lesbia assured her, with great coolness. "It was only
when my father told me about this burglary, that I learned you loved
George."

"I do love him!" cried Maud defiantly, "but I don't see that it
matters to you--now."

"It matters a great deal," said Lesbia coldly. "I am only an
unsophisticated girl, Miss Ellis, but I don't intend to give up the
man I love, without a struggle."

"I understand that you have given him up."

"For the time being, until I can force you to prove his innocence."

"Force me!" Miss Ellis raised her eyebrows for the third time, but her
face grew angry, for she did not like this very straight speaking.
"What have I to do with the matter? I believe that George is innocent
myself, and told my uncle so. Indeed, had I not stood up for George,
he would now be in gaol."

Lesbia smiled contemptuously. "It's all part of the game," she
retorted. "I am a woman, not a man, Miss Hale, and I can see very
plainly how George walked into the trap you set for him."

"I set no trap. And if George says----"

"George says nothing. I have not seen him for a long time. But my
father told me how George was in the gallery and you also."

"Did he tell you that George came to meet me?" asked Maud maliciously.

"No, nor do I believe you."

"Then he did."

"It is a lie," said Lesbia, impolitely but very firmly. "I don't
believe it."

"Ask George himself," cried Maud. "He will tell you that we had a
meeting at three in the morning and----"

Lesbia, who was looking at her, gave an ironical laugh. "Oh, I believe
you now," she said slowly, "I can see the truth in your eyes. Yes,
George did meet you by appointment. Why, I don't know----"

"Because he loved me."

"He never loved you!" cried Lesbia furiously, and looked so angry that
Maud hastily stepped back a pace, thinking she would be struck. "He
loves me and me only. But you inveigled him into the gallery, into a
trap, and made use of this burglary to force him to be your husband."

"I told my uncle that George was innocent."

"Yes, because it suited your book to do so. But you told my father,
and he passed the message on to me, that if I did not dismiss George,
you would prove his guilt."

Maud tore her handkerchief to ribbons. "And I can too," she said,
between her teeth. "You are quite right. To the world I should say
nothing; but to you I can say what I please. We love the same man. I
want him, and I am going to get him. I _did_ trap George into a
meeting, but the burglary was unforeseen. I can make use of it, which,
let me remind you, Miss Hale, I have not done yet. Remember I was
chloroformed, and the key was taken from my neck to open the safe.
What would be easier than for me to declare that George Walker asked
me to meet him in the gallery and rendered me insensible and stole the
jewels, after taking the key, and buried them in the garden, coming
back to tell falsehoods? If I speak----"

"You won't speak."

"I shall speak, rather than let George marry you," flashed out Maud.

Lesbia sneered. "You remind me of the motto of the French Revolution,"
she said. "'Be my brother or I'll kill you,' so George is to marry
you----"

"Or go to gaol. Exactly!"

"Thank you!" Lesbia moved swiftly to the door. "Now that I know your
intentions I can go."

"What will you do?" Maud followed, aghast at this abrupt departure.

"Prove George's innocence, and marry him."

"Try!" said Maud, between her teeth, "try and fail."




CHAPTER X
THE _DEUS EX MACHINA_


If Lesbia had been a trifle more versed in the ways of the wicked
world, she would have remained longer in conversation with Maud, if
only to learn about that lady's plans. Maud declared that unless
George became her husband she would have him put into gaol for the
burglary. But it was difficult to know how she intended to proceed. Of
course, she could declare that Walker had chloroformed her and had
stolen the key of the strong-room to steal the jewels, but she had no
one to prove the truth of her story, plausible as it was, in the face
of Walker's known presence in the picture-gallery. It was George's
word against Maud's and, therefore, the law would have no easy matter
to prove the young man's supposed guilt.

But Lesbia was so hot with indignation at the discovery of Maud's mean
plot that she ended the interview abruptly, and walked quickly away
trying to stifle her rage. For George's sake it was necessary that she
should keep a clear head, and it was necessary also that she should
learn the truth of this conspiracy--as she verily believed it to be.

Come what might, Lesbia decided in her own mind that George should
marry her. But to bring this about she had not only to clear his
character, but to find the amethyst cross and restore it to her
father. But where the cross might be she could not guess. The mystery
of the robbery and of George's presence in the cottage on that fatal
night had never been cleared up.

Walking swiftly down to the river Lesbia thought over these things,
and thought still more when she entered Tim's boat. The little man had
rowed her up to Henley at her request, and took her back the same way.
She had detailed her reasons for visiting Miss Ellis, but had received
scanty comfort from Tim. He was disposed to take a gloomy view of the
matter.

"It's the crass, bad luck to it!" groaned Tim, when she told him how
badly she had fared. "Sure there's nivir bin a moment's pace sinse it
was lost."

"That is very true," rejoined Lesbia, steering the boat towards the
lock, and reviewing in her own mind the untoward circumstances which
had disturbed her life since the proposal of George in the garden.
From the time when the cross had been given to him, there had been
nothing but incessant trouble. Her father had raged, her lover had
been assaulted, her liberty had been curtailed, and George had lost
his situation through being accused of a sordid crime. And to crown
all, another woman, of whose existence she had scarcely heard, had
stepped in to claim Walker as her future husband.

"It's very true," sighed Lesbia dolefully, "the cross has brought
nothing but trouble. If we could get it back again things might mend.
But the question is, how to recover it?"

Tim bent to his oars, and shook his head with another groan. "Let it
bide, Miss, let it bide. Sure we don't want more kick-ups. Me mother,
rist her sowl, towld me that the crass wud bring lashins av worry whin
ye guv it off av yer hand. An' it's truth she spoke, me dear."

"Do you know where she got the cross, Tim?"

"Sure, Miss, an' didn't she tell ye whin she died? 'Twas yer mother's.
I know no more nor that, me dear, 'twas your mother's. As for Masther
Garge, cudn't ye forgit him, Miss?"

"No!" cried Lesbia, indignantly. "I shall love George as long as I
live. I can no more forget him than he can forget me. Would you have
me marry Captain Sargent?"

"Sure, an' I wudn't. He's a proud baste, an' if ye married him, me
dear, he'd be afther bringing me to the gallows, for his treatmint av
ye, Miss Lesbia."

"Then don't let us talk any more about the matter," cried Lesbia,
impetuously. "I shall keep my faith with George."

"Wud ye like to see him, Miss?"

"No," said the girl promptly. "I told him in my letter that we must
never meet again. Nor will we until this mystery of the burglary is
cleared up. I intend to clear it up."

"But how, Miss? Ye've no wan to help ye."

Lesbia reflected. "There's The Shadow," she said quietly.

"An' what wud that poor cratur be afther doing, Miss?"

"I don't know. But he offered to help me, so I shall put his
professions of gratitude to the test. Tim, to-night you must go down
to Cookham and bring him back with you."

"Augh!" groaned Tim, annoyed that anyone but himself should do
anything for his darling. "Sure he's out av the house, so let him
bide, me dear."

"If you don't go to Cookham, I will," said Lesbia firmly.

"An' have trouble wid that baste av a Captain? Me dear, I'll go."

And Tim was as good as his word. Lesbia reached the cottage to find
that her father had left a note saying he had gone to London for a few
days. Hale was always stealing off on mysterious errands, possibly
connected with his equally mysterious business.

Of late no odd characters had been coming to the cottage, but Hale was
absent much more frequently. On this occasion his absence was welcome,
as it gave Lesbia a chance of arranging her plans with Canning. What
these might be she had, as yet, no very clear idea. All she intended
to do was to explain the situation and ask The Shadow what was best to
be done. When she received his opinion, she could then take a step
forward into the veiling mists which surrounded her.

While Tim rowed down to Cookham, which he did after landing Lesbia at
the bottom of the garden, the girl ran into the cottage. She found
that she had it all to herself as, true to his promise, Mr. Hale had
dismissed Mrs. Petty. That good lady, liking the easy place, had
retired in high dudgeon, and would have shown fight but that Hale
quelled her with a glance of his cold, grey eye.

Hale, indeed, possessed a great power--perhaps a hypnotic power--over
those who came to the cottage. Had not Canning fallen sick, and thus
had been removed from his influence, it is very questionable if he
would have offered his services to Lesbia. However, he had done so,
and the girl was about to accept them gratefully.

Lesbia passed the time in dressing herself for dinner, and in
partaking of it. It was a homely meal, consisting of cold meat and
salad, bread and cheese and a glass of prime claret. Afterwards
Lesbia made herself a cup of black coffee, and sat down in the tiny
drawing-room with a book, pending the arrival of The Shadow. But her
thoughts wandered from the printed page to George, and more than ever
she longed for his coming. It had cost her much to write the letter of
dismissal, but in the face of Maud's threat, as conveyed to her by
Hale, she could do nothing else. And the worst of it was that she had
not been permitted to assign a cause for what George must regard as
her heartless behaviour.

However, and very luckily, she had scanty time for sad reflections,
for shortly she heard the hearty voice of Tim, as he entered the house
by the back door, and later the sibilant whisper of The Shadow.

In a few minutes Canning presented himself, looking more lean and more
dismal than ever in his customary suit of black. But his haggard face
was lighted up with an eager smile. The mere fact that Lesbia had
decided to avail herself of his services made him as gay as such a sad
personage well could be. Canning was desperately anxious to repay the
kindness he had received.

"I am glad to see you," said Lesbia cordially. "You lost no time."

"No, Miss," whispered the grim man, who stood with long, hanging arms
at the door. "Captain Sargent went to London to-day with your father,
and I came back with Tim at once. I am so glad you want me to help
you, Miss."

"I need your help very badly," sighed Lesbia, passing her hand across
her brow. "Will you not sit down, Canning."

"In your presence, Miss? Please excuse me."

"But you are yet weak after your illness. Sit down. I want you to."

Thus urged, The Shadow sank softly on to the extreme edge of a
convenient chair placed near the door. Here he fixed his sad eyes on
the beautiful vision at the window, and adored in silence.

Lesbia turned matters over in her mind. She knew that she would have
to speak very plainly, and had a natural reluctance to doing so, since
Canning was a servant and a stranger.

Still, he was the sole person who could help her, as now that George
was out of her life, temporarily, at all events, she felt very lonely.
Her father neither gave her affection, nor desired any, and certainly
would not put out a hand to save George, much less clear his
character. Why should he, when he wanted Walker out of the way so that
his daughter could marry Sargent?

Lesbia thought of these things with her eyes on the floor, and finally
determined to confess everything, as her plight and that of George was
too desperate to permit of over-nice feelings.

With some colour, therefore, she related the whole story from the time
that Walker had proposed to the result of her visit to Maud.

"I was forced to dismiss Mr. Walker," she said in addition, "because
my father came back to tell me that Miss Ellis had threatened to have
Mr. Walker arrested. I saw Miss Ellis also, as I have told you, and
she declares that she can prove Mr. Walker's guilt, and will do so
unless he marries her."

Canning, with his sad eyes fixed upon her, heard the whole tale
without comment. At the end he nodded. "What do you wish me to do,
Miss?"

"I want you to learn who committed this burglary at Mr. Tait's house,
so that Mr. Walker can be cleared."

"But how can I do that, Miss, when I am servant to Captain Sargent? I
have my duties to consider."

"I know that," Lesbia faltered, and became downcast, "and then you
have no experience in looking into these things. I am sorry you cannot
help me."

"I did not say that, Miss."

"Then you will?"

The Shadow reflected, but did not take his eyes from her eager face.
"Yes!" he said at length. "I will help you."

"Oh, Canning, thank you so much. But how?"

"I can't say yet, Miss. In the first place I must leave Captain
Sargent."

Lesbia rose impulsively. "I don't want you to lose your situation."

"I had intended to give the Captain notice long ago," explained
Canning, rising in his turn. "What you say decides me. I shall go to
London, and in one way or another I may be able to learn who stole
those jewels."

"But why in London? They were stolen at Henley."

"Quite so, but the two thieves--if Mr. Walker is to be believed, there
were two--must have taken the jewels to dispose of them in London.
Leave everything to me, Miss. I was in an inquiry office once, and
know how to go about these matters. But," he hesitated, "it will
require money."

"Oh!" Lesbia uttered an ejaculation of dismay. "I have none."

"Can't your father give you some, Miss?"

Lesbia shook her head. "He wants me to marry Captain Sargent, and so
will not allow me to help Mr. Walker. No, my father will give me
nothing. What is to be done?"

"I don't know, Miss. But I have no money and I must have at least
fifty pounds to work on. I shall learn about the burglary first and
then will discover who knocked down Mr. Walker and stole the cross."
He paused. "Has Tim saved any money?"

"No, poor soul," sighed Lesbia, "my father never pays him any wages. I
am sure he would lend me the money if he had it. There is no one from
whom I can borrow, and----" here a sudden idea came to the girl, and
she flushed crimson with mingled hope and nervous fear. "Oh!" she
cried, "he might, he might."

"Who might, Miss?" asked the man sharply.

Lesbia took no notice. "Fifty pounds," she murmured. "It's a large sum
of money. Still he might. He----" she stopped again as she saw The
Shadow looking at her curiously. "Go away, Canning, and return
to-morrow evening. I hope to have the fifty pounds by then."

"Miss," Canning spoke slowly and impressively, "you have honoured me
with your confidence, and you will never regret doing so, as I am
entirely devoted to you. Add to that confidence by telling me from
whom you design to borrow this fifty pounds."

"There is no reason why you should not know," said Lesbia quickly, "I
am thinking of Lord Charvington."

"Mr. Hale's cousin."

"Oh, you know that," she cried, surprised.

"Yes," The Shadow laughed in his whispering, silent way, rather oddly.
"I know more than you give me credit for. You see," he added, slowly,
and with a downcast face, "I was at school with your father and
Charvington."

"You," Lesbia gasped in astonishment, and stared at the lean, dusky,
untidy figure before her. Then she remembered the scrupulous
refinement of the man, noted anew his excellent diction, and suddenly
saw in the weird face and figure evidences of good breeding.

"Mr. Canning," she said suddenly, and gave him a new position at once,
"you are a gentleman!"

"I _was_ a gentleman," he replied bitterly, and dropping his use of
the word "Miss." "Now I am Captain Sargent's valet and a wastrel. But
I am also your very devoted servant, Miss Hale," he bowed. "Let it
remain at that."

"But how did you come to----"

"Don't ask me--don't ask me," said Canning hurriedly. "Some day you
will learn how I came to occupy this position. Meanwhile, get the
fifty pounds from Charvington"--Lesbia noted that he spoke quite as an
equal of the nobleman--"and give it to me. I shall save your lover and
make your path straight for you."

"Can you do this, Mr. Canning?"

"Yes," he answered simply. "Good-night, Miss Hale. Please do not tell
Tim what I have mentioned, and say nothing to Charvington. To-morrow
night I shall come for the fifty, and the----" he paused, opened and
closed his hand several times, and then vanished with a sigh. He might
indeed have been a veritable shadow from the noiseless way in which he
disappeared.

Lesbia remained spell-bound. In a flash it occurred to her that she
should long ago have guessed that The Shadow was other than he
appeared to be. Many things which had puzzled her became plain, and
she wondered how a gentleman had sunk so low as to be a spy, and to
occupy the position of Sargent's valet. But she had too much delicacy
to question Canning, until such time as he chose of his own free will
to speak out.

Besides, she had much to think about in connection with her proposed
borrowing of fifty pounds from Lord Charvington. And unless she could
procure that sum, there would be no chance of George being saved from
the clutches of Maud Ellis.

The nobleman in question was a cousin of Mr. Hale's and had once or
twice been to the cottage. Indeed, Lesbia had reason to believe that
Lord Charvington allowed her father a certain sum every quarter,
although this seemed strange in the face of Hale's assertion that he
could give her two thousand a year if she married to his liking. There
was also the business in the City about which Lesbia knew nothing. Why
should a man in business accept an annuity?

It was all very strange, but then everything connected with Mr. Walter
Hale was strange, and now that Lesbia began to think, she began to
mistrust her father. Why did he keep his business secret? Why did he
accept an annuity, and then declare that he could give her a large
income? Why did he have such shady people at the cottage whom he
scarcely permitted her to see? Altogether Lesbia became aware that
there was something sinister about her father's position. She felt
like a watcher of a black cloud waiting for it to discharge lightning.
More than ever did she determine at least to have the mysteries of the
burglary and of the cross cleared up. The old time of peace had passed
away for the girl, and now she felt that she would have to go forth
and do battle.

With regard to Charvington, she knew him moderately well. He had
always been kind to her, and she had heard her father state that the
nobleman was her godfather. It seemed rather cool to apply to him for
a loan of fifty pounds, but Lesbia was not only desperate but also
very unsophisticated in worldly ways.

Almost without considering what she was about, she wrote a hurried
letter asking him to lend her fifty pounds for six months, and
promised to explain later why she desired the loan. She proposed in
her own mind to repay the money by selling the amethyst cross when
Canning should get it back for her, as she believed he would.

Of course the whole business was very naive and very childish, and a
girl more versed in worldly things would never have ventured to take
such a step. But Lesbia, just like a trusting child, asked for the
money, and posted her letter with a prayer that God would grant her
request.

Like a newly-fledged gambler, who wins every game through sheer
ignorance, Lesbia's desperately-played card turned up trumps in four
and twenty hours. Lord Charvington sent her a cheque by return of post
and invited her to come and explain matters to him personally. Lesbia
danced with joy.

"Now!" she said to herself. "George is safe. Thank God!"




CHAPTER XI
THE SEAMY SIDE


When Mr. Hale returned in three days from London, he was surprised to
find Lesbia extremely cheerful. She had every right to be, since she
had given the fifty-pound cheque to Canning, and he was now in town
looking into the matter of the Henley burglary. How Canning managed to
get away from his master so expeditiously, Lesbia could not tell, nor
did she inquire. It was quite enough for her to know that The Shadow
was searching into the case. To Lord Charvington she had sent a letter
thanking him for the money, and promising to come over and tell him
everything as soon as she could. These things made her hopeful and
bright in spite of her enforced severance from George, and she
managed, by looking towards a bright future, to possess her soul in
patience. But Hale was ignorant of what she was doing, and her
behaviour puzzled him.

"I thought you loved Walker," he said abruptly, and with suspicion.

"Of course I do," rejoined the girl cheerfully.

"It does not seem like it."

Lesbia shrugged her shoulders. "What is the use of crying over spilt
milk?" she asked. "My going about with a long face will not make
George's position any the more endurable. Some day when his character
has been cleared things will change."

"They will never change," said Mr. Hale coldly and severely. "Walker
has committed a sordid crime, and can never marry you."

"I don't believe that he is guilty," retorted Lesbia deliberately.
"And even if I grant for the sake of argument that he is, Miss Ellis
does not seem to think that his guilt is a bar to his marriage with
her."

"She's a love-sick fool."

"So am I."

"With this difference, that she can marry him and you can't. And
talking of Miss Ellis," went on Hale, becoming more stern than ever;
"I saw her in London and she told me that you had actually been to see
her."

"Why not?" asked Lesbia defiantly. "That is no crime."

"It is an impertinence to see her and to talk to her as you did. Why
did you go, Lesbia?"

"I wished to find out how she proposed to force George to become her
husband. I have learned that much. She intends to force him by telling
a lie."

"How do you know that what she says is a lie?" demanded Hale angrily.

"Because I read it in her eyes. A man would not have done so, but I am
a woman, and you can trust one woman to learn everything another woman
leaves unsaid, especially when a man is the stake between them."

"You should have more modesty," snapped her father uncomfortably.

Lesbia coloured. "I have behaved properly in every way," she said, in
a wounded voice; "and, as I love George, I had every right to learn
how this woman proposed to take him from me."

"Well, you know now that she can."

"She _thinks_ she can," said Lesbia, with emphasis; "that is
different."

"Nonsense! She can prove that he took the key from her neck and stole
the jewels," insisted Mr. Hale.

"It is her word against his," rejoined Lesbia drily; "and until Miss
Ellis proves the truth of her statement I believe in George's
innocence."

"Lesbia," cried her father, rising, "what has come to you? Formerly
you used to be quiet and well-behaved and did as you were told;
now----"

"Now," said the girl, getting on her feet and looking very straight at
her father; "now I am a woman, fighting for her happiness, and so will
do my best to hold my own against your tyranny."

Hale did not like the word, and said so. "I am your father and no
tyrant."

"You are both, and much more the latter than the former. I don't know
how it is," said Lesbia, pondering, "but I have an idea that you are
using me as a pawn in some game you are playing. Miss Ellis is in the
game also, and so is Captain Sargent. What the game may be I don't
know, and I decline to be pushed about a chess-board without knowing
why I move."

"You shall do as you are told," said Hale, livid with secret rage, but
not daring to show it openly, lest he should lose more of his already
waning influence.

"I shall do as I think fit," retorted the girl, her spirit up in arms.
"I don't care if you are fifty times my father, you shall not treat me
in this way any longer. If I can clear George's character, I shall see
him and marry him, and if you dare to bring in Mrs. Petty to spy on
me, I shall appeal to my godfather."

"Your godfather. And who may he be?"

"You told me once and I have never forgotten. Lord Charvington is
my----"

"I spoke at random," broke in Hale hastily. "He is not your godfather.
He is nothing more than my cousin and my friend."

"And your benefactor," said Lesbia, unable to resist the shaft. "And
being so, what will he say if he learns how unkindly you are
behaving?"

"Lesbia, you are mad!"

"No! For years I have been your puppet. Lately I have discovered that
I am a human being with a will of my own. So long as you leave me
alone I am content to behave as your daughter. But I decline to endure
tyranny, and I decline to be made use of in this mysterious game you
are playing. I am very glad you spoke to me this morning, father, as
it was time that we came to an understanding;" and Lesbia, with her
head up, marched out of the room. But she would have been scared had
she looked back and seen the expression on her father's face. It was
little less than devilish with rage and baffled cunning.

The worm had been obedient for so long that Hale had never expected
the turning and it came upon him with a shock. He could not afford to
let Lesbia appeal for protection to his noble relative, as he knew
that Lord Charvington was the kindest of men and would, undoubtedly,
interfere.

Of course in an ordinary case, Hale could have prevented such
interference between a father and daughter. But with Charvington, who
allowed him an annuity, it was different. If Hale did not behave well
to Lesbia, he felt very certain that Charvington would punish him by
taking away the quarterly sum. And in spite of his business in the
City, and his boast that he could give Lesbia two thousand a year,
Hale could not afford to lose so certain an income.

He therefore said no more to Lesbia on the subjects of George and Miss
Ellis and the burglary. Nor did he bring back The Shadow and Mrs.
Petty. Indeed, he could not bring back the former, as he had heard
from Sargent that the man had thrown up his situation, and had gone to
London.

This being the case, if Lesbia chose to see George it was impossible
to prevent her from having her own way. But Hale trusted that after
the letter of dismissal George would refuse to have anything to do
with the girl who had apparently thrown him over. Meanwhile he asked
Sargent to the cottage frequently, and advised him to prosecute his
wooing with all zeal. "If you don't secure the girl soon, you will
lose her," said Hale emphatically.

"I shall do so as soon as I can get a chance of seeing her alone,"
said Sargent, and strove to look the handsome, gallant lover.

It was after dinner that he spoke thus; and in the light which came
through the rosy shades of the candles he seemed wonderfully young,
and not at all bad-looking. As usual, he was perfectly dressed in
evening array, and yet had that ultra-fashionable air, which is such a
mark of inferior breeding. Captain Alfred Sargent looked like a
gentleman, and yet there was something lacking in manner to complete
the dress and pretensions. The rosy lights made him look less
colourless for the moment; but when in pursuance of his object he
strolled into the garden to meet Lesbia, he became quite wan, white
and worn-looking in the warm summer moonlight.

Miss Hale, in a simple white dress, looking sweet and girlish and
remarkably pretty, sat on the bench under the chestnut--in the
very place where George had made his memorable proposal. Disliking
Sargent as she did, and the more so since her father wished her to
marry him, she had early left the dinner-table to take refuge in this
love-haunted spot, and dream of George.

With the inconsequence of a woman, she rather resented the fact that
her lover had not replied to his letter of dismissal. She had not
thought that he would accept her decision so readily, and in her heart
she desired that he should come along to take her by storm. At times
she fancied, indeed, that he would suddenly appear to carry her off to
the nearest church, and so frequently sought the garden to afford him
an opportunity to play "Young Lochinvar."

There was also another reason. In the garden she hoped to meet The
Shadow. Lately, he had sent her a line--through Tim--stating that he
had discovered a clue to the robbery, and that he would come down to
tell her about it. Lesbia appointed the bottom of the garden as the
best place of meeting as her father rarely came there, and Canning
could easily row up to the landing-stage in the twilight. Every
evening she expected him, but as yet he had not appeared. Thus, she
was much annoyed when she beheld the slender form of the ex-captain in
the distance.

With a cigarette in his mouth, which he was languidly smoking, Sargent
strolled pensively down the path, and finally came to a halt before
the pretty figure on the garden-seat. Lesbia looked at him blankly,
and gave him no encouragement.

"A penny for your thoughts, Miss Hale," said the gallant captain,
forced by her silence to utter the first word.

"They are worth the Bank of England," replied Lesbia, resolving to
make the best of this bore, since to get rid of him by plain speaking
only meant unnecessary trouble with her father.

"In that case," said Sargent softly, and advancing nearer, "may I hope
they were of me?"

"If you are so very egotistic," said the girl bitingly, "you can think
so."

"You are cruel," muttered Sargent, somewhat disconcerted. He had not
expected so cutting a speech from so apparently timid a girl. "Why are
you so cruel to me, Lesbia--I may call you Lesbia, may I not?"

"No," said Lesbia coldly, "I see no reason why you should. As to being
cruel, Captain Sargent, I am not aware that I am."

"Surely," fenced the captain, "you are aware that I love you."

Lesbia laughed, and he was more disconcerted than ever. "I am aware
that my father wishes me to marry you; but he said nothing of love."

"He left it for me to say."

"Well, then, say it," remarked Miss Hale cruelly.

Sargent had met plenty of women and, with his good looks and
reputation for wealth, had usually scored an easy victory. But this
girl was so straightforward and so absolutely calm that he did not
know how to proceed. With an uneasy laugh he strove to fall into her
humour. "I love you," he stammered.

"Why?" asked Lesbia, still calm and exasperating.

"Look in the glass, and ask me why," he said ardently. "Can I behold
such loveliness and----"

"Captain Sargent," she broke in, smiling broadly, "you speak just like
a lover of the mid-Victorian epoch. I have read such speeches in
books, and I have always thought them exceedingly silly. Be more
original!"

Don Giovanni himself would have turned restive when advised to alter
his style of love-making, and Captain Sargent's waxen face grew red
with wrath. He was a bloodless person, so his anger was more like that
of a fretful child than that of a man.

Lesbia looked at him with a contempt which he found hard to bear. She
wanted a man to master her as all women do, and she saw that this
wooer could never dominate.

"You are very unkind, Lesbia," was all that Sargent could find to say.

"In that case, why not leave me and go back to my father?"

"Because I came from your father. He wants you to marry me. I want it
also. Come," he went on coaxingly, "be my wife, Lesbia, and you shall
have everything that the world can give you."

"I daresay. Everything but a husband."

"I shall be your husband."

"You!" she looked him up and down until he reddened to the roots of
his straw-coloured hair. "I would rather be excused."

"You won't marry me."

"Certainly not."

Sargent grew childish with rage. "If you do not there will be trouble.
I can ruin that man you love--that bounder Walker!"

"He is not a bounder; he is a man, and it will take a stronger man
than you, Captain Sargent, to harm him."

"But I _can_ harm him, and I shall do so," cried the captain, and his
delicate face took on an expression of cunning. Weak as he was, Lesbia
could see that wounded vanity might make him dangerous. "This
burglary----"

"What do you know about it?" demanded Lesbia imperiously.

"Walker is guilty. Miss Ellis says so."

"For her own ends she says so, and you act in the same way. She wants
to marry George, and you want to marry me. It won't do, Captain
Sargent. Things are not to be settled in that fashion. You had
better," she laughed, "marry Miss Ellis yourself."

"I love you; I want to marry you."

"I am sorry," said Lesbia sedately, "but I decline."

"For your father's sake," urged Sargent weakly, angry, and
looking more dangerously cunning than ever. "I can harm him also. I
can----" He saw from the startled expression on the girl's face that
he was saying too much, and abruptly turned on his heel. "I shall come
for my answer to-morrow, Lesbia," he called out, as he walked swiftly
towards the house.

The girl remained where she was, wondering what this new threat meant.
She could understand how he could support her father and Maud in
harming George, but it was difficult to understand how he could harm
Mr. Hale.

In a flash the old unrest came over Lesbia, and she again pondered her
father's unaccountable secrecy, and recalled his shady acquaintances.
Then again, there was Canning, who was a gentleman and had been to
school with Mr. Hale, only to degenerate into Sargent's valet. It was
all very singular and somewhat startling, and Lesbia puzzled over it
hopelessly, until she was aroused from a somewhat painful brown study
by a low whistle.

She looked up and around, to see a boat by the landing-stage, and in
the boat Mr. Canning, apparently more frail than ever. Sargent was
also shadowy, and it dawned upon Lesbia that the two might be related.

"Captain Sargent has just left me," she said, running down to the
landing-stage. "He wanted to marry me and I refused."

"You were quite right, Miss Hale. If you married Sargent, you would be
ruined for ever."

"He threatened to harm my father if I did not, and George also."

Mr. Canning threw back his head and laughed silently. "He can do his
best to harm Walker by supporting Miss Ellis in her lie, but it will
take a much stronger man than Alfred to----" here he became aware that
he had appeared unduly familiar with his late master's name.

"I thought so," said Lesbia, recalling how like the two men were in
looks and fragility; "you are related to Captain Sargent; you are his
brother."

"Yes," said Mr. Canning, looking very pale. "Since you have guessed so
cleverly I may as well admit it. But I shall not tell you my story
now. Later will be time enough. Meanwhile, say nothing to your father
about having guessed that Alfred is my brother. How did you----"

"Oh," said Lesbia smiling, "you are exactly alike. Both pale and
both slender, with the same cast of face and the same colour of hair,
and--oh, it's wonderful!--I believe you are twins."

Mr. Canning shirked this question. He came ashore and passed with
Lesbia under the chestnut tree, behind the trunk, in fact, so that
they might not be seen from the cottage windows.

"I have discovered the truth," he said, in his usual whisper, "but at
present you must not ask me how I came to learn it. But George Walker
is innocent. Mr. Tait had the jewels stolen so as to get the insurance
money."

Lesbia gasped with amazement. "Are you certain?" she demanded, and
when he nodded, asked another question. "How did you learn so
quickly?"

"That is a secret just now," said Canning equably. "Remember that I
warned you before, that you must not ask that question. It is
sufficient to say that I found out how Mr. Tait insured these jewels
for a large sum of money, and then employed two clever London thieves
to steal them. Tait will get the insurance money, and he will also
unset the jewels and sell them in India and America. Of course, the
thieves will have to be paid for the risk they took, though it was not
a great one, as Tait left the gallery doors open, and gave them the
key which he had on his watch-chain to open the safe. If Miss Ellis
had not come down; if Walker had not followed, there would have been
no scandal."

"Mr. Canning," said Lesbia, after a moment's thought, "did Miss Ellis
know that this robbery was about to take place? From all that I have
heard of her she is deep in her uncle's confidence."

"I cannot be sure if she is an accessory before the fact," replied
Canning, speaking in legal phraseology.

"But I can," cried the girl, leaping to a conclusion with the
intuitive certainty of a woman. "I see the whole scheme. Miss Ellis
knew that the jewels would be stolen somewhere about three o'clock in
the morning, and so appointed that hour to meet George, and implicate
him in the crime. It was a carefully arranged trap into which he
walked wholly unconsciously."

"But her reason?" asked Canning, somewhat perplexed.

Lesbia laughed. "You are a mere man, Mr. Canning, and cannot
understand. It takes a woman to fathom the duplicity of another woman.
Miss Ellis loved George, and as he would not marry her willingly, she
lured him into this trap, so as to--oh!" Lesbia broke off, clenching
her little fists and stamping with anger. "But she shall not! she
shall not! I shall see her and defy her. And you, Mr. Canning--you?"

"I am returning to London, to hide," said the man quietly; "but I can
come down here when it is necessary. I shall send you my address as
soon as I arrange where to conceal myself."

"But why should you conceal yourself?"

"That is too long a story to tell you at present. It is enough for
you to know that what I have discovered about Tait--what I have told
you--is dangerous to me. No, Miss Hale, do not ask me further
questions, for I dare not answer. I have jeopardised my liberty, and
perhaps my life, by what I have done for you."

"I do not understand," said Lesbia, somewhat scared.

"It is as well that you do not," said Canning, sombrely. "Bluebeard's
chamber is a dangerous room to look into. When it is necessary--if it
ever is--you shall know what I am concealing now. Meanwhile, I shall
go into hiding in London."

"What am I to do?"

"See Miss Ellis," rejoined The Shadow promptly. "Tell her what I have
discovered, and give my name as your authority--that is, say how
Captain Sargent's servant looked into the matter. You can suppress the
fact of my being a gentleman and Sargent's brother. Tell Miss Ellis
also that when the time comes I can prove that her uncle had the
jewels stolen so as to get the insurance money, in addition to the
money from the sale of the jewels in order to tide over a financial
crisis. Twenty thousand from the jewels and a like amount from
Lloyd's," ended Canning cynically, "will give Mr. Tait ample funds
with which to retrieve his position. He was in danger of bankruptcy,
but this crime, engineered by himself, has saved his credit."

"What wickedness!" murmured Lesbia, as Canning moved towards his boat.

"Oh, such doings are classed under the head of business by people like
Tait. But I must get away before my brother or your father sees me;"
and Canning loosened the painter, slipped into the boat, and took the
oars, not without an anxious glance at the cottage.

"Thank you for what you have done," cried Lesbia softly, remaining,
for obvious reasons, behind the tree-trunk.

"Not at all. I have only repaid my debt--that is, if such a debt can
ever be paid. Au revoir, Miss Hale!" and raising his shabby cap with
all the good breeding of a gentleman, Canning pulled away with an
easy, clean stroke, which could only have been learned at a public
school.




CHAPTER XII
A COUNTERPLOT


Captain Sargent was somewhat disheartened by Lesbia's steady
opposition to his wooing. He was not virile enough to take her heart
by storm, and his usual tactics did not seem to succeed with this
cool, quiet, observant girl, who looked at him so straight. Also his
threats of harming George Walker and Mr. Hale proved to be but blunt
weapons and could not penetrate the shield of Lesbia's composure.
Sargent retreated from the field of battle thoroughly beaten, and he
must have confessed as much to Hale, for that gentleman took his
daughter to task when she returned to the cottage after her secret
interview with Canning. The unsuccessful lover had already departed,
and Lesbia listened for ten minutes to her father's denunciations of
what he was pleased to style her wickedness.

"You ought to be flattered that so rich and handsome a man loves you,"
raged Mr. Hale, who for once in his life lost his self-control. "You
seem to forget that if I died to-morrow--and I might as my heart is
affected--you would be left penniless."

Lesbia raised her eyebrows. "I understood you to say that you could
leave me two thousand a year," she observed quietly.

"If you marry as I wish," cried her father furiously, "not otherwise.
Failing your becoming the wife of my dear friend, Sargent, I shall
leave the money to Lord Charvington."

"Well," said the girl cheerfully, "that would only be fair, since he
has paid you a pension for so long."

"What do you know about that?" snapped Hale, changing colour.

"Very little. But you certainly told me in an expansive moment that
Lord Charvington, as your cousin, allowed you a small income."

"Precious small," muttered Hale, not contradicting.

"But why does he allow you anything?" asked Lesbia, very directly,
"with two thousand a year you cannot wish for his help."

Hale took a turn up and down the room, then stopped opposite to his
daughter and spoke in quieter tones, but none the less emphatic. "I am
not enjoying two thousand a year at present," he declared slowly, "and
so accept an annuity from Charvington, who, being my cousin, has every
right to assist me."

"I don't see that," murmured the girl, shrugging.

"It doesn't matter what you see, or what you don't see," cried Hale,
his temper again getting beyond control. "Do as you are told, or
chance the consequences."

"Be a pawn in fact," she rejoined ironically. "A pawn on your
chess-board."

Hale shrugged in his turn. "Put it how you like," he retorted, "but
obey."

"Certainly not. I am a human being and have the right to----"

"You have the right to do nothing," broke in her father desperately.
"See here, my girl, you are making a great mistake by not letting me
guide you. Had you been open about that amethyst cross, I should never
have allowed you to give it to George Walker. Its possession means
more than you think. The two thousand a year depends upon its
production."

"Oh!" Lesbia opened her eyes widely. "I see. Then you are willing that
I should marry George if you get this two thousand."

"Yes," said Hale bluntly, "but for circumstances which do not concern
you--I prefer that you should marry Sargent."

"Marriage with anyone concerns me a great deal," said Lesbia coolly,
"and I decline to marry a man I do not love. As to the cross: it was
my own property left to me by my mother, and if its production will
bring me two thousand a year I am very sorry it is lost."

"I did not say that it meant two thousand a year to _you_," said Hale
uneasily, and with a scowl.

"Pardon me, father. I assume that, since I am the owner of the cross.
However, it is lost and neither I nor you know where to find it. That
being the case I refuse to marry Captain Sargent and shall marry
George."

"You have sent him away: you forget that."

"I can bring him again to my feet."

"Lesbia Lesbia! you are playing with fire."

"Probably, but I shall continue to play until you tell me the meaning
of all these things."

"I have told you about the cross----"

"Quite so," interrupted the girl drily, "and I now know why George was
assaulted and his mother's cottage robbed."

"You dare to say that I am the guilty person," demanded her father
suspiciously.

"Oh no. If you were, you would have the cross; and thus being able to
get the two thousand a year, you would not oppose my marriage with
George. You are innocent!"

"Thank you for nothing," sneered Hale coolly, "but you can reckon on
this, Lesbia, that if I could have knocked down George and have robbed
him of the cross I should have done so."

"That is candid, father."

"You asked me to be candid. But, hold your tongue, or else talk sense.
You must marry Sargent. I shall not allow you to throw yourself away
on that thief, and----"

"Stop!" cried Lesbia, rising indignantly, "you shall not call George
names in my hearing. He is no thief."

"Can you prove that?"

It was on the tip of the girl's tongue to speak out and accuse Tait.
But she first desired to see Maud Ellis in order to cut her claws, and
therefore, with a self-restraint far beyond her years, she shook her
head.

Hale sneered again, "You are a silly romantic fool," he scoffed, "and
sooner or later I shall force you to do my will."

"Never! Never! Never!"

"Oh, very well," replied Hale, baffled by her obstinacy, "then I shall
go to London and leave you here. I shall not speak to you, or eat with
you, or have anything to do with you, until you obey me as a daughter
should," and turning on his heel, he departed in cold anger.

Hale duly kept his promise and went away leaving the girl to her own
devices. But so clever a man should have known that the punishment--as
he deemed it--was no punishment at all. He had never been a father to
Lesbia in the accepted sense of the word, and she had but small
affection for him. Alone with Tim, she was much happier than when in
Mr. Hale's chilling presence, and preferred his room to his company.
Also, he was really playing into her hands, as she wished to be alone
in order to see Maud and bring her to reason. It was not Lesbia's wish
to call again at Henley, as she thought that she could deal better
with Miss Ellis when she was on her native heath. Therefore, now that
Hale was out of the way, and she was free to do what she desired, she
set to work to concoct a plot, whereby to bring Maud Ellis to the
cottage at Marlow.

To this end she wrote a letter stating that she and George were to be
married shortly, and that Miss Ellis's scheme had failed. This artful
epistle she posted to Henley, hoping that if Miss Ellis was in London
it would be forwarded to her there. She felt certain--since, being a
woman, she knew woman's nature better than a man could know it--that
Maud would seek an interview and come to Rose Cottage. Of course there
was the chance that Maud might first interview Walker, and then learn
the falsity of the statement. But in that case, George would come to
learn the truth, and then she could tell him what Canning had
discovered. In fact, owing to the skilful way in which Lesbia played
her one trump card, she was certain to bring to the cottage either
Maud Ellis or George Walker: and whichever came, she was prepared to
deal with the situation. All the same, she hoped that Maud would be
the one to put in an appearance, as if she could silence her, she
could then call at the Medmenham cottage and explain to her lover the
reason why she had dismissed him. Accordingly, when the letter setting
the trap was posted, Lesbia sat down to think over the behaviour of
Walker.

It puzzled her that he should so tamely accept his dismissal. On the
face of it she had treated him cruelly, and had given no reason for
abruptly breaking off the engagement. All the same, she considered,
woman-like, that he should not have acquiesced too readily to her
proposal that they should never meet again. But she forgot that George
was a proud man, and that the sole reason he could assign for her
dismissing him, was the fact that he was suspected of robbery. If she
believed him guilty--George, as she might have thought, would have
argued in this way--and had not sufficient love to stand up for him,
then she was not worthy of the worship he bestowed on her. But Lesbia
did not think thus. She only knew that she had sent George to the
right-about and that he had gone away without looking back for a
single moment. This was not as it should be, said the woman within
her, and therefore she secretly felt annoyed with Walker for his too
ready obedience. It can therefore be seen that Lesbia Hale was
intensely feminine. Perhaps on that account George loved her the more,
since the unexpected in woman is always what lures the man.

However, think what she would, and argue as she might, the fact
remained that Walker kept away from Rose Cottage and that she had not
sufficient courage to face her lover, when under the wing of his
mother. Lesbia missed the golden days of wooing dreadfully, and in
their absence was anxious to carry on her counterplot, if only to fill
in the time. Besides, there would be a considerable amount of pleasure
in beating Miss Ellis with her own weapons. It was therefore a happy
day to Lesbia that brought the stockbroker's niece into the trap, as
this time the biter was about to be bitten. And Lesbia, being a woman
and dealing with a woman, determined to show no mercy since Maud had
shown none. Besides, the two were fighting over a man, and so reverted
to the ethics of cave life and pre-historic struggle.

Within four days of the posting of the letter, Miss Ellis arrived and
was shown by Tim into the tiny drawing-room. It was empty, as Lesbia
had seen her rival coming, and therefore had departed to change her
frock. Also she hoped to make Maud lose her temper by enforced
waiting, knowing that if she did, there would be less difficulty in
dealing with her. Unsophisticated as Lesbia was, she instinctively
knew how to fight. Her tactics were correct, for when she entered
spick and span and smiling into the drawing-room, she found Maud
fuming restlessly, and quite ready to pick a quarrel on the score of
uncivil treatment.

"I have been kept waiting," said Miss Ellis in a Louis XIV tone, and
putting up a lorgnette to glare at her much too beautiful rival.

"I am so sorry," responded Lesbia politely. "But I was not dressed to
receive anyone, and your visit is unexpected."

Maud laughed contemptuously. "You knew that I would come," she
declared with conviction. "You have been looking out for me every
day."

"_You_ say so," said Lesbia, still graciously, for since the last
interview at Henley, she had changed her tactics with Miss Ellis.
"Will you not be seated? This chair is most comfortable, it has its
back to the light."

"I don't need to sit with my back to the light," flashed Maud
indignantly.

"Oh, I beg pardon, but from that lorgnette I thought that your eyes
might be weak. Sit here then, in the full warmth of the sunshine."

But Miss Ellis knew better than to let the searching light reveal her
age too clearly to her hostess. "I'll sit here," she declared
abruptly, and came to rest on the sofa.

"That's right," said Lesbia caressingly, "It's a nice shady corner."

Maud bit her lip, knowing perfectly well that Lesbia was casting a
reflection on her age. But having taken the seat she could scarcely
leave it without laying herself open to further pointed remarks, so
she remained where she was and came to the object of her visit at
once. "What do you mean by writing me this letter?" she demanded,
producing the epistle of her hostess.

"I mean to show you that your plot to part George and myself has
failed."

Miss Ellis crushed up the letter savagely. "Has it," she inquired,
"seeing that you have broken your engagement?"

"How do you know that?"

"Mrs. Walker told me. And very glad she is I can tell you. Mrs. Walker
is an old friend of my uncle's and has known me for years. She wants
George to marry me. She told me so only a few days ago."

"As if it mattered what she said," retorted Lesbia contemptuously.

"She is George's mother."

"No one denies that."

"And as he is her son, he should obey her."

"Even when she wants him to marry a woman he cares nothing for."

"George does care for me," cried Maud, a deep flush overspreading her
face even to the roots of her sandy hair. "I admit that when he was
engaged to you, he would not look at me. But now that you have thrown
him over so cruelly, he has turned to me for consolation."

"I don't believe it," said Lesbia quickly.

"You must, you shall," snapped Miss Ellis very much in earnest. "Look
here, this sort of thing won't do."

"What sort of thing?"

"This enmity you have towards me. I don't know why you are behaving so
exasperatingly," wailed Maud plaintively. "When you came to Henley, it
was the first time we met, and for your father's sake I was anxious to
make a friend of you. But you were so rude and so silly that I could
not. But I am willing to make every allowance for your want of
training, and so I have come here to ask you to be friends."

"Oh, I don't mind, provided you will leave George alone."

"I shan't, so there. I love him."

"So do I. And as he loves me I have the prior claim."

"But you have broken your engagement and so have left the field open
to me. Don't be a dog in the manger."

"I am not. I love George and I have always loved him. I sent the
letter I did because of what my father told me. You lured George into
a trap, and--as you said yourself at Henley--you can get him arrested.
Because of your attitude I was compelled to dismiss him, or see him
ruined."

Miss Ellis put up her lorgnette with an air of triumph. "You have
stated the case accurately, save for one remark," she declared. "I
_can_ ruin George Walker, and I shall do so unless he marries me. But
I did not lure him into a trap. I merely took advantage of
circumstances."

"Which you knew existed."

"What do you mean by that?"

"What I say," retorted Lesbia, keeping her eyes on Maud's face. "You
appointed that place and that hour of meeting in order to implicate
George in a robbery which you knew was about to take place."

Miss Ellis sprang to her feet with a white face and trembling hands.
"You go too far," she said, in a suffocating voice. "Why should
I?--Why should I?--Oh," she stamped, "your remarks are infamous."

"They are true."

"It's a lie! they are not true. I had no idea that my uncle's
strong-room was to be robbed of those jewels on that night and at that
hour. If I had known I should have prevented the robbery."

"Mr. Tait would not have thanked you for doing so," replied Lesbia
meaningly.

"Are you mad?" gasped Maud, and her face became a dull brick-red.

"No," answered Lesbia drily, "I am merely well-informed."

"Informed of what?" Miss Ellis moistened her dry lips.

"That Mr. Tait wanted money to tide over a financial crisis, and
arranged to have the jewels stolen, so that he could sell them
secretly."

"It's a lie--a lie," cried Maud again, and the perspiration broke out
on her quivering face; "my uncle is a wealthy man: everyone knows
that. If he wanted money he could have sold the jewels openly--they
were his own."

"You forget the insurance at Lloyd's."

Maud dropped on to the sofa as though she had been shot. "The
insurance?"

"Yes. Mr. Tait insured those jewels for something like twenty thousand
pounds, and so had them stolen. Certainly he could have sold them
openly, as you say, but then he would have got only half the money he
requires."

"Half the money?" Maud gasped again, and suddenly looked double her
age.

"Of course, twenty thousand pounds. By insuring the jewels and by
having them stolen, he will gain the proceeds of the sale he has
arranged with the thieves, besides the twenty thousand from the
insurance."

"You dare--to--accuse--my--oh," Maud jumped up fiercely and stamped
angrily, "it is ridiculous; what proof have you of this absurd tale?"

"I have absolute proof," said Lesbia quietly and rising in her turn.
"Mr. Canning--The Shadow--who watched me here at my father's request,
found out what I say and, if necessary, he can prove the truth of what
he found out. And he will, at my request, if you do not promise to
leave George alone and swear that you will not accuse him of a crime
of which--as you knew all the time--he is innocent."

But Maud heard only half this speech. "Canning, The Shadow," she
muttered, "do you mean Captain Sargent's valet?"

"Yes. I nursed him through an illness, and he has shown his gratitude
to me by discovering your uncle's plot, and proving your knowledge of
it. I can prove what I say with Canning's assistance, and I shall do
so, unless you promise to do as I have asked you."

Maud buttoned her jacket with trembling hands and moved towards the
door hastily. "You are talking rubbish," she muttered in a thick
voice. "I refuse to talk of the matter. It is too silly. But," she
faced round, "I shall tell my uncle, and he shall have you put in
gaol."

"He will be in gaol himself," retorted Lesbia "As soon as you leave
this house, I shall arrange with Mr. Canning to go to the police and
state what he told me."

"You would not dare."

"Yes, I would, unless you swear not to accuse George and promise to
leave him to me. I said that before: I say so again, and for the last
time."

"It's a----" Maud was about to say that it was a lie for the third
time, but the word died away on her lips. Whether Maud was cognizant
of the plot to steal the jewels Lesbia could not say, as she made no
remark on this point: but her very silence showed that she was in the
business. Lesbia's attitude left her no alternative but to make terms,
since if she left the house, there was every danger that her uncle
might be arrested. "If I do what you ask, will you hold your tongue?"
Maud demanded faintly.

"Then you admit that what I say is true?" countered Miss Hale.

"No," almost shouted Miss Ellis, "I do not. Still, mud sticks however
wrongly thrown, and I do not want my uncle to suffer through me. As to
Canning, oh, my uncle will deal with him I promise you. Not a word. I
agree to all you ask. I must. I shall not accuse George: I shall leave
him to you and," she leaned forward with a snarl, "I shall bring
misery on you at the eleventh hour."

"I defy you," retorted Lesbia with scorn.

"Very good." Maud smiled in an evil way. "We shall see who wins the
dangerous game you are playing. I----" she broke off abruptly and left
in haste.




CHAPTER XIII
MRS. WALKER'S VISIT

The meeting of the two girls who loved George seemed destined to end
abruptly. On the first occasion Lesbia had broken short the interview
at Henley, and on the second Maud had hastened away from Rose Cottage.
Lesbia wondered that she had not remained to talk further, and was
rather anxious when she remembered that Maud had left with a threat on
her lips. Miss Ellis was clever and cunning and reckless, and in one
way or another might work mischief. Not that Lesbia saw any chance of
her doing any, since she knew too much for Maud's peace of mind.
Without doubt what Canning had discovered was true, else Maud would
not have surrendered so easily. Lesbia thought until she was weary
about the matter, and especially how Canning could have discovered the
truth so speedily. She would have asked him point-blank in spite of
his prohibition, but that he was in London. And as yet he had not
written to tell where he was hiding.

However, as things stood, there was no doubt that Maud would keep her
promise, and that George was safe. On the day after the stockbroker's
niece had paid her visit, Lesbia wrote a long letter to Walker, and
detailed all that Canning had discovered and also narrated its effect
on Maud Ellis. Further, she gave George to understand how she had been
compelled to write the letter of dismissal, and ended up with a fond
wish that her lover should come and see her at once. When this letter
was posted Lesbia began to dream of Walker's speedy return, and
haunted the garden in order to see his boat coming swiftly down the
river.

But the boat never came, nor did any letter from George. Day after day
Lesbia watched the stream: watched also the postman, but in every case
she was disappointed. Walker must have received the letter, else it
would have been returned through the Dead Letter Office, so it was
strange, seeing how she had explained matters, that he did not appear.
Or at least he might have written. The girl wearying for love grew
peaked and wan, much to the distress of Tim, who could not understand.
Finally, Lesbia told him the whole story, and sent him over to the
cottage at Medmenham to see if Walker had received the letter. Tim
returned somewhat downcast.

"Masther Garge has been in London these six days," said Tim, "and the
misthress--his blissid mother, towld me she'd sint the letter to him.
He's got it, me dear, but the divil knows why he doesn't write ye the
scratch av a pen. Augh, me dear, nivir trouble him again. Sure there's
more fish in the say nor ivir come out av that same."

"George is the only man in the world for me," said Lesbia firmly,
although the tears were in her eyes, "and I'll never give him up,
until I hear him say that he loves another. This is Miss Ellis's
work."

"Och murder, me dear, it's a baste she is entoirely. But from what ye
towld me, Miss, ye drew the teeth av her."

"She went away with a threat," sighed Lesbia dismally. "She can't
force my George to marry her now; but evidently she can prevent his
returning to me as I want him to. Oh Tim, what am I to do now?"

"See Masther Garge and ask him plain, Miss."

"But I have not the money to go to London, and besides, I do not know
where George is stopping," protested Lesbia, wringing her hands.

"See his ould mother, the saints be good to her! for an iceberg she
is," suggested Tim after a pause. "Sure she'll tell ye where he is, me
dear."

"No, Tim, no. Mrs. Walker hates my father, and would rather die than
see her son become my husband."

"Hates the masther, is ut?" muttered the crooked little man frowning.
"And if so, me darlin' heart, why shud she come to see him?"

"Come to see him," echoed Lesbia staring, "why Mrs. Walker has never
been here to see my father in her life. I understood from George that
she hated my father. In that case she will never come here. If she did
come," sighed Lesbia, "I might soften her heart so that she might be
on my side. I am sure I could win her over."

"Well, Miss Lesbia, ye can but try, for the ould woman is coming here
to-morrow afternoon to see the masther."

"But he's away, Tim."

"Sure, Miss, he sint me the scratch av a pin sayin' he was coming back
this very day. I towld the ould woman, whin she axed me, so she's
coming to have a talk wid him. An' the divil will make a third wid
them two," muttered Tim crossing himself, "saints kape us from harm!"

Lesbia was much astonished at this news, as Mrs. Walker had never been
to Rose Cottage before, and moreover--on the word of her son--she both
despised and hated Mr. Hale. The girl wondered if the visit had
anything to do with the letter she had lately written to George.
Perhaps Maud's threat had meant that she would enlist Mrs. Walker on
her side to stop the marriage, since Maud herself, for obvious
reasons, was powerless to do so. But then, in any case, Mrs. Walker
disapproved of the marriage, so there was no need for Maud to
interfere. Also, if the letter had been forwarded to George in
London--and Lesbia saw no reason why it should not have been
forwarded--he must have received the same. If so, why did he not
reply, seeing that she had completely exonerated herself, and was
anxious to renew the engagement which for George's own sake she had
been forced to break? Poor Lesbia thought over these questions until
she was weary and her head ached, but she could find no reply. The
only thing to be done, was to wait until the formidable Mrs. Walker
arrived: then a few minutes' conversation with her might reveal the
reason of George's strange behaviour.

Mr. Hale duly returned, and seemed even angrier and more sullen than
he had been before he went away. He scarcely spoke to his daughter,
and several times he looked at her with positive dread in his usually
cold eyes. It appeared as though he considered Lesbia as a careless
child with a box of matches, who might at any moment set the house on
fire. Lesbia had a feeling that he was terribly angry with her, and
yet that this anger was mixed with a certain amount of dread. However,
he contented himself with looking daggers, and to avoid further
disturbances, she did not ask him any questions. But the house was
very uncomfortable. Then at breakfast next morning, on the day when
Mrs. Walker was expected, Hale surprised the girl by announcing an
invitation.

"I saw Lord Charvington when I was in town," said Hale, keeping his
pale eyes on his plate. "For some reason he chose to remember your
existence."

Lesbia gasped, and wondered if Charvington had told her father of the
money she had borrowed. In that case Hale would question her as to the
use she had made of it, and then her counterplot with Canning would
come to light with disastrous results. But Hale's further conversation
made it plain that Charvington had said nothing about the loan.

"He asked how you were," pursued Hale softly, and still keeping his
eyes on his plate, "and if you had grown up a pretty girl. He hasn't
seen you for a long time, remember. Considering how badly you have
behaved, Lesbia, I spoke better of you than you deserved, so
Charvington--prepare yourself for a surprise--has asked you to stop at
his country-house. He told me that his wife would send you the
invitation."

"It is very good of him," said Lesbia faintly. "But I really do not
want to go, father."

Hale looked up with a scowl. "Always opposition," he grumbled, "you
_shall_ go, child. If you won't marry Sargent, there will be a chance
of your making a good match when under Lady Charvington's wing. She
has daughters of her own, too, so you will have a very good time."

"Why should Lord Charvington ask me?"

"I can't say. . . . He suddenly seems to have remembered your
existence. Of course, as my daughter you are related to him. However,
the chance of a visit at such a country house is a very good one for
you, so get ready to start when the invitation comes. Do you want any
frocks, or----"

"No. I have everything," said Lesbia, rising; "after all perhaps the
change will do me good, and I should like to see a little of the
world."

"You will see plenty of it with Charvington and his wife. They are a
gay couple, and entertain largely. They are at their country seat near
Maidenhead for a week; but if you play your cards well Lady
Charvington may take you to London for the rest of the season."

Lesbia nodded and went into the garden. Here she sat on the bench
under the chestnut, and thought over the glittering prospect which was
now open to her. She loved George and was contented with the quiet
life, provided he shared it with her. But as he was absent and was
behaving so very strangely, she thought that it would be best to
plunge into society if only to forget her aching heart. And if George
would not marry her, it might be that she would meet with some other
man, who would take her away from the uncomfortable life with her
father. In her own heart Lesbia knew that she could love no one but
George Walker. Still she could not force him to marry her, and he
appeared to have accepted her letter of dismissal as final in spite of
the second epistle stating why she wrote the first. The poor girl felt
very sad and very lonely, and her tears rained down, salt and bitter,
as she sat a solitary figure under the glorious tree. The blackbird
was piping again, as he had done when George proposed; but it seemed
to her ears that the song was now sad. But that probably was mere
fancy.

At one o'clock Lesbia returned to the cottage, wondering why all these
troubles had come upon her. It really seemed as though Tim's idea
about the bad luck of the cross was true, for ever since she had
bestowed it on her lover there had been nothing but sorrow and
mystery. Even George had not escaped misfortune, since he had been
assaulted and robbed, and had lost his situation through being accused
unjustly of a crime he had never committed. But Lesbia was a reader of
fairy tales, and remembered that the prince and princess always have
much grief before peace and joy arrive, so she hoped that in some
way--she could not see how--the bad luck which was upon her and George
would pass away leaving them married and rich and happy. But, at
present, it must be confessed that there did not appear to be much
chance of such good fortune.

"The ould woman has come this very minit," whispered Tim, meeting the
girl at the back door. "I've put her in the parlour, but the masther
is out."

"My father is certain to come into luncheon," said Lesbia hurriedly.

"Av coorse he is," muttered Tim, "a mighty dainty man he is fur the
inside av him. But she's axing for you, Miss, and----"

"I'll go to her," interrupted Lesbia, "meanwhile, Tim, lay another
place at the table. I daresay Mrs. Walker is hungry."

With these instructions Lesbia sought the small parlour, and entered
to find it occupied by a modern Lady Macbeth. Mrs. Walker clothed in
rich but funereal-looking garments of the deepest black was seated
majestically on the sofa. Without rising she raised a pair of piercing
eyes to look at the girl, and a brief expression of surprise flitted
across her impassive face. She had scarcely expected to find the girl
so beautiful, as she had always taken her son's enthusiastic
descriptions with a grain of salt. However, she privately admitted
that George was right for once and she greeted the girl with stiff
kindness. And indeed it was hard even for a lady of Mrs. Walker's hard
nature to be angry with Lesbia, who looked such a child, and who
behaved so sweetly.

"I am very glad to see you," said Mrs. Walker, looking anxiously into
the girl's delicate face. "You remind me of someone who--no, I can't
recall of whom you remind me. Still--" she searched anxiously--"you
are very like someone I knew."

"Perhaps my mother," Lesbia ventured to remark. "My late nurse,
Bridget Burke, told me I closely resembled my mother."

"I never met your mother," said Mrs. Walker, dropping Lesbia's hand
quickly and becoming stiffer than ever. "Your father and I were never
friends, my dear. I should not be here to-day, save that I have come
to ask him about some business connected with money I expect to
inherit. Also," added Mrs. Walker unexpectedly, "I wanted to see you.
George had talked much of you, my child, and seems to have loved you
greatly. I can't blame him, and the wonder is that he should give you
up."

Lesbia clasped her small hands and sank into a chair, her face white
and her eyes widely open. "George has never given me up," she said
faintly. "I wrote and told him why I was forced to send him the first
letter, and----"

"Yes, yes!" Mrs. Walker waved a beautifully-gloved hand. "I was in
London the other day--in fact I took your letter to George. He showed
it to me and told me everything."

"And what did you say?"

Mrs. Walker's deep, black brows drew together. "Of course the whole
thing is rubbish," she said harshly, "and only a love-sick girl like
Maud Ellis would act in that way. I suppose much must be forgiven her,
as she really loves my son. But after her behaviour, I shall never
consent to her marrying him. No! no! That would never do. Especially,
now that we know her uncle is such a rogue. I wanted George to tell
the police, but he refused."

Lesbia cared very little for the fate of Tait. What she much desired
to know was her own. "You said that George has ceased to care for me,"
she remarked with a pale smile. "I don't understand."

Mrs. Walker gave her a pitying look. "Nor do I, now that I have seen
you, my dear. I don't like your father--I never did, and I would
rather have died than have seen George marrying his daughter. Your
looks and nature have made me change my mind. There is nothing of your
father about you. Had I seen you before----" Mrs. Walker broke off and
shook her stately head, "but it is too late. George will not renew the
engagement."

"Oh, I can't believe that," cried the girl weeping and trembling.

"Strange," muttered the elder woman, "you have been quite a heroine in
clearing George's character, for which I am greatly obliged to you.
Yet here you are crying like a schoolgirl."

"I love him so much: I love him so deeply."

"My poor child, it is the fate of women to have their hearts broken. I
do not know why George still refuses to renew the engagement in the
face of your letter, but he does. Here," Mrs. Walker took an envelope
out of her bag and handed it to the shaking girl, "you can read his
decision in his own handwriting. He asked me to give you this."

With great delicacy she turned away her head, while Lesbia tore open
the envelope with shaking hands. There were only a few lines, but
these intimated plainly that George had accepted his dismissal, and
would not seek to renew the engagement. "I love you still, my
dearest," wrote Walker in conclusion, "but Fate wills that we must
part for ever." Then there were a few tender words, and the epistle
ended abruptly, as though the writer could not trust his emotions.
Lesbia read the lines, folded the letter and replaced it in the
envelope which she put into her pocket. Her eyes were dry now, and her
white face was flushed with colour. With a deep sigh she touched the
elder woman on the shoulder, "I understand," she said calmly.

Mrs. Walker, whose sympathies--remarkably in so cold a woman--were now
entirely with Lesbia, grew snappy to conceal her emotion. "I don't,"
she said acidly, "and when George returns to Medmenham I shall have an
explanation with him. He's a fool."

"No," said Lesbia, her face growing even a deeper red. "Can't you see
that George is only acting in this way to save me?"

"To save you from what?" asked Mrs. Walker shortly.

"I don't know. I can't say," Lesbia spoke more to herself than to her
visitor. "But I feel sure that George wrote this letter as I wrote my
first one to him. I wrote to save him, and now he refuses to renew our
engagement to save me. I don't understand, still--oh I am sure that
everything will come right. I trust in God."

"You do well to do so," said Mrs. Walker gravely, "for only He can
help you, my child. I am thoroughly puzzled, and know not what to
say."

"Say nothing: do nothing," cried Lesbia eagerly. "Things will work out
to a happy end in their due time."

"You are sure of that?"

"I am certain."

"Then," said Mrs. Walker grimly, "you must have a sixth sense which I
do not possess. However, I am glad that you have not given way to
hysteria. You are a brave girl, and I would rather have you for my
daughter-in-law than I would any one else, in spite of your father.
There," Mrs. Walker bent forward and actually kissed the girl's lips.
"That shows I mean what I say."

"Oh!" Lesbia returned the kiss, blushing divinely, "George said that
you hated me, and----"

"How could I hate a girl I had never seen?" snapped Mrs. Walker,
ashamed of her momentary humanity. "I hate your father, and--well
there, say no more about the matter. I hope with all my heart that
things will turn out well for you and George, as you appear to think
they will. Meanwhile while we are waiting for your father, tell me
about the amethyst cross."

Lesbia started to her feet in astonishment. "The cross," she echoed.
"I have lost it. You know that I gave it to----"

"Yes! Yes!" Mrs. Walker waved her hand impatiently. "I know about the
robbery and how no one can find the cross. It must be found,
nevertheless. But I wish to learn exactly how it came into your
possession. George told me something about the matter, but like a man
he told it very badly. For this reason I have come to see you, as well
as Mr. Hale, whom I detest," added Mrs. Walker severely. "Where did
you get the cross?"

"From my mother. That is, the cross belonged to her. She left it to my
nurse Bridget Burke----"

"Where is she?"

"Dead. She died some time ago."

"Unlucky," muttered Mrs. Walker with a dark look. "Well?"

"My mother told Bridget to give it to me, and to tell me that I was
never to part with it save to the man I loved. Then you know"--Lesbia
blushed again--"I gave it to George."

"Yes. I know of that and of the loss. I said so before. But how did
the cross come into your mother's possession?"

Lesbia shook her head. "I really cannot tell you."

Mrs. Walker frowned again, and turned her steely eyes towards the
door. Her quick ears had caught a soft foot-fall, and her quick eyes
had seen the half-open door move. "Come in, Mr. Hale," she said
loudly, "we are saying nothing which you cannot hear."

Hale, who apparently had been listening, entered, looking perfectly
cool and composed. "The cross did not belong to Lesbia's mother," he
said quietly, but the look in his eyes as they rested on Mrs. Walker
was not pleasant.




CHAPTER XIV
THE FAMILY LAWYER


Lesbia uttered an exclamation when she heard the astonishing remark of
her father, and started to her feet. But Mrs. Walker, grimly silent,
kept her seat and glared, like Medusa, on the newcomer. If she could
have turned him into stone she would willingly have done so, as could
be seen from the expression of her hard eyes. Hale, perfectly cool, in
spite of the insulting speech which she made, took a chair and looked
at her with deliberate insolence. Also deliberately he reverted to her
insult.

"I was just passing along to the dining-room," he explained slowly,
"when I heard voices and your last question. I entered at once and was
not eavesdropping, as you are pleased to say."

"There is no need to excuse yourself," said Mrs. Walker tartly,
"for----"

Hale crossed his legs and leaned back. "In my own house I think not."

"For I don't believe a word you say," she finished harshly.

"Naturally you would not," rejoined Mr. Hale smoothly; "you were
always a hard and suspicious woman."

Mrs. Walker moved her hands restlessly, and her eyes gleamed fiercer
than ever. "You know better than that," she muttered. "Take your mind
back thirty years."

"Willingly," said Hale, with great promptness. "Do you wish us to
speak of the past in Lesbia's presence?"

This time he scored, for Mrs. Walker winced. "There is no need for the
child to hear old stories," she remarked, with suppressed passion.
"Let us discuss what I have come to see you about."

"The cross?"

"Oh," she flashed scornfully, "I thought you were not eavesdropping?"

"I admitted that I heard your last question," said Hale, with a shrug,
"but you never would listen."

"I am listening now. Say what you have to say."

"I have said all that I intend to say, Mrs. Walker. The amethyst cross
did not belong to Lesbia's mother."

The girl uttered another exclamation; she was lost in astonishment.
"But, father," she remonstrated, "Bridget told me on her
death-bed----"

"What she told you was what I instructed her to say," interrupted Hale
imperiously. "But your mother--my wife--never possessed such an
ornament."

Lesbia looked at him doubtfully. Of late, she had suspected that her
father was not above telling a falsehood to serve his own private
ends, and in the face of what she knew, it appeared as though he was
telling one now--why, she could not conjecture. While she was trying
to puzzle out the reason, Mrs. Walker rose and swept across to the
window of the drawing-room which looked out into the road. "I don't
see him yet," she muttered to herself, and consulted a bracelet-watch
attached to her left wrist.

"Are you expecting anyone?" asked Hale politely. "Mr. Jabez, my family
lawyer," she replied curtly, and returned to her seat.

Hale raised his eyebrows and looked more gentlemanly than ever; also a
trifle dangerous. "You asked him to my house?"

"Yes, because I want to hear all about the cross. Oh, I know well that
you do not wish to see Mr. Jabez, Walter, but----"

"You call me Walter," said Hale, and suddenly flushed.

"A slip of the tongue," retorted Mrs. Walker, also growing red. "The
time is long past when I could call you so. You are Mr. Hale to me."

"Then why not call me so?" demanded the man coolly.

"I will do so in future," said Mrs. Walker, and bit her lip in silent
rage at having given him an opportunity of scoring. "But I know that
Mr. Jabez is too well acquainted with the seamy side of your life for
you to care about meeting him."

Hale shrugged his shoulders. "He was my family lawyer as he is yours,"
he answered in icy tones, "and one confesses much to one's lawyer,
which one would hesitate to say to others. I can depend upon the
secrecy of Jabez as to my misfortunes."

"Oh!" Mrs. Walker laughed scornfully, "you call them by that name."

"It suits them best. As to Jabez, I have no hesitation in meeting him.
But I prefer to choose my own visitors."

"You certainly would not choose Mr. Jabez," said the elder woman
insultingly. "However, I have taken advantage of your easy-going
nature"--she was very sarcastic--"to invite Mr. Jabez to meet me here,
so that we may discuss the whereabouts of the cross."

"How can we discuss what we cannot and do not know?" asked Hale, with
a contemptuous look. "You are still the same woman, Judith, headstrong
and----"

"Don't call me that name!" she said sharply.

"A slip of the tongue merely, such as you made just now," sneered
Hale; "but all this is very unpleasant for Lesbia. Don't you think
that while we quarrel she had better leave the room?"

Mrs. Walker drew Lesbia down on to the sofa beside her, and retained
the girl's hand within her own. "No," she said sternly, "I am not
going to quarrel with you, Mr. Hale. Besides, I wish Lesbia to be
here, so that she may hear somewhat of the past."

"Why should she?" asked Hale hastily.

"I want her to marry George."

"You--want--her--to--marry--George," repeated Hale astonished, "my
daughter!"

Mrs. Walker looked at him straight. "You may well be surprised," she
said quietly, "especially as you know through my son that I was set
against this marriage, and with good reason let me remind you, Mr.
Hale. But now that I have seen Lesbia"--she drew the girl closer--"I
see no reason why the sins of the father should be visited upon the
child. Lesbia shall be my dear daughter, and I welcome her with joy."

"I have something to say to that. She shall never be your
daughter-in-law, since it is better to be explicit as to
relationship."

"We'll see about that."

"Quite so. You are a clever woman, Judith, but I am also a clever
man."

"Oh!" Mrs. Walker winced again at his using her Christian name. "We
had better not begin about your qualities. Lesbia would certainly have
to leave the room then."

"Don't shame me in the presence of my child, madam," said Hale
thickly, and the veins on his forehead began to swell with anger.

"I beg your pardon," said Mrs. Walker with a careless laugh, "I forgot
how you have deceived her into thinking you an angel."

Hale suddenly rose, and walked to the window. He was in a furious rage
and was trying to keep himself cool, since he knew that any loss of
temper would give Mrs. Walker an advantage which he did not intend her
to gain. She sat quietly smoothing Lesbia's hand, with glittering eyes
quite ready to continue hostilities as soon as her enemy recovered his
breath. Lesbia herself remained passive, wondering what all the
trouble was about. Neither the one nor the other of the disputants
hinted sufficient to enlighten her as to the reasons why they were at
enmity. Hale certainly might have said something more to the point, as
he was rapidly losing control of his temper, but as he turned from the
window, there came a ring at the front door of the cottage. "Here is
Jabez," said Hale, coming back to his seat. "I am glad he has arrived,
if only to stop your tongue."

"Oh, Jabez knows all that I can say," remarked Mrs. Walker grimly, and
became silent.

With wide-open eyes, Lesbia sat waiting quietly to see what would
happen next. This duel of three--as it appeared to be, was as
fantastic as that in which Mr. Midshipman Easy fought. Moreover, the
girl was so bewildered by the hints dropped of a disagreement between
Mrs. Walker and her father, of which she knew nothing, that she was
trying hard to collect her scattered senses in order to take in future
events more clearly.

Mr. Jabez announced his presence in the passage by a dry, hard cough
before he was introduced to the company by Tim Burke. He was a meagre
man of medium height with a bald head, a hatchet face, a pair of eyes
the colour of which could not be seen because of blue spectacles, and
a loose figure invested in well-fitting dark clothes. He looked
somewhat like a certain type of American, but when he opened his
mouth, he spoke very precise English. For the rest, he seemed
unemotional and very much addicted to dry business details. No one
could have called Mr. Jabez an interesting person, but he appeared to
know his business and the value of his time, upon which he placed a
high price.

"Good-day! Good-day! Good-day!" he said severally to the three people
in the room with a little nod to each. "Mr. Hale, I apologise for
calling uninvited at your cottage, but Mrs. Walker, who wished for the
meeting here, must make my excuses. This is your daughter: a very
handsome young lady. I shall take this chair, with my back to the
light, as my eyes are somewhat weak. For that reason I wear blue
spectacles. Now," Mr. Jabez had gained possession of a comfortable
chair by this time, "let us come to business, as I have to return to
London within the hour, Mrs. Walker!"

Thus addressed Mrs. Walker, as grim as Jabez himself, and as impatient
of wasting time, spoke to the point. "I asked you here, Mr. Jabez, to
meet Mr. Hale with whom," she added venomously, "we are both
exceedingly well acquainted."

"Quite so--quite so," interrupted the lawyer with his dry cough, "but
it would be as well to avoid personal remarks. They do no good and
take up valuable time. Go on, Mrs. Walker."

"I want to hear what Mr. Hale has to say about the amethyst cross,"
said the widow with a dark look at her enemy.

"I have nothing to say about it," retorted Hale, nursing his chin with
his hand and leaning back with crossed legs, apparently indifferent.

"Pardon me, but you have much to say," remarked Jabez precisely. "So
far I merely know on the authority of Mrs. Walker--that the cross was
given to this young lady," he nodded very curtly towards Lesbia, "and
that in her turn she passed it to Mr. George Walker."

"That is true," admitted Lesbia, seeing that she was called upon to
speak. "I was told by Bridget----"

"Who is Bridget?" interrupted Jabez keenly.

"My late nurse. She is dead."

Jabez shook his bald head. "T'cht! T'cht! T'cht! That is a pity. Go
on."

"Bridget told me that I was to give the cross only to the man I
loved. I therefore gave it to George. He was assaulted for it on the
towing-path and as it could not be found upon him, his room at
Medmenham was robbed."

Jabez nodded. "Mrs. Walker told me all this," he said quietly, "and
the cross has never been found."

"No," said Mrs. Walker.

"No," said Mr. Hale.

"No!" said Lesbia.

"All are agreed," smiled the lawyer drily, "a most unanimous opinion.
I understand," he addressed Lesbia again, "that your mother originally
owned this cross and gave it to your nurse. Mrs. Walker, on the
authority of her son, told me as much."

"I understood that the cross had belonged to my mother," replied
Lesbia, nervously glancing at her father. "Bridget told me so, when
she gave it to me on her death-bed."

"Then she told you wrongly," said Mr. Hale, "and at my request."

"Why?" demanded Jabez, turning towards his unwilling host.

"Because the cross belonged to another woman, and I did not want that
known in case someone should claim it."

"Ha!" said Mrs. Walker darkly. "And why did you wish to keep it?"

"I--I--liked the ornament," confessed Hale hesitating, and quite
forgetting the sentimental reason he had given to his daughter as to
the desire to keep the cross because it had been the property of his
late wife.

Mrs. Walker laughed scornfully. "I believe you know the reason why the
cross is so valuable," she snapped.

"Yes, he does," chimed in Lesbia, who was determined to learn the
reason of all this mystery. "He says that if produced it will bring
him two thousand a year."

"Lesbia!" Hale jumped to his feet and looked furious. "How dare you?"

"How dare I?" she cried, rising in her turn. "Because you will not
trust me, father, and I am in the dark. The cross is mine, and I have
a right to know all that concerns it. Does the production of the cross
mean gain to my father of two thousand a year?" she asked the lawyer.

"It means that if a certain person produces the cross to me,"
explained Mr. Jabez, "fifty thousand pounds will----"

"Let me explain," interrupted Mrs. Walker sharply. "Lesbia, the cross
is needed to prove the identity of my sister Kate. My father left her
the sum of fifty thousand pounds. She eloped with a man of whom he
disapproved, and has not appeared to claim the money. We don't know if
she is living or dead, and----"

"Ah!" broke in Hale, "this is what George told me."

"Yes," flashed out Mrs. Walker, turning towards him, "and for that
reason you know the value of the cross."

"Oh," Hale shrugged his shoulders, "I knew that long ago."

"Then why did you not produce it?"

"Because I thought it was lost. If the cross belonged to your sister
Kate, Mrs. Walker, I knew her."

"She was not your wife," cried Mrs. Walker savagely, "You were not the
man she ran away with."

"I never said that I was," rejoined Hale coolly. "No. Hear what I have
to say. When I was living at Wimbledon with my wife--Lesbia's
mother--we one day found a woman unconscious in the snow. My wife, who
was a Good Samaritan, revived her and took her in. She died, but
before drawing her last breath, she told me that she was Katherine
Morse----"

"That was my sister's maiden name. But she married the man she ran
away with."

"She never told me so," said Hale coolly. "She died in my wife's arms
and is buried in Wimbledon cemetery. The cross--as I heard from my
wife on her death-bed--she gave to my wife saying that if produced to
Mr. Simon Jabez it would be worth fifty thousand pounds. My wife gave
the cross to Bridget and did not tell me so. When she died I hunted
for the cross and could not find it. But that old hag of an Irishwoman
possessed it and held her peace. On her death-bed she gave it to
Lesbia and told her not to tell me about it. I only became aware of
its whereabouts when I saw it in your son's hand after he had proposed
to Lesbia. Then it was lost again and I don't know who has it."

"What a strange story!" said Lesbia, "why did you not tell me before,
father?"

Hale turned on her viciously. "You were secret with me about the
cross, so what occasion was there to tell you? Had you been open I
would have had that fifty thousand pounds long ago."

"No," said Jabez, who had been listening attentively, "you were not
married to Miss Katherine Morse, and so had no claim to the money."

"I claim it," cried Mrs. Walker triumphantly, "all I wanted to know
was whether my sister Kate was dead. Now you have sworn to that, and
now that we know she is buried in Wimbledon cemetery, I get the
money."

"No," said Jabez again and very drily.

Mrs. Walker rose and turned on him angrily. "You know my father's
will," she cried angrily. "One hundred thousand pounds was left
equally between myself and my sister. I had my share and my husband
spent it. Kate never came to claim her half, so by the will it reverts
to the survivor of Samuel Morse's daughters. I am the survivor so----"

"You go too fast, my dear lady," said the lawyer, "and do not know the
will so thoroughly as I do. Fifty thousand pounds, which I hold, was
left to Katherine and her heirs. There may be a child or children."

"Kate Morse had no child when she died in my house," said Hale
sharply. "I can prove it." He went to the door and called out, "Tim."

In a few minutes, and amidst a dead silence, the crooked little man
appeared rubbing his red head. "What's your will, sor?" he asked
softly.

"You remember the woman who was taken in at Wimbledon years ago?"
questioned Hale impatiently. "The woman with the amethyst cross."

"Ay, sor, I mind that. I wor a bare-futted gossoon thin. Me
mother--rist her sowl!--laid out the shroud av her."

"Had this woman a child with her?" asked Jabez promptly.

"No, sor," said Tim unhesitatingly, "she had not. The only child in
the house wor Miss Lesbia here."

"That will do," said Hale impatiently, waving his hand, and drawing a
long breath, "you can go," and Tim took his departure. "Are you
satisfied?" he asked turning to the lawyer.

"No," said that gentleman quietly, "I must have a better proof that
there was no child. From certain rumours, which I remember hearing
years ago, I am inclined to believe that there is a child."

"I believe there was a child," said Mrs. Walker, who had been sitting
grim and silent. "Kate wrote to me two years after she eloped with
that man, that she had a baby and that it was very ill. She did not
expect it to live."

"Did she mention the sex of the child?"

"No. She did not, nor did I ever hear from her again. I daresay that
man cast her off, or deserted her, and she crawled to Wimbledon to
die. But the child must be dead also, so I inherit the money."

"No! no! no. There is not sufficient proof of the child's death," said
Jabez, "although it appears we can prove the death of your sister.
Then again, I must have the amethyst cross placed in my hands before I
can part with the money. It is well invested," added Jabez with a
chuckle, "and brings in a trifle over two thousand a year. You are
correct in your estimate, Mr. Hale, but I doubt if you can claim the
money."

"I could if I had the cross," muttered Hale savagely.

"Not even then. If the child, whether male or female, appears with the
cross and I can prove that it is the child of Mrs. Walker's sister
then I'll hand over the money. If we can prove the death of the child,
Mrs. Walker will get the money."

"And I'll have it," cried Mrs. Walker rising indignantly. "I am
certain that the child is dead. Kate wrote that it was dangerously
ill."

"But not dead," chuckled Jabez, glancing at his watch. "Well, there is
nothing more to be said, so I shall take my leave. Good-day! good-day!
good-day!" he nodded again to each in turn and vanished as
unexpectedly as he had entered. Mrs. Walker looked remarkably angry.

"The money is mine and I'll have it," she said determinedly.

"You must first find the amethyst cross," sneered Hale.




CHAPTER XV
A STARTLING LETTER


After Mrs. Walker's portentous visit to Rose Cottage with her lawyer,
things went on quietly for some days. Mr. Hale at first positively
refused to speak on the subject of the cross and the fortune attached
thereto, as he maintained that it was useless to talk about
impossibilities. Then he changed his mind and spoke with extraordinary
freedom.

"Nothing can be done until we find the amethyst cross," he said
gloomily to his daughter, "when that is produced, the money will be
forthcoming."

"But you forget, father, that the cross has to be produced by Mrs.
Walker's nephew or niece," said Lesbia doubtfully.

"She hasn't got one," snapped Hale. "If there was a child, it is dead.
I know that no child was brought to my house at Wimbledon by Kate
Morse."

"Mrs. Walker said that was her sister's maiden name. Do you know the
name of the man she married?"

"Yes." Hale cast a jealous side-glance at his daughter. "It's an old
story and a long one."

"Which has to do with Mrs. Walker's enmity against you?" persisted
Lesbia.

"Yes," said Hale again. "She thought that I had something to do with
her sister's elopement. Such rubbish, as though I could have helped
it."

"Why did Miss Morse run away, then?"

"Because of her father. He was a wealthy, old, psalm-singing idiot,
who made the two girls wretched. Kate fell in love with a certain
friend of mine--I am not going to mention his name--and old Morse told
him that he was not to come near the house. Then Kate took the bit
between her teeth and ran away with the man. She had a miserable life,
I believe, but I saw nothing of her until she stumbled foot-sore and
weary into my house at Wimbledon. The rest you know."

"And the money?" asked Lesbia anxiously.

"You heard all that is to be said on that subject when Mrs. Walker was
here," growled Hale, who was more communicative than usual. "But I'll
repeat the story, because I wish to make a suggestion."

"What is the suggestion?" asked the girl, who mistrusted the uneasy
looks of her father.

"First the story and then the suggestion," he remarked grimly. "Well,
it can scarcely be called a story. Samuel Morse, the psalm-singing old
ass I told you of, had a hundred thousand pounds, two daughters, and
no son. He made a will leaving the money equally divided between them,
and after death the money if not used up was to go to their heirs.
Judith--Mrs. Walker that is--married a scampish man-about-town, who
soon got through all she had and then broke his neck in a
steeplechase, leaving Judith with next to nothing upon which to bring
up George. Kate, having eloped with the man whose name I don't wish to
mention, did not claim her share of the cash."

"If Mr. Morse was so angry I wonder he did not alter his will."

"He would have done so. Of that I am absolutely certain," said Hale
emphatically, "but he had no time to do so. Shortly after he made his
will Kate eloped, and the old man died in a fit of rage, before he
could give instructions to Jabez who was his lawyer. Jabez gave fifty
thousand pounds to Judith, who by and by married Walker and lost it
all through his spendthrift habits. The remaining fifty thousand he
invested, and what with the principal and interest it must be a tidy
sum by now. At all events it brings in over two thousand a year. Since
Kate is dead the money passes to her child if she left any, which I do
not believe. Failing a child, it reverts by the will to Mrs. Walker."

"But why need she produce the amethyst cross?" asked Lesbia.

"She need not, as her identity is fully established in Jabez's eyes.
The cross--as I learned from him years ago--was an ornament which old
Morse had made for Kate, a kind of religious symbol."

"Who bears the cross will win the crown," said Lesbia, remembering the
ornament; "or rather, as the motto goes, lose the crown by refusing
the cross."

Hale nodded with a smile of contempt. "Yes! That was old Morse's idea.
He gave the cross to Kate, and then she ran away with it and the man
who became her husband. Jabez, knowing that the ornament is peculiar,
swears that he will need the cross to prove the identity of Kate or of
her child, as no one else could possess so odd a trinket. As if it
could not be imitated exactly," ended Hale with contempt.

"The cross might be imitated," said Lesbia, doubtfully. "But as the
poor woman is dead, it will not be so easy to produce a child as
hers."

Hale, with his head on one side, looked at her oddly. "I don't know so
much about that," he said slowly.

"What do you mean?" questioned Lesbia, seeing that her father had
something on his mind.

"Well," said Hale, pinching his chin and still looking at her as
though to hypnotise her mind; "there was no child, as I said. But you
were only a baby twenty years ago, born, in fact, only a week before
Kate Morse came to my house. Could we not say that you are the child?"

"What?" Lesbia looked indignantly at her father.

"Don't be foolish," said Hale testily. "It is not a crime seeing that
the money is there for the asking, Bridget Burke told you that the
cross was given to you by your mother. Let it be so, and I can swear
and, for your sake, I can get Tim to swear, that you are the long-lost
child. The train has already been laid by Bridget's story--which by
the way I told her to tell you--so old Jabez will be easy to
convince."

Lesbia drew a long breath. "I should not think of deceiving and
robbing Mrs. Walker."

"Oh, nonsense," said Hale earnestly. "When she dies the money goes to
her son, so if you marry him you can hand over twenty-five thousand to
him, or say one thousand a year. Thus you will be acting honestly
towards the Walkers, my dear, and----"

"And dishonestly towards myself," cried Lesbia indignantly. "And what
of the remaining one thousand a year, father?"

Hale drooped his eyes suavely. "I take that for arranging that you get
the money. Come, Lesbia, what do you say?"

"I decline," she retorted, quivering with indignation. "How dare you,
who are my father, make such a proposal? Even if I were the true
child, I should not give you one penny."

"Ha!" said Hale bitterly. "I thought so, and thus suggested a wild
scheme to try you. I might have known."

"I believe that if I had fallen in with your scheme," cried Lesbia
boldly, "that you would have arranged to carry it through. You have
not the cross, however, and even if I consented----"

"I remember the look of the cross, and so do you. It could have been
duplicated, my dear."

Lesbia looked at her father in pained astonishment, and then burst
into bitter tears. "Oh, how I wish that I could respect you," she
wailed.

Hale lifted his eyebrows. "Don't you?"

"No! How can I, when I find that you are so wicked?"

"I was only trying you," he said hastily. "Though it is true that had
you shown a disposition to give me my fair share I might have
endeavoured to get you this fortune. But, as it is, I see well that
all my pains would be thrown away. You would see me--your own
father--starve rather than let me have one penny."

Lesbia dried her tears. "I would have nothing to do with such a wicked
scheme, and I only wish I could get away from you. You have never been
a father to me, and every day we drift farther and farther apart. When
I see Lord Charvington I shall ask him to help me to get a situation,
as a companion or a nursery governess, and then----"

"Lesbia, you surely would not disgrace me by talking to Charvington in
that way," said Hale, his face growing dark. "Perhaps I have never
been affectionate, but then I feel more than I say. And you have
always had comfort and all that I could give."

"I have had everything, save a father's love."

"My nature is a reticent one," said her father sullenly. "So it is
useless to ask for impossibilities. If you really are unhappy with me,
marry George Walker and have done with it."

"And what about Captain Sargent?" asked Lesbia sharply.

Hale shrugged his shoulders. "I can't force you to marry a man against
your will, bad father as you say that I am. I have done my best for
you and you persistently regard me with suspicion."

"What you proposed to do just now----"

"Was merely an experiment. Think no more about it, and don't make
yourself ridiculous with Charvington. Play your cards well with him
and his wife, and you may make a good match."

"I shall marry no one but George," said Lesbia obstinately.

"He won't have anything to do with you," sneered Hale, and turned
away.

Things being strained in this way Lesbia was sufficiently unhappy,
especially as George was absent and silent. She could not understand
why, after her explanation, he refused to come back to her. But in the
depths of her mind, she felt certain that he was acting against his
heart's desire, and much in the same way as she had acted when she
dismissed him. It was impossible to see him, as he was in London and
she did not know his address, and it was equally impossible to write
to him. Certainly, as Mrs. Walker was ready to receive her, she could
have gone to Medmenham to converse with that formidable lady, but she
hesitated to pour out her woes in that quarter. In spite of her sudden
friendliness, Mrs. Walker was unsympathetic, and the poor girl longed
for some kind breast whereon she could lie and weep and be comforted.

Thus it can easily be guessed that Lesbia hailed with joy the arrival
of a brisk little woman, who introduced herself as Lady Charvington.
She came in a gorgeous motor car, with much noise and pomp, and was
dressed like Solomon, in all his glory, so wonderful was her frock.
Mr. Hale was within and received her with much deference, which was
natural considering that Lord Charvington was his patron. Lesbia was
sent for, and duly came down to the tiny drawing-room to be
introduced.

"So this is Lesbia," said Lady Charvington, putting up a
tortoise-shell lorgnette, "quite a beauty I declare."

She frowned a trifle when she said this, for her own daughters, in
their 'teens at present, were not beautiful. She herself had no great
pretension to good looks, although she made the best of herself in
every way. She was as small as Lesbia, but did not possess such a
complexion or such a figure, and there was an ill-tempered droop to
her mouth which made the girl mistrust her. For Lord Charvington's
sake, since he had been so kind to her, Lesbia was anxious to love his
wife, and perhaps had she been a plain girl Lady Charvington might
have given her an opportunity of exercising such affection. But the
looks of Lesbia took her aback, as she saw in this delicately
beautiful girl a formidable rival, not only to her plain daughters but
to herself. For Lady Charvington, in spite of her age and of the fact
that she was married, flirted a great deal. However, swiftly as these
things passed through her mind, she did not permit them to be revealed
by her face and welcomed Lesbia with well-affected enthusiasm.

"You dear," she said, hopping up like a bird to peck the velvet cheek
of her proposed guest; "why have you hidden yourself for so long?"

"I have been stopping here with my father since I came from school,"
said Lesbia, trying to overcome a sudden dislike for this smiling
vision of small talk and chiffon.

Lady Charvington shook a dainty finger at Mr. Hale, who was looking on
well-pleased at the scene. "You naughty, naughty man," she cried
effusively and girlishly, "how dare you keep Beauty shut up in a
castle no one ever heard of? But that Charvington spoke about this
sweet thing the other day and proposed to have her over at the Court
for a few days, I should never never have seen her."

"I didn't wish to trouble you with my girl, Lady Charvington."

"Oh," Lady Charvington uttered a little scream of delight, while
taking in every detail of Lesbia's looks and costume, "there will be
no trouble. We have always plenty of nice boys at the Court and they
will lose their heads over this Sleeping Beauty. For you are that, you
know," she added to Lesbia, "whatever the poor dear creature's name
may have been. But I have come at my husband's express desire to wake
you up, and to find a prince who will kiss you."

"I have already got one," said Lesbia abruptly. "I am engaged!"

Hale frowned, as he thought that she was too candid, but Lady
Charvington felt more satisfied than she had been. An engaged girl
would not be so dangerous. "Then we must ask your prince over to the
Court also," she declared effusively and kissed Lesbia again. "I have
brought over the car to take you back to dinner. Get your frocks and
frills, dear, and we shall start while the afternoon is yet warm."

"Are you ready to go, Lesbia?" asked Hale, smiling artificially, for,
from the look on his daughter's face, he was not quite sure if she
approved of the invitation.

But he need not have troubled. Lesbia did not like Lady Charvington
but, being anxious to see my lady's husband and tell him of her
troubles--since the sending of the cheque proved him to be a kindly
man,--made up her mind to overcome her mistrust and travel in the
motor car. "Everything is ready," she said quietly. "I have only one
box."

"Oh, but, my dear, I wish you to stay for a week," protested the lady.

"So I understood, and thank you very much," replied the girl with
enforced cordiality. "And the one box of clothes will be sufficient."

"Dear me!" said Lady Charvington with a gasp, "what a careful girl you
must be. Why I take five boxes for a week's visit."

"I am not rich enough to do that. Besides," added Lesbia smiling, "I
should only cumber up your motor car."

"Oh, that is all right. It's a big thing and holds heaps. Have you
ever been in one, my dear girl?"

"Lesbia has lived a very quiet life," interposed Hale quickly, "and
knows nothing of modern luxury."

"Poor thing," said Lady Charvington, with a pitying glance. "I hope
your prince is wealthy," she added, turning to Lesbia.

The girl smiled. "On the contrary, he is very poor."

"Dear me! I seem to have found a paragon of virtue. But are you not
rather foolish, my dear girl? With such a face and such a figure and
with my influence you should make a better match."

"So I tell her," cried Hale quickly; he was always on the watch to put
in a word, "and she is not really engaged, Lady Charvington. There is
some disagreement between Lesbia and Mr. Walker."

"What a horrid name! So plebeian!" cried Lady Charvington.

"George is not plebeian," said Lesbia, colouring hotly, "his father
was the Honourable Aylmer Walker."

"Lord Casterton's third son," said the visitor, nodding. "Yes, I have
heard of him from my brothers. He was rather wild, was he not?"

"Really I don't know."

"There is no chance of his coming in for the title--your George, I
mean," prattled on Lady Charvington, "as Aylmer Walker's two elder
brothers have both heaps and heaps of children. I rather think that
Aylmer was the black ba-ba of the family. Well, there, I'm talking
scandal, a thing of which I highly disapprove. Go and get your things
on, dear, and tell your man to put your box on the motor. Wilkins will
help him. He's the chauffeur--not at all a bad driver, but oh, so
dreadfully reckless. Be prepared to go like the wind, my dear."

Lady Charvington babbled on in this fashion with bird-like glances
here and there, taking in every detail of the room. She knew that Hale
was a poor relation of her husband's, and indeed had received him
twice or thrice at The Court near Maidenhead. But this was the first
time she had seen his daughter and, but for the express command of
Lord Charvington, she would not have asked her over. There was some
comfort in the fact that the girl's affections were engaged, but all
the same, such beauty, whether free or bound, would prove dangerous.
"I trust she won't interfere with my men," thought Lady Charvington as
she smiled sweetly on Lesbia leaving the tiny drawing-room.

The girl summoned Tim to take her box to the motorcar which was
panting violently at the door, and went to her room to put on her hat.
She made a desperate attempt while doing so to overcome her dislike to
Lady Charvington, as she felt sure that for some reason the little
woman was hostile. Lesbia was too unsophisticated to put down the
hostility to the fact that Lady Charvington found her exasperatingly
beautiful, and was puzzled to think why any hostility should exist.
But it certainly was there, and Lesbia detected it immediately.
However, as she could see no reason for any such feeling existing
between her and a woman who--on the face of it--was doing her a
kindness, she fought desperately with her intuition. Still it seemed
to her that she was but leaving one abode of trouble to go to another,
wherein even more annoying things might happen. And the root of all
the worry was the missing cross.

Tim took down the box and then returned to Lesbia's bedroom as she was
issuing therefrom. He drew her back mysteriously and produced a letter
cautiously from his inner pocket. "This is for you, Miss," he declared
in a whisper, "it came under cover to me by the mid-day post, with a
scratch av a pin saying Mr. Canning sint it, and 'twas to be given ye
at onct."

"Mr. Canning!" Lesbia's face grew eager, and she hastily opened the
thin envelope to skim five or six lines written on foreign notepaper.
What she read surprised her, and she noted that the address given was
in a quiet street in Whitechapel.


"I have heard indirectly," wrote The Shadow, "that you are going some
time to The Court, Lord Charvington's place near Maidenhead. If you
do, keep a good watch, as two London thieves--the same who robbed
Tait's strong-room by Tait's direction--are about to try to steal Lady
Charvington's jewels when everyone is at dinner. The attempt will be
made on Thursday evening. I advise you to warn Lord Charvington, but
tell him not to bring in the police, as he will deeply regret doing
so. Yours always, C."


This mysterious letter, signed with Canning's initial, startled
Lesbia, For the moment she felt inclined to go down and tell her
father: but on second thoughts and with a discretion far beyond her
years, she decided to say nothing until she met her host. It was now
Tuesday, and the burglary was not arranged for until Thursday. There
was ample time.

"It's nothing, Tim," she said mendaciously, putting the letter away.
"Good-bye for one whole week, you dear old thing," and she kissed him
fondly.




CHAPTER XVI
RECOGNITION


The Court, near Maidenhead, was Lord Charvington's chief country
residence on account of its proximity to London. It was a modern
mansion built in early Victorian days and, in accordance with the
taste of that period, had no great pretensions to architectural
beauty. In fact it might be called ugly, and was a huge, staring
barrack of a place, quite out of keeping with the beauty of the
surrounding grounds. These were of large extent, and so admirably laid
out that they made up for the deficiencies of the building, which,
after all, was comfortable enough within doors, if its external aspect
was uninviting. Modern luxury had made the many rooms very habitable,
and the barn--it looked like a barn--was furnished with the
magnificence of Aladdin's palace.

Lesbia arrived with her hostess in time for afternoon tea and was
speedily introduced to Lord Charvington. There were at least ten
guests of fashionable London stopping for a few days and, while Lady
Charvington chatted with these, her husband made himself agreeable to
Miss Hale. She was very glad to find Charvington so agreeable and
sympathetic, for naturally her first plunge into society made her
somewhat shy. And her host was particularly attentive, quite in a
different way from Lady Charvington's careless hospitality. After a
few minutes' conversation Lesbia felt as though she had known him for
years, and was soon quite at her ease. In fact, Lady Charvington, at
the other end of the room, cast a displeased look in Lesbia's
direction, when she heard her laughing so gaily, and saw how her
pretty face was wreathed in smiles. Charvington was making a fool of
the girl, she thought, and indeed privately deemed it foolish that he
had lifted the girl into a circle so alien to her ordinary life, since
she had neither the money nor the experience to sustain her new
position. However, Charvington had made a point of his cousin's
daughter being asked, so Lady Charvington gave way, as she always did
to her husband in small things.

Charvington was a tall and somewhat stout man, with a fresh-coloured
face and leonine masses of white hair worn somewhat long. He was
clean-shaven, with merry blue eyes filled with vigorous life, and
possessed a strong, calm voice, sympathetic and sweet. His manner was
brisk and lively, and more suited to youth than to age. Not that he
was so very old, for he certainly appeared as lively as the youngest
man in the room. Everyone in the West End knew Lord Charvington, as he
was rich and kind-hearted, two things which beget a very agreeable
reputation. Many a young man had to thank Charvington for help and
advice, and in an unostentatious way he did a great deal of good. When
Lesbia talked with him and became acquainted with his personality, she
no longer wondered that he had acceded so readily to her request for a
loan. The purse of such a genial man was always open to the needy, and
very often to the undeserving.

"I am glad you have come over, Lesbia," he said admiringly, as they
sat in a quiet corner of the room far from the chattering guests.
"Hale did not tell me that you were so pretty. By the way, you must
not mind my calling you by your Christian name. I knew you when you
were but a baby, and it is my privilege, as your elderly cousin, to be
familiar."

"I am very glad you _are_ familiar," said the girl, lifting her eyes
to the strong, kind face, "and I cannot forget that you sent me that
fifty pounds so kindly, without asking what I wished to do with it."

"Pooh! pooh! That is nothing, child. Who should help you but I?
Whenever you are in want of money write to me, and you will receive a
cheque by return of post. I am your cousin, you know. And a very bad
cousin at that," added Charvington, with sudden energy. "I should have
had you here long ago. You must have led a dull life in Marlow."

"No," answered Lesbia quietly, "there was always George."

"Who is George?"

"The man I love."

"Oh!" Charvington's eyes twinkled more than ever; "you are engaged."

"Yes and no."

The man looked puzzled. "What do you mean? I don't like riddles."

Lesbia sighed. "It is a riddle, and a very painful one. For that
reason I accepted your kind invitation and came over. I want to tell
you what I did with the fifty pounds, and also I wish to ask your
advice."

"I shall be delighted to give it, but surely your father--"

"My father"--Lesbia checked a scornful remark which was on the tip of
her tongue--"my father would take no interest in what I wish to tell
you."

Charvington bent his brow and looked at her thoughtfully. "You shall
come to the library in the morning, and there we can have a chat," he
said. "Only one thing I ask you now: your father does not treat you
badly?"

"No," faltered the girl, looking down; she could not betray her
father, although he had behaved so ill. "My father is--well enough,"
she ended lamely.

"Humph!" muttered Charvington, with his eyes still on her face. "Well,
well, we shall see! Meantime have some more tea," and he walked across
the room to have her cup filled.

No more was said for the time being, but Charvington's kind manner
made Lesbia more determined than ever to confide in him. She believed
that she had at length found a friend who would aid her to withstand
the tyranny of her father, and who would assist to put things right
with her lover. They were crooked enough now in all conscience.
Moreover, in any case, she was forced to show him Canning's letter, so
that he might provide against the projected burglary. If she told this
much she would have to tell all, for only by making a clean breast of
it could she be extricated from the mire into which she had sunk,
through no fault of her own. All that evening she longed for the
morning, so that she might tell her new friend the many difficulties
which were making her miserable.

Not that the evening was dull. On the contrary, as the mansion was
filled with lively, well-bred people, it was quite a revelation to
Lesbia in the way of enjoyment. Everyone seemed to be happy and
untroubled by care, which contrasted strongly with the incessant worry
which went on within the four walls of Rose Cottage. These society
people--outwardly at all events--seemed as careless gods, happy,
merry, and gloriously irresponsible. Later in life Lesbia learned what
sadness lurked under this frivolous, laughing exterior, but at this
time she was quite deceived, and thought to herself, "How happy are
the rich and well-born!"

Lady Charvington's two daughters--not yet old enough to be
presented--were very nice girls, although they were decidedly
plain-looking. But they appeared to have none of their mother's
jealousy regarding Lesbia's beauty, and made much of her. She found
herself laughing and talking and entering into their girlish lives,
quite as if she had known them for many years. Lord Charvington seemed
particularly pleased that this should be so, and presided over the
trio like a benevolent wizard. For the most part Lesbia was with the
two girls during her visit, in spite of the attentions paid to her by
sundry youths smitten by her beauty. Seeing this, Lady Charvington
became much more gracious, and inwardly decided that Lesbia Hale knew
her place. All the same she was a trifle uneasy at the way in which
Charvington hovered round the pretty visitor. Not that she cared over
much for her husband, who was older than she was; nevertheless, she
did not like to see him paying marked attentions to anyone else.

On the first evening, there was a small dance after a very splendid
dinner. Lesbia, in her simple white dress, attracted much notice, but
she preferred to talk to Agatha and Lena, Lord Charvington's
daughters, and to laugh at their father's mild witticisms. During a
lull in the dance there was some singing, and towards the end of the
evening an excellent supper. Lesbia retired at midnight, while yet
the festivities were in full swing. This was at Lord Charvington's
express wish, as he did not approve of youth losing any necessary
beauty-sleep. When she laid her head on the pillow and was falling
asleep, Lesbia confessed that she had enjoyed herself greatly. If
George had only been present the evening would have been perfect.

Next morning, Agatha and Lena woke her early and took her round
the grounds. The girls exchanged confidences--chiefly about school
life,--ran races on the dewy sward, and entered filled with the joy of
life to eat a surprisingly good breakfast. Lady Charvington was rather
astounded at Lesbia's appetite. So pretty a girl, she decided, should
eat less and talk less. But Lesbia, although a fairy in looks, could
not live on fairy food, and enjoyed to the full the excellent meal
provided by the very capable chef of her host. "Horrid, greedy, pert
girl," thought Lady Charvington, who was all smiles and attention. "I
am sure I shan't like her!"--quite a needless thought, as she already
heartily disliked her visitor for other reasons than because she was
pretty. But these reasons Lesbia did not learn for some months. Then
they did not matter, as life had changed by that time for the better.

After breakfast, Lord Charvington carried off his pretty little guest
to a noble room lined with books, and placing her in a most
comfortable arm-chair, took his own seat at his desk. "Now, my child,
what is it?" he asked.

"It is rather difficult to begin," faltered Lesbia, feeling if she had
the fatal letter in her pocket.

"Not with me, my dear. You know that you can trust me implicitly."

"Yes," said Lesbia, raising her clear eyes to the kind face. "Well
then I shall begin from the time I gave George the amethyst cross."

"What?" Charvington's ruddy face grew pale, and he pushed back his
chair with considerable violence; "the amethyst cross!"

"Do you know anything about it?" asked Lesbia, astonished by his
change of colour and evident emotion. "It is lost you know--stolen."

"Who stole it?" demanded the man mastering himself with an apparent
effort.

"Listen," said Lesbia, and related everything from the time George
Walker had proposed to the moment of Lady Charvington's arrival at
Rose Cottage. But for the moment she said nothing of the letter from
Canning. That could keep until she heard what Charvington had to say
to the first part of her story. And it may be mentioned that Lesbia
spared her father as much as possible, while explaining her
difficulties.

After his first violent movement, Lord Charvington listened in dead
silence, and his colour slowly returned. With his eyes averted, he
heard the whole extraordinary tale, without interruption, and only
when it was concluded did he speak. Then he gave but small comfort. "I
cannot understand what it all means," he said slowly. "I shall see
Hale, and doubtless he will be able to explain matters. But have no
fear, child, if you love George Walker, you shall marry him. I know
Mrs. Walker, and I knew her husband. A wild fellow was Aylmer Walker,
but not without his good points."

"And you won't let my father have me watched again," said Lesbia
anxiously.

"Certainly not," cried Charvington fiercely. "If I had known that, I
would have--but that's neither here nor there. Your father owes me too
much to disregard my wishes. I shall see that he leaves you your full
liberty and that he consents to your marriage with George. I hope he
is worthy of you, my dear--George I mean," he added wistfully.

"Oh yes. He's the dearest, sweetest, best----"

"There! There!" Charvington smiled a trifle drily. "I can see that
your heart is set upon being Mrs. Walker. Very good. I shall see that
George has an opportunity of earning money, so that you can marry
him."

"And the cross?"

"Never mind the cross just now," said Charvington hastily. "I shall
have to see your father about that. Later we can talk on the subject.
But this Tait," he drummed anxiously with his fingers on the table;
"I knew Tait many years ago. He always was a scoundrel, although I
did not think he would go so far as to join himself with professional
thieves----"

"Oh," Lesbia drew the letter of Canning from her pocket, "I forgot.
Read this, Lord Charvington. It's a warning--only don't tell the
police."

Her host mounted his pince-nez and read the missive in surprise. His
face grew a dark red, and he muttered a word which Lesbia luckily did
not overhear. Then he folded the letter and placed it in his pocket
without remark.

"You won't tell the police," said Lesbia again and still anxiously.

"No," said Charvington, rising, "from what Canning found out before, I
believe Tait is in this business also. I don't want for several
reasons to make a scandal connected with the man, although he deserves
to be gaoled for life. Still, I shall take precautions by having the
house watched. Also I must get my wife to put away her jewel-casket in
the safe. She is very careless about her jewels, and leaves the casket
in her bedroom, sometimes in a drawer or wardrobe, but more often open
on the dressing-table. The maid should put it away, of course, but
she's a half-blind old creature who was my wife's nurse, and neglects
things. But to-day is Wednesday and the burglary is arranged for
to-morrow evening when we dine. I shall see that my wife puts away her
jewels to-morrow evening. I shall go to her room and see that they are
safe before I go to dinner."

"But why not to-day also?" asked Lesbia anxiously.

"The burglary is not until to-morrow evening, child," said Charvington
kindly. "They are safe until then, as they have been safe for years in
spite of my wife's gross carelessness and trust in her neglectful old
nurse. No, my dear, you have given me a needed warning, so it is no
use bothering your head further. To-morrow, I shall make all safe.
When these two thieves find that the house is guarded, they will not
attempt the robbery."

"Will you warn Lady Charvington?"

"What! and have her fall into hysterics? No. I shall merely see that
the jewels are locked up nightly after to-morrow, and have the house
watched for a week or so. My wife need know nothing, my dear."

"I shall keep my own counsel," said Lesbia, rising to leave the room,
"but I do wish you would have the jewels put away to-night, Lord
Charvington."

"Well," he smiled kindly, "perhaps, as you are so anxious I shall.
But, as we know the time and date of the projected burglary, there is
no need."

Lesbia went away, comforted to think that Charvington now knew all her
troubles, and would help her when it was necessary. Doubtless he would
procure George a good situation, and then she could marry her lover.
But the emotion of Charvington, when the amethyst cross was mentioned,
puzzled Lesbia greatly, as there appeared to be no reason for it.
However, she comforted herself with the reflection, that--as he had
promised--he would explain everything when the appointed time arrived,
and went to enjoy her holiday with the two girls. The enjoyment took
the form of a picnic and a run down the river on Lord Charvington's
fine steam launch.

When the girls were out of the way, Charvington sought his wife and
pointed out to her the folly of leaving a case full of rich jewels on
her dressing-table. "They might be stolen," he remonstrated.

Lady Charvington was not at all grateful. "You are always making a
fuss over the jewels," she said impatiently. "I have left the case in
my bedroom for years and I have never lost a single thing."

"That doesn't say you might not lose the lot," snapped Charvington,
who found his wife trying even to his kindly nature.

"There's time enough to talk when I do lose them."

"Then it will be too late. I ask you to put them away every night in
the strong-room. Bertha can take the case there, when she has dressed
you for dinner."

"Very well," said Lady Charvington, who was impatient to return to a
very interesting book she was reading. "I'll tell Bertha, though I'm
sure if the case is in my bedroom she can look after it well enough."

"Pooh. She's half blind. Why don't you get a better maid?"

"Bertha's been with me all my life, and I shall keep her until she is
past work. You have no heart, Charvington," she ended virtuously.

"She's past work now," said her husband, as he stalked from the
boudoir.

Nothing more was said, but had Charvington been in the house on that
Wednesday evening he would either have asked his wife if the jewels
had been put away, or have attended to the matter himself. But during
the day he suddenly decided to go up to London in order to see a
private detective whom he had employed before on various delicate
matters. It would be just as well, thought Charvington, to have this
man in the house on Thursday evening. Then, if the two thieves alluded
to by Canning did arrive, the man could lay hands on them. Not that
Charvington wished to make a public case of the matter, since, as he
had hinted to Lesbia, he was anxious to avoid scandal in connection
with Tait, whom he shrewdly suspected of having a hand in this new
piece of rascality. For this reason he went up to London to engage the
private detective, and remained in town for the night. Next day he
purposed coming back with his assistant and then the matter could be
settled quietly. Lady Charvington would not lose her jewels, and there
would be no trouble--publicly at all events--in connection with Mr.
Michael Tait.

All that Wednesday Lesbia enjoyed herself on the river with her host's
daughters, in spite of the launch's breaking down temporarily on the
way back, in consequence of some accident to the engines. Consequently
it was not until seven o'clock at night that the three girls arrived
in Maidenhead, and it was thirty minutes past when they came to The
Court. Lady Charvington, who had been anxious about their non-arrival,
expressed herself as annoyed at their failure to be in to dinner,
which was at seven o'clock. She sent a message saying that Agatha and
Lena were to dine in their school-room with the governess. Lesbia
feeling herself a culprit--although on the face of it not one of the
three was to blame--decided to dine with the girls and to make her
apologies afterwards to Lady Charvington. And a very merry dinner they
had, for the governess was a charming, middle-aged lady, who made
everything very pleasant. And then the love of Agatha and Lena for
their newly-found cousin grew with every hour. On the whole, Lesbia
enjoyed that school-room meal more than the splendid dinner of the
previous night. She was the more pleased that she had remained absent,
as she was told by the governess that Lord Charvington was away in
London.

After that merry meal, Lesbia went to change her dress in order to go
down to the drawing-room. Agatha and Lena followed to chatter and
help, as they did not like to be separated from their visitor.
Lesbia's room was on the first floor, near that of the girls, and on
the way the three had to pass the door of Lady Charvington's bedroom.
It was closed, but as they passed they heard a shriek of alarm, and
opening it at once saw one man escaping by the window, and another
struggling with Bertha, the ancient maid. Agatha and Lena ran away
screaming for help, but Lesbia dashed forward to help the old woman.
At that moment the man--who wore a mask--threw Bertha on the ground
and ran towards the window. Lesbia caught him before he could fling
his leg over the sill, and tore off the mask. Then she uttered a cry
of dismay and terror.

"Father!" she shrieked, and dropped down in a dead faint.




CHAPTER XVII
DISGRACE


Next morning, Lesbia was sitting in her bedroom, thinking over the
terrible event of the previous night. She had remained in a faint for
a considerable time, and had recovered consciousness to find herself
lying on her bed. At once she had desired to see Lady Charvington, but
her hostess sent up a message asking that Lesbia should wait until the
arrival of Lord Charvington, who had been wired for. From the somewhat
pert behaviour of the maid who brought the message, the unfortunate
girl felt that she was in disgrace, and did not dare to resent it.
Having recognised her father in the man whose mask she had torn off,
she fancied that the whole household knew of the matter. But in this
she was wrong, as she learned, when Agatha, the elder of the girls,
came by stealth to her room about eleven o'clock at night.

"I don't know what is the matter with mother," said Agatha speaking in
a whisper and keeping a watchful eye on the door, "she told Lena and I
that we were not to see you, or speak to you."

"Why?" stammered Lesbia, feeling sick with shame.

"I don't know. I suppose mother is angry at the loss of her jewels.
But my father always told her that she would lose them."

"Have they caught the thieves?"

"No. Lena and I screamed, and everyone came rushing, up. They found
Bertha lying half stunned on the floor, and you in a faint. The two
men had a motorcar at the gate and got away."

Lesbia turned even whiter than she was. "Do they know who the men
are?"

"Of course they don't. They wore masks, you know," said Agatha, "but
one mask was found on the floor. Bertha said that you pulled it off
the man who was struggling with her. Did you know his face?"

"No," muttered Lesbia. The lie choked her, but she could not denounce
her own father, evil as he was.

"I expect when I fainted he jumped from the window after his
companion, and managed to reach the motorcar. Has your father
returned, Agatha dear?"

"No," answered the girl softly, "he is coming back in the morning.
Mother has brought in the police from Maidenhead, but I heard her tell
the chief man that you were too ill to be questioned until the
morning. Mother seems to be very angry with you, Lesbia. I wonder
why?"

"I don't know, dear," said the girl, and indeed she did not. If the
names of the thieves were unknown, Lady Charvington could have nothing
against her. "But if your mother doesn't want you to speak to me,
Agatha, you must go back to bed. When the morning comes I shall see
your mother and ask what is the matter."

"See father," said Agatha, pattering across the room with bare feet,
"he is fond of you: he told me so. Mother is always jealous of anyone
father likes and she will only be disagreeable. I waited till Lena was
asleep, then came here. But I'll go now," she returned to kiss Lesbia,
"good-night, dear, and don't worry. Everything will be right when
father comes back."

Lesbia thought so also. She had implicit faith in Lord Charvington as
his daughter had, and knew that he would understand when he heard the
truth. But could she tell him the truth? Could she say that the man to
whom he allowed an annuity had crept into the house to steal the
jewels? And then Canning had said particularly that the two thieves
were the same that had robbed Tait's strong-room by Tait's direction.
In that case, her father was doubly a villain, as he was not only a
thief, but had tried to throw the blame of the first burglary on
George Walker in order to bring about a separation between them. Now
he had added a second crime to the first, and had robbed his
benefactor and cousin at the very time that his own daughter was a
guest in the house. Canning must have known of her father's guilt and
so, in his letter--for Lesbia's sake no doubt--had advised that the
police should not be brought in. But would Charvington keep the affair
quiet when his wife had lost her jewels? And in any case would he not
send from the house in anger the daughter of such a villain? It was
all terrible, shameful, disgraceful, and poor Lesbia sobbed herself to
sleep at the horror of it all.

Next morning she could eat no breakfast, but after a cold bath to
freshen her up, dressed and sat by the window waiting for Lord
Charvington's arrival. At first she was inclined to see her hostess
and ask why she behaved so oddly. But the fancy was strong within her,
that Lady Charvington in some way must have learned the identity of at
least one of the thieves, and so was visiting the shame of the father
on the head of the innocent daughter. But then Lesbia could not
conjecture if this was true. As Lady Charvington had not entered her
bedroom until Hale escaped, she could not have recognised him, and as
Hale had escaped the truth would never become known unless Lesbia
spoke. This she did not intend to do, unless to Lord Charvington, whom
she could trust. She therefore waited patiently. At all events, as she
gathered from Agatha's report, whatever Lady Charvington suspected she
certainly had not informed the household, in spite of the demeanour of
the pert servant. Nevertheless, the very forbidding of the two girls
to see Lesbia pointed to doubts and hatred and knowledge of the worst
on Lady Charvington's part.

As Lesbia sat there looking out on to the beautiful garden with
tear-filled eyes, she recalled many circumstances in her father's life
which brought home to her forcibly his wicked vocation. The sordid
persons who came by stealth to Rose Cottage must have been thieves and
fences who received stolen goods. Her father's mysterious actions and
frequent absences were accounted for by the fact, for when away he
probably had been robbing with his shameful associates. No wonder he
had laughed when George had proposed to leave Tait's office and join
him in business. And Tait also was a rogue and a scoundrel, belonging
to the gang of which Walter Hale was a member. Sargent might be a
thief also--but of this Lesbia could not be certain. Nevertheless, she
began to suspect that Canning _alias_ The Shadow had something to do
with the robberies. That would explain why a gentleman would descend
to being a spy. Canning was under Hale's thumb and would have to do
what he was told to do. Then she recollected how he had stated that
for telling her about Tait's scheme he would have to go into hiding.
There could be no doubt about it. Canning belonged to the gang and out
of gratitude had betrayed his sordid associates.

Thinking thus Lesbia grew sick and faint. The thought of the
wickedness that surrounded her made her shiver. How could she expect
George to marry her when she was the daughter of a thief? And she
would be forced to tell him, since she could not marry him and keep
silent upon such an important point. To marry George without telling
him the truth would be to place herself in the power of her father.
And now knowing what her father was, Lesbia felt certain that to put
money into his pocket he would not stop short of blackmail. No, she
would have to tell what she had discovered to George and to Lord
Charvington, and thus in one moment she would lose the only two
friends she possessed. Tim remained and Lesbia knew that, come what
might, she could always depend upon the fidelity of the Irishman; she
felt sure that Tim was as innocent as herself of this dreadful
knowledge which had come to ruin her life. In all wide England there
was no more miserable girl than the unfortunate Lesbia, as she sat
weeping by the window and bidding farewell to happiness and
respectability.

Towards noon a message was brought that Lord Charvington wished to see
her in the library, and Lesbia after washing away all traces of the
bitter tears she had shed descended the stairs. She was pale and worn,
but held herself proudly, for whatever might be known, she was
determined to face the worst. Several people were in the hall, and she
saw a policeman near the door. But no one looked at her in any way
suggesting that the terrible truth was known, so Lesbia entered the
noble library with a hope that her father had escaped recognition by
all save herself.

Only two people were in the library, Lord Charvington and his wife.
The former was walking to and fro with a worried expression on his
kind face, but the latter seated in an arm-chair near the window
looked red with anger and apparently had been engaged in a furious
argument: "If you don't tell, I shall," she was saying when Lesbia
entered.

"You shall say nothing," said Lord Charvington sternly. "Hold your
tongue as you have done. Hitherto you have displayed sense in keeping
silence and in silencing Bertha. Continue to behave and----"

"Here's the girl," snapped Lady Charvington, interrupting as Lesbia
came silently into the room and closed the door.

"Why do you speak of me in that way?" asked Lesbia, up in arms at
once. Knowing herself innocent, she did not intend to stand insult.

"You will soon learn," retorted the other, curling her lip. "I wonder
you are not ashamed of yourself. And after all my kindness too, and
my----"

"Silence, Helen," said Lord Charvington imperiously. "How dare you
talk to Miss Hale so insolently?"

"Miss Hale," sneered his wife. "Why not call her Lesbia, as you have
done?"

"I have every right to; she is my cousin." Lord Charvington made an
angry gesture to impose silence on his indignant wife, and turned to
the girl who stood pale and motionless. "My poor Lesbia, don't look so
woe-begone. I will stand by you whatever my wife may say."

"What does she say?" asked Lesbia quietly.

"You had better hear her when she is more composed," said Lord
Charvington with a glance at his wife, thereby arousing her to fresh
fury. "She will probably say something in the heat of the moment for
which she will be sorry. Helen, had you not better go and lie down?"

Lady Charvington arose with a red spot burning on either cheek, and
her eyes glittered like those of an angry cat. "How dare you speak to
me like this in my own house, Charvington?" she cried in a shrill
voice. "I don't leave this room until you turn that shameless girl out
of doors."

"What do you mean?" demanded Lesbia indignantly; but with a sinking
heart.

"Mean," screamed the infuriated woman; "I mean that Bertha heard you
calling the masked man who attacked you, 'Father!' And you cannot deny
it. See, Charvington," she pointed tauntingly to the agonised girl,
"she dare not deny it. Oh you--you daughter of a thief; you accomplice
of a thief."

"Helen, Helen; be silent."

"I shall not be silent. When Bertha told me the truth I ordered her to
hold her tongue until you returned, Charvington. I have held my peace
myself and neither the police nor the servants nor our friends know
that this horrid girl is the daughter of a thief. Why you take such an
interest in the minx I don't know, but surely after what we have
discovered you will pack her off to gaol."

"To gaol; to gaol," Lesbia drew herself up, pale, but fearless. As
Lady Charvington hurled her accusations, the girl's spirit rose to
defend herself. After all, guilty as her father might be, she at least
was innocent. "How dare you speak to me in this way?" she said again.

"And how dare you face me, you cat?" snarled Lady Charvington, looking
much more like a cat herself. "You arrange with your abominable father
to rob me of my jewels, you enter my house to----"

Before Lord Charvington could put out his hand to stop her--for he was
afraid to think what these two angry women might do--Lesbia glided
past him, and stood face to face with her enemy. "You lie," she
breathed in such a low, fierce voice that the other woman fell back
into her chair with a gasp of fear. "I knew nothing of this. I had no
wish to rob you of your jewels."

"Yes, you had, and I know why!"

"Explain then. I dare you to explain."

Lady Charvington cast a swift glance at her husband. "I know what I
know."

"You know that I am innocent," said Lesbia, clenching her hands; "I
dare you to say that I am not."

"You are your father's accomplice."

"That is untrue," broke in Lord Charvington smoothly, "Lesbia warned
me that the jewels would be stolen."

"Of course," scoffed his wife triumphantly, "she knew!"

"If I had been in league with my father would I have given the
warning?"

"Yes," said Lady Charvington, rising to confront Lesbia, who had asked
the question. "My husband showed me the letter purporting to come from
some man in London. It said that the burglary was arranged for
Thursday, and by telling my husband that, he thought he might safely
leave the house and go to London to engage a detective, while your
father robbed the house on Wednesday. It's a well-arranged business."

"I don't know why the burglary took place on Wednesday," said Lesbia
steadily; "the letter I gave Lord Charvington is perfectly true. I
can't explain further than I have done."

"Because you can't; because you can't," taunted Lady Charvington, "but
you shall leave my house in disgrace."

Lord Charvington caught his wife's wrist. "Lesbia shall return to her
home this day," he said imperiously, "because I won't have her
stopping here to be insulted by you. Bertha will say nothing of what
she overheard, as I have forbidden her to speak on the pain of instant
dismissal. You also, Helen, shall hold your tongue."

"I will do nothing of the sort," breathed Lady Charvington
vindictively.

"You shall. I will not permit you to ruin an innocent girl. Knowing
that Hale has stolen your jewels, I can get them back, and have
already communicated with him."

"The police----"

"The police can do nothing. Hale and his accomplice got away cleverly
in their motorcar and cannot be traced. If the jewels are returned
intact--which they will be, as I can force Hale to return them--the
police will not move further in the matter, as I can stop them. Then
this painful episode will be a thing of the past."

"I want that girl disgraced as an accomplice," said the elder woman,
grinding her teeth and pointing towards Lesbia.

Charvington put his arm round Lesbia's waist or she would have fallen.
"I shall not allow it, Helen," he said quietly. "Lesbia is innocent.
Woman, have you no pity for the poor thing; surely she is suffering
enough already, in finding out that her father is a thief."

"Her father," jeered Lady Charvington insultingly. "Oh, yes, her
father," she moved swiftly towards the library door. "If you get back
my jewels I shall hold my tongue, for reasons which you may guess,
Charvington. But don't let that creature come near me, or I shall--I
shall--oh." Lady Charvington could scarcely contain herself. "How I
hate you; hate you. I wish you were dead with all my heart and soul,
you--you----"

What she was about to say in her furious anger Lesbia could not guess.
But whatever it was she never uttered the epithet. Charvington
suddenly moved towards his wife and towering above her glared into her
eyes. "If you say another word I'll kill you."

Lady Charvington quailed. "You are quite capable of doing so," she
breathed undauntedly; "I'm not afraid of you. But clear my house of
that," and with a jeering laugh, she pointed at the trembling girl and
left the room.

"What--what does she mean?" gasped Lesbia, sinking into a chair, her
courage all gone. "What have I done? How can I help my father--my
father--oh Lord Charvington!" and she broke down weeping bitterly.

"Hush! hush!" He stood over her, patting her heaving shoulder. "She
doesn't know what she is saying. I'll see that she holds her tongue
and Bertha also. Nothing will ever be known of your father's
complicity in this crime."

"But what does it mean?" asked Lesbia, lifting a tear-stained face.

"God knows," muttered Charvington moodily, "I have been mistaken in
your father, my dear."

"But--but you don't blame me?"

"No," he declared emphatically, "a thousand times no. My dear, I love
you as if you were my own child, and I shall never, never believe any
harm of you in any way. I can keep my wife's tongue silent, but I can
do no more. You must return to Marlow, until such time as I can
arrange further about your marriage with George Walker."

"Oh," Lesbia wailed and stretched her arms, "I cannot marry him now.
Who would marry the daughter of a thief? Father was one of the thieves
who robbed Mr. Tait's strong-room."

"At Tait's request remember," interpolated Charvington quickly.

Lesbia brushed away the speech. "Oh, what does it matter even if they
are all thieves. But George must have known the dreadful truth and so
he will not renew our engagement. I did not understand him before; I
do now."

"There! there!" Charvington patted her shoulder again, "don't worry.
All will come right, I am sure, and in a way which you do not expect."

Lesbia looked up with sudden hope. "You know of something."

"Yes," said the man gloomily. "I know of something. Don't ask me any
further questions just now, but go back to Marlow. The motorcar is
already at the door with your box on it. As all our other guests have
left the house, your departure will cause no surprise."

"But the police. Will they not want to question me?"

"I'll attend to that. I told the inspector that if necessary he could
question you at Rose Cottage. But as I hope to make your father give
back the jewels, the prosecution will be dropped. Remember, the police
do not know that your father is guilty. Being thus ignorant, they can
do nothing. Go away in peace, my dear, and leave everything to me."

Lesbia rose shuddering. "How can I go back to my father, knowing what
I now know?" she murmured, shivering.

"You go back to the cottage," explained Charvington distinctly. "It is
my cottage, as I pay the rent; the furniture also is mine. I have
supported your father for years and this is the way he repays me.
However, the cottage is yours. I promise you that your father will not
come near you."

"I trust not! I trust not. I could not face him. And you?"

"I shall come over and see you shortly. But go away, contented to know
that all is well. There will be no scandal, and not a word will be
said about this burglary. Your father is safe and you are safe. Later,
I shall see about getting your father to go to Australia, and then you
can marry Walker."

"If he will have me," sighed the unfortunate girl.

"Lesbia," Charvington took her face between his two hands and looked
into her eyes; "I swear that you shall marry him. There! Let the dead
past alone and dream of future happiness," and he kissed her solemnly.




CHAPTER XVIII
LADY CHARVINGTON'S ACCUSATIONS


While Lesbia was thus having so miserable a time, George Walker was
living very quietly, sometimes in London, but more often in Medmenham.
He carefully avoided all mention of Lesbia's name, and when his mother
questioned him regarding his reason for refusing to renew the
engagement he declined to explain. Mrs. Walker was much annoyed by
what she termed his mule-headedness as, after her visit to Rose
Cottage, she was quite willing that Lesbia should become her
daughter-in-law.

"I cannot understand you, George," said Mrs. Walker to her son during
one of their frequent wrangles. "When I objected to this girl, nothing
would do but that you must marry her. Now that I have taken a fancy to
her, you refuse to have anything to do with her. I never thought a son
of mine would blow hot and cold in this silly fashion."

"I am not blowing hot or cold," returned George gloomily; he was very,
very gloomy in those days and had lost all his light-heartedness.
"Lesbia is the only girl in the world that I care to marry. But how
can I make her my wife, when I haven't a penny to keep her with?"

"That is mere evasion. Things are very little changed from the time
you would have married her in the teeth of poverty."

"There is this much change, that I have lost my situation with Tait
and am now living on my mother, which is the meanest thing a man can
do. How then can I renew my engagement with Lesbia?"

"Because I wish you to," said Mrs. Walker promptly, and bent her black
brows.

"I understood you hated her."

"Indeed, I never did," she rejoined sharply. "How could I hate anyone
whom I had never seen? Don't be a fool, George. I certainly hated her
father and I hate him still, for a very good reason, which it does not
concern you to know. But after I saw the girl I repented that I had
not been to see her before, since you loved her. She is an innocent
darling, and I should like no one better for my daughter. It would be
unfair to visit the sins of the father on so sweet a child."

"Yet if the child wasn't sweet," said George drily, "you would not
mind doing so. You are somewhat inconsistent."

"I am not so inconsistent as you are," said his mother, skilfully
avoiding a reply by carrying the war into hic camp. "What I wish to
know is--why do you decline to renew your engagement?"

"I have no money and no situation."

"That isn't the true reason.

"It is the sole reason which I choose to give."

"There is no necessity to be rude, George," said Mrs. Walker with
great dignity. "Cannot you get another situation?"

"Not easily. Tait will give me no references, nor do I care to ask him
for any. Situations are hard to get without references."

Mrs. Walker clasped her strong, white hands together and frowned. "It
is quite absurd that my son and the son of your father should be a
mere clerk in the City," she burst out. "Can't you do something
better?"

"No," replied George gloomily. "I am not clever, and I have not been
brought up to any trade."

"Trade! Trade! My son in trade."

George was sad enough at heart, yet could not forbear smiling at the
horror expressed on her countenance. "There is nothing disgraceful in
trade," he remarked quietly. "My grandfather Morse was a merchant."

"And your grandfather Casterton was an earl," snapped Mrs. Walker.
"There's your uncle, the present owner of the title. Why not go to
him, and see if he cannot assist you?"

"And when I ask him, what excuse can I make?"

"He is your uncle: he has every right to assist you."

"I fear he might not see things in the same light, mother. Besides I
have no qualifications." George paused, then added gloomily: "An
out-of-door colonial life would suit me. Give me enough to get to
Canada or Australia, mother, and there I can carve my way."

"What about me?" asked Mrs. Walker reproachfully.

"I would make a home for you beyond the seas and you can come out
later."

Mrs. Walker shook her head. "I am too old to travel so far," she said
grimly, "moreover, I intend to wait until I get the fortune of my
sister. She is dead: I am sure from what Walter Hale says that there
is no child, so in the end Jabez must give me the fifty thousand
pounds. That money would put all things right: your marriage
included."

"Not with Lesbia," said the young man colouring. "There is no chance
of our coming together. Besides, to get the money you must find that
cross."

"Nothing of the sort," said his mother quickly, "Jabez only requires
its production by a possible child, as a means of identification, a
very silly idea I call it. But he knows that I am Judith Morse, and so
by my father's will inherit, now that my sister is dead."

George shook his head doggedly. "I believe that you will never get the
fortune until that cross is found."

"Then find it."

"I can't. I have tried my best to learn who assaulted me and robbed
this cottage, but I am still in the dark."

This ended the conversation for the time being. But as the days went
by Mrs. Walker still continued to express her disgust at George's
obstinacy regarding Lesbia. She knew that he still loved the girl, and
could not think why he should refuse to renew the engagement in the
face of Lesbia's letter. Of course the excuse of having no situation
was rubbish, so Mrs. Walker decided, as Lesbia was willing to marry
him without one penny. If he truly loved her, as she did him, poverty
would be no bar. When was poverty ever a bar to the union of two young
hearts? Even admitting that George wanted to provide a home before
renewing the engagement, he surely could have seen Lesbia and
explained his reasons for behaving as he was doing. But he never went
near Marlow, and refused to mention her name. As Mrs. Walker, being as
obstinate as her son, insisted on discussing his unfortunate love
affair, and wrangling over the same, George took to remaining for days
in London on the plea that he was looking for work. Time thus passed
very miserably for the grim widow.

One day George came down with the news that he had received a note
from Lord Charvington, asking him to call at The Court, Maidenhead.
Why he should wish to see him George could not guess, as he had never
met him. But in the letter Charvington said that he had been a friend
of Aylmer Walker, and so desired the interview. Mrs. Walker was also
puzzled. She was well acquainted with Lord Charvington, but after her
scampish husband's death she had kept away from the former society she
frequented, on account of her poverty.

All the same, she advised George to keep the appointment, which was
made for the next day, if only to hear what Charvington had to talk
about.

It was strange, a coincidence in fact, that Lady Charvington's motor
should stop on the afternoon of that very day at the gate of the
Medmenham cottage. Never before to George's knowledge had his mother
mentioned Lord Charvington's name, yet on the very day when it was on
her lips, because of the letter, the wife of the nobleman arrived to
pay a visit. Why she should do so was not quite clear, and Mrs. Walker
entered the drawing-room with a frown. She and her sister Kate had
been school-girls together, and she had never approved of the lady.
Her greeting was very cold.

"How are you, Helen?" she said, extending the tips of her fingers. "It
is a surprise to see you in my humble abode."

"I would have called before, only I knew that you did not wish to see
me, Judith," said Lady Charvington, sinking gracefully into the
nearest arm-chair; "but I have come on business."

Mrs. Walker sat also, and folded her hands on the lap of her black
dress with her usual grim smile. "Of course, I knew that you would not
waste your valuable time in coming for nothing. But what business you
can have with me I fail to see. We were never good friends, and you
positively hated Kate because she was prettier than you."

"She never was," said Lady Charvington hotly, and glanced in the
silver-framed hand-mirror, which stood on the table at her elbow.
"Kate had not my complexion, nor my hair."

"Nor your nasty temper," snapped Mrs. Walker, who felt extremely nasty
herself; "but I don't know why we should talk of good looks at our
age."

"I am not old, Judith: you are older than I am."

"Quite so, and I wear ever so much better. You look twice your age."

Lady Charvington made a face. "You were always a disagreeable girl,"
she pouted, "I daresay I am growing no younger, but you need not tell
me so. As to my looks, if you were as worried as I am, you would not
look your best either. So I--who is that?" she inquired as George,
ignorant that his mother had a visitor, tapped at the French window of
the drawing-room.

"My son George," said Mrs. Walker, rising to admit him.

"Oh!" cried Lady Charvington vivaciously. "Lesbia's George."

"My son, Lady Charvington," said Mrs. Walker, introducing the pair.
"George, this is an old friend of mine."

Lady Charvington looked at the splendidly handsome young man
and secretly envied her hostess. Neither of her children was so
good-looking, and moreover, what she always regretted, she had
provided no heir to the title.

"So you are Lesbia's George," she said again, not offering her hand,
but putting up her lorgnette. "Well, the girl has taste."

George coloured under her impertinent gaze and at the sudden mention
of Lesbia. He no more expected Lady Charvington to mention the girl
than he had expected she would arrive on the very day when her name
had first been mentioned in the cottage--that is, her husband's name.
"What do you know of Lesbia, Lady Charvington?" he asked, taking a
chair.

She gave an artificial laugh. "Nothing very creditable."

The young man started and grew an angry red. Mrs. Walker frowned, and
making a sign that her son should be silent, spoke for him. "What do
you mean by running down the girl, Helen? Let me tell you that
Lesbia's name must be mentioned in this house only with respect."

"Oh, I know that she loves your son, and that he loves
her--unfortunately."

"Why so?" asked George very directly, and still red with anger. He was
beginning to dislike this pretty, perfumed, dainty woman, who looked
as frivolous as his mother was stately.

"Because she is, I shrewdly suspect, a--a----" Lady Charvington
hesitated, for the young man looked so angry, and Mrs. Walker so grim,
that she feared to bring out the hateful word. "Well, the fact is,"
she rattled on, "I have lost an amethyst cross, and I believe this
Lesbia Hale has taken it."

"An amethyst cross," repeated George, astonished, too much so in fact
to repel the accusation against Lesbia with the promptitude he wished.
"A cross consisting of four amethyst stones with a green cube of
malachite in the centre bearing a crown, and inscribed 'Refuse and
Lose'?"

"Yes." Lady Charvington was astonished. "Do you know it?"

"Of course I do. It belongs to me."

"To you. Impossible. It is, as I believe the property of Lord
Charvington, and was stolen with other jewels from The Court a few
days ago."

"But how did it get to The Court--how did it come into your
possession?"

"It came into my possession a few weeks ago. I entered the library
during my husband's absence and found this cross on his table.
Wondering why he had such a jewel, and thinking that he had bought it
for me, I took it to my room. Charvington went away before I could
speak to him about it and never made any inquiries--strange to say--as
to its being taken away, I placed it in my jewel case, and forgot all
about it. Then my case was stolen by two London thieves a few days
ago, and the cross also."

"You declared that Lesbia stole it," said Mrs. Walker grimly, "and now
you say that two thieves----"

"Lesbia was in league with them."

George sprang to his feet. "That's wholly false, Lady Charvington.
That is----" he became aware of his rudeness and stammered, "you--you
must be mistaken."

"I am never mistaken," said the visitor in icy tones. "Your son has
not very good manners, Judith."

"They are my manners," said Mrs. Walker fiercely, "and don't you find
fault with them. He has only said what I intended to say, only more
politely."

Before Lady Charvington could snap out a reply, George, now very pale,
intervened. "Perhaps, madam, you will explain upon what grounds you
base this charge against Miss Hale."

"Oh, certainly," rejoined Lady Charvington sharply, "the whole world
might know what I have to say, and the whole world would," she added
spitefully, "only my husband, who seems to have taken a fancy to this
girl, has hushed up the matter."

"He has more sense than you have," muttered Mrs. Walker, "badly as he
treated----" she checked herself with a side glance at George, "but
that is neither here nor there. Go on, Helen, and explain."

Lady Charvington, in order to make George writhe--for she saw that he
loved Lesbia deeply, and resented the fact--was only too ready to give
details of the robbery at The Court with all the venom of which her
very bitter tongue was capable. She related everything that had
happened from the hour of Lesbia's arrival, to the moment of her
departure. "And in disgrace," ended the lady exultingly, "certainly
private disgrace, since for some silly reason Charvington made me hold
my tongue, but disgrace nevertheless. Now what do you think?"

"Think"--George, standing with a white face and clenched hands, took
the words out of his mother's mouth--"I think that you are a very
wicked woman, Lady Charvington. Lesbia is as innocent as a dove."

"I know nothing of the morals of doves," retorted Lady Charvington
coolly, "but you seem to forget that I stated how this girl's father
was one of the thieves. Who the other one was I can't say, but Lesbia
certainly recognised her father. Bertha, my maid, heard her
exclamation, while she was lying half stunned on the floor."

"I am not astonished," said Mrs. Walker bitterly. "Walter Hale is
capable of all things, although I did not know that he would descend
quite so low. I never liked him as you did, Helen."

"Leave the past alone," said Lady Charvington with an angry gesture;
"but you can see that this Lesbia creature was her father's
accomplice."

"Speak more respectfully of Lesbia if you please," said George in a
cold white fury. "She is perfectly innocent, and knew no more of her
father's wickedness than----"

"Than you did, I suppose."

"You are wrong. I knew some weeks ago, that Walter Hale had to do with
a gang of thieves."

"George," cried his mother aghast; "you never told me."

"There was no need to," he said quickly, "I know that Hale, acting by
Tait's orders, stole the jewels from----"

"Was this why you broke your engagement with Lesbia, or rather why you
would not renew it?"

"That was the reason," said George awkwardly.

Mrs. Walker stood up sternly. "Then you believe that Lesbia is an
accomplice."

"No, I don't. My reason is different."

"You refuse to marry the daughter of a thief perhaps," said Lady
Charvington mockingly.

"I do not. My reason--never mind. I can explain my reason to Lesbia
when I see her," said George, standing very straight and looking very
determined.

"You intend to see her, then?" asked his mother.

"This very evening."

"I shall come also," said Mrs. Walker quickly.

"If that is so," drawled Lady Charvington, "perhaps you will ask her
what she has done with the cross."

"She has not got it," cried George. "How can she have it when you
declared that her father stole it and----"

"Oh," Lady Charvington laughed cruelly, "I daresay her father gave her
the amethyst cross, as her share of the plunder."

"Helen, hold your bitter tongue," cried Mrs. Walker wrathfully.

"If you speak of Lesbia in that way, or dare to smirch her fair fame,"
said George very deliberately, "I shall make it my business to make
things unpleasant all round."

"As how?" asked Lady Charvington, putting up her lorgnette.

"To-morrow I am to see Lord Charvington by appointment----"

"I was not aware that you knew my husband."

"I do not, but he wrote to me, and I am to see him."

"Ah!" drawled Lady Charvington coolly, "perhaps knowing that you love
this wretched girl my husband intends to arrange that you shall marry
her and take her out of the country."

The young man restrained his anger by a violent effort. "Perhaps you
are correct, madam," he said in a thick voice and breathing hard. "But
I shall also ask Lord Charvington how the cross came to be in his
possession."

"No!" Lady Charvington shrieked and seemed much perturbed. "You must
not do that."

"Madam," said George in a stately manner and following up his
advantage, "I am the owner of that cross, which was given to me by
Miss Hale. I was assaulted on the towing-path so that I might be
robbed of it. As the thief did not find it on my person he burgled
this cottage and took it from my room. I have every right to ask Lord
Charvington how he became possessed of it."

The visitor rose with rather a pale face but quite composed, and shook
perfume from her costly draperies as she gathered up her belongings to
depart. "Things are bad for Lesbia Hale as it is," she said
composedly. "I advise you to ask no questions of my husband, or he may
withdraw his protection from her. If he does, she is disgraced,
publicly."

"I don't believe it," said Mrs. Walker, crossing to the window and
opening it. "You can leave my cottage by this way, Helen, and the
sooner the better."

Lady Charvington swept towards the French window with a careless
laugh, obviously forced. "I am only too willing to go," she declared.
"I only came over to ask you to question Lesbia Hale as to what she
has done with my amethyst cross."

"Mine, pardon me," said George firmly, as he held the window open,
"and you may be sure that I shall marry Lesbia and protect Lesbia even
against you who seem to hate her, Heaven only knows why."

"Your mother knows," sneered Lady Charvington. "Well, do what you
like, only remember that I have warned you!" and with these ominous
words she took her welcome departure.

"What is next to be done?" asked Mrs. Walker, when the motor hummed
away.

"We must see Lesbia," said George firmly. "What has been said brings
us together at last."




CHAPTER XIX
MR. HALE EXPLAINS


When Lesbia returned to Rose Cottage, after her unlucky visit to The
Court, she found that her father had never been near the place. Tim,
who was alone in the house when she arrived, explained that Hale had
gone to London within an hour of Lesbia's departure with Lady
Charvington in the motor car. There was nothing in this to surprise
the little Irishman, as Hale's comings and goings were always more or
less abrupt. But he was amazed and startled when he heard what Lesbia
had to tell; the revelation being occasioned by Tim's distressed
remark on the girl's pallor.

"Ah now, Miss, an' what hey ye bin doin' wid yer purty silf at all, at
all? Sure the face av ye's as white as a carpse."

Lesbia burst into tears. "Oh Tim, I sometimes wish that I was one, for
I feel so very miserable. George will have nothing to do with me; Lady
Charvington hates me, and my father, my father----"

"Phwat av him?" asked Tim anxiously.

"Can't you guess?" asked Lesbia, drying her eyes, and wondering how
much or how little the man knew of Hale's rascalities.

Tim's face remained passive, but he could not keep a certain amount of
anxiety out of his eyes. "Sure, the masther isn't a good man," he said
in a hesitating manner, "he trates ye like a brute baste, Miss."

"It's worse than that," sobbed Lesbia, breaking down again.

The servant changed colour and raised his hands in mute despair. When
he did find his voice, it was to ask a leading question. "An' how much
do ye know, me dear?"

"I know that my father is a thief."

"Augh! the shame av it," muttered Tim, but did not contradict.

Lesbia noticed that he was less surprised than he should have been.
"You knew that."

"Mary be good to us all!" said Tim sadly. "But I know a mighty lot I'd
rather not know, me dear. But are ye sure, Miss?"

Lesbia sat up, dried her eyes, and detailed all that had happened. Tim
listened in dismayed silence with his sad eyes on her pale face, and
she heard him grind his teeth when it came to an account of Lady
Charvington's accusation. When she ended he still kept silence.

"What do you think of it all, Tim?" asked his mistress, anxious to
hear what he had to say.

"It's black lies that woman spakes," cried Tim vehemently. "Ye nivir
knew av the masther's wrongdoin'."

"Did you, Tim?"

"I knew a trifle, an' guessed a mighty lot. Nivir ask me, miss, phwat
I know till his lardship--an' sure he's a good man--spakes the wurrd.
But I know wan thing, me dear heart, that the blackest clouds have the
blissid sun behint thim."

"There is no sun behind these clouds," said Lesbia, sighing.

"An' there yer wrong, Miss," said Tim briskly. "Sure, whin them clouds
do let the blissid sun sind out th' light av him, ye'll foind pace an'
happiness an' joy galore. Lave things to his lardship. The crass began
the throuble, an' the crass will end that same."

"Tim! Tim, what do you know about the cross?"

"Ah, nivir ask me phwat I know," croaked Tim again. "There's whales
within whales, me dear, an' me mouth's bin saled fur many a year. But
whin his lardship spakes I spake, and thin ye'll be as happy as thim
who dwell in Tirnanoge."

"What's that, Tim?"

"The land av youth where ye and Masther Garge shud be, an' will be,
whin the blissid saints in glory let ye come into ye'r own." And after
delivering himself of this agreeable prophecy, Tim shuffled away to
prepare dinner.

Lesbia was much astonished at the hints thus given, and also much
perplexed. Tim seemed to know of the significance of the amethyst
cross, of the rascality of her father, and also he appeared to know
about Lord Charvington as a possible _deus ex machina_, who would make
the crooked quite straight. Later in the evening she questioned the
little man persistently, but Tim, as wily as an otter, evaded a direct
reply, only insisting that everything would come right in a most
unexpected way. With this Lesbia would scarcely have been content, but
that her attention was taken away from the future to deal with the
present.

Urged by Tim, and now feeling more hopeful as she recalled
Charvington's promise to stand by her, Lesbia made a moderately good
dinner. While Tim was washing up in the kitchen, she sat near the
window of the tiny parlour reading the first book that came to hand.
But the pages did not interest her and, moreover, it soon grew too
dark to read without lights. Lesbia did not call for these, as she
liked the pensive twilight, and so dreamed of George and future
happiness in the gloaming. There was just light enough to see across
the room, so she started with surprise and indignation when she saw
her father suddenly appear in the doorway. He looked much the same as
usual, but then the light was not strong enough to permit her to see
the shame which must certainly have appeared on his face.

"Why have you come here?" asked Lesbia, rising indignantly.

"I have assuredly a right to enter my own house," retorted her father.

"It is not your house," she replied boldly. "Lord Charvington told me
that it belonged to him, and declared that you would come here no
more."

"Ah!" Hale lounged into the room, and dropped with a sigh of fatigue
into a chair. "Charvington proposed more than he could perform; he
always did."

"How did you come in?"

"By the back door, which was open. I rowed up from Cookham."

"You can't stop here," said Lesbia firmly.

"You can't prevent me," said her father, with a sneer.

"I can leave the house, and I will."

"Where will you go?"

"To Mrs. Walker; she will protect me. I will throw myself on her
mercy. But I refuse to remain under the same roof as you."

Hale winced at the scorn in her tones. "You seem to forget that you
are speaking to your father," he said in an icy manner.

"God help me!" cried the girl, with a gesture of despair; "I wish I
could forget. You have brought shame upon me."

"Oh, rubbish," said Hale crossly. "I received a letter from
Charvington in London just before I came down to Cookham which stated
that if I restored the jewels everything would be hushed up."

"And you will do so?"

"I have to," said Hale grudgingly. "It's an infernal nuisance after
all my trouble, but Charvington says that he will set the police on my
track if I don't act square. I shall return the jewels to-morrow, and
then everything will be put right. There is no disgrace to you."

"Isn't there?" said Lesbia, with a bitter laugh. "You appear to have
forgotten that Bertha, the maid, heard my recognition of you, and told
her mistress. Lady Charvington accused me of being your accomplice,
and but that our cousin made her hold her tongue and silenced the
maid, I should have been arrested as knowing your rogueries and
sharing in them."

Hale muttered an oath between his teeth. "Upon my word that's too
bad," he said half apologetically. "The woman had no right to speak of
you in that way, as you are as innocent as a babe. However, if
Charvington has hushed that up also, there is no harm done."

"Father," cried Lesbia, moving forward to confront him, "can you think
that I will consent to live with you, now that I know of your
wickedness?"

"What do you know, other than that I took Lady Charvington's jewels?"
asked her father, defiantly.

"I know that you stole Mr. Tait's jewels by his direction."

"Who dares to say that?" demanded Hale, starting fiercely to his feet.

"Mr. Canning----"

"Mister," sneered Hale, savagely, "since when has he earned such
respect."

"Mr. Canning is a gentleman and Captain Sargent's brother," said
Lesbia in calm, easy tones. Now that she had come to close grips with
her father she felt singularly cool.

Hale muttered a second oath. "I knew that The Shadow had betrayed us,"
he said ominously; "well, he shall pay for his treachery. His silly
gratitude to you for nursing him has made him dishonourable to us."

"Dishonourable!" cried Lesbia, scornfully.

"Why not?" scoffed her father, "There is honour amongst thieves."

"And _you_ are a thief."

"I am," said Hale, shamelessly. "I was driven to such courses because
I wanted money. You may as well know the worst, for I----"

"Oh!" Lesbia threw up her hand, feeling sick at heart. "Don't tell me
any more. Leave this house and never see me again."

Hale settled himself firmly in his chair. "I will do nothing of the
sort," he declared; "this is my house, whatever Charvington may say.
Here I am and here I rest. There's a French soldier's saying for you,"
he sneered.

"Oh," Lesbia sighed as she looked up, "will nothing make this man
ashamed?"

"Nothing!" Hale put his legs up on another chair, "absolutely
nothing."

At this moment there came a sharp ring of the front door bell. Hale
started to his feet with an ejaculation, and Lesbia could guess that
his shameless face had turned white in the shadowy twilight.
Apparently he expected the police, as she gathered from his broken
mutterings. "But it is impossible," he breathed, clenching his hands;
"Charvington said that he would say nothing if the jewels were sent
back. I shall send them to-morrow, and if there is a--ah!"

The two listening in the half-dark room heard Tim shuffle along the
narrow passage and open the door. A moment later and Mrs. Walker's
voice, cold and haughty, struck on their ears. Hale wiped his face and
heaved a sigh of relief. "Don't betray me to that woman," he
whispered.

"I shall not," said Lesbia, quietly, "after all, bad as you are, I
cannot forget that you are my father."

Even as the last word dropped from her mouth, the door opened and Mrs.
Walker was ushered into the room. Behind her came Tim bearing high a
lamp to light her way. The radiance revealed Lesbia white and
shrinking and the defiant face of Walter Hale.

"The masther, howly saints!" muttered Tim, setting down the lamp; then
he addressed Lesbia, quietly: "Will I bring more lights, Miss, av ye
plase?"

"No thank you, Tim, this lamp will be enough. Shut the door."

Without a single glance at his master, Tim departed and left the trio
together. Mrs. Walker, standing just within the room, had said
nothing. Only when the door was closed did she speak. "I did not
expect to find you here, Mr. Hale," she said with contempt and
scarcely concealed surprise.

"And where should I be, save in my own house?" he asked, lightly.

"In gaol," she snapped, "and there you would be, had I my way."

Hale raised his eyebrows. "I do not understand," he remarked, coolly.

"Yes, you do, and you will understand completely when I tell you that
Lady Charvington came to see me to-day." Hale uttered an exclamation
of rage and vexation. "Yes, you may well swear, for she told both
George and myself about the robbery at The Court. What do you say to
that, you detected scoundrel?" she asked, sternly.

"Hush!" he muttered, gruffly, "my daughter is present."

"I am glad she is, I want her to know what you are."

"I do know," faltered Lesbia, weakly, "and oh!"--she covered her face
to sink in a passion of tears on the sofa--"it is shameful: shameful."

Mrs. Walker looked at Hale, still defiant and hard-faced. "I would
have spared you this for the girl's sake," she breathed, "but she
caught you red-handed, so there is nothing to conceal." With a stern
look at him, she glided to the sofa and took the shrinking, fragile
form of the unhappy girl in her strong arms: "Lesbia, my love," she
said tenderly, and the change in her voice was extraordinary, "I have
come to stand by you. That man is not fit to have charge of you. Come
with me, to-night, to Medmenham."

"Oh no--no--George----"

"George knows all that you know, that I know. He was present when Lady
Charvington came to tell us of what had taken place."

"And George despises me," wept Lesbia, burying her face in Mrs.
Walker's bosom.

"Don't be ridiculous, child, don't be foolish. How can he despise you
when you are innocent and he loves you?"

"Loves me--loves me," Lesbia looked up startled; "but he refused to
renew our engagement although I abased myself to the dust to regain
him."

"I think George will be able to explain why he acted in that way," she
whispered. "In a few minutes you will meet George under the chestnut
tree where he proposed to you. It's an idea of his that he should
explain himself there and there renew the engagement. We both arranged
to come here to-night and were to drive over. But at the last moment
George took to his boat and is now rowing down the river to meet you
under the trysting-tree. I drove over."

"Oh!" Lesbia sat up, smiles breaking through her tears. This was a
gleam of sunshine indeed. "George is coming back."

"He will hold you in his arms very shortly," said Mrs. Walker, her
hard face becoming strangely tender. "You poor dear child, how cruelly
you have been treated. But the worst is over: you shall marry my
George and be happy."

"Indeed," said Hale in an acrid, thin voice. "I am not to be consulted
then?"

Mrs. Walker placed Lesbia tenderly back on the sofa and arranged the
cushion. Then she turned, hard and harsh once more to the delinquent.
"You are not to be consulted about Lesbia," she said calmly, "as you
are unfit to have anything to do with her. But I have come to consult
you about the amethyst cross."

"I know nothing about it," said Hale, starting and biting his nether
lip.

"That's a lie," said Mrs. Walker fiercely. "Lady Charvington found the
cross in her husband's library, where he had left it, and thinking
that he had bought it for her, placed it in her jewel-case. As you
stole the case you must have the cross. Give it to me at once. I want
it."

"I know nothing about it," said Hale doggedly and raising his heavy
eyes, "you are wrong--the cross was not with the jewels. I shall send
them back to Lord Charvington to-morrow, as only by my restoring them
will he agree not to prosecute. Charvington will show you the case,
and you will see that there is no cross amongst them."

"I quite believe that," said Mrs. Walker, scornfully, "because you
intend to keep it back. What use it is to you I can't say, as in no
way can you obtain my sister's money."

Hale scowled and, stretching out his legs, slipped his hands into his
pockets. He was perfectly dressed as usual in a cool tweed suit, and
looked in the half light a very handsome and presentable man. No one
would have taken him for a sordid thief. "I have not the cross," was
all he could say, "it was not with the jewels. I don't know where it
is."

"Lord Charvington----"

"If he had it in his library he must have robbed your cottage to get
it, and also must have assaulted your son. I wonder you can stand
that," said Hale with a sneer, "especially since you have a score
against the man as it is. But then you are so forgiving."

"You will not find me so," said Mrs. Walker caustically. "As to
Charvington, I believe he was more sinned against than sinning. I
shall speak of that when we meet. As it is, my feelings towards him
have relented so far as to permit my son to see him to-morrow."

"What!" asked Lesbia, who had sat quietly during this passage of arms,
"is George going over to The Court?"

"Yes. Lord Charvington sent him a message asking him to call. What he
wishes to see him about I cannot guess."

"I know: I know," cried the girl joyfully. "I told him about George
and how George had lost his situation through a false accusation. Lord
Charvington said that he would see George and get him something to do,
so that we might marry."

"Oh that's it, is it?" said Mrs. Walker, smiling and smoothing the
girl's hair.

"Will you let your son accept favours from Charvington?" asked Hale
sneeringly, "from the man who----"

"That is quite enough," said Mrs. Walker, imperiously. "I will have an
explanation with Lord Charvington. I believe from the bottom of my
heart that you were the cause of all the trouble between us. But it
strikes me," Mrs. Walker gathered her mantle round her and sat with
folded arms like a grim and pitiless Fate, "that you are nearing the
end, Mr. Walter Hale. Destiny has been kind to you so far: she will be
kind no longer. I see," Mrs. Walker stared at Hale's twitching face;
"I see imprisonment: I see death: I see----"

"Oh damn your Witch of Endor rubbish," shouted Hale, jumping to his
feet with the perspiration beading his brow, for he was impressed by
the absolute conviction with which she spoke. "You talk nonsense,
infernal nonsense. And see here, you shall not interfere between my
daughter and----"

"I will do as I please and so shall Lesbia," said Mrs. Walker,
interrupting the vehement speech. "You forget that you are only at
large because of Lord Charvington's refusal to prosecute. If you
meddle with this marriage as you have done, he will lay you by the
heels. Yes, you and your gang."

"My gang?" Hale swallowed something and laughed uneasily, "my gang?"

"You and Tait and Maud Ellis and Sargent and that miserable
opium-smoking brother of his. You are all rogues and thieves and----"

"You can prove nothing of all this," interrupted Hale, now quite
livid.

"George can," said Mrs. Walker nodding significantly. "He has seen the
man Canning, whom you call The Shadow, although his real name is
Arthur Sargent."

"Oh!" Lesbia rose quickly, "Has Mr. Canning seen George?"

"Yes, and he has told much which your precious father would like to be
hidden," said Mrs. Walker quietly.

Hale laughed and wiped his brow. "All the same," he said, wetting his
dry lips, "I am Lesbia's father after all. If you disgrace me, you
disgrace her, so I am quite safe."

"That is right, hide behind a woman's petticoats," said Mrs. Walker
bitterly, "it was always your custom. Now you come with me," she rose.
"I have something to say to you and it must be said out of doors.
Lesbia, go into the garden and see George."

"I'll come," said Hale promptly enough, "I am not afraid of arrest; I
know too much. After you, madam," and he held the door open mockingly.




CHAPTER XX
JOURNEYS END IN LOVERS MEETING


Ordinarily speaking Lesbia would have anxiously awaited the conclusion
of Mrs. Walker's out-of-door interview with her father. But when she
saw them stroll away in the moonlight, she suddenly remembered that
George was waiting in the garden to explain. Probably the interview
asked by Mrs. Walker had merely been an excuse to get Hale out of the
way so that he might not interrupt the lovers' meeting, as he
assuredly would do if left to his own marplot devices. Lesbia,
therefore, saw that it was foolish to waste the golden hour, when it
had been so propitiously brought about. Closing the front door, she
ran rapidly along the passage into the garden and sped lightly down
the grass-grown path. In another minute she was under the tree and in
George's arms.

The night was lovely with moonlight and radiant with stars. In the
neglected garden roses red and white and yellow breathed fragrance
into the still, warm air of summer. There was not a breath of
wind and the ripples on the broad river were only formed by the
smoothly-flowing current. It murmured softly between the green banks
and was an accompaniment to the occasional song of the nightingales,
which spoke one to the other in the garden and across the river. At
the dawn of love, the blackbird had fluted his song of joy, when the
sky was blue and the sunshine was glorious. Now the sleeping world was
bathed mysteriously in silver under a starry dome, and the nightingale
sang a diviner song. Through much sorrow had they come to a better
understanding of love, and the liquid notes of the immortal bird alone
could interpret the nobler feelings which trouble had begotten. In
George's arms lay Lesbia, safe at last in the haven of love, and the
night sent upon them a benediction in the song of the bird.

"But you have been very, very cruel," said Lesbia softly. Woman-like
she was the first to find her tongue.

"I might say the same of you, dear," whispered George, sitting down
and gathering her closer in his arms, "but neither of us was cruel.
Circumstances are to blame."

Lesbia, knowing that there was no period to the golden hour now that
her father was out of the way, settled herself comfortably for a long
talk. She had much to tell and much to ask, and before the rapture of
love's silence could be renewed there was much to explain. "I know
that I behaved very badly," she whispered penitently, "but I could not
help it. Unless I had broken our engagement, my father told me that
Maud Ellis would denounce you as a thief."

"I understand, dearest; but you did not believe that I was guilty?"

"No," Lesbia pressed her cheek against his, "of course I didn't: but
if I had not been cruel I should not have been kind. I could not risk
Maud's accusing you publicly. But perhaps," added the girl, hopefully,
"she would not have done so, and I was weak to be so cajoled by her
and by my father."

"I think you acted wisely," said George, after a pause. "Maud led me
into a trap and certainly would not have let me out again until I
agreed to marry her, or at least until you gave me up. You did so and
she was content for the time being. She could part us, my sweet, but
she could not make me false to you."

"I knew it, in spite of your cruel letter."

"It was as cruel as yours, Lesbia, so we can cry quits on that score.
I know that you learned the truth through Canning. He explained to me,
and spoke very gratefully of your kindness to him in his illness."

"How did you meet him, George?"

"He met me. That is, he wrote to me at Medmenham asking me to see him
in the City as he had something important to tell me. We met in a
Mecca."

"A Mecca?"

"One of those underground coffee-rooms in London City, dear. There
Canning, or rather Sargent as he really is, explained."

"He told you who he was?"

"Yes! And he told me also that Tait was connected with a gang of
thieves, two members of which had robbed Tait's strong-room with his
connivance. Tait thus got the insurance money in addition to the
jewels which he sold on the Continent. He made about forty thousand
pounds over the deal and, after paying his accomplices, had enough
left to avert a financial crisis, which was the reason for the
robbery."

"Did you know then that my father was a thief?" asked Lesbia,
shuddering.

"Of course not."

"I thought you did know, and for that reason had thrown me over."

"Lesbia," George said vehemently, and pressed her so strongly to his
breast that she almost cried out with the delicious pain; "how can you
think so meanly of me? Were you the daughter of a murderer I should
marry you. It is you whom I love, my dearest, and not all the fathers
and crimes in the world will ever separate us."

"Yet something parted us for a time."

"Your letter."

"That at first," acknowledged Lesbia, sighing at the memory of what
she had been forced to write, "then yours. Oh, George, when I made it
plain that Maud--the horrid girl--could do nothing, why didn't you
come back to me?"

"Because Maud was too clever. Finding out that she could not accuse
me, since Canning could prove my innocence, Maud played a bold game
and told me that your father had robbed Tait's strong-room. She swore
that if I did not write to you, as you had written to me, she would
denounce Mr. Hale and have him put in prison. Lesbia," George suddenly
slipped from the seat and knelt at the girl's feet holding her hands
tightly, "what could I do in the circumstances but write as Maud
dictated? I did not dare to let her bring this shame on you."

"But you could have explained your reason?"

"No, dear, no. Maud was too smart for that. She insisted that I should
give no explanation, hoping that out of pique you would throw me over
and marry Sargent as your father desired. He was in the plot also. I
had to let things stand, as I was helpless; but I trusted that your
heart would guess the truth. I was always true to you; I have always
been. But you no doubt thought me false from that letter, as I thought
you heartless from the way in which you wrote. Now I can see, you can
see, that neither one of us is to blame. We were the sport of
circumstances."

Lesbia bent and kissed his yellow hair. "I understand now," she said
softly, "but, oh George, how could Maud Ellis or my father think that
I would marry Captain Sargent, a mere apology for a man, and hardly
that even?"

"They hoped to work on your feelings; to wear you out, my dear. But
had you become engaged to that dandy scoundrel I should have stopped
any possible marriage by denouncing Sargent as a member of Tait's
gang."

"Is he, George?" asked Lesbia quickly, and she remembered what Mrs.
Walker had said in the drawing-room.

"Yes! Canning--his brother, you know--did not tell me everything, but
he revealed a great deal. Sargent is in society and poses as a man of
good family living on his fortune. He is well-born, but he has no
money save what he obtains by theft."

Lesbia shuddered, "How horrible; how sordid. And my father?" her voice
sank.

"He is in the swim also, so are Maud Ellis and Tait. Indeed, I believe
that Tait is the head of the whole infernal business. But that I knew
your father was in with the lot and that I wished to spare you, I
would have gone to the police at once."

"Oh!" Lesbia's tears dropped on her lover's hand, "how dreadful it all
is."

George knelt before her and drew her head down on his shoulder.
"There, there, dear!" he said, gently drying her eyes, "don't worry;
we'll be married soon, and then you will be taken away from this
terrible life."

"Tim also," murmured Lesbia tearfully, "I can't leave Tim behind."

"Of course he'll come too," said George cheerily, "I don't believe
that he knew anything of the rascality that was going on."

"I think he did," said Lesbia doubtfully, "not that he is wicked
himself. But he knew and, I believe, held his dear tongue for my
sake."

"Tim would do anything for you, darling, in the same way as Canning
would."

"Poor Mr. Canning--I mean Mr. Sargent."

"No, don't call him by his real name; he wishes to be known simply as
Canning--The Shadow. He belongs to the gang and so does that Mrs.
Petty who was set to watch you."

"A dreadful woman," said Lesbia, nestling, "how I disliked her. But I
am sorry that Mr. Canning is wicked, George. He has been so kind."

"Kindness begets kindness," said Walker sententiously, "and I don't
think Canning is so very wicked. He has been unlucky all his life and
drifted from bad to worse until he took to smoking opium. That
finished him, and he was on the streets when his brother--who always
kept his head, in spite of his silly looks--took him up, and made him
his servant. Canning does a lot of the dirty work of the gang, and did
not denounce them as he would only be thrown again on the world. Also
the gang would certainly do him harm if the fact of his betraying them
became known."

"And it is known, George. I am sure of it; because Mr. Canning told me
to mention his name to Maud Ellis. If she is a member of the gang, she
must have told the rest about the betrayal."

"I daresay that is why Canning went into hiding," said George
thoughtfully; "however, all we can do is to leave him to deal with the
matter. For your sake I can say nothing since your father----"

"George," Lesbia sat up and placed her hands on his shoulders, as he
knelt at her feet, "your mother told me that you were going to see
Lord Charvington to-morrow."

Walker nodded. "It is true, though I don't know what he wishes to see
me about. I don't know him; I never met him."

"I have met him, and I know him," said Lesbia eagerly, "and he is the
kindest and best man in the world. He wants to help us, George, and to
get you something to do so that we may marry. Now you must ask him to
advance you money to go to Australia or Canada, and we can marry
before we go. Then we can start a new life."

"I suggested something of that sort to my mother, but she was averse
from leaving England. Still, she may change her mind."

"She must, and she can come also," said Lesbia vehemently. "Oh,
George, don't you see that I cannot remain in England? Even if my
father escapes this time, as he will, because Lord Charvington is so
kind, he is sure to be found out some day. Then think of the disgrace.
I should always be unhappy thinking of what might happen. No, George,
if you love me, let us marry and place the ocean between this
miserable old life and the happy new one which we are sure to have
together. Say yes, dear George, say yes."

"I do, I do. I think your idea is excellent, and you must persuade my
mother to act in this way. To-morrow I shall suggest our plan to Lord
Charvington. I daresay he will give us enough to go away with and then
I shall soon earn enough to pay him back. Yes, dear," George rose,
looking tall and stalwart in the moonlight, "we shall begin a new life
together and leave all this wickedness behind us."

Lesbia rose also and clung to her tall lover like an ivy to an oak. "I
believe that everything will come right at last," she declared
joyfully, "as Tim says it will. Only he added that the cross began it
and the cross must end it, whatever that may mean."

George shook his head. "I can't explain the cross," he said
doubtfully, "it is all very mysterious. Lord Charvington had it in his
possession according to his wife. And yet I cannot think that
Charvington would commit a burglary. He," George smiled broadly,
"cannot possibly belong to the gang. However, it was stolen with the
jewels, so your father----"

"He has not got it, George. He told your mother that he had not got
it."

"Then either your father or Lady Charvington is telling a lie.
However, I shall learn the truth when I see him to-morrow. And now,
dear, you must go in, as it grows late."

"No," said Lesbia, petulantly. "I have to wait here until your mother
comes to us. She went out to talk with my father. George," she added,
after a pause, "I wonder what your mother knows about my father."

"Nothing very good, you may be certain," said Walker grimly. "She must
know him as a very clever rogue. By the way, Lesbia, do you know how
your father and Sargent escaped discovery when they robbed Tait's
strong-room."

"Was Captain Sargent the other--thief?" said Lesbia, shivering at the
horrible sound of the word.

"Yes. He and your father arranged with Tait. Maud knew of the
arrangement and used it to inveigle me into a trap. Her chloroform
business was all a fake, if you will forgive the slang. Tait gave the
key and the two simply opened the strong-room and cleared with the
jewels. When I pursued them they dodged into the wood round the house,
and then entered the house again by a door which they had left open.
Then, after putting away the jewels in Tait's own private room, they
came down and joined the other guests in the search. Very clever of
them, wasn't it, dear?"

"Oh, don't, don't!" cried Lesbia, catching his hand and looking white
and wan. "It's so terrible to think that my own father should do this.
Why have I such a father?" she asked, raising her eyes in despair to
the moon. "What have I done to have such a father?"

"Hush, hush, dear," George pressed her to him. "Think no more of him.
He is not worthy of you."

"He was never affectionate to me," sobbed Lesbia, whose nerves were
quite unstrung, as might have been expected after what she had
undergone. "We never understood each other. I was never drawn to him.
Why, oh, why?"

George caught the hands she was wringing, firmly in his warm, kind
clasp.

"My dearest, listen to me," he said softly. "You have been unhappy in
the past, but you shall be happy in the future. Let your father fade
out of your life, and come with me to the land of love. It is said
that a woman shall forsake her parents and cling to her husband. So,"
said George, drawing himself up, "you are mine for ever, and when we
are married it will be my delight to make you perfectly happy."

"Ah, yes, but the shadow of the past will ever remain. After all, he
is my father. I can't do away with that," and she continued to sob.

The young man could only press her to his distressed heart and smooth
her hair. After all, what could he say in the face of facts? Wicked
and cold and hard and cruel as the man was, Hale undoubtedly was the
girl's father, and nothing could do away with the painful fact. But
for that relationship, George would have throttled Hale, or would have
thrown him into the river; but as it was, he could do nothing. He
could not even comfort his dear love who lay sobbing in his arms. The
nightingale still sang on, the stars still twinkled like jewels and
the moon still poured floods of white light down on the sleeping
earth. But the magical glory of the scene was darkened to the lovers
because of the evil of those around them. Yet--and Lesbia learned the
lesson afterwards--out of sorrow comes joy and the way of love is the
way of the cross. Something like this came into the young man's mind.

"Remember the motto of the amethyst cross," he whispered. "'Refuse and
lose'; we cannot understand why we are so afflicted, but we must bear
the cross if we are to win the crown. And after all, dear, you should
be sorry as I am for your father. He is reaping much grief and pain
for his sowing."

Lesbia sighed and placed her arms round George's neck. "Yes," she said
in a weary manner, "the cross is heavy, but we must bear it. I am sure
that in the end all will come right. Tim said so and so did Lord
Charvington."

Down the pathway came Mrs. Walker, looking tall and stately and stern
in her dark robes. Her face was set and white, and--strange in so hard
a woman--she looked as though she had been weeping. "Lesbia," she said
softly, "come back to the cottage and go to bed."

"But my father is there," sobbed the girl, "and you promised to take
me to Medmenham."

"Your father has left the cottage for a time at least," said Mrs.
Walker, gently disengaging the girl from her son's arms. "You will be
alone with Tim and he will look after you, until we see how things
turn out."

"How did you induce Mr. Hale to go, mother?" asked George, looking
troubled.

"That is not for you to know at present," she said sternly. "I had an
interview with him--a private interview," she added with emphasis,
"and he saw that it was best to leave for a time. Rest in peace, my
child," she said, kissing Lesbia's brow. "You are safe now, and can
come to no harm. Be brave as you have been, for a little time longer,
and all will end well."

"George," said Lesbia, stretching her arms like a a weary child.

"Dearest!" the young man kissed her and gave her into his mother's
charge. So the two women passed into the cottage, while he watched
them sadly.

Sorrow had not yet done her work.




CHAPTER XXI
TWO INTERVIEWS


At the present moment, George Walker had plenty of time on his hands,
and being naturally industrious, he did not enjoy the enforced
idleness. Hitherto he had spent the bulk of his leisure hours in
looking for a situation and in thinking of Lesbia. Now he made up his
mind to act in order to bring about some sort of settlement of his
very disorderly affairs. Lesbia could no longer remain with her
father, as his character was so extremely bad. Hale had left the
cottage, but would be certain to return again, therefore George wished
to see if he could not marry Lesbia--say within a month--so as to
rescue her from the troubles by which she was environed.

To do this he required assistance and believed that he would
receive it from Lord Charvington, who appeared to be particularly
well-disposed towards the girl. The idea of emigrating to the
Colonies--if Mrs. Walker could be persuaded to lend her approval to
the suggestion--was by no means a bad one, as then the whole unhappy
past could be set aside for ever. In another country with better
prospects, and unaffected by the sordid life compulsorily spent with
sordid people, George foresaw that he would be able to make a calm,
bright and happy future for himself and his wife. He therefore crossed
the river and walked to Maidenhead with the idea of explaining his
scheme to Charvington, and asking him to advance the necessary funds.

But before starting a new life George wished to round off the old. He
saw very plainly that for some reason the amethyst cross had been the
cause of the late troubles. Since its loss everything had gone wrong:
and it was necessary that it should be found if things were to be put
right. Jabez, the lawyer, insisted that it should be produced before
he would part with the fifty thousand pounds trust money. If, then,
the ornament could be found and given into Jabez's hands, Mrs. Walker
would benefit. Certainly, there was a chance that her late sister had
left a child, but in the absence of proof this difficulty might be
overcome. At all events, the production of the cross appeared to be
necessary to force Jabez into dealing with the trust money and its
accumulations.

Then again, George wished to do something for Canning. The man was a
wastrel and a ne'er-do-weel and had no one to take an interest in him:
but he had done Lesbia a service at considerable risk, and it was only
fair that he should be rewarded. Undoubtedly he belonged to the gang
of clever thieves, but he had repented sufficiently of his wickedness
to help the lovers, whom the gang--or at least three members of
it--had desired to destroy. This service should be recompensed,
especially as Canning could not remain in England without being
exposed to the vengeance of his former associates. George determined
to lay the case before Lord Charvington, and ask him to help. Failing
any aid being forthcoming in this quarter, George intended to take
Canning to Australia or Canada with him, and there start the man on a
new career. Canning was not an old man and there was ample time for
him to redeem the shortcomings of his youth. He was not inherently
wicked as were his brother and Hale, but merely weak.

On arriving at The Court, George was at once shown into the library
wherein Lord Charvington was waiting for him. The old man arose
courteously and came forward with outstretched hand. He appeared to be
pleased that George had kept his appointment so punctually, and
expressed himself with great cordiality. "I am very glad to see you,
Mr. Walker," he said, when the two were again seated. "I knew your
father."

"My mother also, I believe, sir," said George.

Charvington's face changed. "I have not seen Mrs. Walker for many a
long day," he remarked in a low voice, "perhaps we may meet again,
but----" he paused to ask an abrupt and extraordinary question. "Does
your mother ever speak ill of me?" he demanded, his eyes eagerly
searching the young man's face.

"No," answered George, much astonished. "She has scarcely mentioned
your name. Why should she speak ill of you?"

"I thought that Hale might have--but that is neither here nor there.
It is enough for you to know, Mr. Walker, that I knew your mother and
her sister over thirty years ago. We all three knew Hale also, and he
caused trouble. He would cause trouble still if he could, but I think
this last escapade of his will keep him quiet."

"Did you know my aunt Miss Katherine Morse?" asked George, astonished.

"Yes," Charvington rested his head on his hand and drew figures on the
blotting-paper, "but why do you speak of her by her maiden name? She
was married, you know."

"I don't know her married name. My mother never mentions it. Perhaps,"
George hesitated, "perhaps she doesn't know it."

"Yes, she does," answered Charvington, still drawing, "so does Hale.
Your aunt died in his house at Wimbledon remember. I understood from
Jabez that Hale had admitted as much."

"I believe he did. You know Mr. Jabez?"

"Yes." Charvington heaved heavy sigh. "But I have not seen him for
years. We correspond occasionally--that is all," he paused, then
dropping the pencil with which he was drawing, wheeled his chair and
looked at his guest briskly. "But we have no time to talk of these old
stories. Let us come to the point. Have you heard about Lesbia's stay
here?"

"Yes," said George very distinctly, "Lady Charvington told both my
mother and myself about the matter."

Lord Charvington's face grew a dull brick red. "When did you see my
wife?"

"Yesterday: she called on my mother at Medmenham."

"What did she say?" asked the elder man, abruptly and anxiously.

George gave details in a blunt cool way, exaggerating nothing and
suppressing nothing. The effect on Lord Charvington was very marked.
He jumped up from his chair and paced the room, holding his head in
both his hands.

"Good heavens: oh! good heavens," he muttered, "these women, these
women. How dare Helen speak so? What does she guess? What does she
know?"

"About what?" asked George with keen curiosity, and his question
recalled Lord Charvington to the fact, which he seemed to have
forgotten in his agitation, that he was not alone.

"Never mind," he said sharply, and returned to his seat more composed.
"Do you mean to say that Lady Charvington stated that she had found
the cross in this library?"

"Yes, sir. And I thought that you might know----"

"I know nothing," interrupted Charvington violently, and nervously
shifting various articles on his writing-table. "I know that there is
such a cross. I remember that Mr. Samuel Morse gave it to his
daughter, and remarked on its oddity. But how did it get into this
library?"

"Did you not bring it here?"

"No, sir, no." Charvington again rose and began to walk off his
uncontrollable agitation. "I have not seen that cross for years. The
last time I set eyes on it Miss Morse--I may as well call her Miss
Morse, since your mother has not revealed her married name--wore it
round her neck. My wife says that she found it here. I tell you, Mr.
Walker, that I do not know how it came into this room. I never saw
it."

"How strange!" said George, believing this speech, but wondering
nevertheless.

"But how comes it," asked Charvington wheeling, "that _you_ know about
the amethyst cross, Mr. Walker?"

"I received it from Lesbia as a love-gift," explained George, and went
on to relate the circumstances of the assault and robbery. Charvington
walked up and down nodding, and muttering at intervals. When George
ended he came to a halt before the young man.

"Lesbia told me much of what you tell me," he said quietly, "but of
course I was ignorant that my wife had taken the cross from this room.
She did not tell me that. I cannot understand."

"And I," said George in his turn, "cannot understand why Lady
Charvington is so bitter against Lesbia."

"Ah! Woman! Woman!" said Charvington, with a gesture of despair, "who
can understand the nature of Woman! Let us leave that question for the
time being, Mr. Walker. What we have to do is to get at the root of
this matter. If the cross was in my wife's jewel-case, as she asserts,
undoubtedly the burglary was committed to gain possession of it. Hale
was the thief, as you know. He has sent me back the case intact. I
received it this morning, as only on condition of its being restored,
would I consent to hush the matter up. And I hushed it up for his
daughter's sake, Mr. Walker. But," Charvington wrinkled his brow and
threw back his white mass of hair, "the amethyst cross is not amongst
the jewels."

"Hale probably kept it back. He wants it, you know, as he has some
idea of getting this money by producing it."

"Yes! Yes! I heard something about that," muttered Charvington, "but
of course that is impossible, unless--unless----" he paused, opening
and shutting his hands feverishly. "Damn him," he burst out with a
stamp of his foot, "I would like to throttle him as he nearly
throttled you."

George looked up in surprise. "Throttled me?"

"Yes," said Charvington impatiently "can't you see? It must have been
Hale who assaulted you on the towing-path to get back that cross, and
he, as an expert thief, took the ornament from your cottage."

"On the face of it, that appears probable," said George slowly, "all
the same I don't think it was the case."

"Why not? He wanted the amethyst cross."

"Quite so. But if he had obtained it from my cottage so long ago, he
would have taken it to Mr. Jabez to procure the money if possible. The
mere fact, too, that he was willing I should marry Lesbia, if I found
the missing ornament, shows that Hale did not commit the assault and
robbery."

"Then who could have done so?"

George shrugged his shoulders. "I can't say. Probably the person who
placed it in this room."

"If it ever was in this room," muttered Charvington, darkly.

"Your wife declares----"

"Oh yes--oh yes. I know what she declares. Well, these things are not
to be threshed out in five minutes. Mr. Walker," he stopped short
before George, "do you wish to marry Lesbia?"

"With all my heart and soul. We have come together again and last
night we renewed our love-vows."

"They should never have been broken," said Charvington impatiently.

"They never were, save by circumstances," said George solemnly, "our
hearts were always true," and he related the plotting of Maud and
Walter Hale.

"Devils! Devils!" muttered Charvington, with another stamp, "and it's
all my fault--all my fault."

"What!" George scarcely knew if he had heard aright.

"All my fault I say." Charvington clutched his head with an expression
of pain. "You do not know, you can't guess--you--you--never mind. I'll
put an end to all this. You shall marry Lesbia and make her happy. I
shall settle Hale once and for all. Come, what is your idea?"

"My idea," said George deliberately, "was, when I entered this room,
to ask you to give me enough, as a loan, to marry Lesbia, so that I
could take her to Australia or Canada and begin a new life. But now I
have changed my mind, as I can guess that in some way you can arrange
matters without my having to adopt such an extreme course."

"Yes," said Charvington quietly; "I believe that I can arrange matters
and in a very surprising way. They should have been arranged long ago,
only for the fact that I had not the courage. It is very hard to do
right sometimes. But the time has come. Mr. Walker, in three days
certain people must be brought together into this room."

"What people, sir?"

"Walter Hale and Lesbia; yourself and your mother; Mr. Jabez and
my wife. When we are all assembled I shall be able to straighten
things, crooked as they are at present. I ask you to see that these
people--saving my wife, who will be invited by me to be present--are
here on the third day from now at three o'clock in the afternoon."

"And then?"

"Then you shall marry Lesbia and be happy ever afterwards. Now go."

George went without another word, wondering very much at the turn
which events had taken. He had hoped that Charvington would arrange
his destiny and that of Lesbia, but the old nobleman seemed able and
ready to arrange the destiny of many other people. George could not
entirely understand the meaning of Charvington's behaviour, and after
a brief reflection did not attempt to. He decided to write a note
telling Hale and Lesbia to be at The Court at the appointed time, and
also to go personally to London to see Mr. Jabez and arrange for his
presence. Having thus made up his mind what to do, George strode
towards home whistling with a load off his mind. In one way or another
things would surely be put right.

Then came a surprise. While passing through Nightingale Thicket the
young man saw Canning, looking more shadowy than ever, flitting down
the road to meet him. But as the man drew nearer George saw that his
usually pale face was flushed, that he was dressed spick and span as a
gentleman, and that there was a general look of opulence about him. He
glided up to Walker swiftly--for he appeared too unsubstantial to do
anything save glide--and broke into a voluble explanation.

"Walker," he cried, and in loud tones which contrasted markedly with
his usual whispering speech, "I came down this morning especially to
see you. They told me you had gone to Charvington's place, so I
crossed the river and walked in this direction on the chance of
meeting you."

"What's your hurry?" asked George, surprised by this change of clothes
and looks and manner.

"I am leaving England, and have come to say good-bye. Let us sit down
on the grass by the roadside, no one will come along. After I have
explained, I shall push on to Maidenhead and take the train to London.
From London I go to Italy. Yes, an old aunt of mine has remembered me
in her will at the eleventh hour, and I have inherited two hundred a
year, an annuity, the principal of which I cannot touch."

"Luckily for you," said George, taking out his pipe; "you would waste
it."

"I daresay, I was always a wrong 'un. However, I go to Italy because
there I can live like a fighting-cock on an income which means penury
in England. I go also because Tait and Hale and the rest of them are
making things too hot for me. But before departing I wanted to see you
to confess."

George lighted his pipe and looked sideways in surprise. "Confess
what?"

"That I assaulted you," said Canning, nervously.

"You," George glanced in amazement at the frail figure.

"Yes. Of course I took you by surprise, or you could have knocked me
into a cocked-hat. You can punch me now, Walker."

"I don't want to punch you as you put it," said George bluntly. "Of
course you acted like a skunk in sneaking behind me and knocking me on
the head, to say nothing of tying me up; all the same----"

"I tied you up," said Canning, who had lain down and was smoking a
cigarette, "because I did not wish you to recover and get back to your
cottage at Medmenham until I had secured the cross."

George turned indignantly. "Then you were the thief?" he declared.

"Yes," admitted Canning, coughing. "Kick me. I'll take it lying down."

"No," said George, after a pause; "you have done me a service through
Lesbia, by preventing the success of Maud Ellis's plot. The evil you
have done is counterbalanced by the good. But how did you get me into
Rose Cottage?"

Canning sat up and looked puzzled. "I didn't do that," he said
earnestly. "I left you trussed on the towing-path like a fowl, and how
the deuce you got into the cottage I know no more than you do. Have
you never found out?"

"No," said George promptly, "but I am beginning to find out many
things, and it is just possible that I may solve that riddle also. By
the way, why did you sneak the amethyst cross?"

"My brother wanted it."

"Sargent?"

"Yes. Hale came to Cookham on the evening when you proposed to Miss
Lesbia, and told Alfred that she had given you the cross. Alfred
insisted that I should rob you, and primed me with champagne to do
what he wanted. I started for the cottage with a sandbag and a rope to
stun you and bind you, hoping to take you by surprise. I saw you
coming along the towing-path in the twilight and then----"

"Yes," George cut him short, "I know the rest. You crept up behind me
and stunned me and bound me, and then sneaked back to rob the cottage.
You are a pretty bad lot, I must say."

"I am," said Canning languidly, "but now that I have enough to keep
the wolf from the door I'll reform. Besides, you can kick me as I
said."

"I don't want to, you poor devil, since you have confessed and have
done me a service. Why did you?"

"Because Miss Hale was the only human being who was ever kind to me,"
said Canning, throwing away his cigarette. "Oh, Walker, you don't know
the terrible life I have had. I never was wicked, really I wasn't:
only weak, only easily led. I hated myself all the time I was working
for Alfred and those accursed wretches he associated with. I hated all
mankind because I was treated so badly: but Miss Hale changed my
nature by her kindness, and I did what I could to repair my wrong
towards her and towards you. Because she loved you I have confessed
because I want her to know the truth. Then I pass out of her life and
yours for ever. Take this address in London," Canning handed him a
pencilled card, "it will find me for the next week. After that I go to
Italy. Tell Miss Hale everything I have told you, and then ask her to
write and say that she forgives me. I don't want her to think badly of
me."

George nodded and slipped the card into his pocket, feeling very sorry
for the miserable man. "Only one question I should like to ask," he
said, rising from the grass; "why did your brother want this cross?"

"Lady Charvington--as I found out from overhearing a conversation
between them--asked him to get it."

George thought of the lie told by the lady as to the cross having been
found by her in the library. "And why did she want it?"

"I can't say," replied Canning, moving away; "ask her. Good-bye. And
Walker, my dear fellow," he added, "one last word. Maud Ellis and Hale
are plotting to get that money which should come to your mother.
Good-bye," and he disappeared down the road--withdrawing swiftly like
a receding mist. That was the last George saw of Arthur Sargent,
_alias_ Canning, _alias_ The Shadow.




CHAPTER XXII
THE PLOT


But that Canning fairly ran away, George would have stopped him to ask
further questions. He had told much which was new and strange and
explained a great deal: but his last remark hinted at further
difficulties.

Apparently, Hale had not yet given up all idea of procuring the money,
although how he hoped to do so in the absence of the child, George
could not understand. Of course, Walker felt very certain that Hale
had kept back the amethyst cross when sending the jewels to Lord
Charvington, but its production by Hale would have no effect on Mr.
Jabez. The lawyer wanted the cross to be produced by the child of
Katherine Morse--whatever her married name might be and, according to
Hale himself, the dying woman had no child. Mrs. Walker, indeed, had
stated that her sister had written about a sick child, but this had
probably died. If not, surely during all these twenty years the child
would have come forward to recover its inheritance.

George was naturally puzzled with this new development, and decided
that to learn the truth it would be best to go to the fountain head.
That is, if Hale intended to use the cross to procure the money he
would have to produce it to Mr. Jabez in his office in Lincoln's Inn
Fields. It was thus best to go at once to Mr. Jabez and inform him of
what Canning had said about this new plot. What Maud Ellis had to do
with the matter it was impossible to say; George could no more
understand her connection with the matter than he could understand why
Lady Charvington had employed Captain Sargent to get her the cross.
What possible interest could she have in the amethyst cross? And why
had she told a deliberate lie about its being in the library?

George was quite bewildered with the complicated state of affairs. And
Jabez, as he believed, alone could solve the mystery.

George duly gave his mother Lord Charvington's message. She received
it in silence, but with a change of colour, which did not escape his
notice.

"Mother," he asked abruptly, "what do you know about Lord
Charvington?"

"He was not Lord Charvington when I knew him," confessed Mrs. Walker,
after a pause, "but Philip Hale. Hale, you know, is the family name
and Lesbia's father bears it as a cousin. Charvington had not come
into the title some twenty and more years ago. I knew him very well
and liked him," she sighed, "but he was always weak."

George looked incredulous. "Weak," he echoed, "he seems to me to be a
very strong man and one who knows his own mind."

"He has no doubt learned by experience," replied Mrs. Walker, "and
heaven only knows how badly he needed to learn. So he is going to
speak at last. He should have done so long ago."

"About what, mother?"

Mrs. Walker pursed up her mouth. "Never mind, George, I prefer that
Lord Charvington should tell his own story. If he does, Walter Hale
will find himself in trouble, and I shall be glad of that. I have
waited long to see him punished: soon I shall be satisfied."

"Why do you hate Hale so, mother?"

"I have every cause to hate him," cried Mrs. Walker vindictively, and
her eyes glittered. "Years ago I loved Walter Hale."

"You--loved--that--man?" said her son slowly.

"What is there strange in that?" snapped his mother, trying to keep
her restless hands still. "He was handsome and clever and rich. I
loved him and I thought that he loved me. I gave him my heart and
found out only too late that he was playing with me. He was always
cruel and wicked and hard, selfish to the core and thinking only of
himself. We were engaged," added Mrs. Walker, drooping her head, and
in a lower tone, "and he confessed then that he had very little money.
He believed that I was an heiress, and so I was to the extent of fifty
thousand pounds. My father did not like him and declared that if I
married Walter he would cut me off with a shilling. I did not care,
for I loved the man for himself: but he loved me for my money, and
when he learned my father's decision he threw me over, and went after
some other woman who was rich."

"Lesbia's mother?"

"I suppose so," said Mrs. Walker, pretending indifference; "but he
vanished out of my life, and I heard that he was courting this
heiress, in the hope of making a good marriage for his pocket. I was
left alone, and I married your father Aylmer Walker, not because I
loved him, but because he was kind and sympathetic. Aylmer was a
spendthrift and wasted all my money; all the same he was kind-hearted
and not a scoundrel like Walter Hale. Then you were born and shortly
afterwards misfortunes came. I was only married four years when
your father broke his neck leaving me penniless. Then Kate eloped
with"--Mrs. Walker paused--"she eloped, that is all I can say. I saw
Walter Hale again and learned, and learned--oh!" he rose and wrung out
her hands, "what a villain the man is. But he shall be punished now. I
swear if Charvington will not punish him, I shall punish him myself."

"But mother----"

"Not a word," cried Mrs. Walker passionately, "I can't bear to discuss
the matter. When we meet at Charvington's place, the long-hidden truth
will come to light. Until then----" she stopped, closed her mouth,
shook her head, and left the room hastily.

George wondered what could be the hidden truth she referred to, but
could come to no conclusion. He wrote a letter to Lesbia saying that
she was to come to Lord Charvington's place, and stating that he would
call to take her over. Then he smoked a pipe and retired to bed,
intending the next day to go to London and see Mr. Jabez in Lincoln's
Inn Fields. Mrs. Walker did not put in an appearance again on that
evening. Of course George, as a lover, lay awake and thought of
Lesbia. He was sorely inclined to postpone his visit to Mr. Jabez, and
go over to Marlow on the morrow, but it was necessary to execute
business before indulging in pleasure, since, when everything was
settled, he would have Lesbia beside him always as his dear wife. He
therefore restrained his longing for a sight of her face, and
gradually dropped off to sleep.

Next morning Mrs. Walker had her breakfast in bed and did not see her
son. George left a message that he would return in the evening, and
went to Henley in his boat to catch the mid-day train. He soon arrived
in London, and without wasting time went to see Mr. Jabez.

The old lawyer had a large and expensive office in Lincoln's Inn
Fields, and from the number of clerks was apparently much sought after
as a solicitor. He received Walker as soon as the young man sent in
his card, as it seemed that George had luckily arrived during the
slack season. "A week ago," said Mr. Jabez, in his precise way, "I
should have had to keep you waiting for some hours."

The room in which Jabez received his client--as George was--was a
large apartment with a painted ceiling and three long windows looking
out on to the gardens of the square. Probably in Georgian days it had
held brilliant company, but now, since the tide of fashion had rolled
farther to the west, it was given over to the dry-as-dust details of
the law. Jabez looked as hatchet-faced as ever, and still wore his
large blue spectacles to aid his weak eyes. He welcomed George
politely in his dry way, and waited to hear what the young man had to
say.

"Lord Charvington wants you to come down to The Court the day after
to-morrow at three o'clock," said George abruptly.

"Why?" demanded Jabez quietly, and more puzzled than he chose to
admit.

"I can only answer you by telling you all that has taken place,"
answered the young man, and forthwith related what he knew.

Nursing his chin in the hollow of his hand, Jabez crossed his lean
legs and listened quietly enough, nodding at intervals. "I thought it
would come to this," he observed, when the young man ended.

"Come to what?"

"An explanation."

"Of what?"

"Of many things which will astonish you," said Jabez drily. "Of course
I was acquainted with Lord Charvington when he was merely the
Honourable Philip Hale. Then----" Jabez suspended further confidences.
"It is best to allow Lord Charvington to speak for himself."

"Do you know what he intends to say?"

"Partly. And yet," mused the solicitor, looking at his neat shoes,
"there may be something interesting which I do not know. However, the
main point is that I shall arrange to be there at the stated time. The
gathering promises to be interesting. The cross," Jabez stopped, "h'm!
yes, the cross. I see now how Hale got it."

"He stole it from Lady Charvington, who procured it from Sargent, who
employed Canning to thieve it from me," explained George.

"So you said before, and I am not so stupid as to require a double
explanation," said Jabez crustily, "but I am wondering how Hale hopes
to get the money by means of this cross. Certainly he declares that he
has found the child, and----"

"What!" cried George, starting to his feet in amazement.

Jabez looked up and raised a hand. "Don't speak so loud, your voice
goes through my head," he said in his testy manner. "Yes," he searched
amongst some papers, "here is a letter from Walter Hale saying that he
will call to-morrow at noon with the child of Katherine Morse----"

"Doesn't he mention my aunt's married name?"

"No," answered Jabez, sucking in his cheeks, "and that is what makes
me suspicious of the affair. However, what you have told me to-day
about Lady Charvington's share in the business, and her husband's
attitude gives me an idea. Send a wire to Lord Charvington asking him
to meet you here to-morrow. Then you can both see Mr. Hale and this
child."

"I should like to, but what use----"

"There! There. I have no time to waste. Go and do what you are told,"
said Jabez, rising with an angry gesture. "I may be wrong and I may be
right. But putting two and two together----" he stopped and walked to
the window, musingly, "yes, I believe it may be so."

"What may be so?" questioned George, picking up his hat.

Jabez wheeled crossly. "Oh, you are there still. Go away and send that
wire. At noon to-morrow, bring Lord Charvington here. Good-day," he
rang the bell, "get out, young Walker, you are taking up my time."

Wondering at the behaviour of the lawyer, George departed and
forthwith sent a prepaid wire to Charvington, asking him to come to
the Lincoln's Inn Fields office. He had half a mind to go down and
explain personally, but as he could not explain very much he relied on
the wire, hoping that Charvington's curiosity would be sufficiently
aroused to make him obey the summons. Late in the afternoon an answer
came intimating that Charvington would be at Jabez's office at the
appointed time. George was greatly pleased, as he foresaw that Hale's
little plot would in some way be frustrated, Charvington apparently
knew of much to Hale's disadvantage; hence the wily old lawyer had
induced him to be present. Having come to this conclusion Walker wired
to his mother saying that he would remain in London, and employed his
evening in going to a music hall. He positively had to do so, for if
he had remained alone in his hotel brooding over riddles which he
could by no means solve, he felt that his brain would not bear the
strain. Still, in a vague way, he felt that all things were being
shaped to a happy end and that light was coming out of the darkness
which had enshrouded things for so long.

At a quarter to twelve in the morning George met Charvington in the
semi-courtyard in front of the mansion, wherein Jabez had his office.
The elder man jumped out of the hansom, in which he had driven from
the railway station, and walked towards the young one with an elastic
step, after he had paid his fare.

"What's all this, Walker?" he demanded abruptly. "Why did you wire for
me to come up on this day, and at this hour, and to this place?"

"Come upstairs to Mr. Jabez and he'll explain," said George, leading
the way up the steps, "we cannot linger here. Hale may see us."

"Hale," Charvington followed hurriedly and caught the young man's arm,
"and why is Hale coming here?"

"He has found--so he says--my cousin."

"Your--cousin?"

"My aunt's child--the heir to the property which Mr. Jabez has held
for so long."

Charvington stopped on the landing. "So Hale is going to anticipate
me," he muttered, and without waiting to be announced he opened the
door of Jabez's private room and strode in. The lawyer looked up
irritably.

"I'm engaged. You, Lord Charvington? Well, I might have guessed as
much from your abrupt entry. You haven't changed much in your
impulsive ways."

Lord Charvington threw down his hat and stick and gloves and flung
himself into a chair. "I have changed very much in looks," he
retorted; "however there is no time for these personalities. Walker,"
he indicated the young man who had followed him closely, "tells me
that Hale intends to produce the heiress to his aunt's property."

Jabez looked inquisitively at Charvington through his blue spectacles.
"I believe so," he said quietly and cautiously, with a glance at his
watch. "Hale will bring the girl here in a few minutes."

"It's a girl then," sneered Charvington.

"You mentioned the word 'heiress' yourself," remarked Jabez, with
emphasis.

"A mere guess. And what of the cross?"

"Hale says that the girl will produce it."

"Humph! I don't believe that the girl will produce stolen property.
You know that the cross was stolen from my house?"

"So I believe," said Jabez politely.

"Yes, Walker here told me, though how it got into my library----"

"I can tell you that now, Lord Charvington," interposed George, "as I
heard the truth from Canning the other day. Sargent employed Canning
to steal the cross in order to pass it over to your wife."

Charvington bounded from his chair. "What did she want with it?"

"I can't say--I don't----"

"Hush," said Jabez, who, at the sound of wheels in the courtyard, had
gone to one of the tall windows; "here come Hale and his heiress. Go
into the next room with Walker, Lord Charvington. When I require you I
shall summon you."

"But why do you bring me here at all?" demanded Charvington brusquely.

Jabez looked straight at him and his long fingers played a tune on the
table. "I have an idea," he said gravely; "you may be able to tell me
if that idea is correct."

"What is the idea?"

"I cannot tell it to you, until I see this heiress."

"Very good." Charvington sat down again. "Introduce her and Hale."

"No! No!" said Jabez anxiously, "that would never do. Wait until I
hear Hale's story and then----"

"Hale will only tell you a pack of lies," interrupted Charvington
violently. "And besides he stole the cross and----"

Jabez put his hand against the breast of the angry speaker and pushed
him gently towards a side door. "Go in there and wait," he said
insistently. "You also, Walker."

"No," cried Charvington, "I shan't."

"If you don't," said the solicitor very quietly, "I shall wash my
hands of this matter. Already Hale and his heiress are waiting in the
ante-chamber, and if your voice is recognised, they will not come in."

"Why not?"

"Because I believe that this is another of Hale's wicked schemes. Let
me hear the whole invention he has made up, and then I can call upon
you to substantiate the story."

"But I can't wait. I want to know who this girl is."

"Can't you guess?" demanded Jabez, leading him deftly to the door of
the inner room where he wished him to wait.

"I can do more than guess, I know."

"Humph," muttered Jabez, "I thought so."

"You thought what?"

"Never mind. If you know rightly, you will be able to help me."

Charvington stamped. "I believe it's all lies. I want to see this
girl."

"Well," said Jabez resignedly. "I shall do a thing I have never done
before since you will not be quiet otherwise. In the panel of this
door there is a small knot-hole. Look in and see if----"

Charvington rushed into the room, dragging Walker after him, and
closed the door. Shortly afterwards they heard the entrance of two
people. The old man applied an eye to the knot-hole. Then he laughed
silently and made George apply his eye. "Look at the heiress," he said
sneeringly.

Walker looked eagerly and saw--Maud Ellis.




CHAPTER XXIII
ONE PART OF THE TRUTH


It was indeed Maud Ellis who entered on the arm of Mr. Hale. She was
carefully dressed and, as usual, had made the best of her looks, such
as they were. But she appeared to be anxious--to be strung up to
fighting-pitch--after the manner of a woman who anticipated that she
was not going to get her own way without a battle. On her entrance,
she measured the lean lawyer with the eye of an antagonist, and then
sat down in the chair which he politely pushed forward. As to Walter
Hale, he looked much the same as he always did, cool, polished, and
composed. Of course, he was perfectly arrayed in Bond Street taste,
and his manners were as irreproachable as was his costume. If Miss
Ellis was nervous, Hale assuredly was not. To Jabez, he suggested a
bowie-knife--an odd comparison, but one which came unexpectedly into
the lawyer's unimaginative brain.

"You know, of course, Mr. Jabez," said Hale when seated, "what I have
come to see you about."

The solicitor, who had taken his usual chair before the table, nodded
and pointed to Hale's letter which lay on the blotting-paper before
him. "To produce the amethyst cross," said he gravely.

"And something more important than the cross. Allow me," Hale stood up
to give his words due effect, "to present to you, Miss Katherine
Morse----"

"Oh," interrupted Jabez drily, "I understood from you that she died in
your Wimbledon house years ago."

"You are thinking of my mother," put in Maud boldly. "She, indeed, is
dead; but I am her child and am called after her."

"Even to the name of Morse?"

"Later," said Hale, with dignity, "I can give you the married name of
this young lady's mother. Meanwhile, the cross is----"

"Is here," said Maud, and opening a little bag which was swinging on
her wrist, she extracted therefrom a red morocco case and handed it to
Jabez.

He opened it gravely and beheld the long-lost ornament. "It was my
dear mother's," added Miss Ellis with feigned pathos, as though the
sight was too much for her tender heart. "My grandfather gave it to
her, and----"

"And your mother gave it to you," ended Jabez, seeing with his usual
keen gaze that her eyes were dry behind the handkerchief she was
holding to them.

"No," she replied, unexpectedly and sadly. "I never set eyes upon it
until Mr. Hale saw me a few days ago."

"Permit me to explain," said Hale, as watchful as a cat. "As I told
you, Miss Morse----"

"Still no married name," muttered the solicitor ironically.

"That will be told later," remarked Hale, provokingly self-possessed.
"I have first to tell my story."

"Go on," Jabez stretched his legs and put his hands in his pockets,
"it is sure to be interesting."

"I hope so," rejoined Hale, making a sign to Maud that she should not
talk, "and already you know much of it."

"Let me see. Yes, I remember. You told me at Rose Cottage, in the
presence of Mrs. Walker, that Miss Morse died at your Wimbledon house
in the arms of your wife. She gave the cross to your wife, who
afterwards gave it to the nurse, Bridget Burke. She in her turn gave
it to your daughter Lesbia, who presented it to young Walker from whom
it was stolen. Am I right?"

"Perfectly," said Hale gravely. "So you can see how Miss Morse here,
never set eyes on it until I brought it to her."

"And how did you become possessed of it?"

"I shall explain that, when you have heard Miss Morse's story."

Maud put up her veil and wiped her lips. "I am only too anxious to
tell it," she declared eagerly, "and----"

Jabez cut her short. "I am sure you are, but before hearing it I
should like to remind Mr. Hale that he declared in my presence and in
the presence of Mrs. Walker that there was no child."

"Quite so," said Hale promptly. "I am not bound to tell you anything I
desire to keep silent."

"I think you will have to do so, if you wish this young lady to get
fifty thousand pounds," said Jabez coolly.

"Of course: that is why I am here. But I refer to the interview at my
Marlow cottage. Then, I was not bound to speak. I speak now. There was
not any child with Miss Morse when she died at my Wimbledon house. But
with her last breath she told me where she had left the child--in a
poor neighbourhood and with a poor woman."

"Who was very good to me," said Maud, with tenderness very well acted.
"Dear Mrs. Tait, shall I ever forget her kindness?"

"Tait. Humph. So that's the name, is it?"

"The name of my foster-mother who brought me up. For years I have been
called Maud Ellis, but only when Mr. Hale came to see me bringing the
cross did I learn my true name and parentage."

"Why did your foster-mother call you Ellis?" asked Jabez.

"She passed me off to the world as her sister's child," said Maud
glibly.

"Why? I cannot see the need."

"Nor I," said Miss Ellis, with a swift glance at Hale. "But who knows
the human heart, Mr. Jabez?"

"No one so far as I know. But you were saying----"

"If you will permit me to tell my story I can make everything clear."

"I am quite certain that you can," said the lawyer, politely ironical.
"Go on."

"Mrs. Tait kept a lodging-house in Bloomsbury. My mother lived there
after leaving her husband--my father, who treated her very badly. I am
right," she added turning to Hale, "in saying this?"

"He behaved like a brute," said Hale emphatically, "but then he always
was a brute I am sorry to say."

"Dear me," murmured Jabez, "proceed, please."

"My mother left me with Mrs. Tait, as she had very little money and
went to seek out my father at Wimbledon one bitterly cold, snowy day.
He turned her from his door, and she nearly perished in the snow.
Fortunately this good man," Maud glanced pathetically at Hale, who
tried not to look too conscious, "took in the starving and chilled
woman. My mother died, and I was left to Mrs. Tait's kind care."

"What about the cross?" asked Jabez abruptly, stifling a yawn.

"I can explain that," interposed Hale quickly, "indeed I have already
done so. It was given to my wife and----"

"Of course: of course, I remember now. Well," Jabez turned to Maud,
"so you remained with Mrs. Tait."

"Until she died. Then her husband adopted me as his niece and with him
I lived, retaining my name of Maud Ellis."

"There was a husband then?"

"Yes," said Hale anxiously, "you may know of him, Mr. Michael Tait, the
stockbroking philanthropist."

"Oh," drawled the solicitor quietly, "the same man who lost his jewels
the other day."

"Yes," admitted Hale, quite ignorant of how much Jabez knew, "the
same. He was poor when Miss Morse--or Miss Ellis if you like--came to
his wife, and Mrs. Tait kept a boarding-house to help him. Then Tait
made a lucky speculation--he was a clerk in the City--and began to
grow rich. But before he could make a fortune Mrs. Tait died, and thus
never benefited."

"No, poor dear, and she was so very kind," said Maud sweetly,
"however, when my uncle grew rich----"

"Your uncle?" queried Jabez.

Maud coloured to the roots of her sandy hair. "I have fallen into the
habit of calling my friend Mr. Tait my uncle. And, indeed, until the
other day I almost thought that he was my uncle until I knew the
truth. But as I was saying, Mr. Jabez, my uncle--for I still call Mr.
Tait so--placed a magnificent tombstone over her remains when he grew
rich. That is my story."

"A very interesting one," said Jabez politely. "Then I take it that
you are the young lady entitled to fifty thousand pounds."

"I am. I understood that when I came and presented that cross," Maud
pointed to the ornament on the table, "that the money would be given
to me."

"You certainly said as much to me, Jabez," chimed in Hale anxiously.

"Quite right. The cross," Jabez waved his hand, "was only a little
attempt of mine to introduce romance into the dry details of the law.
Of course it is a means of identification, but it will be necessary
for Miss Ellis to produce her certificate of birth, her baptismal
certificate and----"

Hale bit his finger with vexation. "I anticipated that objection," he
interrupted in hard tones, "and I knew you would make it."

"In the interest of Mrs. Walker I must make it."

"Yes! yes. But the fact is, that only Mrs. Tait, besides the mother,
knew where the certificate of birth and that of baptism were to be
found. They are both dead, as you have heard, so----"

"So," ended Jabez rising to stand before the fireplace, "so there will
be no chance of this young lady getting the money."

"Don't you believe my story?" demanded Maud angrily.

"Oh yes. One has only to look into your face, my dear madam, to
be certain that you speak as you believe. But the law is not so
tender-hearted as I am. The law requires proofs."

"The amethyst cross----"

"Is one proof, but others are required. Then, you see, the cross was
stolen and has not been in your possession all these years. It is not
a very strong proof of your identity."

"I can make an affidavit," said Hale sharply, "swearing that the
mother me told where the child was to be found."

"Quite so, and doubtless Mr. Tait--then in the Bloomsbury
lodging-house kept by his wife--can make another affidavit showing how
the mother left the child in his wife's charge."

"Of course," assented Hale readily. "Tait will do anything I ask him."

"And my uncle," said Maud, "for I must call him uncle, will only be
too glad to see me come into my kingdom."

"Oh, I am certain of that," said Jabez, trimming his nails rapidly
with a little knife, "and to show your gratitude, you will doubtless
divide the money with him."

"Oh no. My uncle is too rich to need help," said Maud virtuously.

Jabez shut the knife and restored it to his pocket. "So he made enough
by the double deal of the jewels and the insurance fraud to tide over
the financial crisis which threatened him," he said deliberately.

Maud turned pale and uttered an exclamation. "I don't understand."

"Do you, Mr. Hale?" asked Jabez.

"No," said the man coldly, "I know nothing of Tait's business."

"Rubbish! rubbish! See here, Hale, and you, young woman, before you
came here to try your games on me, you should have made certain that I
knew nothing of your doings. As it is, from Mrs. Walker, from her son,
and from various other people, I know all that has taken place in
connection with that cross from the time Miss Lesbia Hale gave it to
her lover, and----"

"You insult Miss Morse," interrupted Hale furiously.

"Miss Maud Ellis you mean," sneered the lawyer, "and--no you don't,"
he stretched out his long arm, and snatched the cross away, before
Hale could lay a finger on it. "That belongs to Mrs. Walker's niece."

"I am Mrs. Walker's niece," panted Maud, standing up with a red and
furious face. Since Jabez appeared to know so much, she saw very well
that the plotting of herself and Hale had come to an untimely end.
Nevertheless, like a woman, she persisted in fighting, even when the
game had been irretrievably lost. "She will acknowledge me."

The lawyer slipped the case containing the cross into the pocket of
his coat and faced round. "If Mrs. Walker will acknowledge you as her
niece," he declared, "I will give you the money."

"What's the use of talking in this way?" cried Hale angrily. "You know
well enough that Mrs. Walker wants the money for herself. She will
certainly not help this poor girl to gain her rights."

"Girl," echoed Jabez cruelly, and with his eyes on Maud's plain face,
which showed elderly lines. "I am no judge of a lady's age, but----"

"Brute! brute," cried Miss Ellis, making for the door. "Hale, come
away, I am not going to stand here and be insulted."

"I am coming," said Hale sullenly: then turning to the lawyer: "as to
these veiled accusations you bring against me----"

"Oh, you want me to speak clearer. Very well, then. You, Mr. Hale, and
you, Miss Maud Ellis, belong to a gang of clever thieves. The police
have been trying to break up the gang for years: but hitherto have not
succeeded. Now they will lay hands on one and all."

"Oh!" gasped Maud, trembling. "What nonsense you talk."

"The police do not think so. You and Hale had better make yourselves
scarce, for one of your gang has given the rest away."

"Canning, blast him!" shouted Hale fiercely.

"Ah!" Jabez turned on him, "you admit then that I speak the truth."

"I admit nothing," muttered Hale, wiping his face.

"As you please," Jabez moved towards the door leading into the inner
room where Lord Charvington and George were concealed, "but Canning is
now in communication with the police. I learned yesterday that he knew
all. I got his address from young Walker, and have seen him. To save
his own skin he will turn king's evidence and you and Miss Ellis
there, and her dear uncle and Sargent, and a few others, including
Mrs. Petty, will be----"

"Damn you," cried Hale, while Maud stood trembling at the outer door,
which she had not strength enough to open, "I'll kill you."

With outstretched hand he lunged forward to grip the lawyer. Jabez on
the watch dexterously slipped aside and flung open the door. Hale
unable to restrain his impetus plunged right through the entrance into
the strong arms of George Walker. That young gentleman picked him up
like a feather and carrying him into the outer room, flung him into
Jabez's chair. Maud uttered a cry of alarm. She did not know Lord
Charvington: but she knew George, and guessed that he had overheard
the whole wicked plot. Overcome with shame she tore blindly at the
door, opened it hurriedly and fled away, pulling down her veil to hide
her shameful face. She could not meet the eye of the man, whom she had
wronged so deeply, because she loved him too well.

None of the three men followed her, as their attention was taken up
with Hale. Over him stood George, righteously indignant. "You
confounded blackguard," cried George between his teeth, "if you were
not Lesbia's father I would murder you."

"Set your mind at rest on that point, George," said Lord Charvington,
who was strangely white, "I am Lesbia's father."

"You!" George recoiled, dazed and startled. "Katherine Morse was my
first wife and I am Lesbia's father."

"Now," said George to Hale, "I can choke the wicked life out of you."

But Charvington stopped him. "Leave him to God."




CHAPTER XXIV
ANOTHER PART OF THE TRUTH

A day or so after the scene in the Lincoln's Inn Fields office, a
party of those interested in the circumstances connected with the
amethyst cross assembled in the library of The Court. George was
present with Lesbia by his side--Lesbia, still ignorant of her true
parentage. Mrs. Walker, looking less grim than usual, had a seat near
Mr. Jabez, who had come down to hear Lord Charvington's story and to
witness the righting of the wrong which had been done to Lesbia. But
two people who should have been on the spot were absent--Walter Hale
and Lady Charvington.

On returning from London, where he had admitted the truth, Charvington
had interviewed his wife. What took place between them was never
known, for out of shame for the lady's behaviour Charvington said as
little as he could, when explaining fully. But his wife must have been
dissatisfied with the conversation, for she left The Court and
returned to London. In spite of what her husband said, she absolutely
refused to be present at the rehabilitation of Lesbia, and it must be
confessed that Charvington felt relieved. He knew his wife's fiery
temper and vindictive nature well, and therefore dreaded lest she
should make a scene. Besides he was manifestly in the wrong, and when
given an inch Lady Charvington immediately took an ell with all the
zest of an ungenerous woman. Mrs. Walker having been the lady's
schoolfellow had something to say on the subject: but she reserved her
remarks until she heard Charvington's story. She, for one, was not
astonished at Lady Charvington's failure to put in an appearance at
the conference. She had never credited her with a kindly heart willing
to forgive and forget. And time proved that her estimate was right.

As to Hale, the interview in Jabez's office had more or less done away
with the necessity for his presence.

He admitted the truth of Charvington's statement to Jabez, and after
confessing the whole of his wicked plots to gain possession of Mrs.
Walker's money--or rather the money which now belonged to Lesbia as
her mother's heiress,--he had been permitted to depart. This he did,
knowing that the police were on his track, and that unless he could
get out of the country he would be in danger of arrest. And if he were
arrested he knew well enough that he would suffer a long term of
imprisonment. Destiny, as Mrs. Walker had remarked, had been very kind
to him, but the hour had arrived when she demanded the return of all
the good fortune which she had lent. And Hale lurked in byways,
trembling for the payment of the bill which the police--as Destiny's
agents--were trying to present. He did his best to give the police no
chance of presenting it, and longed--like David--for the wings of a
dove that he might fly away and be at rest.

But enough people were present to give Charvington an opportunity of
confessing his weakness and folly and, to be plain, cowardice, or, to
be generous, want of courage. Only George and Jabez knew what he was
about to say, as they already had heard the confession in the office.
But Mrs. Walker and Lesbia were ignorant, and although they guessed
that they had been brought there to hear how things could be righted,
they little suspected the way in which this would be accomplished.

Lord Charvington glanced round at the attentive faces, and then
abruptly plunged into the middle of his his story. It was not an easy
one for him to tell, and only sincere repentance made him bold enough
to open his mouth. "I have to right a great wrong," he said with
considerable emotion, "a wrong done to you, Lesbia."

"To me!" The girl looked surprised and clutched George's hand tighter.

"Yes! Listen. For you to understand I must go back over twenty years.
You remember that time, Judith?"

"Yes," said Mrs. Walker quietly, "but you should go back nearly thirty
years, Philip. George is now five-and-twenty and I married his father
some seven years previous to the time you speak of."

"I begin some twenty-three years ago," said Charvington, after a
pause, "as it was then that I married your sister Katherine. Lesbia,"
he turned to the girl, "you are now twenty I believe?"

"Yes, but what have I to do with----"

"You have everything to do with it," interrupted Charvington, "for I
am your father, Lesbia--your guilty, cowardly, cruel father."

"What!" Mrs. Walker rose slowly with a pale face and indignant eyes,
"do you mean to say that this girl is my sister's child?"

"Yes, and as such inherits the money."

"I don't want it," said Lesbia, who was as pale as a wintry moon, for
she could scarcely grasp the significance of her father's statement.

Mrs. Walker waved the objection aside. "I don't mind about the money,"
she said harshly, "and if George marries Lesbia the money is well
bestowed. But to think that you, Philip, should know the truth and
conceal it. I always thought that you were more sinned against than
sinning, Philip, as Hale was your evil genius. But if you knew that
Lesbia was your daughter why did you permit her to call that wretch
father?'

"I am about to explain," said Charvington, trying to speak quietly,
"and I remember the time, Judith, when you would not have called Hale
a wretch."

"I remember it also," said Mrs. Walker, sitting down, "a time when I
loved the man. But you know, Philip, how he deceived me and left me
and threw me into the arms of George's father. I can neither forgive
nor forget the cruelty with which he treated me. And you allowed your
own child--my poor Kate's daughter--to call him father. How could you?
how could you?"

"I was wrong, Judith----"

"Wrong," she repeated strongly, "you were wicked and cruel. What
induced you to arrange matters so? Why was not Lesbia given into my
charge? I was her aunt; I had the right to look after her. But I
expect you and Mr. Jabez made up the matter between you and----"

"Pardon me," said the lawyer politely, "but I knew nothing for ever so
long, and if I had known, I should have given the money which I held
in trust to Miss Lesbia Hale."

"Is my name Lesbia Hale?" asked the girl, who looked pale and scared.

"Yes," said her father, "Hale is my family name. You are Lesbia Hale,
as your half-sisters are Agatha and Lena Hale."

"My half-sisters?" muttered Lesbia bewildered.

"Of course. Your mother was my first wife, and you are her child;
Helen Harrowby is my second wife, the mother of Agatha and Lena."

"Helen Harrowby," said Mrs. Walker with scorn. "Oh, I know her well,
better than you know her, Charvington, or you would never have married
her."

"Heaven knows that I have learned to know her," said the man bitterly,
"but allow me to explain myself, and----"

"One moment," put in Jabez, "I wish to explain on my part to Mrs.
Walker, that I knew nothing of the truth for years. It was only when
you, madam," he addressed himself directly to Mrs. Walker, "told me
of the theft of the amethyst cross, and how your son had obtained it
from Miss Hale, that I got an idea. I fancied--on account of the
cross--that Miss Hale might be your sister's child, but Hale swore, if
you remember, that there was no child."

"Yes," said George caustically, "and then tried to pass off Maud Ellis
as the child so as to get the money."

"That plot was doomed to fail from the first," said Jabez waving his
hand, "as by then, I knew too much. I did not like to declare my
belief that Miss Hale was the missing child, until I had further
proof. In one way and another the proofs came to hand. When Lord
Charvington appeared in my office at my request, immediately before
Hale called with Miss Ellis, I was then pretty well convinced that he
was Miss Hale's father. I was right."

"But you knew for years that he had been my sister's husband," said
Mrs. Walker, "and knowing that, you should have asked him about the
child."

"You knew also. Why did not _you_ ask?"

"Because from Kate's letter to me saying that the child was
dangerously ill, I believed that it had died."

"You told me that," said Jabez, "and I thought so also. Perhaps I have
been blind and have not done justice to my legal training. However,
the case is a very peculiar one. Let us hear what Lord Charvington has
to say, and then, if necessary, I can exonerate myself further."

Mrs. Walker moved her chair and caught Lesbia's disengaged hand. "I am
quite ready," she said calmly, "and before Charvington speaks, I must
thank him for giving me back Kate's child."

Lesbia was too overcome to speak coherently, but muttering something
unintelligible, she sat between mother and son, her aunt and her
cousin, allowing them to hold her hands, and feeling, poor child, that
at last she had someone to love her, and cherish her, and take care of
her. Lord Charvington cast a longing glance at the trio. He would have
liked to take Lesbia in his arms, but it was part of his punishment to
see her cling to others, while he detailed the folly that had led to
his isolation.

"When I was young," he said in a steady voice, and speaking slowly,
"there were two people between myself and the title I hold. I was then
merely Philip Hale."

"The Honourable Philip Hale," said Mrs. Walker promptly.

"No," he contradicted, "no, Judith, my father was only a younger son.
I had no title whatsoever until the death of my cousins by drowning
placed me here as head of the family. And I had no expectation then of
becoming rich and titled. I was simply a briefless barrister."

"And Walter's closest companion," muttered Mrs. Walker.

"Yes. But Walter was not so wicked in those days as he has since
proved to be."

"He was always wicked," snapped the woman, "he was your evil genius."

Charvington passed his hand through his white hair. "I fear he was.
However, we can talk of that later. Walter and I were the best of
friends, and it was Walter who introduced me to Mr. Samuel Morse, a
City merchant. He had two daughters. Judith----"

"That was me," murmured Mrs. Walker, "and the other daughter was my
sister Kate. You loved Kate, and I thought that Walter loved me."

"Walter behaved very badly," said Charvington promptly. "He was poor
while pretending to be rich, and so, when your father, not approving
of his scampish ways, learned that you loved him, Judith, he
threatened to disinherit you."

"Quite so, and learning that, Walter threw me over. Later, I married
George's father, who was quite as scampish, but kind-hearted and
honourable."

"Yes!" Charvington nodded, "I always wondered why Mr. Morse permitted
that marriage as he knew that Walker was quite as wild as Hale."

"But he knew also that Aylmer was honourable, which Walter never was.
Let that pass, I was jilted by Walter and married Aylmer. I lost my
money and my husband, and was left with George to live on nothing.
That's my story, I want to hear yours."

"You know most of it," said Lord Charvington, now speaking rapidly as
though anxious to end a disagreeable task. "I loved Kate; she was the
only woman I ever loved, but your father, thinking me as dissipated as
Walter, refused to permit the match. Kate eloped with me, and your
father would have altered his will but that he died before he could
send for his lawyer."

"And that was me," said Jabez, "however, the will was very fair. You,
Mrs. Walker, got your fifty thousand when you married your husband,
and he soon got rid of it. The other fifty thousand pounds belonged to
Kate, but she never appeared to get it. Why not?" he asked
Charvington.

"Walter Hale again," said that gentleman quickly. "Kate and I were
married and went on the Continent. I was poor and we lived quietly,
hoping that some day Mr. Morse would relent. Then we heard that he had
died. Walter undertook to find out about the will, and told us that
Kate inherited nothing, that all had been left to you, Judith."

"And you believed him," said Jabez. "Why didn't you communicate with
me?"

"I had no reason then to doubt Walter," said Charvington stiffly.

"Augh," groaned Mrs. Walker softly, "you were always an honourable
fool."

"I was, in believing Walter," said Charvington, "and not until lately
have I learned how I was deceived. Walter was always plausible and
clever. Besides, I kept the fact of my marriage secret from my father
lest he should disinherit me. Walter made capital out of that also.
Then there was Helen----"

"Helen," cried Mrs. Walker, rising, much agitated. "She always hated
me and hated Kate because Kate was pretty and you loved her. Helen and
Walter caused all the trouble."

"I know that now; I did not know it then," said Charvington sadly. "I
was always foolish as you remarked just now. I was living in Paris
with my wife. Lesbia was a baby then. We met Helen, who pretended to
be our friend."

"A friend such as Walter was," muttered Mrs. Walker.

"I fear so, but let us say nothing since Helen is now my wife."

"You let her off too easily."

"She is now my wife," said Charvington determinedly, "so that puts an
end to all discussion. Besides, Walter was to blame, as my wife
informed me in a conversation we had when she refused to be present at
this meeting. He worked on Kate's feelings and made her believe that I
was in love with Helen. I was wrong also, for then I went about much
with Helen, while my wife was ill, so that in the end Kate grew
jealous."

"You treated her worse than I thought," said Mrs. Walker darkly.

Charvington threw out his hands. "I never was a hero," he said
entreatingly, "but surely I have suffered for my weakness--the
weakness of a pleasure-loving man. I was wrong; I here admit publicly
that I was wrong. Surely you will believe that my repentance is
sincere."

Mrs. Walker looked at his drawn face and admitted that it was. After
all, few men would have had the courage to stand up and speak as
Charvington was now speaking--to lay bare the secrets of their
weakness and strive, even at the eleventh hour, to make amends.
Charvington had sinned through weakness; he confessed through strength
gained from the lessons of a hard life, hard in spite of his outward
show of prosperity. "I forgive you," said Mrs. Walker in softer tones,
"go on."

"I come to the cruellest part," said Charvington in a thick voice.
"Kate was so jealous that she fled with the child. I searched for her
but could not find her. It was in winter. Then Walter sent for me. I
came to England and he told me that Kate had come to him weak and ill
and almost starving. She had sold what jewels she possessed to feed
herself and her child, and only retained the amethyst cross which her
father had given her. Then she went to Walter at Wimbledon, and there
died in the arms of Bridget Burke."

"Was Mr. Hale married then?" asked George anxiously.

"No. He never married in his life. But when I arrived my wife was
buried and had left the child to the care of Bridget, and also had
given her the cross saying it was to be handed to Lesbia when she grew
up."

"Bridget gave it to me on her death-bed," sighed Lesbia, who wept
bitterly.

"Yes, I learned that," said Charvington with a heavy sigh. "But to go
back to my story. I repented deeply of the way in which I had behaved.
I meant no harm, and would have explained to my wife had she not left
me secretly. I never had an opportunity of explaining. Kate simply
disappeared and died. Owing to my conduct I did not dare to go near
you, Judith, or I might have placed the child in your care. As it was
Hale proposed that Lesbia should be nursed by Bridget and that I
should allow him money. I agreed to this, as at the time it seemed the
best way out of the difficulty. Then my cousins were lost at sea in
their yacht. I came in for a large income and for the title. My
relatives urged me to marry again. Chance threw me once more into
Helen's company----"

"Chance!" snorted Mrs. Walker. "Chance! I know the minx."

Charvington passed over this remark. "I married Helen and took up the
station I now hold. I arranged to allow Walter an annuity if he looked
after Lesbia. He did so, and gradually she began to look on him as her
father."

"And you permitted that--you permitted that," cried Mrs. Walker
furiously.

"Yes," said Charvington with an effort. "Weakness again. My wife knew
the truth and I did not dare to bring my child into the house. I
provided that Lesbia should have a good education, and saw that she
had everything she desired. Walter was kind to her in his own way.
Gradually I came to accept the situation. Then the cross passed into
Walker's possession, and--" he threw out his hand--"you know the rest."

George nodded. "But how did Lady Charvington learn the truth, and why
did she want the cross?"

Charvington sighed again and hung his head. "I do not wish to speak
ill of my wife," he said in a low voice; "but in justice to Lesbia I
must be frank. Hale learned about the money waiting for Lesbia, and
knew that it could be obtained if the cross was shown to you, Jabez,
But Hale could not find the cross."

"I know why," said Lesbia quickly, "Bridget kept it secretly
beside her, as my mother thought that Mr. Hale."--she did not say
father--"might take it away. My mother told Bridget that the cross
would prove that I was her child should any money be waiting for her.
Bridget gave the cross to me and made me promise to say nothing to Mr.
Hale, but to give it to the man I loved. While I was giving it to
George, Mr. Hale came and then----"

"Then," said Lord Charvington, "he went to Cookham and told Sargent
that you, Walker, had the cross. My wife had already learned through
Sargent, who obtained the information from Hale, that if Lesbia
produced the cross she would inherit a fortune. Then--she--" he
hesitated.

Mrs. Walker took up the explanation. "I can see it all," she said
scornfully, "Helen hated Kate so that she was determined that Lesbia
should not get the money and hired Sargent to get the cross. He did
through his brother. We know all about that. But did Helen know that
Sargent was a thief?"

"No," said Charvington sharply. "Helen is not altogether bad. She did
not know of that, nor did she ever suspect that Walter was such a
rascal. I was amazed myself when I heard the truth. I only learned it
during the last few weeks. But you can see how the cross came into my
wife's possession."

"Yes," said George, "but why did she tell the lie about its being in
the library?"

"To conceal the fact of how she came to get it, as she knew perfectly
well that Sargent had obtained it in some underhand way. She guessed
that if she swore I had given her the cross, that no inquiry would be
made and, of course," he added apologetically, "as my wife, I should
have been obliged to support her."

"Philip," cried Mrs. Walker, rising, "you are as weak as ever."

"No," denied the man, "I am strong. Things being as they are, I must
make the best of them. Helen is my wife, and to save the honour of my
name all that I have told you must be kept silent."

Mrs. Walker shrugged her stately shoulders. "I shall say nothing," she
observed, "neither will anyone else. As to Walter, he can be left to
the punishment of the law. But I am certain," she added, with
emphasis, "that as he knows everything, he will speak if only out of
revenge."

Charvington winced. "As I have sown, so must I reap," he murmured.
"Let us hope that out of shame Walter will be silent and not add to my
burden, which is already sufficiently heavy. If I have sinned through
weakness, I have repented and I have been punished."

Mrs. Walker offered her hand. "You shall not be punished further by
me," she said generously, "you were always good and kind, Philip, but
very weak. I held my tongue about you, and I shall hold it still. As
to Walter----"

"Oh," said Jabez, rising, "I daresay I shall find some means to square
him. In the interests of all parties, it will be best to give him a
sum of money and assist him to escape. Once abroad he will say
nothing, besides which he will not dare to venture back to England.
You forget, Lord Charvington, that although he has a hold on you by
knowing so much, you have a hold on him by what you know. Now if
I----"

"Do what you think best," said Charvington, whose hungry, bloodshot
eyes were fixed on Lesbia, "I give you full permission. But my
child--" he held out his arms to Lesbia, who rose pale and
trembling--"will you not forgive me?" said the man in a thick voice.
"I have done you wrong, but I have suffered and I will make amends and
I--I----"

Lesbia ran forward and threw her arms round his neck. "I forgive you,"
she whispered, "and I will learn to love you, and--and--father!"

Her voice rose in a scream. Unable to bear the joy of this
forgiveness, a long-threatened attack of apoplexy seized on the man's
weakened frame. He tried to speak, choked, grew purple in the face and
fell full length on the floor from the arms of the daughter he had not
acknowledged for so many years.




CHAPTER XXV
REVENGE

A week later and George was seated beside Lesbia on the well-known
bench under the famous chestnut tree. Lord Charvington had recovered
from his apoplectic fit, and was now progressing favourably. For two
or three days Lesbia and Mrs. Walker had nursed him; but when Lady
Charvington heard of her husband's illness she came down to The Court
at once. A furious passage of arms took place between her and Mrs.
Walker, which resulted in the defeat of the latter lady. Her enemy,
being Charvington's wife and mistress of the house, had the power to
send away those whom she regarded as interlopers, and she exercised
this power forthwith. Lesbia departed under the wing of Mrs. Walker,
and Charvington was too ill to prevent his wife from behaving in this
despotic manner.

Mrs. Walker desired the girl to come to Medmenham, there to remain
until such time as she could be married. But Lesbia, thinking of Tim,
insisted on returning to Rose Cottage. Jabez allowed her sufficient
money to live on, pending his handing over to her the invested fifty
thousand pounds, so there was no difficulty on the score of money.
Then it was unlikely that Hale would come back to see Lesbia, now that
she knew the truth; and under the charge of the devoted Tim, she could
remain quietly until George found occasion to make her his wife.

But there was another reason why Hale could not come. He was in
hiding, for the information given to the police by Canning--forced, in
order to save himself, to turn king's evidence--had resulted in the
arrest of Tait and Mrs. Petty and several members of the infamous
gang, whose names Canning had supplied. But Hale had managed to
escape, likewise Captain Sargent, who had been warned by Maud. That
clever young lady, having seen at Jabez's office that the game was up,
did what she could to put the rest of the gang on the alert and then
vanished like a bubble. Things were in this position when George sat
hand in hand with Lesbia under the chestnut tree, discussing the
future.

"I saw Lord Charvington yesterday," explained the young man, "and he
is now rapidly getting better. He proposes that we shall get married
next month and accompany him to the south of France. He has a villa
there which he will place at our disposal."

"And Lady Charvington?" asked Lesbia timidly.

"Your stepmother," said Walker, smiling.

"No," said Lesbia shuddering, "don't call her that."

"Why not? She has behaved exactly as a stepmother does--in fiction."

Lesbia shook her head. "I think of her merely as Lady Charvington--a
stranger, and when we are married I shall never set eyes on her
again."

"I don't think she wants to see you," said George drily. "She is still
vindictive. It seems that she always loved your father and can never
forgive your dead mother for having married him. Thus she visits her
anger upon you, my dear. However, what she does or what she says
matters little. And for her own sake she will say as little as
possible."

"She is a strange woman," sighed Lesbia, "and very unhappy."

"Don't make any mistake, my dear. Lady Charvington is too hard-hearted
to be unhappy. So long as she has her rank and her title and her
crowds of adorers, she cares for no one. Whatever love she may have
had for your father she has long since given entirely to herself."

"Do Agatha and Lena know that I am their half-sister?"

"No. I was talking about that yesterday to Lord Charvington. As you
know he has not been able to do anything because of his illness, but
he is only waiting to get on his feet again to put matters straight."

"In what way?" asked the girl anxiously.

"Well, you are his daughter, my dear, and he desires to acknowledge
you as such in the most public manner."

"No," said Lesbia firmly and sadly, "that would be useless and would
do no good. Such an acknowledgment would only lead to a lot of
questions being asked by my father's friends, and then the whole
unhappy business would be raked up. I don't want my miserable story to
be published in the papers, especially as Mr. Hale's name is so
notorious. Let me marry you quietly, my dear, and then we can go away
to France with my father for a few months. I have you, I have the
money left to me by my mother, and I have found my real father--the
rest matters very little."

George kissed her. "You wise little darling," he said admiringly,
"I think your decision is exactly what I should expect from your
commonsense way of looking at things. I agree with you, that it is
best to let sleeping dogs lie, and not to stir up muddy water, and not
to--to--what other proverb shall I use, Lesbia?"

"'Let the dead past bury its dead,'" she replied, seriously. "We have
had much trouble, and we have been parted. Now the troubles appear to
have come to an end and we are together. Let us marry and enjoy our
good fortune and be happy in our own small way."

"Amen! amen! amen!" said George, laughing, "and indeed I think we
deserve the good fortune for we did not refuse to bear the cross."

"And so have gained the crown of perfect love," said Lesbia
contentedly as she nestled in her lover's arms.

The garden was still brilliant with many-hued roses, and the river
murmured a joyous song as it flowed tranquilly under the deeply blue
summer sky. But the blackbird and his mate had gone away with their
brood and the nest was deserted. Still other birds remained and other
birds were singing lustily of summer joys. Basking in the warm
sunshine, contented with each other's company, George and Lesbia
passed into that hour of silence, which speaks of love so deep that no
speech is needed. They listened to the birds, to the river, to the
whispering of the breeze, and dreamed of a future that would always be
happy. They were together, they understood each other, so nothing else
mattered.

But their golden hour was disturbed by Tim, who hobbled down the
pathway with a distressed look on his ugly, kind face. The two
expected him, so the arrival was not an intrusion. For several days
Lesbia had insisted that Tim should explain how much he had known of
the many disgraceful things lately found out. Hitherto Tim had evaded
an explanation, but on that morning he had gravely promised to tell
what he knew. Therefore, when he halted before the dreaming couple,
George roused himself.

"Here is Tim, my darling," he said with a laugh, "put him in the
witness-box."

"Ye might say the confessional, Masther Garge," replied Tim, squatting
on the dry grass and looking like a good-tempered gnome. "What is it
ye want to know, me darlin' heart?"

"About my father--that is about Mr. Hale," said Lesbia, who had been
addressed.

"The bands av death on him," muttered Tim, using an ancient Irish
oath. "Sure I knew he wasn't any kith or kin av yours, Miss, though by
the same token I niver rightly knew as his lardship was yer father."

"Tim," said his young mistress severely, "you told Mrs. Walker in my
presence that there was no child with the poor lady who died at
Wimbledon."

"Is ut yer mother ye talk av, Miss?" asked Tim innocently. "Sure ut
was lyin' I wor, an' if I hadn't lied, that divil--ut's the masther I
mane--wud have brought throuble on ye."

"In what way, Tim?" asked George, looking puzzled.

"Augh, nivir ask me, sor. But wasn't I always listenin' and pokin' an'
pryin' when that divil--ut's the masther I mane--had thim dirthy
tatterdemalions here? Thaves they wor, an' spies, an' racavers av
stolen goods, bad luck to thim! The masther caught me wan night an'
larned as I knew av the divilments he wor indulgin' in. An' ses he,
'Tim,' ses he, if ye breathe wan wurrd I go to gaol, an' by the same
token I'll see that Miss Lesbia goes wid me. Well ye know,' ses he,
'as she lies whin callin' me her father, but if ye tell her I am not,'
ses he, 'it manes gaol fur us both.' Augh!" Tim rocked in much
distress, "an' what cud I do, Miss dear, me not knowin' the true
father av ye."

"And if you had known, Tim?" asked Lesbia anxiously.

"If I'd known as his lardship wor yer father," said Tim emphatically,
"I wud have gone on me bare shinbones to ask him to take ye out av
this divil's house. But me masther--bad luck to him!--lied like the
father av lies, as he'll some day go to, an' being in the dark as it
wor, I didn't dare to let a mouse's squeak av what I knew come to yer
purty ears, Miss."

"But you hinted that the cross would bring trouble, Tim."

"I did that, Miss. Sure, whin the mother that bore ye died in the
arrums av me own mother she guv the crass, 'an',' ses she, wid her
last gasp, 'let me choild have it, whin she grows up to prove as she's
me lawful choild. An' if there's money comin',' ses she, 'though be the
same token, me sister has got it all, the crass may git it fur the
choild. But nivir let her see her father,' ses she, 'for a bad man he's
bin to me.'"

"Not altogether bad, Tim," said Lesbia gently, "my mother was
deceived. Did she tell Bridget my father's name?"

"No, Miss," said Tim promptly, "had she towld, I'd have larned it whin
me own mother died, and thin I'd have asked his lardship to take ye
from this divil--ut's the masther I mane. But me mother sid nothin'
for she knew nothin', save what she towld ye about the crass. 'And,'
ses me mother to me whin she guv ye the crass, there'll be throuble
over yon crass,' ses she, 'fur th' Sight's on me being near me latter
end,' ses she. 'Throuble there'll be over the crass, an' sorrow an'
tears an' sudden death. But thim who love will win clear and thim as
is bad will come to the black grave.'"

"There has been trouble certainly, Tim," said Lesbia sighing, "and the
cross both began it and ended it, as your mother declared it would.
But now, thank God," she turned to place her arms round George's neck,
"it's all over and we shall have no more. Your mother prophesied
rightly, Tim, save that there has been no sudden death or black grave,
and there isn't likely to be."

Tim rocked and shook his huge head. "Thim as is goin' to their long
rest sees things as thim aloive can't get a squint at. Me mother
foresaw th' sorrow an' tears av th' crass an' the joy which ye an'
Masther Garge there have now, good luck to both ay ye! So the sudden
death an' the black grave will come I doubt not. But here, me dears,"
said Tim, after a pause, "there's wan thing ye don't know as I'll tell
ye."

"And what is that?" asked George, smiling.

"'Twas me, Masther Garge, as carried ye from the river bank to the
room in yonder," Tim nodded towards the cottage. "I wor out fishin' an'
I saw ye in the moonlight lying on the path, though be me sowl I nivir
dreamed 'twas you. I rowed ashore an' found ye stunned an' bound, bad
luck to the divil who did ut! I tuke ye into the cottage and called
softly to the young misthress there. She thought 'twas a drame an'
come down to see to you. An' now ye know, both av ye."

Lesbia and George looked at one another in astonishment. "Why didn't
you tell us this before?" asked Walker sharply. "And why did you bring
me to the cottage?"

"Sure now," said Tim in injured tones, "didn't I think as 'twas the
masther had been up to some divilment, and didn't dare spake in case
he'd get Miss Lesbia clapped into gaol 'longside him? But I knew as
the masther wud nivir dare to harrum ye in his own house wid Miss
Lesbia by the side av ye, an' so I brought ye here into his very jaws
as it wor. An' wasn't I right, me dear sor?"

"Yes," assented Walker promptly, "I think you were. It was very clever
of you to have protected me in that way, even though it was Canning
and not Hale who assaulted me. Well, Lesbia," he turned to the girl,
"here is another thing made clear. Quite a surprise."

"I hope it is the last surprise," said the girl, wearily, "I am very
tired of being surprised."

"In that case," said a smooth voice at her elbow, "you will be tired at
seeing me."

Lesbia started to her feet with a cry, and George with an exclamation
of astonishment. As to Tim, he scrambled to his feet with an oath.
"Augh, murther! murther!" cried the Irishman, "it's the black divil
his own silf."

"That's complimentary," said Hale, who was standing calm and composed
near the lovers. "You were so busily engaged talking, Lesbia, that you
did not hear me come down the path."

"How dare you come here?" said the girl indignantly.

"It's my own house. I had the key," retorted Hale coolly. "I opened
the front door and entered. Finding no one within I came here and find
that Tim is giving me away. But I am not so black as I am painted."

"You are much worse, I daresay," said George bluntly.

"Oh, you're there, you lucky young man," said Hale, raising his
eyebrows. "I congratulate you on marrying Lesbia and on getting the
money."

"In spite of all your plotting," said Walker sharply.

Hale sat down on the bench with a sudden look of fatigue. He was cool
and smiling and bore himself both shamelessly and dauntlessly. But it
was apparent that he behaved thus out of bravado. In spite of his
boldness, and of the fact that he was dressed as carefully as ever, he
was thoroughly ill and had his back to the wall.

"You had better leave this place," said Lesbia, to her lover, "the
police are hunting for you."

"Someone else is hunting for me," said Hale gloomily, "Maud Ellis is
on my track swearing vengeance."

"Why should she?"

"Because to get the money and induce her to play her part, I promised
to marry her. I have no intention of doing so. Then again, for my own
safety, I have sent a communication to the police offering to tell all
I know about Tait and his gang on condition that I am let off. Maud,
confound her, has found this out, and swears to have my life."

"She would scarcely go so far as that," said George scornfully.

"Oh, I think so," said Hale quietly, "she can't show herself, as she
is in danger from the police also, and so will revenge herself as she
best can. I don't think there's much she would stick at. I caught
sight of her on the London platform as I came down this morning, so I
expect she will follow me to this house. There will be trouble unless
you can aid me to get away."

"How can we compound a felony?" asked George, frowning.

"It is better than to see a tragedy," retorted Hale. "I am not afraid
of Maud unless she takes me by surprise; but that is just what she
will do. I am not your father, Lesbia, as you know now, and perhaps I
have not been kind in my treatment. All the same I ask you to exercise
that kind nature which you always declared you possessed, and give me
fifty pounds to get abroad with. Once across the Channel I can shift
for myself."

"I have not got fifty pounds," said Lesbia hesitating. Badly as Hale
had treated her she yet wished to assist him, and truly he was in
great need of the coals of fire which she could heap upon his head.

"You can soon get it," said Hale eagerly. "Charvington will give you
anything. Send Walker to ask him for the money and I can remain
concealed in the cottage until he returns."

The lovers looked at one another. Both were inclined to assist the
miserable man, little as he deserved kindness at their hands. Tim,
with a grim face, stood neutral, but being of a less forgiving nature,
would gladly have pitched his old master into the river had Lesbia but
lifted a finger. But she gave no sign, so Tim waited. It was hard to
say what would have happened had not Fate decided the matter.

The four people in the garden were so deeply engaged in conversation
that they did not observe a boat crossing the river from the opposite
shore, some distance above the garden. Tim, indeed, did catch a
glimpse of a craft holding two people, but did not take much notice.
The boat reached the near shore and then dropped down alongside the
bank until it was directly abreast of the chestnut tree. Then for the
first time, George and Lesbia looked round at the sound of dipping
oars. Hale raised his head and looked also. The next moment there was
the sharp report of a revolver and he rolled off the bench shot
through the breast. Twice again the revolver spoke and twice Hale was
wounded. Maud Ellis was a sure shot.

"There," cried she, flinging the weapon ashore to Lesbia, "you can
finish him off. He betrayed my uncle, he betrayed me, he betrayed us
all. Only Sargent, who is rowing me, and I have escaped. Good-bye,
Lesbia, you have your lover--my lover--the man I adore. I hope
you'll be happy. I have done justice on that blackguard, so I
am going to clear. You'll never see me again, and you can thank your
stars that I did not kill you as well as that scoundrel there.
George--good-bye--good-bye."

She sat down quickly in the boat, which was already receding rapidly
from the garden. Sargent apparently had not expected that Maud would
have been so thorough in her vengeance and could be seen talking
angrily to her. He rowed with all his might across the river, let the
boat drift down-stream and leaped ashore. Maud followed alertly and
the two set off running rapidly. Where they went, or how they escaped
George never knew; but that was the last seen of them in England.

Meanwhile Lesbia was on her knees beside the wretched man who
had done her so much harm, striving to staunch his wounds with her
handkerchief. Tim already had run up the path shouting for the police,
and George was about to follow, as he wanted Maud to be arrested for
her dastardly crime, when Hale opened his eyes.

"Are you there, Lesbia?" he asked faintly. "It's no use my asking for
your forgiveness, as I hate being a sneak at the last moment. I have
lived bad and I have died bad. But I can say this, that you are the
sole human being I regret having injured. You are a fool, as you have
always been, like your father--but you are a sweet fool. And I--I----"
he choked.

"Hush! hush!" said Lesbia distractedly. "George, take him into the
house, and fetch the doctor. We must save him----"

"No," gasped Hale with a flash of energy, "don't save me to let me rot
in gaol. Maud has done me a good turn after all. I die and--and--I
cheat--I cheat the law," he opened his eyes again and stared at the
two pale faces, then smiled. "God bless you," he gasped, "oh, to think
that I should bless----" he laughed, but the effort was too great and
he fell back dead.

At the same moment Tim came running down with a policeman at his
heels.

"It's too late, Tim, he is dead," said Lesbia faintly.

"Dead is ut?" muttered Tim, staring and crossing himself. "Then me
mother wor right in all she said. Sudden death and the black grave.
Augh! Sure 'twas the truth me mother spake afther all."




CHAPTER XXVI
THE END OF IT ALL


THE villa owned by Lord Charvington at Nice was beautifully situated,
beautifully furnished, and beautifully built. Endless money had been
spent upon it to make it as perfect as any human habitation could be.
Lady Charvington was particularly fond of it, and her extravagance was
evident both in the house and in the lovely gardens. Great was her
rage when she heard that her husband had invited George and his young
wife and her arch-enemy Mrs. Walker to stay there with him. But she
was even more angry when she learned that Charvington had made a free
gift of the villa to his daughter.

"His conduct has always been atrocious," said Lady Charvington to
Jabez, who was the sole person to whom she could speak of such things,
since for her own sake she was forced to hold her tongue to the world
at large, "but this is the worst thing he has ever done. How dare he
give my villa to that horrid girl?"

"He has every right to," said Jabez drily, "as the villa is Lord
Charvington's own property. And I beg leave to state that I do not
consider young Mrs. Walker a horrid girl. She is very sweet, and is
bearing her good fortune as modestly as she bore her bad luck
bravely."

"I hate her," said Lady Charvington fervently.

"Why, may I ask?"

"Because I hated her mother. I always loved Charvington, and she took
him from me."

"But you got him in the end," Jabez reminded her.

"Got him. Yes, I got the rags and tatters of the passion he had for
that detestable Kate Morse. I never forgave her while she lived, and I
certainly shall not forgive her now she is dead."

"Very good; but you needn't hate her daughter," expostulated Jabez
earnestly; "consider how unhappy the poor girl has been, and through
no fault of her own. Even now--in deference to her own wish, I
admit--she is not acknowledged by her father, publicly at least."

"I don't care," cried Lady Charvington, with all the venom of an angry
woman. "I hate the girl, and I shall always hate her. But I didn't
come here to listen to your views, Mr. Jabez. What I wish to know is
if I can insist that my villa shall be given back to me."

"No," said Jabez, and very glad he was to be able to reply in the
negative, "the villa was never settled on you, and Lord Charvington
has a perfect right to deal as he pleases with his own property."

"It is my property, and Charvington's a brute. I wonder that I ever
loved him--indeed I do," cried the lady vehemently, "and to think of
that horrid girl getting the husband she wanted and the fifty thousand
pounds, and my villa, and--oh!" she stamped, "it makes one doubt if
there is a Providence."

"I fear," said Jabez gravely, as she rose to depart, "that some day,
if you bear such ill-will towards one who has never injured you, that
you will find there _is_ a Providence."

"Pooh! pooh! That's all goody-goody talk," said Lady Charvington
contemptuously, "but that I have to think of Agatha and Lena I should
get a separation from my husband. As it is, I shall spend as much
money as I can, and enjoy myself in my own way. I don't want to see
him."

"I fancy you'll see very little of him," said Jabez drily, as he
accompanied her to the door. "Lord Charvington is fond of a quiet
life. All you have to do is to enjoy your position and the ample
income which he allows you, and hold your tongue about these family
troubles."

"Oh, of course you are on his side," cried Lady Charvington in a rage.
"I really believe that you suggested he should give that nasty girl my
villa."

"Pardon me," said the solicitor, skilfully dodging the question, "it
never was your villa."

"It was, and she has stolen it. I only hope she'll be as thoroughly
unhappy as she well can be, with the fool she's married and her
disagreeable mother-in-law. Judith was always horrid."

"I fear you will be disappointed. Young Mrs. Walker adores her
mother-in-law, and is adored in turn. They are, as you know, all at
the villa with Lord Charvington and, as I gather, perfectly happy."

"How disgusting," cried Lady Charvington vindictively, "but I shall
wait for the interference of an overruling Providence. Some day the
sins of the lot of them will come home to them, and they will be
thoroughly miserable."

"And your ladyship's sins?" inquired Jabez very gravely.

"Sins," she stared, "I have none." After which speech, which
completely silenced the lawyer, so taken aback was he by its amazing
impudence, she took her departure. All the same she also took his
advice and said nothing of what had happened in connection with the
affairs of the amethyst cross. And in time--as she could not keep up a
hostile attitude for ever--she found it politic to smooth over things
with her worried husband. But she never forgave Lesbia to her dying
day.

Not that Lesbia cared. She was absolutely happy with her husband and
mother-in-law and father at the villa. The income derived from her
mother yielded over two thousand a year, and this had been
supplemented by Lord Charvington, anxious to make amends. What with a
large income and a lovely villa, and a handsome, affectionate husband,
Lesbia was very fortunate indeed, and felt quite glad that she had
gone through so much trouble, to get to such a goal. Something of this
sort she said to her father one evening after dinner.

The party were seated on the terrace which overlooked the deeply blue
waters of the Mediterranean. At the moment, these were dyed with rosy
hues from the setting sun. Mrs. Walker, looking much less stern and
much more composed, was seated in a deep arm-chair near Lesbia, whom
she could scarcely bear out of her sight. Lord Charvington, now
looking wonderfully hale and hearty--for it was six months since his
attack of apoplexy--sat near a small round table upon which stood
coffee and liqueurs. George lounged about with a cigar, casting looks
of affection on Lesbia. The quartette, arrayed in evening dress amidst
beautiful surroundings, looked thoroughly happy and well-to-do. After
the storm had come the calm, and when recalling the storm, as
sometimes she could not help doing, Lesbia always spoke cheerfully.

"The trouble was worth going through, to come to this," she said,
smiling in a happy manner.

"I think so too, dear," observed George, who was always hovering in
her vicinity. "And I think we have learned the lesson which those very
troubles were sent to teach."

"What lesson?" asked Lord Charvington lazily.

"To trust in God."

"Yes," said Mrs. Walker, who was knitting, "you and Lesbia have
learned that, and I have learned a lesson also. I have learned to be
more sympathetic and more liberal-minded. We are all mortal, and no
one has any right to judge another person not knowing that person's
temptations."

"Do you allude to Walter?" asked Charvington.

"Yes. He behaved badly, I allow; but then his will was not strong
enough to struggle against the evil that was in him. And after all,"
Mrs. Walker laid down her knitting, "he was terribly punished. He was
snatched out of life unprepared. I hope he has found mercy. But the
evil that he did lived after him. Alas! Alas!"

"I think Tait and his gang found that was so," said George grimly.
"From what was said at the trial, it seemed that Hale was the soul of
the gang, even though Tait posed as the head. Canning, of course,
escaped because he turned king's evidence and is now in Italy; but
Tait got a long sentence."

"Mrs. Petty and the rest of the gang also," observed Charvington, "but
Maud Ellis and Alfred Sargent escaped."

"They were very lucky," said George reflectively. "The police, advised
by Tim, were on their track almost at once, but they never caught
them. As they were not disguised I wonder that they ever escaped."

"Hale was not disguised either, I heard you say," remarked
Charvington. "It seems to me that audacity favoured the lot of them.
Hale would have escaped also, I doubt not, had he not been shot by
that wretched woman."

"Why do you shudder, George?" asked Mrs. Walker, at this point.

"I am thinking how easily she could have shot Lesbia," said George
reluctantly. "She had two or three shots left after she polished off
Hale. But she flung the revolver ashore and made a sentimental speech
wishing myself and Lesbia good luck. I should have thought--but
there," George sighed, "no man can understand a woman."

"No woman can understand a man," said Lesbia, laughing. "But I am glad
Maud did not shoot me. Where is she now?"

Charvington removed his cigar. "I have reason to believe, from some
facts which came to Jabez's ears, that she has married Alfred Sargent
and is engaged in making trouble in a South American Republic."

"Sargent is not strong enough to do much," objected George.

Mrs. Walker shook her head. "I believe Alfred Sargent was a much
cleverer man than his appearance warranted," she said sharply. "He
looked like a fool, but he acted like a wise man. Not only did he
escape, but he managed to carry off his thievish earnings. Then look
how cleverly he behaved in society in never being suspected. Yet he
stole--as we learned at the trial of Tait and the rest--at balls, at
weddings, from private houses, and blackmailed any number of people. A
dangerously clever man, I call him."

"Well, don't let us talk any more about him," said Charvington
impatiently, "Maud is clever if you like, and probably will end in
imposing him on some second-rate republic, as its President, even
though he is a foreigner. I believe that there is no end to that
woman's ambition. But he and she are both out of our lives. Also Hale
is dead, and as Lesbia has now changed her name, she will not be
connected with the sordid past in any way. Let us talk of something
more agreeable."

"The amethyst cross for instance," said Lesbia pointedly.

Charvington wriggled. "Why? That belongs to the disagreeable past."

"It taught George and me a lesson," said Lesbia seriously, "and I am
sorry that it has been lost sight of."

"It has not been lost sight of," said Charvington, after a pause.
"Jabez got it from Hale and restored it to me. But I did not show it
to you, Lesbia child, because I thought that the sight of it would be
painful."

"Not now, that I have learned its lesson. Where is it, father?"

"Call Tim."

Lesbia rang a silver bell which was on the table and shortly Tim,
looking more grotesque and more like a gnome than ever, appeared. He
was with the young couple as the majordomo of their small household,
and enjoyed himself hugely. "Tim," ordered Lord Charvington, giving
him a key, "go to my study and open my dispatch box. Bring me the
morocco case you will find in it. A red morocco case."

"Yes, yer lardship," said the majordomo gravely, as he departed.

"Are you sure you want the cross, Lesbia?" asked Mrs. Walker
seriously.

"Yes. Whenever I forget to be kind and thoughtful, whenever I am
inclined to judge others harshly, the cross will remind me of my own
shortcomings."

"You have none, dear," said George fondly.

"George," Mrs. Walker smiled, "you are spoiling her."

"I know someone else who spoils me more," whispered Lesbia roguishly,
and Mrs. Walker smoothed the girl's hair.

At this moment Tim returned with the case. Lord Charvington opened it
and took out the ornament which glittered in the rosy hues of sunset.

"Presarve us!" whispered Tim crossing himself. "The unlucky crass!"

"Lucky now, Tim," said Charvington, slipping a slender watch-chain he
wore from his waistcoat. "It found me my daughter. Here, Lesbia," he
threaded the loop at the top of the cross, "you can wear it now."

Lesbia bent her head and her father threw the chain on her neck. The
amethyst cross gleamed with purple fire on her white bosom, a symbol
of all that had passed and a symbol also of a brighter future. "I
shall always wear it," said Lesbia with serious lovely eyes.

"'Refuse and lose,'" said George meditatively, "well we have not
refused the cross although I daresay had it been in our powers to do
so we should have shirked the burden."

"Thank Heaven you were not allowed to, for the bearing of the burden
has taught you much," said Mrs. Walker devoutly.

"It has earned me the crown of perfect love," said George, drawing
Lesbia to his breast.

"And that is worth everything," Lesbia replied, kissing him.





THE END





COLSTON AND CO. LTD. PRINTERS, EDINBURGH,








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Amethyst Cross, by Fergus Hume

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE AMETHYST CROSS ***

***** This file should be named 56230.txt or 56230.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/2/3/56230/

Produced by Charles Bowen from page scans provided by La
Trobe University, Australia


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

