The Project Gutenberg EBook of Preludes 1921-1922, by John Drinkwater

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Preludes 1921-1922

Author: John Drinkwater

Posting Date: March 20, 2014 [EBook #5628]
Release Date: May, 2004
First Posted: July 25, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRELUDES 1921-1922 ***




Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al
Haines.










  Preludes 1921-1922

  By John Drinkwater



  All thoughts, all passions, all delights,
    Whatever stirs this mortal frame,
  All are but ministers of love,
    And feed his sacred flame.

                        COLERIDGE.




  FOR DAVID


  CONTENTS

  I.     PRELUDE
  II.    DAVID AND JONATHAN
  III.   THE MAID OF NAAMAN'S WIFE
  IV.   LAKE WINTER
  V.    GOLD
  VI.   BURNING BUSH
  VII.  TO MY SON
  VIII. INTERLUDE

  NOTE.--This  book is really one poem, and is a
  development of my sonnet sequence, Persuasion.




  PRELUDE

  Though black the night, I know upon the sky,
  A little paler now, if clouds were none,
  The stars would be. Husht now the thickets lie,
  And now the birds are moving one by one,--
  A note--and now from bush to bush it goes--
  A prelude--now victorious light along
  The west will come till every bramble glows
  With wash of sunlit dew shaken in song.
  Shaken in song;  O heart, be ready now,
  Cold in your night, be ready now to sing.
  Dawn as it wakes the sleeping bird on bough
  Shall summon you to instant reckoning,--
  She is your dawn, O heart,--sing, till the night
  Of death shall come, the gospel of her light.



  DAVID AND JONATHAN

  And Jonathan too had honour in his heart,
  Jonathan who with an armour-bearer went
  Alone by Michmash to the Philistines,
  And met a spray of swords because of courage
  That made him single greater than a host.
  Jonathan too had known his battles, dared
  At any hour the coming of death, because
  In twilight silence he had walked with God,
  Read Him in blossoms and the mountain brooks,
  And learnt that death, well known, can alter nothing.
  He was a brown man, burnt with love of summer,
  His young beard curled, and russet as the eyes
  That looked on life, and feared it, yet were master,
  Because they knew the tyranny they feared,
  Measured it, learnt it, gazed it into nothing.

  ....

  And now he watched the boy, the son of Jesse,
  David with hair like maples in October,
  And skin that women loving coveted,
  David with eyes that often by the sheepfolds
  Had looked through leaves up to the folds of heaven,
  And seeing them crammed with golden fleece of stars,
  Had known how the blood can run because of beauty.
  Jonathan watched him take the armour off
  Given by Saul, and choose the bright smooth pebbles,
  And walk out from the Israelitish throng
  Into the field against the Philistine giant.
  Watching, he snatched his sword and cried to Saul,
  "Bid him come back. This murder must not be."
  And as he spoke, he knew the words were treason,
  His heart alone in all the world was sure
  That David was the Lord's appointed arm,
  To meet this bulk of dirt, this giant fear
  Brandishing out of the loathly camps of evil.
  And before Saul could answer, he put down
  The sword, and said, "I love him. Let him go."

  ....

  But the words, I love him, were not for his father Saul,
  Hardly Jonathan knowing he spake them out.
  But as he looked on David love was there,
  Waking from that in David that he himself
  A little was, and always greatly shaping
  Himself towards, so that his name was spoken
  Famously in Saul's kingdom. It was courage,
  The clean heart, undivided in its doing,
  The purpose that, being bodied in the brain,
  Thenceforth knew every trickling argument
  That fell from tongues of persuading circumstance,
  As lures of evil ever threatening life,
  That Jonathan loved above all enterprise.
  He knew, or the rarer man within him knew,
  That once your yea in holy meditation
  Had shaped itself in the perfect syllable,
  Thenceforth no nay from any other tongue
  Or wise or passionate or masterful,
  Could be listened to without the shame of sin
  Corrupting all your constancy for ever.
  He knew the curse of good betraying good,
  Till both in bleak irresolution fall.
  And all his years was Jonathan's anguish only
  To keep this tillage of his wisdom clean.

  .....

  Since boyhood he had known Philistia
  For the black thing it was, a plague opposed
  Always against the loveliness of Israel,
  And when his father Saul was anointed king
  By Samuel in Ramah, then Jonathan knew
  How all the lessons of his youth had been
  To fit him for the striking of the men
  Who profaned beauty and let the soul be blind.
  And he was diligent in bronze and arms,
  And kept his body supple, and his eye
  Keen, and the coming of his hooves was thunder,
  Wherever battle fell. He bore a flame,
  Zealous and pure, in the heavens of his mind,
  To serve and to instruct. Aye, to instruct--
  There was the biting blemish, as we shall see.

  .....

  Philistia was foul, and Jonathan knew,
  And the voice of God within him was plain and constant
  To strike and strike unwearying to the end.
  And then the poor, precise, infirmity
  That loads good minds with ever seeming virtue,
  Until they cast their treasure to the dust,
  Crept on him, wound about the gleaming truth
  That was his one foundation. Day by day
  He was resolved, and then the grain of doubt
  Would come to hurt the riding of his thought,
  And break the level balance that it had.
  Was then the Philistine mere black? That day
  Jonathan's arm half paused upon the blow,
  And evil went a little scatheless off.
  Surely the worst even of adversaries
  Had somewhere beams that pointed to salvation,
  And hasty judgment might not be the will
  Of an all-seeing Lord? Then would the vengeance
  Falter, and stay, and Jonathan's battle failed.
  And always then was bitterness and reproach
  In the night watches when upon his couch
  He looked on the stars studding his little window
  Before sleep came. Then he would speak again
  The word that single was his valiance,
  His only truth, his warrant as a man,
  And once again Philistia was doomed.
  Then for a season clean the stroke and sure
  That Jonathan drove, and black was known for black,
  Till slowly as before would mount and mount
  Scruple on scruple, as was not he himself
  A little black sometimes, or plainly wicked?
  And should the wicked man not be redeemed?
  Merely destruction surely was no answer,
  Since yet the wickedness must wander somewhere?
  How should he say, I, Jonathan of Israel
  Am good, and you the Philistine are cursed,
  Since in that face was something that had been
  Learnt from the buds and corn and frozen hills
  That he himself had known for seals of God?
  And would not his power on Israel increase,
  Take on a loftier authority,
  If to his famous arms he could add a tale
  Of counsel working in the hearts of men,
  Moving them to a finer charity,
  A little pity for offence? And so
  Instruction like a worm was at his roots,
  And pride of virtue made Jonathan forget.
  Then sometimes as he knew himself betrayed
  He would cry upon his spirit in the night--

    I, Jonathan, who know
    The processes of God
    Moving within me,
    Turn aside to my idols of desire.
    He has taught me the ways
    Of Philistine cruelty. He
    Shows me the bad man toiling to the ruin
    Of beauty and the free spirit on earth,
    And has equipped me for the establishment
    Of His will in this battle, and I fail.
    I am a leaf spinning about the wind,
    Who have been shown the ways of stedfastness.
    O Israel, I have heard
    My dedication made
    To your sweet service by the voice of Him,
    And I betray
    That wisdom, that great simpleness of wisdom,
    Inventing in my brain
    Fantastic argument
    As though God's mind
    Had missed the brighter pools
    That I alone could visit and gaze into.
    He tells me, and I hear
    Voices not His.
    Knowing, I question. And I am ashamed.

  So Jonathan saw walking at his side
  Always a shadow that was his own denial.

  .....

  And now was April mirrored in the plumes
  Of ravens and the green of the young wheat,
  And dusky ewes with white lambs in the sun
  Lay in the valley plain between the hosts
  Of Israel and Philistia. And on this day
  Jonathan learnt utter reproach, and love.
  There on the plain Goliath stood alone,
  Poised in his mighty bulk, with black locks flowing,
  A handsbreadth taller even than Saul the king
  Who shouldered it above the men of Israel,
  And beat his words of sure defiance out,
  Ringing across the windless noon. And all
  Israel heard, and fear was on them, knowing,
  If thus the issue, how it should prevail.
  And Jonathan in the tent of Saul his father,
  Watched, and his blood was quick, and in his mind
  He strove against the last of doubt. And then
  The young man David stood before them, bidden
  By Saul, who heard one say, "There is a boy
  New come from tending sheep in Bethlehem,
  And seeks the king." And David stood before them,
  And asked no leave, but said, "There was a cause.
  It bade me come, and I will fight with him."
  And Saul denied, but David did not hear
  Denial, saying, "the wild beasts of the field
  I with my hand have slain at the fold's gate,
  And this is mine to do." And David stood,
  Greater than argument while Saul armed him there.
  And Jonathan saw the purpose that he was not,
  Glowing and bodied, and his love was born.

  .....

  Then David flung the armour off, and said,
  "I am David, and I know not these strange arms.
  I must go out as I have always been,
  Not girt with new occasion. It is I,
  David the shepherd that am David still,
  And I know nothing of your spears and plate.
  A sheepskin have I worn, and in my hand
  A sling, and pebbles taken from the brook.
  Now shall I go, content that God has watched me
  So habited and armed through all my youth.
  Should I pretend another David now,
  I should meet this man with neither honour nor hope.
  If I am sent against the Philistine
  Out of God's anger, and I know it is so,
  It is not one the chosen of Saul's hosts,
  But I, David of Bethlehem must go,
  The son of Jesse, and keeper of his flocks."

  .....

  Almost the tears were seen in Jonathan's eyes,
  Because of David's words, of which he knew
  The poor ghosts hiding somewhere in his own heart.
  And then he spoke his fear, and then the words,
  Resting his sword, "I love him. Let him go."
  And David stept out of the emerald light
  That played up from the grass floor of the tent,
  Into the full flood of the April noon,
  And walked a little way, and those two stood
  Parted a hundred paces, the man of terror,
  Hewn massy and with shock of builded limbs,
  And David moulded like a sea boy risen
  From caves of music where the water spins
  Wet sand into the shapes of flowing flowers;
  David with limbs all bright with the sun's tones,
  And ruddy locks curling with youth and light,
  His body all alert on steady loins,
  Clean spun of flesh that knew the winter snows,
  And mellow pools of summer, and the dews
  Dropping among the crocuses of dawn.
  His sandle-straps bound ankles as a girl's,
  And fluttering to his knees the sheepskin hung,
  Cloaking one shoulder, while the other gleamed.
  And there he paused, the sling in his right hand,
  His left hand fingering the pouch of pebbles,
  While Israel fearing murmured, and the hosts
  Of Philistine derision rocked the noon.
  Then did Goliath cry, "Am I a dog,
  For a boy's whipping? Have you not a man,
  That you would send a cleaner up of crumbs
  From the queen's table? Come then, and be broken,
  For birds to find you and the dogs at night."
  And Jonathan heard Philistia shout again,
  And David, like a flame unwinded, stood
  Quivering at the cry, and laid a stone
  In the sling's fold, and cast his staff, and ran,
  Fleet as the king bird gliding under leaves,
  Towards Goliath. And a giant spear
  Swung from the Philistine hand, and forty paces
  Sang in the air and brushed the flying sheepskin,
  And sudden David's feet were planted firm,
  Locked on the earth, and circling in the sun
  The tight thong flashed and loosened, and the stone
  Smote the Philistine wrath above the eyes,
  And the day was clouded from him, and he fell.

  .....

  Then Israel spared not. And, when night was come,
  Jonathan sent for David to his tent,
  And those two sat while the yellow torches burned,
  And Jonathan spoke and said, "David, my brother,
  To-day you have made a story that shall be
  For ever fruitful in the heart of man.
  This day is David's. But of this day I too
  Share, not in the honour, but in the harvesting,
  Or the harvesting I think is wholly mine.
  Shall I speak on?" And David said, "Speak on."
  Then Jonathan--"This morning there was a man,
  And it was Jonathan, who many years
  Had gone snared in a purpose not his own,
  That is, not truly mine. Always I knew,
  Walking by that self I said was honest,
  Another self, the true self, in a shadow,
  Or at an angle that my eyes refused.
  I was a proud man, David, very virtuous,
  Or, in fairness to myself, desiring virtue,
  Truly desiring it, I may say that.
  And yet even in that desire there moved
  A lie, for I knew the virtue of my desire
  Was something tainted. No--I knew it not,
  But that other self walking beside me knew it,
  And whispered, I knew, a thing that I would not hear.
  Always it whispered, as I stood alone,
  I said, in subtle thought among all Israel.
  God had spoken to me, David, that the Philistine
  Was evil, evil, that was all God said,
  And bade me strike as a man by God assured.
  But the man to whom God spoke I put aside,
  The still self walking, whispering, in the shadow.
  And I, the Jonathan of daily light,
  Tempered the word of God, I tempered it--
  I who should be God's outcast doing so.
  I counted evil twenty different ways,
  And none of them plain evil. I diced with God,
  And the dice fell as often to my hand,
  It seemed, as His, but falling so the whisper
  Was ever shadowed at my ear, unheard.
  And ever as this new intelligence,
  This pride of thought, crept over me and filled
  My dawn and noon and sleep, a hunger grew,
  A dreadful hunger for that self denied,
  And every word I spoke for righteousness
  Turned bitter on my lips, because I knew
  That every word was righteousness undone.
  Such was the man this morning when you came,
  Who from the king's tent watched you, David. Then
  Change and completion and I know not what
  Of heavenly fulfilment fell upon me.
  Not from myself, nor of my own devising,
  But marvellously spoken in a space
  Of golden light that glowed about the form
  Of a boy standing in my father's tent.
  Quite suddenly the thing I lacked was there,
  The shadow whispering at my side had gone
  And stood there bodied in you, David, brother,
  O dear young shepherd from your sheepfolds called--
  Nay Jonathan myself it was there standing,
  Or barren branches of myself in flower,
  My jailored thought flooded with light of song.
  And in that moment nothing was between
  Your soul and mine, and knowing you, I loved,
  Since love is understanding, and must come
  When mind looks on the presence of very mind.
  I loved you, David, and I love, and ever--
  Because my mind, even in one day's passing,
  Has learnt you as no years could better learn--
  My love is fixed upon you. And, moreover,
  Since from this hour I must for ever know
  Some element of me lodged sole in you,
  Some certainty in you alone to be
  Among my weeds the patient husbandman,
  I must in your love prosper or not at all.
  Now therefore, David, let a covenant be
  Between us from this day, for the heart knows."

  .....

  David and Jonathan under the long torches
  Were silent then. And David's eyes were fixed
  Long upon Jonathan, as eyes may sometimes look
  On eyes, and see no face, looking beyond
  Into unimaged life, into the brain
  Moving behind the circumstance of flesh,
  Eyes that to-morrow passing might hardly know
  The mere face that to-night they gaze upon.
  And Jonathan having spoken, waited there
  While David searched him slowly with still eyes.
  Then David rose, and drew the tent-fold back,
  And looked upon the stars of Palestine
  Long, and a mallow moon; and Jonathan waited.
  Then David came again, and spoke, "I too,
  Standing this morning in your father's tent,
  Knew that a life unwonted was near me there.
  And now you have spoken, and the love you say,
  I know, and as your will is so is mine.
  Something I am for you that none can be.
  Let it be so, but all is not then said.
  This morning when I smote the Philistine,
  I was God's purpose, that I must believe.
  But purpose only is not all of God,
  Hearing you now, I know it is not all.
  When first I saw you I did not know it then--
  Only, facing the Philistine, something new
  A moment marked me, and unnoted went,
  No touch of it upon my will. But now
  I have heard you speak, and what it was I know.
  You loved me, Jonathan, seeing, as I stood,
  That shadowy self of you of which you tell me
  Suddenly living fearless in the sun.
  That is your reaping of my field, and I
  Glory to give it you. But were that all,
  Proud to be loved, I should not love again.
  But now I know for me is too a reaping.
  Your shadow to my living purpose leaps,
  And that is wonderful. But as you spoke
  Some David hidden from the man that slew
  Goliath listened also, and is now
  With us for ever. And he that wrought this life
  Is you, Jonathan of doubts and speculation,
  The man who sits there plainly now, the mere
  Jonathan when the shadow is forgotten.
  Now do I know my purpose magnified,
  Sure as of old, but learning in its flight,
  Of pity and the sad heart of man from you,
  And how the jealous and unmerciful,
  Being stricken down, are but poor sorrows too.
  So, Jonathan my brother, as you take,
  So do you give, and in us now shall be
  The perfect whole of purpose and compassion,
  And resolution without pride of heart.
  Now therefore will I make the covenant,
  Knowing that never more can you or I
  Without this love be better than a tale
  Of corrupting seed and fallow-lands unsown."

  .....

  Now Jonathan rose and put the torches out,
  And a grey beam of dawn was on those two.
  And Jonathan took his outer garment off,
  Which was the king's son's, and robed David there,
  And he took the sword that Saul had given him,
  Belted in gold and cased in figured steel,
  And it hung on David's loins. And Jonathan said,
  "Who fails in this, that is the last betrayal,
  The quenching of the holy spirit of God."
  And David said, "So be it." And they embraced,
  And kissed. And David went into the dawn.
  And Jonathan watched until the day was full.



  THE MAID OF NAAMAN'S WIFE

  That was the proud woman, Naaman's wife.
  Basking at noon under the Syrian fans,
  While Naaman, the leprous mighty captain,
  Proud glowing flesh now silver-skinned and tainted,
  Walked in contagion here and there, apart.
  His wife, the unblemished Naaman in her mind,
  The man who, coming with the spoils and shouts,
  Had made a hundred triumphs hers, when all
  The Syrian women courted her for that,
  Now saw in the pestilent limbs shame and reproach,
  Some treachery that made her, who was mate
  Of Syria's pride, bondwoman of a leper.
  She must nurse her blame, since he was Naaman still,
  With an old honour paid by stedfastness,
  The mark of Syria's compassion. Black
  Thoughts were her only payment for betrayal,
  But in secret she could play them without pity,--
  Let the fans beat, they could not beguile her from that.

  .....

  And Naaman had loved her, but not now,
  Knowing the uses that his love had been,
  How given for her to squander it in pride.

  .....

  Syria out of Israel had brought
  Captives, and among them one, a maid,
  A little maid, just troubled with the touch
  Of womanhood upon her body and thought,
  And she served Naaman's wife, a lonely girl,
  To answer bidding, and covet little tones
  Of kindness that she heard go to and fro,
  But not for her. She trembled as she stood
  At the proud woman's couch, because a fault
  In orders done meant scolding and even rods.
  And she had but two joys. One, to remember
  A Galilean town, and the blue waters
  That washed the pebbles that she knew so well,
  Yellow in sunlight, or frozen in the moon,
  A little curve of beach, where she would walk
  At any hour with an old silver man.
  Her father's father, her sole companion,
  Who told her tales of Moses and the prophets
  That lived in the old days. And of that time
  She had but now poor treasuries of the mind,
  Little seclusions when, the day's work done,
  She made thought into prayer before she slept;
  These, and a faded gown that she had brought
  Into captivity, patterned with sprigs of thyme,
  And blades of wheat, and little curling shells,
  And signs of heaven figured out in stars,
  Made by a weaver that her grandsire knew,
  A gift on some thanksgiving. She might not wear it,
  Being suited as became a slave, but often
  At night she would spread it in her loneliness,
  And think how finely she too might be drest,
  As finely as any proud woman of them all,
  If the God of Israel had not visited her
  Surely for sin, though she could not remember.
  Thus one joy was. And then the Lord Naaman,
  This wonder soiled, this pitiful great captain
  Forbidden all that he had so proudly been--
  To worship him, that was her other joy.
  When the dusk came, and the city fell to silence,
  And out of his poor banishment he would walk,
  She followed him, knowing the very hour,
  And all her heart was flooded through with pity,
  Because she knew the leprosy left still
  A Naaman untainted and lovely.
  Then in her mind was the proud woman a loathing,
  Who dared to waste a marvel such as this,
  The right in the world's knowledge so to love.
  O pitiful evil blasting so great a flesh,
  Walling a spirit so governing itself
  In spite of desolation. A maid's thought thus
  Knew how the frames of mastery can suffer.

  .....

  Sometimes at night when not even lepers walked,
  Solitary in the Syrian meadows she
  Would wander in the old perplexity
  That the moon makes of love. Never, she knew,
  Could any adoration that she brought
  Touch even the Lord Naaman's banishment,
  The Naaman fallen from the time when even
  Great ladies dare not speak the thing they felt.
  She was nothing, or the world could never know
  If she was more than nothing; a maid to bind
  Tresses for beauty that was not her own.
  And yet she knew that she had beauty too,
  A little hermit beauty that might spend
  Royally if it dare and a man would speak,--
  Royally, Naaman, but he could not hear.
  But still for all the silence of her lips,
  And heart with promise nothing known, she loved--
  Loved the sad leper walking in the dusk,
  Loved the great lord, loved even his leprosy,
  Since by it he came a little down to her,
  Loved him, and knew that her love was the sum
  Of all that loving, and must be. But even so,
  She knew her love an honester thing than any
  That the proud woman had. O moon, she thought,
  Could you not make me truly tell this love,
  This love pulsing along my blood and brain,
  As midnight surges going through the sky?
  And long she pondered how she best might serve.

  .....

  Then one day when the fans moved, and she stood
  Ministering with her perfumes at the couch,
  Her mistress, with eyes that meant the thought was nothing,
  Said, "Is it not grievous that my lord goes thus?"
  And the maid felt the colour at her throat
  Flow round her neck and flood up to her temples,
  But knowing, feared not, or put her fear aside,
  And said "Would God my lord were in Samaria,
  To seek Elisha there, a prophet, lady,
  Whom God hath taught to cure whom he will cure."
  She spoke, and the bright bowl trembled in her hands,
  And fear because of her words made the tongue dry
  As the woman looked with still cold eyes upon her.
  But the word passed from lip to lip, and the king
  Heard it, and sent for Naaman and said,
  "A girl among the slaves that you brought in
  From Israel has spoken a strange thing,
  Of one Elisha, a prophet whom they obey,
  Saying that he could bid the blemish off
  That is cheating Syria of her proudest man.
  Now therefore journey to him, and I will send
  Word to Israel's king, that he shall bless
  Favours from us in whom his fortune lies,
  Bidding him call this prophet to your cause.
  Go, and the love of Syria go with you."

  .....

  Then Naaman with his servants went at dawn,
  And Naaman's wife saw how again might come
  Her mastery among the women of Syria.
  Yet was the little maid her hatred now,
  Lest of her word should come this resurrection.
  And Naaman went, and Israel's king was glad,
  Because of Syria's favour, and sent down
  The hill to where Elisha lived among
  Farmers of flax and goatherds and a few
  Unhappy men who brought their sorrow to God,
  Asking his mercy on the Syrian lord.
  And Naaman stood before the prophet of Israel,
  And told his grief. And Elisha looked upon him,
  Measured his faith, and bade him bathe his body
  Seven times in the river of Jordan, and be
  Whole. And Naaman questioned, and was wrath,
  As was not any river of Damascus
  Purer than Jordan, and in more virtue flowing?
  But, little, his servants said, was this to do,
  And, as persuasion led him, he went down
  And seven times let Jordan cover him,
  And came with a clean body as of old,
  A strong man with the tides of blood before him,
  With equal limbs for all the spirit could dare,
  And into Syria he sang upon his riding.

  .....

  And tidings came to the Syrian king of this,
  Heralding a Naaman mightier than ever,
  With clean flesh and a wisdom all matured,
  And all the city rang upon his coming,
  The king and his estate, people and priests,
  And soldiers glad of their old captain again.
  And matrons with their girls, and the rich merchants,
  All shouted Naaman, Naaman, through the streets.
  And Naaman's wife stood at the king's right hand,
  Her slave-borne canopy coloured and spangled,
  While the great fans beat upon her pride again,
  And Naaman in plumes and plate and mail
  Again was master of the Syrian hosts.

  .....

  Afar, beyond the barriers of the streets,
  Pressing among the crowd for a moment's seeing,
  The Israelitish maid, between her duties,
  Watched with a proud flush beating down her limbs.
  And shyly she had on a faded gown,
  Patterned with sprigs of thyme and blades of wheat,
  And paling stars and little curling shells.
  And as the shouting rose, she watched in silence,
  With trembling lips, and Naaman passed by her,
  And her hands moved towards him, and fell down,
  Then stole upon her bosom, as they would ease
  The aching beauty of her loneliness.
  And there unnoted as he passed she stood,
  With not a thought from all that world upon her.
  Only, when service came again, she saw
  A glowing hatred in the proud woman's eyes.
  And in the night she thought of it, and wept,
  But not for any hatred were her tears.



  LAKE WINTER

  Full summer dusk was round him as he stood
  On the hill-top, over the calling sheep
  Drifting along the pastured downs. The moon
  Far off was rising from the Sussex sea.
  Above him, building up into the sky,
  Black, and with pointing sails now skeletoned,
  A windmill gathered strays of evening wind
  Whispering through the splitting timbers. Still
  The setting sun washed with a fuller gold
  The golden sheaves patterned upon a cone
  Of downland by him farther from the sea.
  So still, he seemed a thing woven of earth,
  A life rooted and fixed as were the oaks
  Locked in the soil, their bases webbed with fleece
  Of sheltering ewes, he watched across the valley,
  And the hour passed, and the black mill grew and grew,
  And then a light came in a far window
  Of a grey farm cresting the hill beyond,
  And sudden tides beat on him as he saw
  A white dress moving in the distant pines.

  .....

  Lake Winter, a five hundred acre man,
  Was English, bred far back, a part of England,
  With South and North and Midland in his blood.
  And somewhere Devon, somewhere Suffolk too.
  He had been born of love. They had been lovers,
  Who made him, and no more, but they were lovers.
  She of a proud house, proud to make it prouder
  With wit and beauty, and a young brain glowing,
  And a swift body fearless and pitiful;
  And he a Cotswold yeoman, thrift and power,
  And mastery of earth and herds and flocks,
  And knowledge of all seasons and their fruits,
  And a heart of meditation, all his birthright;
  Ten generations deep from Gloucester stone.
  And those two met, and loved, and of their love
  Came a new purity of blood and limb,
  As of a purpose slowly moulding them.
  And long they waited, and then one summer noon,
  He, coming northward from his Cotswold home,
  Found her by Rydal as she had bidden him,
  And proudly stride to stride they took the road,
  Sure youth by youth, and to Helvellyn's foot
  They came, and climbed up to the brighter air,
  And into the wind's ardour still went on,
  Until upon the mountain top they stood,
  And lake by lake was fading in the dusk.
  Out of the plains they saw the moon move up
  And over them the deeper blue came on,
  The faint stars glowing into mastery.
  And in that splendour of a summer hill,
  Amid the mellow-breathing night, where yet
  The poppies of the valley could not come,
  There was conceived a boy....
                         And sorrow came
  Upon their love. Before the moon again
  Was full upon Helvellyn, the Cotswold lover
  With a great elm was blasted in a storm,
  And lay, a burnt thing, in a Cotswold grave.
  And she went out, took her inheritance,
  And lived apart, and the man-child was born.
  She called him Lake, for those fading lakes of dusk,
  And gave him her own name. And twenty years
  She tended him, and died; and from her substance
  Lake Winter now for fifteen years had kept
  His Sussex acres in fertility.
  Such was the man, so born, so passionately made,
  So knit of English earth and generations,
  Who now upon the summer evening watched--
  His manhood full upon his middle years--
  A white dress moving in the distant pines.

  .....

  Down to the valley from their hills they came,
  Lake Winter and the woman that he loved.
  He waited by a long brown garden wall,
  Mottled with moss and lichen, where in the dusk
  Like a great moth a late flycatcher wove,
  And watched her coming down a rutted path,
  Towards him. And the flowing of her body,
  Sure step through fugitive cadences of limb,
  Up to the little golden arch of hair,
  Was lovely as a known yet wanted tale.

  .....

  Zell Dane, the wife of Martin Dane, who held
  Tollington Manor farm, was ten years wed.
  Dane was an honest man by groom and horse,
  Paid pew-rent and his losing wagers, thought
  The British Empire lived at Westminster,
  Stood by the State and rights of property,
  Drank well, and knew the barmaids of a county.
  He married Zell, and neither could have said
  Why it was done. Ten years had gone since then,
  And he was now a half forgotten habit,
  She, some queer porcelain stuff beyond his knowing.

  .....

  Lake Winter came and went at Tollington,
  As other neighbours, a little in Dane's mind
  Suspect for certain rumours of his birth,
  But known for a straight rider and plain speaker,
  Who meant his words and had words for his meaning.
  And Lake and Zell, between the jests at table,
  Where they could match the best wits of the room,
  Would talk of things that Dane and the rest counted
  As pointing ways not good for level minds.
  Why pose about Beethoven, and Debussy,
  Or these French fellows Degas and Picasso,
  When there were Marcus Stone, and A Long, Long Trail,
  And "A Little Grey Home in the West," that common folk
  Could understand? And, however the truth might be,
  It wasn't decent openly to say
  That William Wordsworth was a better poet--
  Though more or less in a poet was no matter--
  Because it seemed that once in his flaming youth
  He had loved gloriously in France....

  . . . . .

              Dane heard and saw,
  And was a little troubled that clear heads
  Should cloud and squander thus, a little scornful.
  Still if it gave them pleasure, and it but meant
  Mind with mind idling together so,
  Winter could come and go for all he cared,
  He wouldn't grudge ... and then the doubt began,
  A thought that somewhere under all this play
  And nimbleness was crouching the true thing,
  Lust, plain lust. There was between man and woman,
  So Dane had learnt, two several conditions,
  A compact to keep smooth the day's affairs,
  That, and plain lust. This mind play was a sham....
  Winter and Zell were lusting, that was all...
  Then let them... damn it, let the matter be...
  Time would show all, and there were crops and hounds.

  ....

  They stood together by the dusky wall.
  And long their lips met, in a hushed world fading,
  A night of beauty fading in their own.
  And then "I made a rhyme for you to-day,
  When the last sheaves were binding I made it,
  thus--"

     I have no strange or subtle thought,
       And the old things are best,
     In curious tongues I am untaught,
       Yet I know rest.

     I know the sifting oakleaves still
       Upon a twilit sky,
     I hear the fernowl on the hill
       Go wheeling by.

     I know my flocks and how they keep
       Their tunes of field and fold,
     My scholarship can sow and reap,
       From green to gold.

     The circled stars from down to sea
       I reckon as my gains,
     The swallows are as dear to me
       As loaded wains.

     Yet these were ghosts and fugitive,
       Until upon your step they came
     By revelation's lips to live
       In your dear name.

     I saw you walking as dusk fell,
       And leaves and wains and heaven and birds
     Were miracles my blood may tell,
       And not my words.

  "And yet I would not lose the tidings come
  On so dear words, though the blood knows it all,
  As the song says." She spoke; and from the valley
  Slowly towards the mill, by ghostly flocks
  That stole about the meadows of the moonrise,
  They walked, and made this argument of love.

  LAKE. How shall they stand for wisdom, who forbid
  The body's love, which is so small a thing,
  Yet let the souls, or minds, or what you will
  Be mated, as though spirit were the drudge,
  For no-one's heed, and limbs alone to be,
  As though clay were the gold, inviolate?
  If I could grudge love coming anywhere,
  Falling even on whom I loved in all,
  I think the body at least should have no share
  Of jealousy from me, which should be spent
  Rather on minds meeting above my own,
  Myself an exile from their understanding.
  Beloved, in the mating of our minds
  I am all peace to walk thus in your presence,
  And in that peace your body of my desire,
  And all my earth, as passionate as any,
  Seem snares to tempt us to the loss of all,
  Since by them the world threatens this our peace,
  Which else we may so gather, undenied.
  Then is not flesh merely the trouble of love,
  When love goes thus, as love between us now?

  .....

  Zell took his hand, and her life was in his veins,
  And his words beat back upon him as she spoke.

  .....

  ZELL. Dear, you are wise of all your books, and speech
  Of windy downs, and polities of men,
  And the old passions weaving history,
  And strong and gentle things of sea and earth,
  And the poor passing of the life of man,
  But not in this. You have your great-heart courage
  For all such ardours as might make you seem
  Some fabled hero standing against fate,
  But not in this. In sifting vanity
  From the right honour, and building from ambition,
  You have a vision constant as the tides,
  But not in this. They may look Sussex over
  For any man who found a crooked word
  Ever upon your lips, and vainly look,
  Because, dear, truth is an old habit in you,
  But not in this. Here in the night enchanted,
  With not an ear to catch the whispered truth,
  Let nothing but the truth between us be--
  I love you, Lake; I love the fair mind moving
  In equal joy among men's praise or censure;
  I love the courage of its lonely flight,
  Here in a land of light convenience.
  I love you for the years that you have given
  To Sussex plough and pasture till they are grown
  Surer and richer in your wit than any.
  I love you for the love in which you gather
  My mind that from youth on has gone unmated,
  And then I love you for the bearing kept
  In you when slight occasions something royal
  Take on because you silently are there.
  I know you, Lake, for a man worthy honour,
  And well to honour is well to delight.
  But, dear, with all this giving of my love,
  Great and unmeasured giving, sending back
  In joy the worship that you bring to me,
  I love your glowing body, and you love mine.
  No words, or thrift of philosophic thought,
  Can put that love out of the love we are.
  At night, alone, when the dark covers me,
  I ache for you, body for body I ache.
  And then I know that over you as well
  The dear, forlorn, resistless pain is full.
  We may persuade, virtuously persuade,
  That this is but an accident of love,
  Not of love's very being, a thing to bind
  In brave captivity at the world's bidding,
  But I know, as you know it, that persuasion
  So made is outcast in the house of truth.
  I love you, and the thing I love is made
  All wonderful of flesh and spirit both,
  Body and mind inseparably one,
  And I must spend my love on all or nothing.
  Should I but love those limbs so rightly planned
  By ancestry so wise of English earth,
  It were a simple harlotry in me.
  But, Lake, to love the life and not the house,
  The living house so admirably built
  Of tissue flawless as the material stars,
  Wherein the life I love is manifest,
  Were harlotry no less I know than that.
  You, the dear Lake of my idolatry,
  For I am something near it, as you are,
  Are one life, whereto pilgrim thought conspires
  With all the cunning moulding of the flesh,
  And of my brain and body is my love,
  Dream to your dream, desire to your desire.
  If you should die, my memory of you
  Would be no tale of the mere mind conceiving,
  Of contemplation thriving thus or thus,
  In trance of spaces where not even wings nor breath
  Recall the moving of substantial things.
  Rather in me for ever should be glowing
  The imaging mind mated in equal limbs,
  Thought visible in lines of the athlete,
  Wisdom persuading in the lover's clasp.
  And how should thought know thought until the whole
  Of body's beauty is by body learnt?
  Until the trial of that most dear seclusion
  Is past, and all the dangers of mere lust
  Disproved, when in possession is no stale
  Regret and disillusion, how should be known
  That the still hours of thought with thought are stable
  Against the wearing of dissolving time?
  Dear, we must love by all the tokens of love,
  Before the presence of love beyond dispute
  Is between us and for ever fixed.

  .....

  Lake heard, and knew that answer could be none,
  Then by the sheep-tracks on the silver downs
  Silent they walked, and midnight came apace,
  And by the bases of the mill they went,
  Close moving, arm by arm, and down again
  Towards the valley, where again they stood,
  And let their lives beat out upon the night.
  And as they waited on farewell, a form
  Came up before them, and Martin Dane stood there,
  And "by your leave," he murmured, and went on.
  Then Zell, "To-morrow, when the moon is full,
  Meet me beside the mill mound. Martin goes
  To Farnham for the otter hunting." Lake
  Took her and kissed, and with no word they parted
  Where the light still looked from the hillside farm
  Over the valley to his home. And he
  As dreaming passed again by the mill to sleep.

  .....

  Firmer the mould, surer the flight of boughs,
  Familiar move the bright plains of the air,
  And newly stedfast the gospel he had known
  Year by year written on his Sussex life,
  Now seemed to Lake this day. Among his men,
  All day he drew and pegged the rickyard straw,
  And piled the barn from floor to the swallows' beam,
  Brown throated and brown armed, the golden rose
  Of summer wind glowing upon his face,
  And all the phrasing of his body good.
  And twilight fell on the full harvest home,
  And the barn doors were closed, and painted wagons
  Stood empty by the ricks, with sunken wheels
  Smeared with the fallen husks, and voice was none,
  And silence with the moon was over all.

  .....

  Lake through the eve walked his familiar paths,
  Counting the labour of his years; the shed
  Where morn and night the cattle came to stall,
  Empty and still now but for the timbering rats;
  The low smooth paven dairy, where the moon
  Now sent a shaft on one full yellow bowl;
  The barn so happily at teeming time again,
  The rickyard stacked with hurdles by the fence,
  The long loft over plough and wagon teams.
  Among the heavy apple trees he passed,
  By ledgy sheep track, over the new stubble,
  Across the valley, and in the shadow kept
  Of Martin Dane's home hop-yard, and again
  Back to his own hillside. And in the south,
  Beyond the moon, over the midnight sea,
  Came up a cloud all heavy with black wind.

  .....

  Zell by the mill was standing when he came,
  Now darkly gowned so that she seemed a shadow,
  Black by the black mill, save for the white face,
  And gold hair and white hands that caught the moonlight.
  Together the wide wooden steps they climbed,
  By broken treads and splitting rail, and he
  Lifted the rusted latch, and there within
  Were folded sacks perished along the seam,
  Forgotten with the dust, and the bare walls,
  Now weather-broken. Above them a dim light
  Showed them a laddered way still up. They came
  Into the high roof chamber, and a rent
  In the top timbers let the moonlight in,
  Half moulding to their vision spars and beams,
  The mill's old ghostly life, and sail-cloth piled
  From the use of generations. A window space
  Just from their towery refuge let them look
  Over familiar earth now tranced. And Lake
  Saw yet again his roofs and acres loved,
  Tenderly, as though interpreters
  Of his long care and their good yielding hours
  Freshly upon his senses ministered; Zell
  Across the valley saw a lone slumbering light,
  While from the south the mounting darkness crept,
  And the wind gathered, moaning upon the mill,
  Filling its frame with a low pulsing breath.

  .....

  And over love the heavenly figures went
  In their unchanging change. No longer now
  The moonlight shafted through the torn roof-timbers,
  And star by star crossed the small field of sky,
  And in those hours of peace that only comes
  With passion mated and of passion born,
  Lake knew within him stirring that far beauty
  Of an old starry still Helvellyn night.
  And Zell made all the wisdom of her words
  Wisdom of life, so simple and unclouded,
  Leaving no fume of trouble in the dark,
  Ending for ever the brain's captivity.

  .....

  They slept. And still the south wind gathered up,
  Gust upon gust to a full swelling tide,
  And the great sail-timbers groaned, and blackness fell
  Over the mill that trembled as in pain
  Of age now nearly with all quarrels done.
  Along the ridges of the downs it swept,
  Beating the boughs of ash and elm, a flood
  Of storm exulting in deliverance.
  And fury up and down the valleys played
  And rose and spilt and sank upon the hills,
  And to and fro the thunder bayed, till sudden
  The world about the sleeping lovers shook
  With sounding doom. And Zell, waking, cried out,
  And he beside her stood, and folded her
  A moment as from fear, and kissed her, and they turned
  To go, when from the bases of the mill
  A shrieking as of life being crushed and torn
  Clanged out upon the beating elements,
  And the hurt timbers, whipped and wrencht, sent up
  A last fierce wail, and for a moment swayed,
  Then gave the life up of a hundred years,
  And to the earth the mill plunged in defeat.

  .....

  Sleepers along the hill-top in the night
  Stirred as a ruin above the thunder broke,
  And slept again. And dawn upon a world
  Of leaves and downs and sheep washed into brightness
  Came on that Sussex out of a clear sky,
  And on the sea the little ships went on
  With sails just filled with a small virgin wind.
  And slowly one by one the village came
  To see the old mill that their sires had known,
  And sires beyond them, blasted in a world
  Where peace was lord as in immortal mood.
  They stood and silence kept them until one
  Saw suddenly upon the dawn breeze blown,
  Out from a mound of split and twisted timber
  A strand of golden hair. And strong arms worked
  Until upon the grass unheeding lay
  Those two dear bodies locked in a love that now
  Was beyond malice and denial and fear.

  .....

  And Martin Dane home from his hunting came,
  And heard, and saw them lying side by side,
  And wondered how could folly pay so much
  For so unsound and gossipy an end,
  Gave his instructions for a decent grave,
  And found a tap-room topic to his mind.

  .....

  That night the promise of the dawn was full,
  And on the broken mill a clear moon shone,
  Silvering all the ways the lovers knew.
  And by the wreck a shadowy figure watched,
  Half Lake, and half that old Helvellyn lover,
  And on the night a whispered cadence fell--

  Again in the world, a story has been made,
  These looked upon beauty unafraid,
  O these were lovely, these were the great ones, they dared,
  And denied not, but upon love's bidding fared.

  Pity them not; they would scorn that as your hate,
  They knew the voices, they knew the hours that mate
  With hours beyond all judgment of mankind,
  These were the proud adventurers of the mind.

  Kindled for ever because of them shall be
  A wiser freedom. The long lanes of the sea,
  The golden acres of Sussex shall holy keep
  Their names, their love, their ending. Let them sleep.



  GOLD

  There is a castle on a hill,
    So far into the sky,
  That birds that from the valley-beds
    Up to the turrets fly,
  Climbing towards the sun can feel
    The clouds go tumbling by.

  But always far above the clouds
    The sun is shining there,
  It shines for ever on those walls;
    And the great boughs that bear
  Harvests of never fading fruit
    Are golden everywhere.

  Who journeys to that castled crest
    Finds, with his journey done,
  All ages and all colours in
    Cascades of light that run
  Over the broad weirs of the air
    For ever from the sun.

  Two things are silver: flower of plum
    When April yet is cold;
  And willowed floods that of the moon
    Quiet leases hold.
  That castle in the sky alone
    Of living things is gold.

  Between unfathomable blue
    And the bright belts of green,
  Midway the plains of heaven and earth,
    Rock-borne it stands between
  Woods and the sky, a golden world
    Where only gold is seen.

  Old carvers in the stone have cut
    Forests and wraths and herds,
  And these are gold: the dials tell
    The sun in golden words;
  The very jackdaws, from the towers
    Wheeling, are golden birds.

  The minting of the sun is on
    The gravel everywhere,
  The yellow walls are fleeces washed
    In pools of sunny air,
  That coming to that castle place
    All men are Jasons there.

  Trancelike to stand upon that hill
    When the deep summer sings,
  Gold-clad, gold-hearted, and gold-voiced,
    And sings and sings and sings,
  Is as to wait a rising world
    In flight of golden wings.

  And I have walked with love that way,
    And on that golden crest
  The sun was happy for my love,
    For she is golden-tressed.
  Red gold, that of all golden things
    The great sun marks for best.

  O golden castle of the sky
    Hereafter gold can be
  Only your image when the sun
    Transfigured her for me,
  Till she was golden-clouded Jove,
    And I her Danae.

  Hereafter in the chambered night
    When linked love is told,
  One thought shall spare to climb that hill
    Into the sunbright fold,
  For a great summer noon when love
    Was gold, and gold, and gold.



  BURNING BUSH

  From babyhood I have known the beauty of earth--
  I learnt it, I think, in the strange months before birth,
  I learnt it passing and passing by each moon
  From the harvest month into my natal June.
  My mother, the dear, the lovely I hardly knew,
  Bearing me must have walked and wandered through
  Stubble of silver or gold, as moon or sun
  Lit earth in the days when my body was begun.
  And then October with leaves splendid and blown
  She watched with my little body a little grown,
  And winter fell, and into our being passed
  Firm frost and icy rivers and the blast
  Of winds that on the iron clods of plough
  Beat with an unseen charging. Then the bough
  Of spring came green, and her glad body stirred
  With a son's wombed leaping, and she heard
  Songs of the air and woods and waterways,
  And with them singing the coming of my days.
  And nesting time drew on to summer flowers,
  And me unborn she taught through patient hours.
  Then on that first June day, with spices blown
  Of roses over clover crops unmown,
  And grey wind-lifted leaves and blossom of bean,
  She gave her dear white beauty to the keen
  Anguish of women, and brought my body to birth
  Already skilled in the sculptures of the earth.

  Then in the days when her breasts nourished me,
  Daily she walked, that happy girl, to see
  How summer prospered to bring the harvest on,
  And how the gardens and how the orchards shone
  With scarlet and blue and yellow flowers and fruit,
  And hear with equal love the lonely flute
  Of legendary satyrs in the wood,
  Or the still voice of Christ in bachelorhood.
  And she would come I know to me her son
  With lovely secret gossip of journeys done
  In fields where some day my own feet should go.
  It was not gossip in words that I could not know,
  Mere ease and pleasure for her mother wit,
  But such as I could feel the joy of it
  Beating about my baby blood and sense,
  Maternal tending of intelligence
  In the unwhispered rites of bosom and lip,
  Divinings worded in bodily fellowship.
  And every shape and colour and scent she knew,
  Were intimations winding, folding, through
  My infancies of flesh and thought, each one
  To find its unblemished record and copy done
  In little moods drawn from the suckling-breast...
  That now, in manhood, when I find the nest
  Of the chaffinch moulded in the elder tree,
  And looking on that lichen cup can see
  The images of eternity and space
  Lavished upon a small bird's dwelling-place:
  Or when from some blue passage of the sky
  I know that also colour can prophesy:
  Or, ghosted on the brushing tides of wheat,
  The gossip of a Galilean street,
  So many Sabbaths gone, I hear again,
  And his hands plucking that immortal grain:
  Or when by spectral ancestries I pass
  Again to Eden, as the orchard grass
  Gives out the scent of mellow apples blown
  From windy boughs--all these, I know, were known
  By that dear mother when the boy to come
  Was the zeal and gospel of her martyrdom.

  Then came the time when I could walk with her,
  We pilgrims of the fields, with everywhere
  Strange leaves, and spreading of earth, and hedgerow themes,
  And mossy walls, and bubbling of the streams,
  And the way of clouds, and the full moon to wane,
  The bird-song in the lilacs after rain,
  And month by month the coming of the flowers,
  for me to learn in speech, as had been ours
  Knowledge unspoken while she fashioned me...
  And then she died; and I went on to be
  Through lonely boyhood her disciple still,
  A wanderer by many a Berkshire hill,
  By water-meadows of the Oxford plain,
  By the thick oaks of Avon, with the strain
  Of an old yeoman wisdom dreaming on
  New beauty ever following beauty gone,
  Until I knew my earth and her raiment fair
  In every difference of the seasons' wear,
  Long years her scholar, with learning of her ways
  To slip unleasht all singing into praise
  Should learning yet by some enchantment be
  Bidden to passion's better husbandry.

  And the enchanted bidding fell. And you,
  O Love, it was that spelt the earth anew.

  O Love, you silent wayfarer,
  How many years all unaware
  By blackthorn hedge, and spinney green
  With larch, I wandered, while unseen
  You in my shadow walked, nor made
  Even a whisper in the shade.

  O Love, on many an evening hill
  I watched the day go down, the still
  Dark woods, the far great rivers wind,
  Thin threads of light. And I was blind,
  Or seeing knew not, for you were
  Beside me still, yet hidden there.

  O Love, as year by year went on,
  And budding primroses were gone,
  And berries fell, and still the bright
  Crocuses came in the night,
  You left me to my task alone,
  O Love, so near me and unknown.

  O Love, though she who bore me set
  Earth's love for ever on me, yet
  Some word withheld still troubled me,
  Some presence that I could not see,
  Till you, dear alien, should come,
  And doctrine be no longer dumb.

  O Love, one April night I heard
  The doctrine's everlasting word,
  And you beneath that starry sky,
  Unknown, were with me suddenly,
  Yet there was no new meeting then,
  But some old marriage come again.

  O Love, and now is earth my friend,
  Telling me all, until the end
  When I shall in the earth be laid
  With all my maps and fancies made,
  And you, Love, were the secret earth
  Of my blind following from birth.

  O Love, you happy wayfarer,
  Be still my fond interpreter,
  Of all the glory that can be
  As once on starlit Winchelsea,
  Finding upon my pilgrim way
  A burning bush for every day.



  TO MY SON

  (AGED SIXTEEN)

  Dear boy unborn: the son but of my dream,
    Promise of yet unrisen day,
  Come, sit beside me; let us talk, and seem
    To take such cares and courage for your way,
    As some year yet we may.

  As some year yet, when you, my son to be,
    Look out on life, and turn to go,
  And I, grown grey, shall wish you well, and see
    Myself imprinted as but she could know
    To make amendment so.

  I see you then, your sixteen years alight
    With limbs all true and golden hair,
  And you, unborn, I will, this April night,
    Tell of the faith and honour you must wear
    For love, whose light you bear.

  Beauty you have; as, mothered so, could face
    Or limbs or hair be otherwise?
  Years gone, dear boy, there was a virgin grace
    Worth Homer's laurel under western skies
    To wander and devise.

  Beauty you have. Cherish it as divine,
    Wash it with dews of diligence,
  Not vainly, but because it is the sign
    Of inward light, the spirit's excellence
    Made visible to sense.

  Athlete be you; strong runner to the goal,
    Glad though the game be lost or won:
  Fleet limbs that chronicle a fleeter soul,
    In every winter valiantly to run,
    Till the last race be done.

  Love wisdom that is suited in a rhyme,
    And be in all your learning known
  Old minstrels chanting out of faded time,
    Since he who counts all years gone by alone
    Makes any year his own.

  And when one day you are a lover too,
    Come back to her who bore you, dear,
  Tell out your tale; you shall the better woo
    For every word that from her lips you hear,
    For she made love most clear.

  Most clear for him who sits beside you now;
    There was a certain frost that fell
  Before its time upon a summer bough,--
    And how at last that reckoning was well,
    She for your love shall tell.

  Labour to build your house, but ever keep
    That greater garden fresh in mind,
  That England with its bird-song buried deep
    In cool great woods where chivalry can find
    The province of its kind.

  Be great or little your inheritance,
    Know there shall number in that dower
  No treasure from the treasuries of chance
    So rare as that you came the perfect flower
    Of love's most perfect hour.

  Go now, my son. Be all I might have been.
    (Ask her. She knows, and none but she.)
  Her beauty and her wisdom weathered clean
    Some part of me in you, that you might be
    Her own eternity.



  INTERLUDE

  What love is; how I love; how builders' clay
  By love is lit into a golden spending;
  How love calls beautiful ghosts back to the day;
  How life because of love shall have no ending--
  These with the dawn I have begun to sing,
  These with the million-budded noon that's rising
  Shall be a theme, with love's consent, to bring
  My song to some imperishable devising.
  And may the petals of this garland fall
  On every quarrel, and in fragrance bless
  Old friendship; and a little comfort all
  The weary loves that walk the wilderness,
  While still my song I consecrate alone
  To her who taking it shall take her own.











End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Preludes 1921-1922, by John Drinkwater

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PRELUDES 1921-1922 ***

***** This file should be named 5628.txt or 5628.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/6/2/5628/

Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al
Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
