The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sketches of Seymour (Illustrated),
Part 5., by Robert Seymour

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Sketches of Seymour (Illustrated), Part 5.

Author: Robert Seymour

Release Date: July 13, 2004 [EBook #5649]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKETCHES OF SEYMOUR ***




Produced by David Widger





SKETCHES BY SEYMOUR

Part 5.



FISHING FOR WHITING AT MARGATE.

"Here we go up--up--up;
And here we go down--down--down."


"Variety," as Cowper says, "is the very spice of life"--and certainly, at
Margate, there is enough, in all conscience, to delight the most
fastidious of pleasure-hunters.

There sailors ply for passengers for a trip in their pleasure boats,
setting forth all the tempting delights of a fine breeze--and woe-betide
the unfortunate cockney who gets in the clutches of a pair of plyers of
this sort, for he becomes as fixed as if he were actually in a vice,
frequently making a virtue of necessity, and stepping on board, when he
had much better stroll on land.

Away he goes, on the wings of the wind, like--a gull!  Should he be a
knave, it may probably be of infinite service to society, for he is
likely ever afterwards to forswear craft of any kind!

Donkies too abound, as they do in most watering placesand, oh! what a
many asses have we seen mounted, trotting along the beach and cliffs!

The insinuating address of the boatmen is, however, irresistible; and if
they cannot induce you to make a sail to catch the wind, they will set
forth, in all the glowing colors of a dying dolphin, the pleasurable
sport of catching fish!

They tell you of a gentleman, who, "the other day, pulled up, in a single
hour, I don't know how many fish, weighing I don't know how much." And
thus baited, some unwise gentleman unfortunately nibbles, and he is
caught.  A bargain is struck, 'the boat is on the shore,' the lines and
hooks are displayed, and the victim steps in, scarcely conscious of what
he is about, but full well knowing that he is going to sea!

They put out to sea, and casting their baited hooks, the experienced
fisherman soon pulls up a fine lively whiting.

"Ecod!" exclaims the cockney, with dilated optics, "this is fine--why
that 'ere fish is worth a matter of a shilling in London--Do tell me how
you cotched him."

"With a hook!" replied the boatman.

"To be sure you did--but why did'nt he bite mine?"

"'Cause he came t'other side, I s'pose."

"Vell, let me try that side then," cries the tyro, and carefully changes
his position.--"Dear me, this here boat o'yourn wobbles about rayther,
mister."

"Nothing, sir, at all; it's only the motion of the water."

"I don't like it, tho'; I can tell you, it makes me feel all over
somehow."

"It will go off, sir, in time; there's another," and he pulls in another
wriggling fish, and casts him at the bottom of the boat.  "Well, that's
plaguey tiresome, any how--two! and I've cotched nothin' yet--how do you
do it?"

"Just so--throw in your hook, and bide a bit--and you'll be sure, sir, to
feel when there's any thing on your hook; don't you feel any thing yet?"

"Why, yes, I feels werry unwell!" cries the landsman; and, bringing up
his hook and bait, requests the good-natured boatman to pull for shore,
'like vinkin,'--which request; the obliging fellow immediately complies
with, having agreeably fished at the expense of his fare; and, landing
his whitings and the flat, laughs in his sleeve at the qualms of his
customer.

But there is always an abundant crop of such fools as he, who pretend to
dabble in a science, in utter ignorance of the elements; while, like
Jason of old, the wily boatman finds a sheep with a golden
fleece,--although his brains are always too much on the alert to be what
is technically termed--wool-gathering.  Some people are desirous of
seeing every thing; and many landsmen have yet to learn, that they may
see a deal, without being a-board!




ANDREW MULLINS.--AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY.


CHAPTER I.--Introductory.

"Let the neighbors smell ve has something respectable for once."


There is certainly no style of writing requiring so much modest assurance
as autobiography; a position which, I am confident, neither Lord
Cherbury, nor Vidocq, or any other mortal blessed with an equal
developement of the organ of self-esteem, can or could deny.

HOME, ("sweet home,")--in his Douglas--gives, perhaps, one of the most
concise and concentrated specimens extant, of this species of
composition.  With what an imposing air does his youthful hero blow his
own trumpet in those well-known lines, commencing,

"My name is Norval."

Although a mere cock-boat in comparison with these first-rates, I think I
may safely follow in their wake.  Should the critics, however, condescend
to carp at me for likening myself to a cock-boat, I have no objection, if
by a twist of their ingenuity, they can prove me to be a little funny!

Economy was one of the most prominent characteristics of the family from
which I sprang.  Now, some authors would weary their indulgent readers
with a flatulent chapter upon the moral beauty of this virtue; but as my
first wish is to win favor by my candor, I must honestly confess, that
necessity was the parent of this lean attenuated offspring!--For, alas!

My 'angel mother,' (as Anna Maria phrases it,) was a woman of ten
thousand, for she dwelt in one of the most populous districts of London!
My sire, was of the most noble order of St. Crispin; and though he had
many faults, was continually mending--being the  most eminent cobbler in
the neighbourhood.

Even in the outset of their connubial partnership, they started under the
most favorable auspices--for, whereas other couples marry for love or
money, they got married for 'nothing' taking advantage of the annual
gratuitous splicings performed at Shoreditch Church on one sunshiny
Easter Monday.

In less than three years my amiable mother presented her lord and master
with as many interesting pledges of their affection--I was the cobbler's
last--and

'Though last, not least, in their dear love.'




CHAPTER II.--Our Lodging.


Our precarious means were too small to permit us to rent a house, we
therefore rented one large room, which served us for--

"Parlor and kitchen and all!"

in the uppermost story of a house, containing about a dozen families.

This 'airy' apartment was situated in a narrow alley of great
thoroughfare, in the heart of the great metropolis.

The lower part of this domicile was occupied by one James, who did
'porter's work,' while his wife superintended the trade of a
miscellaneous store, called a green-grocer's; although the stock
comprised, besides a respectable skew of cabbages, carrots, lettuces, and
other things in season, a barrel of small beer, a side of bacon, a few
red herrings, a black looking can of 'new milk,' and those less
perishable articles, Warren's blacking, and Flanders' bricks; while the
window was graced with a few samples of common confectionary, celebrated
under the sweet names of lollypops, Buonaparte's ribs, and bulls'-eyes.

In one pane, by permission, was placed the sign board of my honored
parent, informing the reading public, that

'Repairs were neatly executed!'

In my mind's eye how distinctly do I behold that humble shop in all the
greenness and beauty of its Saturday morning's display.

Nor can I ever forget the kind dumpy motherly Mrs. James, who so often
patted my curly head, and presented me with a welcome slice of bread and
butter and a drink of milk, invariably repeating in her homely phrase, "a
child and a chicken is al'ays a pickin'"--and declaring her belief, that
the 'brat' got scarcely enough to "keep life and soul together"--the real
truth of which my craving stomach inwardly testified.

Talk of the charities of the wealthy, they are as 'airy nothings' in the
scale, compared with the unostentatious sympathy of the poor!  The former
only give a portion of their excess, while the latter willingly divide
their humble crust with a fellow sufferer.

The agreeable routine of breakfast, dinner, tea, and supper, was unknown
in our frugal establishment; if we obtained one good meal a day, under
any name, we were truly thankful.

To give some idea of our straitened circumstances, I must relate one
solitary instance of display on the maternal side.  It was on a Saturday
night, the air and our appetites were equally keen, when my sire, having
unexpectedly touched a small sum, brought home a couple of pound of real
Epping.  A scream of delight welcomed the savory morsel.

A fire was kindled, and the meat was presently hissing in the borrowed
frying-pan of our landlady.

I was already in bed, when the unusual sound and savor awoke me.  I
rolled out in a twinkling, and squatting on the floor, watched the
culinary operations with greedy eyes.

"Tom," said my mother, addressing her spouse, "set open the door and
vinder, and let the neighbors smell ve has something respectable for
once."




CHAPTER. III.--On Temperance.

"I wou'dn't like to shoot her exactly; but I've a blessed mind to turn
her out!"


Armed with the authority and example of loyalty, for even that renowned
monarch--Old King Cole--was diurnally want to call for

"His pipe and his glass"

and induced by the poetical strains of many a bard, from the classic
Anacreon to those of more modern times, who have celebrated the virtue of

"Wine, mighty wine!"

it is not to be marvelled at, that men's minds have fallen victims to the
fascinations of the juice of the purple grape, or yielded to the alluring
temptations of the 'evil spirit.'

It is a lamentable truth, that notwithstanding the laudable and wholesome
exertions and admonitions of the Temperance and Tee-total Societies, that
the people of the United Kingdom are grievously addicted to an excessive
imbibation of spirituous liquors, cordials, and compounds.

Although six-bottle men are now regarded as monstrosities, and drinking
parties are nearly exploded, tippling and dram-drinking among the lower
orders are perhaps more indulged in than ever.

The gilded and gorgeous temples--devoted to the worship of the
reeling-goddess GENEVA--blaze forth in every quarter of the vast
metropolis.

Is it matter of wonder, then, that while men of superior intellect and
education are still weak enough to seek excitement in vinous potations,
that the vulgar, poor, and destitute, should endeavour to drown their
sorrows by swallowing the liquid fires displayed under various names, by
the wily priests of Silenus!

That such a deduction is illogical we are well aware, but great examples
are plausible excuses to little minds.

Both my parents were naturally inclined to sobriety; but, unfortunately,
and as it too frequently happens, in low and crowded neighbourhoods,
drunkenness is as contagious as the small-pox, or any other destructive
malady.

Now, it chanced that in the first-floor of the house in which we dwelt,
there also resided one Stubbs and his wife.  They had neither chick nor
child.  Stubbs was a tailor by trade, and being a first-rate workman,
earned weekly a considerable sum; but, like too many of his fraternity,
he was seldom sober from Saturday night until Wednesday morning.  His
loving spouse 'rowed in the same boat'--and the 'little green-bottle' was
dispatched several times during the days of their Saturnalia, to be
replenished at the never-failing fountain of the 'Shepherd and Flock.'

Unhappily, in one of her maudlin fits, Mrs. Stubbs took a particular
fancy to my mother; and one day, in the absence of the 'ninth,' beckoned
my unsuspecting parent into her sittingroom,--and after gratuitously
imparting to her the hum-drum history of her domestic squabbles, invited
her to take a 'drop o' summat'--to keep up her I sperrits.'

Alas! this was the first step--and she went on, and on, and on, until
that which at first she loathed became no longer disagreeable, and by
degrees grew into a craving that was irresistible;--and, at last, she
regularly hob-and-nobb'd' with the disconsolate rib of Stubbs, and shared
alike in all her troubles and her liquor.

Fain would I draw a veil over this frailty of my unfortunate parent; but,
being conscious that veracity is the very soul and essence of history, I
feel myself imperatively called upon neither to disguise nor to cancel
the truth.

My father remonstrated in vain-the passion had already taken too deep a
hold; and one day he was suddenly summoned from his work with the
startling information, that 'Mother Mullins'--(so the kind neighbour
phrased it) was sitting on the step of a public house, in the suburbs,
completely 'tosticated.'

He rushed out, and found the tale too true.  A bricklayer in the
neighbourhood proposed the loan of his barrow, for the poor senseless
creature could not walk a step.  Placing her in the one-wheel-carriage,
he made the best of his way home, amid the jeers of the multitude.
Moorfields was then only partially covered with houses; and as he passed
a deep hollow, on the side of which was placed a notice, intimating that

"RUBBISH MAY BE SHOT HERE!"

his eyes caught the words, and in the bitterness of his heart he
exclaimed--

"I wou'dn't like to shoot her exactly; but I've a blessed mind to turn
her out!"




CHAPTER IV.--A Situation.

"I say, Jim, what birds are we most like now?" "Why swallows, to be
sure,"


In the vicinity of our alley were numerous horse-rides, and my chief
delight was being entrusted with a horse, and galloping up and down the
straw-littered avenue.--I was about twelve years of age, and what was
termed a sharp lad, and I soon became a great favourite with the ostlers,
who admired the aptness with which I acquired the language of the
stables.

There were many stock-brokers who put up at the ride; among others was
Mr. Timmis--familiarly called long Jim Timmis.  He was a bold, dashing,
good-humoured, vulgar man, who was quite at home with the ostlers,
generally conversing with them in their favourite lingo.

I had frequent opportunities of shewing him civilities, handing him his
whip, and holding his stirrup, etc.

One day he came to the ride in a most amiable and condescending humour,
and for the first time deigned to address me--"Whose kid are you?"
demanded he.

"Father's, sir," I replied.

"Do you know your father, then?"

"Yes, sir."

"A wise child this;" and he winked at the ostler, who, of course, laughed
incontinently.

"I want a-lad," continued he; "what do you say--would you like to serve
me?"

"If I could get any thing by it."

"D-me, if that a'int blunt."

"Yes, sir; that's what I mean."

"Mean!  mean what?"

"If I could get any blunt, sir."

Hereupon he laughed outright, at what he considered my readiness,
although I merely used the cant term for "money," to which I was most
accustomed, from my education among the schoolmasters of the ride.

"Here, take my card," said he; "and tell the old codger, your father, to
bring you to my office to-morrow morning, at eleven."

"Well, blow me," exclaimed my friend the ostler, "if your fortin' arn't
made; I shall see you a tip-top sawyer--may I never touch another tanner!
Vy, I remembers Jim Timmis hisself vos nothin but a grubby boy--Mother
Timmis the washer-woman's son, here in what-d've-call-'em-court--ven he
vent to old Jarvis fust.  He's a prime feller tho', and no mistake--and
thof he's no gentleman born, he pays like one, and vot's the difference?"

The next morning, punctual to the hour, I waited at his office, which was
in a large building adjoining the Stock Exchange, as full as a dove-cot,
with gentlemen of the same feather.

"O!" said he, eyeing my parent, "and you're this chap's father, are you?
What are you?"

"A boot and shoe-maker, sir; and my Andrew is an honest lad."

"For the matter o' that, there's little he can prig here;" replied my
elegant and intended master.  "But his tongs--eh--old fellow--can't you
rig him out a little?"

My father pleaded poverty; and at last he bargained to advance a guinea,
and deduct it out of my weekly-wages of two and sixpence, and no board.
My father was glad to make any terms, and the affair was consequently
soon arranged.  I was quickly fitted out, and the next morning attended
his orders.

I had, however, little else to do than wait in his office, and run to the
Stock Exchange, to summon him when a customer dropped in.  I had much
leisure, which I trust was not wholly thrown away, for I practised
writing on the back of the stock-receipts, of which a quantity hung up in
the office, and read all the books I could lay my hands on; although, I
must confess, the chief portion of my knowledge of the world has been
derived from observation.

"The proper study of mankind is man."

Although quick in temper, and rude in speech and manners, Timmis was
kind; and, if he had a failing, it was the ambition of being a patron;
and he was certainly not one of those who do a good deed, and

"Blush to find it fame."

He not only employed my father to make his boots, but recommended him to
all his friends as a "good-fit," and procured the old man some excellent
customers.  Among his acquaintance, for he had few friends, was Tom
Wallis, a fat, facetious man, about forty, with whom he was always
lunching and cracking his jokes.  One day, when the stocks were "shut"
and business was slack, they started together on a sporting excursion
towards the romantic region of Hornsey-wood, on which occasion I had the
honour of carrying a well-filled basket of provisions, and the inward
satisfaction of making a good dinner from the remnants.

They killed nothing but time, yet they were exceedingly merry, especially
during the discussion of the provisions.  Their laughter, indeed, was
enough to scare all the birds in the neighbourhood.

"Jim, if you wanted to correct those sheep yonder," said Tom, "what sort
of tool would you use?"

"An ewe-twig, of course," replied my master.

"No; that's devilish good," said Wallis; "but you ain't hit it yet."

"For a crown you don't do a better?"

"Done!"

"Well, what is it?"

"Why, a Ram-rod to be sure--as we're sportsmen."

My master agreed that it was more appropriate, and the good-natured Tom
Wallis flung the crown he had won to me.

"Here's another," continued he, as Mr. Timmis was just raising a bottle
of pale sherry to his lips--"I say, Jim, what birds are we most like
now?"

"Why swallows, to be sure," quickly replied my patron; who was really, on
most occasions, a match for his croney in the sublime art of punning, and
making conundrums, a favourite pastime with the wits of the Stock
Exchange.




CHAPTER V.--The Stalking Horse.

"Retributive Justice"


On the same landing where Timmis (as he termed it) 'held out,' were five
or six closets nick-named offices, and three other boys.  One was the
nephew of the before-mentioned Wallis, and a very imp of mischief;
another, only a boy, with nothing remarkable but his stupidity; while the
fourth was a scrubby, stunted, fellow, about sixteen or seventeen years
of age, with a long pale face, deeply pitted with the small-pox, and an
irregular crop of light hair, most unscientifically cut into tufts.

He, by reason of his seniority and his gravity, soon became the oracle of
the party.  We usually found him seated on the stairs of the first floor,
lost in the perusal of some ragged book of the marvellous school--scraps
of which he used to read aloud to us, with more unction than propriety,
indulging rather too much in the note of admiration style; for which he
soon obtained the name of Old Emphatic!--But I must confess we did obtain
a great deal of information from his select reading, and were tolerably
good listeners too, notwithstanding his peculiar delivery, for somehow he
appeared to have a permanent cold in his head, which sometimes threw a
tone of irresistible ridicule into his most pathetic bits.

He bore the scriptural name of Matthew and was, as he informed us, a
'horphan'--adding, with a particular pathos, 'without father or mother!'
His melancholy was, I think, rather attributable to bile than
destitution, which he superinduced by feeding almost entirely on
'second-hand pastry,' purchased from the little Jew-boys, who hawk about
their 'tempting' trash in the vicinity of the Bank.

Matthew, like other youths of a poetical temperament, from Petrarch down
to Lord Byron, had a 'passion.'

I accidentally discovered the object of his platonic flame in the person
of the little grubby-girl--the servant of the house-keeper--for, as the
proverb truly says,

"Love and a cough cannot be hid."

The tender passion first evinced itself in his delicate attentions;--nor
was the quick-eyed maid slow to discover her conquest.  Her penetration,
however, was greater than her sympathy.  With a tact that would not have
disgraced a politician--in a better cause, she adroitly turned the
swelling current of his love to her own purposes.

As the onward flowing stream is made to turn the wheel, while the miller
sings at the window, so did she avail herself of his strength to do her
work, while she gaily hummed a time, and sadly 'hummed' poor Matthew.

There being nearly thirty offices in the building, there were of course
in winter as many fires, and as many coal-scuttles required.  When the
eyes of the devoted Matthew gazed on the object of his heart's desire
toiling up the well-stair, he felt he knew not what; and, with a heart
palpitating with the apprehension that his proffered service might be
rejected (poor deluded mortal!), he begged he might assist her.  With a
glance that he thought sufficient to ignite the insensible carbon, she
accepted his offer.  Happy Matthew!--he grasped the handles her warm
red-hands had touched!--Cold-blooded, unimaginative beings may deride his
enthusiasm; but after all, the sentiment he experienced was similar to,
and quite as pure, as that of Tom Jones, when he fondled Sophia Western's
little muff.

But, alas!--

"The course of true love never did run smooth."

Two months after this event, 'his Mary' married the baker's man!--

                   * * * * * * * * * *

Wallis's nephew had several times invited me to pay him a visit at his
uncle's house, at Crouchend; and so once, during the absence of that
gentleman who was ruralizing at Tonbridge, I trudged down to his villa.

Nothing would suit Master John, but that he must 'have out' his uncle's
gun; and we certainly shot at, and frightened, many sparrows.

He was just pointing at a fresh quarry, when the loud crow of a cock
arrested his arm.

"That's Doddington's game 'un, I know," said Master John.  "What d'ye
think--if he did'nt 'pitch into' our 'dunghill' the other day, and laid
him dead at a blow.  I owe him one!--Come along."  I followed in his
footsteps, and soon beheld Chanticleer crowing with all the ostentation
of a victor at the hens he had so ruthlessly widowed.  A clothes-horse,
with a ragged blanket, screened us from his view; and Master'John,
putting the muzzle of his gun through a hole in this novel ambuscade,
discharged its contents point blank into the proclaimer of the morn--and
laid him low.

I trembled; for I felt that we had committed a 'foul murder.'  Master
Johnny, however, derided my fears--called it retributive justice--and
ignominiously consigned the remains of a game-cock to a dunghill!

The affair appeared so like a cowardly assassination, in which I was
(though unwillingly--) 'particeps criminis'--that I walked away without
partaking of the gooseberry-pie, which he had provided for our supper.




CHAPTER VI.--A Commission.

"Och! thin, Paddy, what's the bothuration; if you carry me, don't I carry
the whiskey, sure, and that's fair and aqual!"


I was early at my post on the following morning, being particularly
anxious to meet with Mr. Wallis's scapegrace nephew, and ascertain
whether anybody had found the dead body of the game-cock, and whether an
inquest had been held; for I knew enough of the world to draw my own
conclusions as to the result.  He, although the principal, being a
relative, would get off with a lecture, while I should probably be kicked
out of my place.

In a fever of expectation, I hung over the banisters of the geometrical
staircase, watching for his arrival.

While I was thus occupied, my nerves "screwed up,"--almost to cracking,
Mr. Wallis's office-door was thrown open, and I beheld that very
gentleman's round, pleasant physiognomy, embrowned by his travels,
staring me full in the face.  I really lost my equilibrium at the
apparition.

"Oh!--it's you, is it," cried he.  "Where's my rascal?"

"He's not come yet, sir," I replied.

"That fellow's never at hand when I want him--I'll cashier him by ___."
He slammed to his own door, and--opened it again immediately.

"Timmis come?" demanded he.

"No, sir; I don't think he'll be here for an hour."

"True--I'm early in the field; but what brings you here so soon?--some
mischief, I suppose."

"I'm always early, sir, for I live hard by."

"Ha!--well--I wish--."

"Can I do anything for you, sir?" I enquired.

"Why, that's a good thought," said he, and his countenance assumed its
usually bland expression.  "Let me see--I want to send my carpet-bag, and
a message, to my housekeeper."

"I can do it, sir, and be back again in no time," cried I, elated at
having an opportunity of obliging the man whom I had really some cause to
fear, in the critical situation in which his nephew's thoughtlessness had
placed me.

In my eagerness, however, and notwithstanding the political acuteness of
my manoeuvre, I got myself into an awful dilemma.  Having received the
bag, and his message, I walked off, but had scarcely descended a dozen
stairs when he recalled me.

"Where the devil are you going?" cried he.

"To your house, sir," I innocently replied.

"What, do you know it, then?" demanded he in surprise.

Here was a position.  It was a miracle that I did not roll over the
carpet-bag and break my neck, in the confusion of ideas engendered by
this simple query.

I could not lie, and evasion was not my forte.  A man or boy in the wrong
can never express himself with propriety; an opinion in which Quinctilian
also appears to coincide, when he asserts--

"Orator perfectus nisi vir bonus esse non potest."

I therefore summoned up sufficient breath and courage to answer him in
the affirmative.

"And when, pray, were you there?" said he.

"Yesterday, sir, your nephew asked me to come and see him."

"The impudent little blackguard?" cried he.

"I hope you ain't angry, sir?"

"Angry with you?--no, my lad; you're an active little chap, and I wish
that imp of mine would take a pattern by you.  Trot along, and mind you
have 'a lift' both ways."

Off I went, as light as a balloon when the ropes are cut.

I executed my commission with dispatch, and completely won the favour of
Mr. Wallis, by returning the money which he had given me for coach-hire.

"How's this?--you didn't tramp, did you?" said he.

"No, sir, I rode both ways," I replied; "but I knew the coachmen, and
they gave me a cast for nothing."

"Umph!--well, that's quite proper--quite proper," said he, considering a
moment.  "Honesty's the best policy."

"Father always told me so, sir."

"Your father's right;--there's half-a-crown for you."

I was delighted--

"Quantum cedat virtutibus aurum;"

and I felt the truth of this line of Dr. Johnson's, although I was then
ignorant of it.  I met his nephew on the landing, but my fears had
vanished.  We talked, however, of the departed bird, and he wished me, in
the event of discovery, to declare that I had loaded and carried the gun,
and that he would bear the rest of the blame.

This, however, strongly reminded me of the two Irish smugglers:--one had
a wooden leg, and carried the cask; while his comrade, who had the use of
both his pins, bore him upon his shoulders, and, complaining of the
weight, the other replied:--"Och! thin, Paddy, what's the bothuration; if
you carry me, don't I carry the whiskey, sure, and that's fair and
aqual!" and I at once declined any such Hibernian partnership in the
affair, quite resolved that he should bear the whole onus upon his own
shoulders.




CHAPTER, VII.--The Cricket Match

"Out! so don't fatigue yourself, I beg, sir."


I soon discovered that my conduct had been reported in the most
favourable colours to Mr. Timmis, and the consequence was that he began
to take more notice of me.

"Andrew, what sort of a fist can you write?" demanded he.  I shewed him
some caligraphic specimens.

"D___ me, if your y's and your g's hav'nt tails like skippingropes. We
must have a little topping and tailing here, and I think you'll do. Here,
make out this account, and enter it in the book."

He left me to do his bidding; and when he returned from the
Stock-Exchange, inspected the performance, which I had executed with
perspiring ardour.

I watched his countenance.  "That'll do--you're a brick!  I'll make a man
of you--d___ me."

From this day forward I had the honour of keeping his books, and making
out the accounts.  I was already a person of importance, and certainly
some steps above the boys on the landing.

I did not, however, obtain any advance in my weekly wages; but on
"good-days" got a douceur, varying from half a crown to half a sovereign!
and looked upon myself as a made man.  Most of the receipts went to my
father; whatever he returned to me I spent at a neighbouring book-stall,
and in the course of twelve months I possessed a library of most amusing
and instructive literature,--Heaven knows! of a most miscellaneous
character, for I had no one to guide me in the selection.

Among Mr. Timmis's numerous clients, was one Mr. Cornelius Crobble, a man
of most extraordinary dimensions; he was also a "chum" of, and frequently
made one of a party with, his friend Mr. Wallis, and other croneys, to
white-bait dinners at Blackwall, and other intellectual banquets.  In
fact, he seldom made his appearance at the office, but the visit ended in
an engagement to dine at some "crack-house" or other.  The cost of the
"feed," as Mr. Timmis termed it, was generally decided by a toss of "best
two and three;" and somehow it invariably happened that Mr. Crobble lost;
but he was so good-humoured, that really it was a pleasure, as Mr. Wallis
said, to "grub" at his expense.

They nick-named him Maximo Rotundo--and he well deserved the title.

"Where's Timmis?" said he, one day after he had taken a seat, and puffed
and blowed for the space of five minutes--"Cuss them stairs; they'll be
the death o' me."

I ran to summon my master.

"How are you, old fellow?" demanded Mr. Timmis; "tip us your fin."

"Queer!" replied Mr. Crobble,--tapping his breast gently with his fat
fist, and puffing out his cheeks--to indicate that his lungs were
disordered.

"What, bellows to mend?" cried my accomplished patron-- D___ me, never
say die!"

"Just come from Doctor Sprawles: says I must take exercise; no malt
liquor--nothing at breakfast--no lunch--no supper."

"Why, you'll be a skeleton--a transfer from the consolidated to the
reduced in no time," exclaimed Mr. Timmis; and his friend joined in the
laugh.

"I was a-thinking, Timmis--don't you belong to a cricketclub?"

"To be sure."

--"Of joining you."

"That's the ticket," cried Timmis--"consider yourself elected; I can
carry any thing there.  I'm quite the cock of the walk, and no mistake.
Next Thursday's a field-day--I'll introduce you.  Lord! you'll soon be
right as a trivet."

Mr Wallis was summoned, and the affair was soon arranged; and I had the
gratification of being present at Mr. Crobble's inauguration.

It was a broiling day, and there was a full field; but he conducted
himself manfully, notwithstanding the jokes of the club.  He batted
exceedingly well, "considering," as Mr. Wallis remarked; but as for the
"runs," he was completely at fault.

He only attempted it once; but before he had advanced a yard or two, the
ball was caught; and the agile player, striking the wicket with ease,
exclaimed, amid the laughter of the spectators--"Out! so don't fatigue
yourself, I beg, sir."

And so the match was concluded, amid cheers and shouting, in which the
rotund, good-natured novice joined most heartily.




CHAPTER VIII.--The Hunter.

"Hunting may be sport, says I, but I'm blest if its pleasure."


Two days after the cricket-match, Mr. Crobble paid a visit to my master.

"Well, old fellow, d___ me me, if you ain't a trump--how's your wind?"
--kindly enquired Mr. Timmis.

"Vastly better, thank'ye; how's Wallis and the other fellows?--prime
sport that cricketing."

"Yes; but, I say, you'll never have 'a run' of luck, if you stick to the
wicket so."

"True; but I made a hit or two, you must allow," replied Mr. Crobble;
"though I'm afraid I'm a sorry member."

"A member, indeed!--no, no; you're the body, and we're the--members,"
replied Mr. Timmis, laughing; "but, halloo! what's that patch on your
forehead--bin a fighting?"

"No; but I've been a hunting," said Mr. Crobble, "and this here's the
fruits--You know my gray?"

"The nag you swopp'd the bay roadster for with Tom Brown?"

"Him," answered Crobble.  "Well, I took him to Hertfordshire Wednesday
last--"

"He took you, you mean."

"Well, what's the odds?"

"The odds, why, in your favour, to be sure, as I dare say the horse can
witness."

"Well, howsomever, there was a good field--and off we went.  The level
country was all prime; but he took a hedge, and nearly julked all the
life out o' me.  I lost my stirrup, and should have lost my seat, had'nt
I clutched his mane--"

"And kept your seat by main force?"

"Very good."

"Well, away we went, like Johnny Gilpin.  Hunting may be sport, says I,
but I'm blest if its pleasure.  This infernal horse was always fond of
shying, and now he's going to shy me off; and, ecod! no sooner said than
done.  Over his head I go, like a rocket."

"Like a foot-ball, you mean," interrupted Mr. Timmis.

"And, as luck would have it, tumbles into a ditch, plump with my head
agin the bank."

"By jingo! such a 'run' upon the bank was enough to break it," cried my
master, whose propensity to crack a joke overcame all feeling of sympathy
for his friend.

"It broke my head though; and warn't I in a precious mess--that's all--up
to my neck, and no mistake--and black as a chimney-sweep--such mud!"

"And only think of a man of your property investing his substance in mud!
That is a good 'un!--Andrew," said he, "tell Wally to come here." I
summoned his crony, and sat myself down to the books, to enjoy the
sportive sallies of the two friends, who roasted the 'fat buck,' their
loving companion, most unmercifully.

"You sly old badger," cried Wallis, "why, you must have picked out the
ditch."

"No, but they picked out me, and a precious figure I cut--I can tell you
--I was dripping from top to toe."

"Very like dripping, indeed!" exclaimed Mr. Timmis, eyeing his fat
friend, and bursting into an immoderate fit of laughter.  The meeting
ended, as usual, with a bet for a dinner at the "Plough" for themselves
and their friends, which Mr. Crobble lost--as usual.




CHAPTER IX.--A Row to Blackwall.

'To be sold, warranted sound, a gray-mare, very fast, and carries a lady;
likewise a bay-cob, quiet to ride or drive, and has carried a lady'


Steam-boats did not run to Greenwich and Blackwall at this period; and
those who resorted to the white-bait establishments at those places,
either availed themselves of a coach or a boat.  Being now transformed,
by a little personal merit, and a great favour, from a full-grown
errand-boy to a small clerk, Mr. Timmis, at the suggestion of my good
friend Mr. Wallis, offered me, as a treat, a row in the boat they had
engaged for the occasion; which, as a matter of course, I did not refuse:
making myself as spruce as my limited wardrobe would permit, I trotted at
their heels to the foot of London-bridge, the point of embarkation.

The party, including the boatman, consisted of eight souls; the tide was
in our favour, and away we went, as merry a company as ever floated on
the bosom of Father Thames.  Mr. Crobble was the chief mark for all their
sallies, and indeed he really appeared, from his size, to have been
intended by Nature for a "butt," as Mr. Wallis wickedly remarked.

"You told, me, Crobble, of your hunting exploit in Hertfordshire," said
Mr. Wallis; "I'll tell you something as bangs that hollow; I'm sure I
thought I should have split with laughter when I heard of it.  You know
the old frump, my Aunt Betty, Timmis?"

"To be sure--she with the ten thousand in the threes," replied Mr.
Timmis; "a worthy creature; and I'm sure you admire her principal."

"Don't I," cried Wallis; and he winked significantly at his friend.

"Well, what d'ye think; she, and Miss Scragg, her toady, were in the
country t'other day, and must needs amuse themselves in an airing upon a
couple of prads.

"Well; they were cantering along--doing the handsome--and had just come
to the border of a pond, when a donkey pops his innocent nose over a
fence in their rear, and began to  heehaw' in a most melodious strain.
The nags pricked up their ears in a twinkling, and made no more ado but
bolted.  Poor aunty tugged! but all in vain; her bay-cob ran into the
water; and she lost both her presence of mind and her seat, and plumped
swash into the pond--her riding habit spreading out into a beautiful
circle--while she lay squalling and bawling out in the centre, like a
little piece of beef in the middle of a large batter-pudding!  Miss
Scragg, meanwhile, stuck to her graymare, and went bumping along to the
admiration of all beholders, and was soon out of sight: luckily a joskin,
who witnessed my dear aunt's immersion, ran to her assistance, and, with
the help of his pitch-fork, safely landed her; for unfortunately the pond
was not above three or four feet deep! and so she missed the chance of
being an angel!"

"And you the transfer of her threes!--what a pity!" said the sympathizing
Mr. Timmis.

"When I heard of the accident, of course, as in duty bound, I wrote an
anxious letter of affectionate enquiry and condolence.  At the same
period, seeing an advertisement in the Times--'To be sold, warranted
sound, a gray-mare, very fast, and carries a lady; likewise a bay-cob,
quiet to ride or drive, and has carried a lady'--I was so tickled with
the co-incidence, that I cut it out, and sent it to her in an envelope."

"Prime! by Jove!"--shouted Mr. Crobble--"But, I say, Wallis--you should
have sent her a 'duck' too, as a symbolical memorial of her accident!"




CHAPTER X.--The Pic-Nic.

--had just spread out their prog on a clean table-cloth, when they were
alarmed by the approach of a cow.


"People should never undertake to do a thing they don't perfectly
understand," remarked Mr. Crobble, "they're sure to make fools o'
themselves in the end.  There's Tom Davis, (you know Tom Davis?) he's
always putting his notions into people's heads, and turning the laugh
against 'em.  If there's a ditch in the way, he's sure to dare some of
his companions to leap it, before he overs it himself; if he finds it
safe, away he springs like a greyhound."

"Exactly him, I know him," replied Mr. Timmis; "that's what he calls
learning to shave upon other people's chins!"

"Excellent!" exclaimed Mr. Wallis.

"He's a very devil," continued Mr. Crobble; "always proposing some fun or
other: Pic-nics are his delight; but he always leaves others to bring the
grub, and brings nothing but himself.  I hate Pic-nics, squatting in the
grass don't suit me at all; when once down, I find it no easy matter to
get up again, I can tell you."

Hereupon there was a general laugh.

"Talking of Pic-nics," said Mr. Timmis.  "reminds me of one that was held
the other day in a meadow, on the banks of the Lea.  The party,
consisting of ladies only, and a little boy, had just spread out their
prog on a clean table-cloth, when they were alarmed by the approach of a
cow.  They were presently on their pins, (cow'd, of course,) and sheered
off to a respectful distance, while the cow walked leisurely over the
table-cloth, smelling the materials of the feast, and popp'd her cloven
foot plump into a currant and raspberry pie! and they had a precious deal
of trouble to draw her off; for, as Tom Davis said, there were some
veal-patties there, which were, no doubt, made out of one of her calves;
and in her maternal solicitude, she completely demolished the plates and
dishes, leaving the affrighted party nothing more than the broken
victuals."

"What a lark!" exclaimed Mr. Crobble; "I would have given a guinea to
have witnessed the fun.  That cow was a trojan!"

"A star in the milky way," cried Mr. Wallis.

We now approached the 'Plough;' and Mr. Crobble having 'satisfied' the
boatman, Mr. Wallis gave me half-a-crown, and bade me make the best of my
way home.  I pocketed the money, and resolved to 'go on the highway,' and
trudge on foot.

"Andrew," said my worthy patron, "now don't go and make a beast of
yourself, but walk straight home."

"Andrew," said Mr. Wallis, imitating his friend's tone of admonition; "if
any body asks you to treat 'em, bolt; if any body offers to treat you,
retreat!"

"Andrew," said Mr. Crobble, who was determined to put in his oar, and row
in the same boat as his friends; "Andrew,"--"Yes, Sir;" and I touched my
hat with due respect, while his two friends bent forward to catch his
words.  "Andrew," repeated he, for the third time, "avoid evil
communication, and get thee gone from Blackwall, as fast as your legs can
carry you--for, there's villainous bad company just landed here--wicked
enough to spoil even the immaculate Mr. Cornelius Crobble!"




CHAPTER XI.--The Journey Home.

"Starboard, Tom, starboard!"--"Aye, aye-starboard it is!"


I found myself quite in a strange land upon parting with my master and
his friends.  It was war-time, and the place was literally swarming with
jack-tars.

Taking to the road, for the footway was quite crowded, I soon reached
Poplar.  Here a large mob impeded my progress.  They appeared all moved
with extraordinary merriment.  I soon distinguished the objects of their
mirth.  Two sailors, mounted back to back on a cart-horse, were steering
for Blackwall.  A large horse-cloth served them as a substitute for a
saddle, and the merry fellow behind held the reins; he was smoking a
short pipe, while his mate was making an observation with his spy-glass.

"Starboard, Tom, starboard!" cried the one in front.

"Aye, aye-starboard it is!" replied his companion, tugging at the rein.

"Holloo, messmate! where are you bound?" bawled a sailor in the crowd.

"To the port o' Blackwall," replied the steersman.  "But we're going
quite in the wind's eye, and I'm afeared we shan't make it to-night."

"A queer craft."

"Werry," replied Tom.  "Don't answer the helm at all."

"Any grog on board?" demanded the sailor.

"Not enough to wet the boatswain's whistle; for, da'e see, mate, there's
no room for stowage."

"Shiver my timbers!--no grog!" exclaimed the other; "why--you'll founder.
If you don't splice the main-brace, you'll not make a knot an hour.
Heave to--and let's drink success to the voyage."

"With all my heart, mate, for I'm precious krank with tacking. Larboard,
Tom--larboard."

"Aye, aye--larboard it is."

"Now, run her right into that 'ere spirit-shop to leeward, and let's have
a bowl."

Tom tugged away, and soon "brought up" at the door of a wine-vaults.

"Let go the anchor," exclaimed his messmate--"that's it--coil up."

"Here, mate--here's a picter of his royal majesty"--giving the sailor
alongside a new guinea--"and now tell the steward to mix us a jorum as
stiff as a nor'wester, and, let's all drink the King's health--God bless
him."

"Hooray!" shouted the delighted mob.

Their quondam friend soon did his bidding, bringing out a huge china-bowl
filled with grog, which was handed round to every soul within reach, and
presently dispatched;--two others followed, before they "weighed anchor
and proceeded on their voyage," cheered by the ragged multitude, among
whom they lavishly scattered their change; and a most riotous and
ridiculous scramble it produced.

I was much pleased with the novelty of the scene, and escaped from the
crowd as quickly as I conveniently could, for I was rather apprehensive
of an attempt upon my pockets.

What strange beings are these sailors!  They have no care for the morrow,
but spend lavishly the hard-earned wages of their adventurous life.  To
one like myself, who early knew the value of money, this thoughtless
extravagance certainly appeared unaccountable, and nearly allied to
madness; but, when I reflected that they are sometimes imprisoned in a
ship for years, without touching land, and frequently in peril of losing
their lives--that they have scarcely time to scatter their wages and
prize-money in the short intervals which chance offers them of mixing
with their fellow-men, my wonder changed to pity.

"A man in a ship," says Dr. Johnson, "is worse than a man in a jail; for
the latter has more room, better food, and commonly better company, and
is in safety."




CHAPTER XII.--Monsieur Dubois.

"I sha'nt fight with fistesses, it's wulgar!--but if he's a mind to
anything like a gemman, here's my card!"


The love-lorn Matthew had departed, no doubt unable to bear the sight of
that staircase whose boards no longer resounded with the slip-slap of the
slippers of that hypocritical beauty, "his Mary."  With him, the romance
of the landing-place, and the squad, had evaporated; and I had no
sympathies, no pursuits, in common with the remaining "boys"--my
newly-acquired post, too, nearly occupied the whole of my time, while my
desire of study increased with the acquisition of books, in which all my
pocket-money was expended.

One day, my good friend, Mr. Wallis, entered the office, followed by a
short, sharp-visaged man, with a sallow complexion; he was dressed in a
shabby frock, buttoned up to the throat--a rusty black silk neckerchief
supplying the place of shirt and collar.

He stood just within the threshold of the door, holding his napless hat
in his hand.

"Well, Wally, my buck," cried my master, extending his hand.

Mr. Wallis advanced close to his elbow, and spoke in a whisper; but I
observed, by the direction of his eyes, that the subject of his
communication was the stranger.

"Ha!" said Mr. Timmis, "it's all very well, Walley--but I hate all
forriners;--why don't he go back to Frogland, and not come here, palming
himself upon us.  It's no go--not a scuddick.  They're all a parcel o'
humbugs--and no mistake!"

As he uttered this gracious opinion sufficiently loud to strike upon the
tympanum of the poor fellow at the door, I could perceive his dark eyes
glisten, and the blood tinge his woe-begone cheeks; his lips trembled
with emotion: there was an evident struggle between offended gentility,
and urgent necessity.

Pride, however, gained the mastery; and advancing the right foot, he
raised his hat, and with peculiar grace bowing to the two
friends--"Pardon, Monsieur Vallis," said he, in tremulous accents, "I am
'de trop;' permit, me to visdraw"--and instantly left the office.

Mr. Timmis, startled by his sudden exit, looked at Mr. Wallis for an
explanation.

"By ___!" exclaimed Mr. Wallis seriously-- "you've hurt that poor fellow's
feelings.  I would sooner have given a guinea than he should have heard
you.  Dubois is a gentleman; and altho' he's completely 'stumped,' and
has'nt a place to put his head in, he's tenacious of that respect which
is due to every man, whether he happens to be at a premium, or a
discount."

"Go it!" cried Mr. Timmis, colouring deeply at this merited reproof--"If
this ain't a reg'lar sermon!  I didn't mean to hurt his feelings, d___
me;  I'm a reg'lar John Bull, and he should know better than to be popped
at my bluntness.  D___ me, I wouldn't hurt a worm--you know I wouldn't,
Wallis."

There was a tone of contrition in this rambling apology that satisfied
Mr. Wallis of its truth; and he immediately entered into an explanation
on the Frenchman's situation.  He had known him, he said, for several
years as a tutor in the family of one of his clients, by whom he was much
respected: a heavy loss had compelled them suddenly to reduce their
establishment; Dubois had entreated to remain with his pupil--refused to
receive any salary--and had even served his old patron in the capacity of
a menial, adhering to him in all his misfortunes, and only parted with
him, reluctantly, at the door of the debtor's prison!

"Did he do that?" said my master; and I saw his eyes moisten at the
relation.  "A French mounseer do that!  Game--d___ me!"--and lifting the
lid of his desk, he drew out a five pound note!  "Here, Wallis, tip him
this flimsey!  Tell him--you know what to say--I'm no speechifier--but
you know what I mean."  I almost jumped up and hugged my master, I was so
excited.

The next day Monsieur Dubois again made his appearance; and Mr. Wallis
had the pleasure of beholding Mr. Timmis and his gallic friend on the
best terms imaginable.

As for me, I had good cause to rejoice; for it was agreed that I should
take lessons in the "foreign lingo," by way of giving him "a lift," as
Mr. Timmis expressed it.  I remember him with feelings of gratitude; for
I owe much more than the knowledge of the language to his kindness and
instruction.

As for Mr. Timmis, he could never sufficiently appreciate his worth,
although he uniformly treated him with kindness.

"Talk of refinement," said he, one day, when discussing Dubois' merits
with Mr. Wallis; "I saw a bit to-day as bangs everything.  A cadger
sweeping a crossing fell out with a dustman.  Wasn't there some spicy jaw
betwixt 'em.  Well, nothing would suit, but the dustman must have a go,
and pitch into the cadger.

"D___ me, what does the cove do, but he outs with a bit of dirty
pasteboard, and he says, says he, "I sha'nt fight with fistesses, it's
wulgar!--but if he's a mind to anything like a gemman, here's my card!"
Wasn't there a roar!  I lugg'd out a bob, and flung it at the vagabond
for his wit."




CHAPTER XIII.--My Talent Called into Active Service.

"Ar'n't you glad you ain't a black-a-moor?"

"I should think so," replied his sooty brother, "they're sich ugly
warmints."


Having to deliver a letter, containing an account and a stock receipt,
to one of Mr. Timmis's clients, residing at the west end of the town; in
crossing through one of the fashionable squares, I observed a flat-faced
negro servant in livery, standing at the door of one of the houses.

Two chimney sweepers who happened to be passing, showed their white teeth
in a contemptuous grin at the African.

"Bob," I overheard one remark, "ar'n't you glad you ain't a
black-a-moor?"

"I should think so," replied his sooty brother, "they're sich ugly
warmints.  Master's daughter, wots come from boarding school! says the
sight of 'ems' enough to frighten one into conwulsions!"

Alas! for the prejudice of the world!  How much this ignorant remark
reminded me of my patron's unfounded hatred of all "forriners."  It was
precisely the same sentiment, differently expressed, that actuated the
thoughts and opinions of both.

I must, however, do Mr. Timmis the justice to say, that he made ample
amends to Monsieur Dubois for the affront he had so thoughtlessly put
upon the worthy Frenchman; and did all in his power to obtain him pupils.

The consequent change in his dress and manner, his amiable conduct, and
gentlemanly deportment, at last completely won upon the esteem of the
boisterous broker, who swore, (for that was generally his elegant manner
of expressing his sincerity) that Dubois was a 'downright good'un;' and
were it not for his foreign accent, he should have taken him for an
Englishman born--really believing, that there was no virtue in the world
but of English growth.

I had now been above twelve-months in his office, and although I had
received but a moderate compensation for my services, yet the vast
improvement I had made (thanks to the instruction of Monsieur Dubois,)
was more valuable than gold.  My father also, though but scantily
furnished with book-knowledge, had, nevertheless, the good sense to
appreciate and encourage my progress; he was well aware, from
observation, that 'knowledge is power,' and would frequently quote the
old saw,

"When house, and land, and money's spent;
Then larning is most excellent"--

and spared all the money he could scrape together to purchase books for
me.

One day Mr. Crobble came into the office with an open letter in his hand.
"Here,"--cried he, "I've received a remittance at last from that, German
fellow--two good bills on the first house in the city--but I can't make
top nor tail of his rigmarole.  Do you know any chap among your
acquaintance who can read German?"

"Not I," replied Mr. Timmis.

"Will you allow me, Mr. Crobble?" said I, stepping forward.  "This letter
is written in French, not German, Sir," I observed.

"What's the difference to me, Master Andrew; it might as well be in wild
Irish, for the matter o' that."

"Andrew can read the lingo," said my master.

"The devil he can!" exclaimed Mr. Crobble; "I dare say I shall be able to
make it out," said I; "and if not, Monsieur Dubois will be here;
to-morrow morning, and you can have it by twelve o'clock, sir."

"Ain't that the ticket?" exclaimed Mr. Timmis, delighted at the surprise
of his friend; "you don't know how vastly clever we are, old fellow."

Mr. Crobble, much gratified at this information, placed the letter in my
hands; and, leaving me to take a lunch at Garraway's with Mr. Timmis, I
eagerly sat about my task--and luckily it was not only plainly written,
but the subject-matter by no means difficult, being rather complimentary
than technical.  By the time they returned, I had not only translated,
but made a fair copy of it, in my best hand.

"Come, that is clever," said Mr. Crobble; "let me see, now, what shall I
give you?"

"Nothing, Sir," I promptly replied; "I am Mr. Timmis's clerk--and all
that I know I owe to his kindness."

I saw, with pleasure, that this compliment was not lost upon my master.

Mr. Crobble was really a gentleman in feeling, and therefore did not
persist in offering me any remuneration; but as he left the office, he
said, "I thank you, Mr.  Andrew--I shall not forget your services;" and
departed evidently much pleased with my performance.




CHAPTER XIV.--A Dilemma.

"EE cawnt gow back, 'cause they locks the gates,"

"Well, can we go forward, then?"--"Noa, ee cawnt, 'cause the roads are
under water;"


"EE cawnt gow back, 'cause they locks the gates," said a bumpkin on the
road-side to a Cockney-party in a one-horse chaise.

"Well, can we go forward, then?" demanded the anxious and wearied
traveller.

"Noa, ee cawnt, 'cause the roads are under water;" replied the joskin,
with a grin.

This was certainly a situation more ridiculous than interesting; and I
smiled when I heard the story told, little suspecting that Fortune would
one day throw me into a similar dilemina--so blindly do we mortals hug
ourselves in the supposed security of our tact and foresight.

"How d'ye do, Mr. Andrew," said Mr. Crobble, when he had seated himself,
and sufficiently inflated his lungs, after the fatiguing operation of
mounting the stairs.

"Where's Timmis?--tell him I want a word with him."

I quickly summoned my patron, and followed him into the office.

"Well, old puff and blow!" exclaimed Mr. Timmis, with his usual
familiarity.

"What's in the wind?  Want to sell out?  The fives are fallen three per
cent. since Friday.  All the 'Change is as busy as the devil in a high
wind."

"No--no more dabbling, Timmis," replied Mr. Crobble; "I lost a cool
hundred last account; I want a word in private with you"--and he glanced
towards me; upon which I seized my hat, and took up my position at my old
post on the landing.  How were my feelings altered since I first loitered
there, listening to the marvels of poor Matthew!

I was lost in a pleasant reverie, when the sharp voice of Mr. Timmis
recalled me.

"Andrew," said he, "my friend Crobble wants a clerk, and has cast his eye
upon you.  What do you say?"

I scarcely knew what to say.  On one side stood my master, to whom I
really owed so much--on the other his friend, who offered me a promotion,
which I felt, on many accounts, was most attractive.  "I should have no
objection," I replied, "but great pleasure in serving Mr. Crobble,
sir--but--I have received so many favours from you, that I'm afraid I
might seem ungrateful."

The good-natured Mr. Wallis happily stepped in at this moment to my
relief.

"Nonsense," replied Mr. Timmis; "the stock is delivered to the highest
bidder; here Crobble backs eighteen shillings a week against my
half-a-crown-take him."

I still felt some hesitation, although it was evident, from his
expression, that Mr. Timmis valued the servant much less than the servant
valued the master.

"Only look here, Wally," cried he; "here stands Andrew, like an ass
between two bundles of hay."

"Rather like a bundle of hay between two asses, I think," replied Mr.
Wallis; and good-naturedly tapping me on the shoulder, he continued--"
accept Mr. Crobble's offer, Master Andrew: you're much too good for
Timmis--he can soon get a grubby half-crown boy--but you may wait a long
time for such an eligible offer."

"Eighteen shillings a week," said Mr. Crobble; who, I must confess,
without any particular stretch of self-esteem, appeared anxious to engage
me--, "but I shall want security."

That word "security" fell like an avalanche on my mounting spirit, and
cast me headlong down the imaginary ascent my busy thoughts had climbed
to!

"Five hundred pounds," continued Mr. Crobble; "d'ye think--have you any
friends?"

"None, sir; my father is a poor man, and quite unable."  I could scarcely
speak--like the driver of the one-horse chaise, I could neither advance
nor recede.

"The father," said Mr. Timmis, "is only a poor shoe-maker--a good fellow
tho'--an excellent fit!"

"You mean to say," cried Mr. Wallis, "it were bootless to seek security
of the shoe-maker."

A laugh ensued; and, notwithstanding my agitated feelings, I could not
forbear being tickled by Mr. Wallis's humour, and joining in the
merriment.

This sally gave a most favourable turn to the discussion.  "Come," said
Mr. Wallis, "I'll stand two hundred and fifty--and you, Timmis, must go
the other."

"No; d___ me, he may bolt with the cash-box, and let me in, perhaps,"
exclaimed Mr. Timmis.  I burst into tears; I felt, that from my long and
faithful services, I deserved a better opinion--although I had no right
to expect so great a favour.

Rude as he was, he felt some compunction at having wounded my feelings;
and swore a round oath that he was only joking, and I was a fool.  "Did I
think, for a moment, that Wally should get the start of him; no--I was an
honest chap, and he'd put his fist to double the amount to serve me;" and
then bade me "sit to the books," and make all square before I cut my
stick: and thus happily concluded this most momentous change in my
circumstances.




CHAPTER XV.--An Old Acquaintance.

"Only three holidays left, and still this plaguey glass says 'very
wet;'--I can't bear it--I can't--and I won't."


How impatiently did I count the minutes 'till the office was closed, for
I longed to communicate the glad tidings of my good fortune to my worthy
father.  The old man wept with joy at the prospect, and assisted me in
rearing those beautiful fabrics termed castles in the air.

His own trade, by the recommendation of the rough, ill-mannered, but
good-natured Mr. Timmis, had wonderfully increased; and, by making some
temporary sacrifices, he was enabled to give me an appearance more
suitable to the new position in which I was so unexpectedly placed.  In a
narrow alley, on the south side of the Royal Exchange, on the
ground-floor, I found the counting-house of Mr. Crobble.  Under his
directions, I quickly made myself master of the details of the business.
Alas! it was but the slender fragment of a once flourishing mercantile
house, of which time had gradually lopped off the correspondents, whilst
his own inertness had not supplied the deficiency by a new connexion; for
his father had left him such an ample fortune, that he was almost
careless of the pursuit, although he could not make up his mind, as he
said, to abandon the "old shop," where his present independence had been
accumulated.  I consequently found plenty of leisure, uninterrupted by
the continual hurry and bustle of a broker's office, to pursue my
favourite studies, and went on, not only to the entire satisfaction of
Mr. Crobble, but to my own, and really began to find myself a man of some
importance.

In the course of business, I one day fell in with an old acquaintance.

"A parcel for Cornelius Crobble, Esq.," said a little porter, of that
peculiar stamp which is seen hanging about coach-offices--"Two
and-sixpence."

I looked at the direction, and drew out the "petty cash" to defray the
demand; when, then, first looking at the man, I thought I recognised his
features.

"What!" cried I, "Isn't your name--"

"Matthew," answered he quickly.

"Matthew!--why, don't you know me?"

"No, sir," replied he, staring vacantly at me.

"Indeed!--Have I so outgrown all knowledge?  Don't you recollect Andrew
Mullins?"

"Good heavins!" exclaimed he, with his well-remembered nasal twang; "are
you--"

"Yes."

"Well, I declare now you've growed into a gentleman.  I should'nt--I
really should'nt--"  He did not say what he really "should not"--but
extended his hand.--"Hope you ain't too proud to shake hands with an old
friend?--"

I shook him heartily by the hand, and made some enquiries touching his
history.

Poor Matthew seated himself with all the ease imaginable, and laid his
knot beside him, and began, after the manner of his favourite heroes, to
"unbosom himself."

"You've a father," said he; "but I'm a horphan, without father nor
mother--a houtcast!"--and he sunk his head upon his bosom; and I observed
that his scrubby crop was already becoming thin and bald.

"Since I left the place in the 'lane,' I've bin a-going--down--down"--and
he nearly touched the floor with his hand.  "That gal, Mary, was the ruin
of me--I shall never forget her.--My hopes is sunk, like the sun in the
ocean, never to rise agin!"  I was rather amused by this romantic, though
incorrect, figure; but I let him proceed: "I've got several places, but
lost 'em all.  I think there's a spell upon me; and who can struggle
against his fate?"

I tried to console him, and found, upon a further confession, that he had
flown to spirits "now and then," to blunt the sharp tooth of mental
misery.

Here, then, was the chief cause of his want of success, which he blindly
attributed to fate--the common failing of all weak minds.  For my part,
notwithstanding the imperial authority of the great Napoleon himself, I
have no faith in Fate, believing that the effect, whether good or bad,
may invariably be traced to some cause in the conduct of the individual,
as certainly as the loss of a man, in a game of draughts, is the
consequence of a "wrong move" by the player!--And poor Matthew's
accusation of Fate put me in mind of the school-boy, who, during a wet
vacation, rushed vindictively at the barometer, and struck it in the
face, exclaiming--"Only three holidays left, and still this plaguey glass
says 'very wet;'--I can't bear it--I can't--and I won't."

I did all in my power to comfort the little porter, exhorting him to
diligence and sobriety.

"You were always a kind friend," said he, pathetically; "and
perhaps--perhaps you will give me something to drink your health, for
old-acquaintance sake."  This unexpected turn compelled me to laughter.
I gave him sixpence.

Alas! Matthew, I found, was but a piece of coarse gingerbread, tricked
out with the Dutch metal of false sentiment.




CHAPTER XVI.--The Loss of a Friend.

"I say, ma'am, do you happen to have the hair of 'All round my hat I
vears a green villow?'"


I was startled by the batho-romantic sentiment of Matthew, somewhat in
the same manner as the young lady at the bookseller's, when she was
accosted by a musical dustman, with--"I say, ma'am, do you happen to have
the hair of 'All round my hat I vears a green villow?'"

But, however ridiculous they may appear, such incongruous characters are
by no means caricatures--nay, are "as plentiful as blackberries,"
especially in the lower grades of society.

I was indulging in a reverie of this sort, when Monsieur Dubois, my kind
and gentlemanly tutor, abruptly entered the office.  I felt proud in
having obtained his friendship--for he was to me a mine of wealth, and
appeared master of every subject upon which my curiosity prompted me to
inquire, whilst the worthy Frenchman was so flattered by my sincere
respect, that he took a delight in imparting his knowledge to so willing
and diligent a scholar.

Mr. Crobble had promised that I should continue my studies, being much
pleased with the proof I had been fortunate enough to give him of my
progress, generously offering to defray the charges of tuition; and I
found in my new place, even more time than when in the employ of Mr.
Timmis: for, indeed, half-a-clerk would have been sufficient to have
conducted the whole business.

I was no less surprised at the unusual abruptness of approach, than at
the extraordinary excitement apparent in the manner of Monsieur Dubois;
for he always boasted of his coolness and philosophy under all
circumstances.

"Peace, peace!--'mon cher ami'--peace is proclaim"--cried he, raising his
hat and his eyes to the dingy ceiling of our office--"Grace a Dieu!--le
tyran Napoleon--le charlatan est renverse de son piedestal--oui, mon
eleve--I vill see, again once more my dear France!"

He grasped my hand in his ecstasy, and tears filled his eyes to
overflowing.  I had heard rumours of the restoration of the Bourbons, but
I had not anticipated the loss of my inestimable tutor.

I was almost ashamed of my selfishness; but vanquished my feelings so far
as to congratulate him on his prospects, with as much cordiality and
appearance of truth as I could assume.

"I trust, however," said I, "that restored to your country, and your
friends, you will find that happiness you so much deserve.  Go where you
will, you will be followed by the regrets of your English friends."

"Ah! les Anglais!--'combien'--how motch 'reconnaissance?'" said he, "I
vill have for them!  I sall them forget nevare!"

Mr. Crobble interrupted our colloquy.  "All right t'other side the
channel, Mounseer," cried be, elated; "we've licked Boney: he's done up;
stocks are up; and Timmis, (your old master, Andrew) is as busy as a bee
--only he's making money instead of honey!"

He shook hands with Monsieur Dubois; and congratulated him upon the
restoration of Louis the Eighteenth.

I mentioned to him Monsieur Dubois' intention of proceeding immediately
to France.  "He's right," cried he; "let every man stick to his King and
his country; and I say"--he suddenly checked himself, and beckoning me
aside, continued in an under tone--"Andrew, you understand this Mounseer
better than I do; he appears a good fellow in the main: if he should want
a lift, to fit him out for the voyage, or any thing of that sort, tell
him Corny Crobble will lend him a hand, for old acquaintance sake; I
shan't stick at a matter of forty or fifty pound--you understand--put it
to him, as a matter of business; for that'll suit his proud stomach best,
perhaps"--then, turning to Monsieur, he said, "Excuse whispering before
company, Mounseer Dubois.  Good morning."

"Bon jour, Monsieur," replied Dubois, making my obese governor one of his
most graceful bows.

I was highly gratified at being selected as the medium of this generous
offer; which Monsieur Dubois received without hesitation, as one who
intended to repay it; but, at the same time, with the most grateful
acknowledgments of Mr. Crobble's considerate kindness.




CHAPTER XVII.--Promotion.

"I, think there must be something wrong about your rowing,"

"My rowing!" cried I; "nonsense!--it's because you don't steer right."


"I remember, when I was a young man, I once took a fancy to rowing," said
Mr. Crobble one day to me.  "I wasn't then quite so round as I am at
present.  Cousin Tom and I hired a wherry, but somehow we found we didn't
make much way.  Tom was steering, and I took the sculls, sitting my back
to him like a gaby!"

"I, think there must be something wrong about your rowing," said Tom.

"My rowing!" cried I; "nonsense!--it's because you don't steer right.
Well, at last a waterman came alongside, and grinning (the fellow
couldn't help it) good-naturedly, pointed out the cause of our dilemma;
at which we both laughed heartily.  Ever since that time I've been of
opinion, that unless people, 'who row in the same boat,' understand each
other, they'll never get along--"

I smiled at this lengthy prologue, not conceiving to what it could
possibly lead.

"Now, Mr. Andrew," resumed he, "I mean to be very industrious, and devote
a whole day to giving you an insight into the business; after which I
expect you'll pull away, while I only steer, which will suit me to a T--,
you understand."

"Exactly, sir," I replied; and, in consequence, he really set about the
task; and I soon acquired sufficient knowledge in the business, as not
only to row in the same boat with him, but, what was still more agreeable
to my patron's indolence, to manage the "craft" without his assistance.

Six months after the departure of Monsieur Dubois, he sent a remittance,
with interest on the amount, advanced by Mr. Crobble, with a long epistle
to me, stating, that he had entered into partnership with his elder
brother, and commenced the business of a banker, under the firm of
"Dubois Freres," at the same time informing me that they were already
doing a large stroke of business, and wanted an agent in London,
requesting me to inform him if it would be agreeable to Mr. Crobble for
them to draw upon his respectable house.

I saw at once the advantages of this correspondence, and so warmly
solicited Mr. Crobble to accede, that he at last consented, provided I
undertook the whole management of the affair.

The English were now daily flocking to Paris, and the money required for
their lavish expenditure in the gay capital of France compelled their
application to the bankers.

Messrs. Dubois Freres had their share of this lucrative business, and, as
their agents in London, we necessarily became participators in their
large transactions.

In three months these operations had increased so enormously, and the
profits were so considerable, that Mr. Crobble not only advanced my
salary, but consented to engage the assistance of two junior clerks.  I
was now a man of some consideration.  I was the senior clerk of the
establishment, although the youngest of the three.

In two years I found myself at the head of six clerks, and had as much
business as I could possibly manage.

My star was in the ascendant.  I had not only more money than I required
for my expenses, but was enabled to maintain my poor old father, who
daily became more and more infirm.

I rented a small cottage at the rural village of Hackney, but my labour
occupied me early and late, and it was only on a Sunday I could really
enjoy my home.

Three years after quitting the office of Mr. Timmis, I had the
inexpressible pleasure of employing him to purchase stock for his errand
boy!  I was proud as a king.

"I said that boy would turn out well," said the good-natured Mr. Wallis;
"he always had a good principle."

"And now bids fair," said Mr. Timmis, "to have both principal and
interest."

Mr. Crobble having lately had a large property left him in Hertfordshire,
rarely came to the office above once a-quarter, to settle accounts.

"A good dividend--a very good dividend!" said he, upon receipt of the
last quarter's profits.  "But, Mr. Mullins, I cannot forget that this
business is your child."

"And I'm happy to say a thriving one," I replied.

"Are you satisfied--perfectly satisfied?" demanded he.

"Beyond my wishes, sir."

"I am not," said he shortly.

"No, sir?" exclaimed I, with surprise.

"No, Sir!" repeated he.  "Those who sow should reap.  I've no
children--I'm an idle fellow-a drone, sir--and won't consent to consume
all the honey.  Don't speak, sir--read that!" and he pulled a parchment
from his pocket.

It was a deed of partnership between Cornelius Crobble, of Lodge,
Hertfordshire, Esquire, and the poor cobbler's son,

ANDREW MULLINS.




A RIGMAROLE.--PART I.

"De omnibus rebus."


The evening is calm--the sun has just sunk below the tiles of the house,
which serenely bounds the view from the quiet attic where I wield the
anserine plume for the delectation of the pensive public--all nature,
etc.--the sky is deep blue, tinged with mellowest red, like a learned
lady delicately rouged, and ready for a literary soiree--the sweet-voiced
pot-boy has commenced his rounds with "early beer," and with leathern
lungs, and a sovereign contempt for the enactments of the new police-act
--greasy varlets proclaim to the hungry neighbourhood--"Baked sheeps'
heads, hot!"--O! savoury morsel!--May no legislative measure ever silence
this peripatetic purveyor to the poor! or prevent his calling--may the
tag-rag and bob-tail never reject a sheep's head!

"I never sees a sheep's head, but I thinks on you," said Mrs. Spriggins,
whose physiognomy was as yellow and as wrinkled as a duck's foot.
Spriggins whipped his horse, for they were driving in a one-horse chaise,
with two boys, and an infant in arms--Spriggins whipped his horse
spitefully, for Mrs. S.'s sarcasm inspired him with a splenetic feeling;
and as he durst not chastise her, the animal received the benefit of her
impetus.  Spriggins was a fool by nature, and selfish by disposition.
Mrs. S. was a shrivelled shrew, with a "bit o' money;"--that was the bait
at which he, like a hungry gudgeon, had seized, and he was hooked!  The
"spousals" had astonished the vulgar--the little nightingale of
Twickenham would have only smiled; for has he not sweetly sung--

"There swims no goose so grey, but soon or late
She finds some honest gander for her mate;"

and her union was a verification of this flowing couplet.

At different times, what different meanings the self-same words obtain.
According to the reading of the new poor-law guardians, "Union," as far
as regards man and wife, is explained "Separation;" or, like a ship when
in distress, the "Union" is reversed!  In respect of his union, Spriggins
would have most relished the reading of the former!  But there are
paradoxes--a species of verbal puzzle--which, in the course of this ride,
our amiable family of the Spriggins's experienced to their great
discomfort.

Drawing up a turnpike-gate, Mrs. S. handed a ticket to the white-aproned
official of the trust.

"You should have gone home the way you came out--that ticket won't do
here," said the man; "so out with your coppers--three-pence."

"I don't think I've got any half-pence!" said Mr. S., fumbling in his
pennyless pocket.

"Well, then, I must give you change."

"But I'm afraid I hav'nt got any silver," replied Mr. S., with a long
face.--"I say, mister, cou'dn't you trust me?--I'd be wery sure to bring
it to you."

But the man only winked, and, significantly pointing the thumb of his
left hand over his sinister shoulder, backed the horse.

"Vell, I'm blessed," exclaimed Mr. S.--and so he was--with a scolding
wife and a squalling infant; "and they calls this here a trust, the
fools! and there ain't no trust at all!"

And the poor animal got another vindictive cut.  Oh! Mr. Martin!--thou
friend of quadrupeds!--would that thou had'st been there.  "It's all my
eye and Betty Martin!" muttered Mr. S., as he wheeled about the jaded
beast he drove, and retraced the road.




A RIMAROLE--PART II.

"Acti labores sunt jucundi"


The horse is really a noble animal--I hate all rail-roads, for putting
his nose out of joint--puffing, blowing, smoking, jotting--always going
in a straight line: if this mania should continue, we shall soon have the
whole island ruled over like a copy-book--nothing but straight lines--and
sloping lines through every county in the kingdom!

Give me the green lanes and hills, when I'm inclined to diverge; and the
smooth turnpike roads, when disposed to "go a-head."--"I can't bear a
horse," cries Numps: now this feeling is not at all reciprocal, for every
horse can bear a man.  "I'm off to the Isle of Wight," says Numps:  "Then
you're going to Ryde at last," quoth I, "notwithstanding your hostility
to horse-flesh."  "Wrong!" replies he, "I'm going to Cowes."  "Then
you're merely a mills-and-water traveller, Numps!"  The ninny! he does
not know the delight of a canter in the green fields--except, indeed, the
said canter be of the genus-homo, and a field preacher!

My friend Rory's the boy for a horse; he and his bit o' blood are
notorious at all the meetings.  In fact I never saw him out of the
saddle: he is a perfect living specimen of the fabled Centaur--full of
anecdotes of fox-chases, and steeple-chases; he amuses me exceedingly.  I
last encountered him in a green lane near Hornsey, mounted on a roadster
--his "bit o' blood" had been sent forward, and he was leisurely making
his way to the appointed spot.

"I was in Buckinghamshire last week," said he; "a fine turn out--such a
field!  I got an infernal topper tho'--smashed my best tile; tell you how
it was.  There was a high paling--put Spitfire to it, and she took it in
fine style; but, as luck would have it, the gnarled arm of an old tree
came whop against my head, and bonneted me completely!  Thought I was
brained--but we did it cleverly however--although, if ever I made a leap
in the dark, that was one.  I was at fault for a minute--but Spitfire was
all alive, and had it all her own way: with some difficulty I got my nob
out of the beaver-trap, and was in at the death!"

I laughed heartily at his awkward dilemma, and wishing him plenty of
sport, we parted.

Poor Rory!  he has suffered many a blow and many a fall in his time; but
he is still indefatigable in the pursuit of his favourite pastime--so
true is it--that

"The pleasure we delight in physic's pain;"

his days pass lightly, and all his years are leap years!

He has lately inherited a considerable property, accumulated by a miserly
uncle, and has most appropriately purchased an estate in one of the
Ridings of Yorkshire!

With all his love for field-sports, however, he is no better "the
better," says he, "is often the worse; and I've no notion of losing my
acres in gambling; besides, my chief aim being to be considered a good
horseman, I should be a consummate fool, if, by my own folly, I lost my
seat!"




A RIGMAROLE--PART III.

"Oderunt hilarem tristes."


The sad only hate a joke.  Now, my friend Rory is in no sense a sad
fellow, and he loves a joke exceedingly.  His anecdotes of the turf
are all racy; nor do those of the field less deserve the meed of praise!
Lord F____  was a dandy sportsman, and the butt of the regulars. He was
described by Rory as a "walkingstick"--slender, but very "knobby"--with a
pair of mustaches and an eye-glass.  Having lost the scent, he rode one
day slick into a gardener's ground, when his prad rammed his hind-legs
into a brace of hand-glasses, and his fore-legs into a tulip-bed.  The
horticulturist and the haughty aristocrat--how different were their
feelings--the cucumber coolness of the 'nil admirari' of the one was
ludicrously contrasted with the indignation of the astonished cultivator
of the soil.  "Have you seen the hounds this way?" demanded Lord F____,
deliberately viewing him through his glass.

"Hounds!" bitterly repeated the gardener, clenching his fist.  "Dogs, I
mean," continued Lord F____; "you know what a pack of hounds are--don't
you?"

"I know what a puppy is," retorted the man; "and if so be you don't
budge, I'll spile your sport.  But, first and foremost, you must lug out
for the damage you have done--you're a trespasser."

"I'm a sportsman, fellow--what d'ye mean?"

"Then sport the blunt," replied the gardener; and, closing his gates,
took Lord F____ prisoner: nor did he set him free till he had reimbursed
him for the mischief he had done.

This was just; and however illegal were the means, I applauded them for
the end.

Our friend B___d, that incorrigible punster, said, "that his horse had
put his foot in--and he had paid his footing,"

B___d, by the bye, is a nonpareil; whether horses, guns, or dogs, he is
always "at home:" and even in yachting, (as he truly boasts) he is never
"at sea."  Riding with him one day in an omnibus, I praised the
convenience of the vehicle; "An excellent vehicle," said he, "for
punning;"--which he presently proved, for a dowager having flopped into
one of the seats, declared that she "never rid vithout fear in any of
them omnibus things."

"What is she talking about?" said I.

"De omnibus rebus," replied he,--"truly she talks like the first lady of
the land; but, as far as I can see, she possesses neither the carriage
nor the manners!"

"Can you read the motto on the Conductor's button?" I demanded.  "No;" he
replied, "but I think nothing would be more appropriate to his calling
than the monkish phrase--'pro omnibus curo!'"

At this juncture a jolt, followed by a crash, announced that we had lost
a wheel.  The Dowager shrieked.  "We shall all be killed," cried she;
"On'y to think of meeting vun's death in a common omnibus!"

"Mors communis omnibus!" whispered B___d, and----

I had written thus far, when spit--spit--splutter--plop!--my end of
candle slipped into the blacking bottle in which it was "sustained," and
I was left to admire--the stars of night, and to observe that "Charles's
wain was over the chimney;" so I threw down my pen--and, as the house was
a-bed--and I am naturally of a "retiring" disposition, I sought my
pallet--dreaming of literary fame!--although, in the matter of what might
be in store for me, I was completely in the dark!




AN INTERCEPTED LETTER FROM DICK SLAMMER TO HIS FRIEND SAM FLYKE.


eppin-toosday

my dear sam

i've rote this ere for to let you no i'm in jolly good health and harty
as a brick--and hope my tulip as your as vell----read this to sal who
can't do the same herself seeing as her edication aintt bin in that line
----give her my love and tell her to take care o' the kids.----i've got a
silk vipe for sal, tell her; and suffing for 'em all, for i've made a
xlent spec o' the woy'ge and bagg'd some tin too i can tell you; and vont
ve have a blow out ven i cums amung you----napps----that's the ass----is
particklar vell and as dun his dooty like a riq'lar flint----

i rode too races ar' needn't say as i vun em for napps is a houtanhouter
an no mistake!

lork!  didn't i make the natifs stare!  and a gintlum as vos by, vanted
to oan 'im an oferd any blunt for im but walker!  says i there aint sick
a ass as this 'ere hanimal in the hole country----besides he's like as
vun o' me oan famly, for i've brot im up in a manner from the time he vos
a babby!----he's up to a move or too and knows my voice jist for all the
world like a Chrissen.

Red-nose Bill vot had a nook 'em down here brings this and he'll tell you
all about the noose----i shall foller in about, a veek or so----tell sal
to keep up her sperrits and not to lush vith Bet----i dont like that ere
ooman at all----a idle wagabone as is going to the Union like
vinkin----i'm no temperens cove meself as you nose, sam, but enufs enuf
and as good as a feast.

The gintry as taken hervite a likin to Napps and me----they looks upon im
as hervite a projidy----for he's licked all the donkies as run agin
im----the vimmen too----(you no my insinnivating vay, sam,) and nobody
nose better than me how to git the right sow by the ear----no sooner do i
see 'em a comin vith their kids, than i slips of and doffs my tile, an i
says, says i----do let the yung jentlum have a cast----and then the
little in coorse begins a plegyin the old 'uns, and----so the jobs done!

----vot's to pay, my good man?  says she

----oh----nothink, marm, says i, as modest as a turnip new-peeld----napps
is a rig'lar racer----i dont let im hout but i'm so fond o' children!

----this here Yummeree doos the bisnis prime, for the vimmen comes over
the jentlum and a pus is made up for anuther race----and in coorse i
pockits the Bibs----cos vy?----napps is nothink but a good 'un.

'tother day hearin as there vos an hunt in the naborwood:----napps, says
i-a----speakin to my ass----napps ve'll jist go and look at 'em----

----vell ve hadnt got no more nor a mile wen i comes slap alongside of a
starch-up chap upatop of raythur a good lookin' oss.----but my i! vornt
there bellows to mend; and he made no more vay nor a duck in a
gutter.----i says, sir, says i, dye think ve shall be in time for the
hunt? but he never turns is hed but sets bolt uprite as stiff as
pitch----jist for all the world as if his mother had vashed im in starch.

----i twigs his lean in a jiffy----so i says says i "oh-you needn't be so
shy i rides my own hannimal,"----

----vich i takes it vos more nor he co'd say, for his vas nothin more nor
a borrod'un and if i dont mistake he vos a vitechapler----i think ive
seed im a sarvin out svipes and blue ruin at the gin-spinners corner o'
summerset street or petticut lane----dunno witch.

----sam, i hates pride so i cuts his cumpny----i says says i----napps it
dont fit you aint a nunter you're o'ny a racer and that chaps afeard his
prad vill be spiled a keeping conapny with a ass----leastways i'm o' the
same opinyon in that respec consarning meself and----so i shall mizzle.

----a true gintlum as is a gintlum, sam is as difrent to these here
stuck-up fellers az a sovrin is to a coronashun copper vot's on'y gilt.

vell lie turns hof over the left and vips up his animal tryin to get up a
trot----bobbin up and down in his sturrups and bumpin hisself to make a
show----all flummery!----he takes the middel o' the field to hisself, and
i cox my i for a houtlet and spi's a gait----that's the ticket! says i;
so liting the 'bacca and blowin a cloud I trots along, and had jist cum
to the gait ven turnin' round to look for the gin-spinner, blow me! sam,
if i didn't see the cove again heels over head over an edge----like a
tumler at bartlmy fare;----vile his preshus hannimal vas a takin it cooly
in the meddo!

"vat a rum chap"--says i, a larfin reddy to bust----"vat a rum chap to
go over the 'edge that vay!  ven here's a riglar gait to ride through!"

----and so, i druv on, but somehow, sam, i coudn't help a thinkin' as
praps the waggerbun lead broke his nek----stif as it vas! and so i said
to napps----"napps,"----says i----"lets go and look arter the warmint
for charity's-sake"

----napps vots as good-natur'd a ass as his master, didn't make no
obstacle and so ve vent---

----my i!----sam, i'd a stood a Kervorten and three outs ad you a bin
there!----there vas my jentlum up to his nek in a duckpond----lookin' as
miserribble as a stray o' mutton in a batter puddin'

"halp! halp!" says he, a spittin' the green veeds out of his
mouth----"halp me, faller, and i'll stand a bob" or summat to that efeck.

----but i couldn't hold out my fin to him for larfin----and napps begun a
brayin at sich a rate----vich struck me as if he vas a larfin too, and
made me larf wusser than ever----

----vell, at last, i contrivis to lug him out, and a preshus figger he
cut to be sure----he had kervite a new sute o' black mud, vich didn't
smell particlar sveet i can tell you.

----"ain't hurt yoursef?" says i, "have you?"

----"no"----says he----"but i'm dem wet and utterably spiled"----or vords
like that for he chewd'em so fine i couldn't rightly hit 'em.

----ater i'd scraped him a little desent, and he'd tip'd a hog----vich
vas rayther hansum----i ax'd him vere he'd left his tile?

"tile?"----says he----a yogglin his i's and openin' his jaws like a dyin'
oyster "yes your castor"----says i, "your beaver your hat."

"Oh!"----says he, p'inting dismal to the pond----"gone to the devil d___
me!"----so vith that he takes out a red and yuller vipe, and ties it about
his hed, lookin' for all the vorld like a apple-ooman.

----as he had come down hansum i in coorse ofer'd to ketch his prad vich
va'n't much difficulty----and up he jumps and lepped with a squosh into
the saddle----and rid of vithout as much as sayin' by your leave good
luck to you or anythink else----

---vell, this here vos the end and upshot o' that day's fun for I vos too
late for the start by ten minnits----i saw 'em goin' it at a distance so
i takes a sight!----but i had too much valley for napes to put im to it
so as to get up vith 'em----or he might a done it praps!---

----i've lived like a fightin cock and am as fatt as butter----but the
race is goin' to begin in a hour and i must go and ketch napps who's a
grazin on the commun and looks oncommun vell----so no more at present
from,

Yours, my prime 'un,

dick stammer.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Sketches of Seymour (Illustrated),
Part 5., by Robert Seymour

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SKETCHES OF SEYMOUR ***

***** This file should be named 5649.txt or 5649.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/5/6/4/5649/

Produced by David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
